FIFTH EDITION
George E. Dieter
Linda C. Schmidt
ENGINEERING
DESIGN

ENGINEERING DESIGN
FIFTH EDITION
George E. Dieter
University of Maryland
Linda C. Schmidt
University of Maryland

ENGINEERING DESIGN, FIFTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill, a business unit of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 1221 Avenue of the 
Americas, New York, NY 10020. Copyright © 2013 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights 
reserved. Previous editions © 2009, 2000, and 1991. Printed in the United States of America. No part of 
this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database 
or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., including, 
but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance 
learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside 
the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
ISBN 978-0-07-339814-3
MHID 0-07-339814-4
Vice President & Editor-in-Chief: Marty Lange
Vice President of Specialized Publishing: Janice M. Roerig-Blong
Editorial Director: Michael Lange 
Global Publisher: Raghothaman Srinivasan
Senior Sponsoring Editor: Bill Stenquist
Marketing Manager: Curt Reynolds
Developmental Editor: Lorraine K. Buczek 
Project Manager: Melissa M. Leick
Design Coordinator: Brenda A. Rolwes
Cover Designer: Studio Montage, St. Louis, Missouri
Cover Image: © Getty Images RF
Buyer: Laura Fuller
Media Project Manager: Balaji Sundararaman
Compositor: Cenveo Publisher Services
Typeface: 10.5/12 Times Roman
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Dieter, George Ellwood.
  Engineering design. — 5th ed. / George E . Dieter, Linda C . Schmidt.
       p. cm.
  ISBN 978-0-07-339814-3 (acid-free paper)
  1. Engineering design.  I. Schmidt, Linda C.  II. Title.
  TA174.D495 2013
  620'.0042—dc23
                                                            2011048958
www.mhhe.com

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
GE ORGE E . DI ET E R is Glenn L. Martin Institute Professor of Engineering at 
the University of Maryland. The author received his B.S. Met.E. degree from Drexel 
University and his D.Sc. degree from Carnegie Mellon University. After a stint in 
industry with the DuPont Engineering Research Laboratory, he became head of the 
Metallurgical Engineering Department at Drexel University, where he later became 
Dean of Engineering. Professor Dieter later joined the faculty of Carnegie Mellon 
University as Professor of Engineering and Director of the Processing Research Insti-
tute. He moved to the University of Maryland in 1977 as professor of Mechanical 
Engineering and Dean of Engineering, serving as dean until 1994.
Professor Dieter is a fellow of ASM International, TMS, AAAS, and ASEE. He 
has received the education award from ASM, TMS, and SME, as well as the Lamme 
Medal, the highest award of ASEE. He has been chair of the Engineering Deans 
Council, and president of ASEE. He is a member of the National Academy of Engi-
neering. He also is the author of Mechanical Metallurgy, published by McGraw-Hill, 
now in its third edition.
L I N DA C. SC H M I DT is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mechani-
cal Engineering at the University of Maryland. Dr. Schmidt’s general research inter-
ests and publications are in the areas of mechanical design theory and methodology, 
design generation systems for use during conceptual design, design rationale capture, 
and effective student learning on engineering project design teams.
Dr. Schmidt completed her doctorate in Mechanical Engineering at Carnegie Mellon 
University with research in grammar-based generative design. She holds B.S. and M.S. 
degrees from Iowa State University for work in Industrial Engineering. Dr. Schmidt is a 
recipient of the 1998 U.S. National Science Foundation Faculty Early Career Award for 
generative conceptual design. She co-founded RISE, a summer research experience that 
won the 2003 Exemplary Program Award from the American College Personnel Asso-
ciation’s Commission for Academic Support in Higher Education. Dr. Schmidt was 

iv 
engineering design 
awarded the American Society of Engineering Education’s 2008 Merryfi eld Design 
Award.
Dr. Schmidt is active in engineering design theory research and teaching engi-
neering design to third- and fourth-year undergraduates and graduate students in 
mechanical engineering. She has coauthored a text on engineering decision-making, 
two editions of a text on product development, and a team-training curriculum for 
faculty using engineering student project teams. Dr. Schmidt was the guest editor of 
the Journal of Engineering Valuation & Cost Analysis and has served as an Associ-
ate Editor of the ASME Journal of Mechanical Design. Dr. Schmidt is a member of 
ASME, SME, and ASEE.

v
BRIEF CONTENTS
Chapter  1 Engineering Design 
1
Chapter  2 Product Development Process 
36
Chapter  3 Problem Defi nition and Need Identifi cation 
70
Chapter  4 Team Behavior and Tools 
118
Chapter  5 Gathering Information 
158
Chapter  6 Concept Generation 
191
Chapter  7 Decision Making and Concept Selection  
244
Chapter  8 Embodiment Design  
299
Chapter  9 Detail Design  
386
Chapter 10 Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
411
Chapter 11 Materials Selection  
437
Chapter 12 Design with Materials 
487
Chapter 13 Design for Manufacturing 
526
Chapter 14 Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
628
Chapter 15 Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
680
Chapter 16 Economic Decision Making 
734
Chapter 17 Cost Evaluation 
776
Chapter 18  Legal and Ethical Issues in Engineering
Design 
www.mhhe.com/dieter
Appendices 
A-1
Author & Subject Indexes 
I-1

vi
DETAILED CONTENTS
 
Preface 
xiii
Chapter  1 
Engineering Design 
1
 1.1 
Introduction 
1
 1.2 
Engineering Design Process 
3
 1.3 
Ways to Think about the Engineering Design Process 
6
 1.4 
Description of Design Process 
14
 1.5 
Considerations of a Good Design 
17
 1.6 
Computer-Aided Engineering 
22
 1.7 
Designing to Codes and Standards 
24
 1.8 
Design Review 
26
 1.9 
Societal Considerations in Engineering Design 
28
 1.10 Summary 
32
 
New Terms and Concepts 
33
 
Bibliography 
33
 
Problems and Exercises 
33
Chapter  2 
Product Development Process 
36
 2.1 
Introduction 
36
 2.2 
Product Development Process 
36
 2.3 
Product and Process Cycles 
44
 2.4 
Organization for Design and Product Development 
48
 2.5 
Markets and Marketing 
55
 2.6 
Technological Innovation 
61
 2.7 
Summary 
66
 
New Terms and Concepts 
67
 
Bibliography 
67
 
Problems and Exercises 
67

 
detailed contents 
vii
Chapter  3 
Problem Defi nition and Need Identifi cation 
70
 3.1 
Introduction 
70
 3.2 
Identifying Customer Needs 
72
 3.3 
Customer Requirements 
80
 3.4 
Gathering Information on Existing Products 
86
 3.5 
Establishing the Engineering Characteristics 
94
 3.6 
Quality Function Deployment 
99
 3.7 
Product Design Specifi cation 
111
 3.8 
Summary 
113
 
New Terms and Concepts 
115
 
Bibliography 
115
 
Problems and Exercises 
116
Chapter  4 
Team Behavior and Tools 
118
 4.1 
Introduction 
118
 4.2 
What It Means to be an Effective Team Member 
119
 4.3 
Team Leadership Roles 
120
 4.4 
Team Dynamics 
121
 4.5 
Effective Team Meetings 
123
 4.6 
Problem-Solving Tools 
125
 4.7 
Time Management 
144
 4.8 
Planning and Scheduling 
146
 4.9 
Summary 
154
 
New Terms and Concepts 
154
 
Bibliography 
155
 
Problems and Exercises 
155
Chapter  5 
Gathering Information 
158
 5.1 
The Information Challenge 
158
 5.2 
Types of Design Information 
160
 5.3 
Sources of Design Information 
161
 5.4 
Library Sources of Information 
164
 5.5 
Government Sources of Information 
168
 5.6 
Information From the Internet 
169
 5.7 
Professional Societies and Trade Associations 
174
 5.8 
Codes and Standards 
176
 5.9 
Patents and Other Intellectual Property 
178
 5.10 Company-Centered Information 
187
 5.11 Summary 
188
 
New Terms and Concepts 
189
 
Bibliography 
189
 
Problems and Exercises 
189
Chapter  6 
Concept Generation 
191
 6.1 
Introduction to Creative Thinking 
192
 6.2 
Creativity and Problem Solving 
196

viii 
engineering design 
 6.3 
Creative Thinking Methods 
202
 6.4 
Creative Methods for Design 
212
 6.5 
Functional Decomposition and Synthesis 
216
 6.6 
Morphological Methods 
226
 6.7 
TRIZ: The Theory of Inventive Problem Solving 
229
 6.8 
Summary 
240
 
New Terms and Concepts 
241
 
Bibliography 
242
 
Problems and Exercises 
242
Chapter  7 
Decision Making and Concept Selection 
244
 7.1 
Introduction 
244
 7.2 
Decision Making 
245
 7.3 
Evaluation Processes 
257
 7.4 
Using Models in Evaluation 
262
 7.5 
Pugh Chart 
279
 7.6 
Weighted Decision Matrix 
283
 7.7 
Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) 
286
 7.8 
Summary 
294
 
New Terms and Concepts 
295
 
Bibliography 
295
 
Problems and Exercises 
295
Chapter  8 
Embodiment Design 
299
 8.1 
Introduction 
299
 8.2 
Product Architecture 
302
 8.3 
Steps in Developing Product Architecture 
306
 8.4 
Confi guration Design 
311
 8.5 
Best Practices for Confi guration Design 
318
 8.6 
Parametric Design 
328
 8.7 
Dimensions and Tolerances 
340
 8.8 
Industrial Design 
358
 8.9 
Human Factors Design 
361
 8.10 Life-Cycle Design 
368
 8.11 Prototyping and Testing 
369
 8.12 Design for X (DFX) 
379
 8.13 Summary 
381
 
New Terms and Concepts 
382
 
Bibliography 
382
 
Problems and Exercises 
383
Chapter  9 
Detail Design 
386
 9.1 
Introduction 
386
 9.2 
Activities and Decisions in Detail Design 
387
 9.3 
Communicating Design and Manufacturing Information 
391

 
detailed contents 
ix
 9.4 
Final Design Review 
402
 9.5 
Design and Business Activities Beyond Detail Design 
403
 9.6 
 Facilitating Design and Manufacturing with 
Computer-Based Methods 
406
 9.7 
Summary 
408
 
New Terms and Concepts 
408
 
Bibliography 
409
 
Problems and Exercises 
409
Chapter 10 
Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
411
10.1 
The Environmental Movement 
411
10.2 
Sustainabilty 
416
10.3 
Challenges of Sustainability for Business 
420
10.4 
End-Of-Life Product Transformations 
422
10.5 
Role of Material Selection in Design for Environment 
427
10.6 
Tools to Aid Design for the Environment and Sustainability 
431
10.7 
Summary 
436
 
New Terms and Concepts 
435
 
Bibliography 
436
 
Problems and Exercises 
436
Chapter 11 
Materials Selection 
437
11.1 
Introduction 
437
11.2 
Performance Requirements of Materials 
440
11.3 
The Materials Selection Process 
451
11.4 
Sources of Information on Material Properties 
455
11.5 
Cost of Materials 
460
11.6 
Overview of Methods of Materials Selection 
462
11.7 
Material Performance Indices 
463
11.8 
Materials Selection with Decision Matrices 
471
11.9 
Selection with Computer-Aided Databases 
476
11.10 Design Examples 
477
11.11 Summary 
481
 
New Terms and Concepts 
482
 
Bibliography 
483
 
Problems and Exercises 
483
Chapter 12 
Design with Materials 
487
12.1 
Introduction 
487
12.2 
Design for Brittle Fracture 
488
12.3 
Design for Fatigue Failure 
494
12.4 
Design for Corrosion Resistance 
506
12.5 
Design Against Wear 
511
12.6 
Design with Plastics 
516
12.7 
Summary 
523

x 
engineering design 
 
New Terms and Concepts 
523
 
Bibliography 
523
 
Problems and Exercises 
524
Chapter 13 
Design for Manufacturing 
526
13.1 
Role of Manufacturing in Design 
526
13.2 
Manufacturing Functions 
527
13.3 
Classifi cation of Manufacturing Processes 
529
13.4 
Manufacturing Process Selection 
536
13.5 
Design for Manufacture (DFM) 
561
13.6 
Design for Assembly (DFA) 
565
13.7 
Role of Standardization in DFMA 
572
13.8 
Mistake-Proofi ng 
577
13.9 
Early Estimation of Manufacturing Cost 
581
13.10 Process Specifi c DFMA Guidelines 
585
13.11 Design of Castings 
586
13.12 Design of Forgings 
590
13.13 Design for Sheet-Metal Forming 
593
13.14 Design for Machining 
597
13.15 Design of Welding 
602
13.16 Residual Stresses in Design 
609
13.17 Design for Heat Treatment 
615
13.18 Design for Plastics Processing 
618
13.19 Summary 
623
 
New Terms and Concepts 
625
 
Bibliography 
625
 
Problems and Exercises 
626
Chapter 14 
Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
628
14.1 
Introduction 
628
14.2 
Probabilistic Approach to Design 
634
14.3 
Reliability Theory 
642
14.4 
Design for Reliability 
657
14.5 
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) 
662
14.6 
Fault Tree Analysis 
667
14.7 
Defects and Failure Modes 
670
14.8 
Design for Safety 
672
14.9 
Summary 
675
 
New Terms and Concepts 
676
 
Bibliography 
676
 
Problems and Exercises 
677
Chapter 15 
Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
680
15.1 
The Concept of Total Quality 
680
15.2 
Quality Control and Assurance 
683

 
detailed contents 
xi
15.3 
Statistical Process Control 
687
15.4 
Quality Improvement 
692
15.5 
Process Capability 
695
15.6 
Taguchi Method 
700
15.7 
Robust Design 
706
15.8 
Optimization Methods 
712
15.9 
Design Optimization 
728
15.10 Summary 
729
 
New Terms and Concepts 
730
 
Bibliography 
730
 
Problems and Exercises 
731
Chapter 16 
Economic Decision Making 
734
16.1 
Introduction 
734
16.2 
Mathematics of Time Value of Money 
735
16.3 
Cost Comparison 
742
16.4 
Depreciation 
747
16.5 
Taxes 
749
16.6 
Profi tability of Investments 
753
16.7 
Other Aspects of Profi tability 
761
16.8 
Infl ation 
762
16.9 
Sensitivity and Break-Even Analysis 
765
16.10 Uncertainty in Economic Analysis 
767
16.11 Benefi t-Cost Analysis 
768
16.12 Summary 
770
 
New Terms and Concepts 
772
 
Bibliography 
772
 
Problems and Exercises 
772
Chapter 17 
Cost Evaluation 
776
17.1 
Introduction 
776
17.2 
Categories of Costs 
777
17.3 
The Cost of Ownership 
780
17.4 
Manufacturing Cost 
781
17.5 
Overhead Cost 
782
17.6 
Activity-Based Costing 
784
17.7 
Methods of Developing Cost Estimates 
787
17.8 
Make-Buy Decision 
792
17.9 
Product Profi t Model 
793
17.10 Refi nements to Cost Analysis Methods 
798
17.11 Cost of Quality 
803
17.12 Design to Cost 
805
17.13 Value Analysis in Costing 
808
17.14 Manufacturing Cost Models 
811
17.15 Life Cycle Costing 
816

xii 
engineering design 
17.16 Summary 
820
 
New Terms and Concepts 
821
 
Bibliography 
821
 
Problems and Exercises 
821
Chapter 18 
 Legal and Ethical Issues in Engineering Design
(see www.mhhe.com/dieter) 
826
18.1 
Introduction 
826
18.2 
The Origin of Laws 
827
18.3 
Contracts 
828
18.4 
Liability 
831
18.5 
Tort Law 
832
18.6 
Product Liability 
833
18.7 
Protecting Intellectual Property 
838
18.8 
The Legal and Ethical Domains 
839
18.9 
Codes of Ethics 
841
18.10 Solving Ethical Confl icts 
846
18.11 Summary 
851
 
New Terms and Concepts 
853
 
Bibliography 
853
 
Problems and Exercises 
854
 
Appendices 
A-1
 
Author & Subject Indexes 
I-1

xiii
PREFACE TO FIFTH EDITION
THE FIFTH EDITION of Engineering Design continues the reorganization and 
expansion of topics introduced in the fourth edition. Major reorganization of topics 
to improve flow of information and increase learning have been made in Chapter 3, 
Problem and Need Identification; Chapter 6, Concept Generation; and Chapter 7, 
Decision Making and Concept Selection. A new, progressive example has been intro-
duced and is continued through these three chapters. A new Chapter 10, Design for 
Sustainability and the Environment, has been added. The book continues its tradition 
of being more oriented to material selection, design for manufacturing, and design for 
quality than other broad-based design texts.
The text is intended to be used in either a junior or senior engineering design 
course with an integrated hands-on design project. At the University of Maryland 
we present the design process material, Chapters 1 through 9, to junior students in a 
course introducing the design process. The whole text is used in the senior capstone 
design course that includes a complete design project, starting from selecting a market 
to creating a working prototype. Students move quickly through the fi rst nine chapters 
and emphasize Chapters 10 through 17 in making embodiment design decisions.
The authors hope that students will consider this book to be a valuable part of their 
professional library. Toward this end we have continued and expanded the practice of 
giving key literature references and referrals to useful websites. Many new references 
have been added and all websites have been verifi ed as of June 2011. References to many 
of the design handbooks and design monographs available at knovel.com have been 
added to this edition. We have also used the extensive series of ASM Handbooks to 
extend topics in Chapters 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15. These are also available at knovel.com.
New to This Edition
• Reorganization and new material in Chapters 3, 6, and 7, including a progressive 
example throughout these chapters
• New Chapter 10, Design for Sustainability and the Environment

xiv 
engineering design 
• Chapter 16, Economic Decision Making, brought into the book from text website
• Section on Cost of Quality added to Chapter 17, Cost Evaluation
• Many additional connections to useful design information on the Internet
• Updated and new references including links to handbooks available through 
knovel.com
• PowerPoint lecture slides available to instructors through McGraw-Hill Higher 
Education
We want to acknowledge the willingness of students from our senior design course 
for permission to use material from their report in some of our examples. The JSR 
Design Team members are: Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, 
Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn.
Special thanks to Peter Sandborn, Chandra Thamire, and Guangming Zhang, our 
colleagues in the Mechanical Engineering Department, University of Maryland, for 
their willingness to share their knowledge with us. Thanks also to Greg Moores of 
the DeWalt Division of Stanley Black and Decker, Inc. for his willingness to share his 
industrial viewpoint on several topics. We also thank the following reviewers for their 
helpful comments and suggestions: Bruce Floersheim, United States Military Acad-
emy; Mark A. Johnson, Michigan Tech University; Jesa Kreiner, California State Uni-
versity at Fullerton; David N. Kunz, University of Wisconsin, Platteville; Marybeth 
Lima, Louisiana State University; Bahram Nassersharif, University of Rhode Island; 
Ibrahim Nisanci, University of Arkansas at Little Rock; Keith E. Rouch, University 
of Kentucky; Paul Steranka, West Virginia University Institute of Technology; M. A. 
Wahab, Louisiana State University, John-David Yoder, Ohio Northern University; 
D. A. Zumbrunnen, Clemson University.
George E. Dieter and Linda C. Schmidt
College Park, MD
2012

1
1
 1
 ENGINEERING DESIGN  
1.1
 INTRODUCTION 
 What is design? If you search the literature for an answer to that question, you will 
fi nd about as many defi nitions as there are designs. Perhaps the reason is that the pro-
cess of design is such a common human experience. Webster’s dictionary says that to 
design is “to fashion after a plan,” but that leaves out the essential fact that to design is 
to create something that has never been. Certainly an engineering designer practices 
design by that defi nition, but so does an artist, a sculptor, a composer, a playwright, or 
any another creative member of our society. 
 Thus, although engineers are not the only people who design things, it is true that 
the professional practice of engineering is largely concerned with design; it is often 
said that design is the essence of engineering. To design is to pull together something 
new or to arrange existing things in a new way to satisfy a recognized need of soci-
ety. An elegant word for “pulling together” is  synthesis . We shall adopt the following 
formal defi nition of design: “Design establishes and defi nes solutions to and pertinent 
structures for problems not solved before, or new solutions to problems which have 
previously been solved in a different way.” 1  The ability to design is both a science 
and an art. The science can be learned through techniques and methods to be covered 
in this text, but the art is best learned by doing design. It is for this reason that your 
design experience must involve some realistic project experience. 
 The emphasis that we have given to the creation of new things in our introduction 
to design should not unduly alarm you. To become profi cient in design is a perfectly 
attainable goal for an engineering student, but its attainment requires the guided ex-
perience that we intend this text to provide. Design should not be confused with dis-
covery. Discovery is getting the fi rst sight of, or the fi rst knowledge of something, as 
1
 1.  J. F .  Blumrich ,  Science, vol. 168,  pp. 1551–1554 ,  1970 . 

2 
engineering design 
1
when Columbus discovered America or Jack Kilby made the fi rst microprocessor. We 
can discover what has already existed but has not been known before, but a design is 
the product of planning and work. We will present a structured design process to as-
sist you in doing design in Sec. 1.5.  
 We should note that a design may or may not involve  invention . To obtain a legal 
patent on an invention requires that the design be a step beyond the limits of the exist-
ing knowledge (beyond the state of the art). Some designs are truly inventive, but most 
are not. 
 Look up the word  design  in a dictionary and you will fi nd that it can be either a 
noun or a verb. One noun defi nition is “the form, parts, or details of something accord-
ing to a plan,” as in the use of the word  design  in “My new design is ready for review.” 
A common defi nition of the word  design  as a verb is “to conceive or to form a plan 
for,” as in “I have to design three new models of the product for three different over-
seas markets.” Note that the verb form of  design  is also written as “designing.” Often 
the phrase “design process” is used to emphasize the use of the verb form of  design . It 
is important to understand these differences and to use the word appropriately. 
 Good design requires both analysis and synthesis. Typically we approach complex 
problems like design by  decomposing  the problem into manageable parts. Because we 
need to understand how the part will perform in service, we must be able to calculate 
as much about the part’s expected behavior as possible before it exists in physical form 
by using the appropriate disciplines of science and engineering science and the neces-
sary computational tools. This is called  analysis . It usually involves the simplifi cation 
of the real world through models.  Synthesis  involves the identifi cation of the design 
elements that will comprise the product, its decomposition into parts, and the combi-
nation of the part solutions into a total workable system. 
 At your current stage in your engineering education you may be much more fa-
miliar and comfortable with analysis. You have dealt with courses that were essen-
tially disciplinary. For example, you were not expected to use thermodynamics and 
fl uid mechanics in a course in mechanics of materials. The problems you worked in 
the course were selected to illustrate and reinforce the principles. If you could con-
struct the appropriate model, you usually could solve the problem. Most of the input 
data and properties were given, and there usually was a correct answer to the prob-
lem. However, real-world problems rarely are that neat and circumscribed. The real 
problem that your design is expected to solve may not be readily apparent. You may 
need to draw on many technical disciplines (solid mechanics, fl uid mechanics, electro 
magnetic theory, etc.) for the solution and usually on nonengineering disciplines as 
well (economics, fi nance, law, etc.). The input data may be fragmentary at best, and 
the scope of the project may be so huge that no individual can follow it all. If that is 
not diffi cult enough, usually the design must proceed under severe constraints of time 
and/or money. There may be major societal constraints imposed by environmental or 
energy regulations. Finally, in the typical design you rarely have a way of knowing the 
correct answer. Hopefully, your design works, but is it the best, most effi cient design 
that could have been achieved under the conditions? Only time will tell. 
 We hope that this has given you some idea of the design process and the environ-
ment in which it occurs. One way to summarize the challenges presented by the de-
sign environment is to think of the  four C’s of design.  One thing that should be clear 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
3
1
by now is how engineering design extends well beyond the boundaries of science. The 
expanded boundaries and responsibilities of engineering create almost unlimited op-
portunities for you. In your professional career you may have the opportunity to create 
dozens of designs and have the satisfaction of seeing them become working realities. 
“A scientist will be lucky if he makes one creative addition to human knowledge in his 
whole life, and many never do. A scientist can discover a new star but he cannot make 
one. He would have to ask an engineer to do it for him.” 1 
 1.2 
ENGINEERING DESIGN PROCESS 
 The engineering design process can be used to achieve several different outcomes. 
One is the design of products, whether they be consumer goods such as refrigerators, 
power tools, or DVD players, or highly complex products such as a missile system or 
a jet transport plane. Another is a complex engineered system such as an electrical 
power generating station or a petrochemical plant, while yet another is the design of a 
building or a bridge. However, the emphasis in this text is on product design because it 
is an area in which many engineers will apply their design skills. Moreover, examples 
taken from this area of design are easier to grasp without extensive specialized knowl-
edge. This chapter presents the engineering design process from three perspectives. 
In Section 1.3 the design method is contrasted with the scientifi c method, and design 
is presented as a fi ve-step problem-solving methodology. Section 1.4 takes the role of 
design beyond that of meeting technical performance requirements and introduces 
the idea that design must meet the needs of society at large. Section 1.5 lays out a 
cradle-to-the-grave road map of the design process, showing that the responsibility of 
the engineering designer extends from the creation of a design until its embodiment is 
 The Four C’s of Design 
 Creativity 
●   Requires creation of something that has not existed before or has not existed in 
the designer’s mind before 
 Complexity 
●  Requires decisions on many variables and parameters 
 Choice 
●  Requires making choices between many possible solutions at all levels, from 
basic concepts to the smallest detail of shape     
 Compromise 
●  Requires balancing multiple and sometimes confl icting requirements 
 1 .  G. L .  Glegg ,  The Design of Design,  Cambridge University Press, New York,  1969 . 

4 
engineering design 
1
disposed of in an environmentally safe way. Chapter 2 extends the engineering design 
process to the broader issue of product development by introducing more business-
oriented issues such as product positioning and marketing. 
 1.2.1 Importance of the Engineering Design Process 
 In the 1980s when companies in the United States fi rst began to seriously feel the im-
pact of quality products from overseas, it was natural for them to place an emphasis on 
reducing their manufacturing costs through automation and moving plants to lower-
labor-cost regions. However, it was not until the publication of a major study of the 
National Research Council (NRC) 1  that companies came to realize that the real key to 
world-competitive products lies in high-quality product design. This has stimulated a 
rash of experimentation and sharing of results about better ways to do product design. 
What was once a fairly cut-and-dried engineering process has become one of the cut-
ting edges of engineering progress. This text aims at providing you with insight into 
the current best practices for doing engineering design. 
 The importance of design is nicely summed up in Fig. 1.1. This shows that only 
a small fraction of the cost to produce a product (5 percent) is involved with the de-
sign process, while the other 95 percent of cost is consumed by the materials, capital, 
and labor to manufacture the product. However, the design process consists of the 
accumulation of many decisions that result in design commitments that affect about 
70 to 80 percent of the manufactured cost of the product. In other words, the decisions 
made beyond the design phase can infl uence only about 25 percent of the total cost. 
If the design proves to be faulty just before the product goes to market, it will cost a 
great deal of money to correct the problem. To summarize:  Decisions made in the 
design process cost very little in terms of the overall product cost but have a major 
effect on the cost of the product . 
 The second major impact of design is on product quality. The old concept of prod-
uct quality was that it was achieved by inspecting the product as it came off the pro-
duction line. Today we realize that true quality is designed into the product. Achieving 
quality through product design will be a theme that pervades this book. For now we 
point out that one aspect of quality is to incorporate within the product the perfor-
mance and features that are truly desired by the customer who purchases the product. 
In addition, the design must be carried out so that the product can be made without 
defect at a competitive cost. To summarize:  You cannot compensate in manufacturing 
for defects introduced in the design phase . 
 The third area where engineering design determines product competitiveness 
is product cycle time. Cycle time refers to the development time required to bring 
a new product to market. In many consumer areas the product with the latest “bells 
and whistles” captures the customers’ fancy. The use of new organizational methods, 
the widespread use of computer-aided engineering, and rapid prototyping methods 
are contributing to reducing product cycle time. Not only does reduced cycle time 
 1 .  “Improving Engineering Design,”  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. ,  1991 . 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
5
1
increase the marketability of a product, but it reduces the cost of product development. 
Furthermore, the longer a product is available for sale the more sales and profi ts there 
will be. To summarize:  The design process should be conducted so as to develop 
quality, cost-competitive products in the shortest time possible . 
 1.2.2 Types of Designs 
 Engineering design can be undertaken for many different reasons, and it may take 
different forms. 
●  Original design , also called  innovative design . This form of design is at the top of 
the hierarchy. It employs an original, innovative concept to achieve a need. Some-
times, but rarely, the need itself may be original. A truly original design involves 
invention. Successful original designs occur rarely, but when they do occur they 
usually disrupt existing markets because they have in them the seeds of new tech-
nology of far-reaching consequences. The design of the microprocessor was one 
such original design.  
●  Adaptive design . This form of design occurs when the design team adapts a known 
solution to satisfy a different need to produce a  novel application . For example, 
adapting the ink-jet printing concept to spray binder to hold particles in place in a 
rapid prototyping machine.  
●  Redesign . Much more frequently, engineering design is employed to improve an 
existing design. The task may be to redesign a component in a product that is fail-
ing in service, or to redesign a component so as to reduce its cost of manufacture. 
Often redesign is accomplished without any change in the working principle or 
concept of the original design. For example, the shape may be changed to reduce a 
stress  concentration, or a new material substituted to reduce weight or cost. When 
Percentage of product cost committed
Market
development
Conceptual
design
Product
design
Manufacturing
Product use
Time (nonlinear)
Cost incurred
Cost committed
0
20
40
60
80
100
 FIGURE 1.1 
 Product cost commitment during phases of the design process. ( After Ullman. ) 

6 
engineering design 
1
redesign is achieved by changing some of the design parameters, it is often called 
 variant design. 
●  Selection design.  Most designs employ standard components such as bearings, 
small motors, or pumps that are supplied by vendors specializing in their manu-
facture and sale. Therefore, in this case the design task consists of selecting the 
components with the needed performance, quality, and cost from the catalogs of 
potential vendors. 
 1.3 
WAYS TO THINK ABOUT THE ENGINEERING DESIGN PROCESS 
 We often talk about “designing a system.” By a system we mean the entire combina-
tion of hardware, information, and people necessary to accomplish some specifi ed 
task. A system may be an electric power distribution network for a region of the na-
tion, a complex piece of machinery like an aircraft jet engine, or a combination of 
production steps to produce automobile parts. A large system usually is divided into 
 subsystems , which in turn are made up of  components or parts . 
 1.3.1 A Simplifi ed Iteration Model 
 There is no single universally acclaimed sequence of steps that leads to a workable de-
sign. Different writers or designers have outlined the design process in as few as fi ve 
steps or as many as 25. One of the fi rst to write introspectively about design was Morris 
Asimow. 1  He viewed the heart of the design process as consisting of the elements 
shown in Fig. 1.2. As portrayed there, design is a sequential process consisting of many 
design operations. Examples of the operations might be (1) exploring the alternative 
concepts that could satisfy the specifi ed need, (2) formulating a mathematical model 
of the best system concept, (3) specifying specifi c parts to construct a subsystem, and 
(4) selecting a material from which to manufacture a part. Each operation requires 
information, some of it general technical and business information that is expected 
of the trained professional and some of it very specifi c information that is needed to 
produce a successful outcome. Examples of the latter kind of information might be 
(1) a manufacturer’s catalog on miniature bearings, (2) handbook data on the proper-
ties of polymer composites, or (3) personal experience gained from a trip to observe a 
new manufacturing process. Acquisition of information is a vital and often very dif-
fi cult step in the design process, but fortunately it is a step that usually becomes easier 
with time. (We call this process  experience. ) 2  The importance of sources of informa-
tion is considered more fully in Chap. 5. 
 Once armed with the necessary information, the design team (or design en-
gineer if the task is rather limited) carries out the design operation by using the 
 1 .  M .  Asimow ,  Introduction to Design,  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,  1962 . 
 2 . Experience has been defi ned, perhaps a bit lightheartedly, as just a sequence of nonfatal events. 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
7
1
appropriate technical knowledge and computational and/or experimental tools. At 
this stage it may be necessary to construct a mathematical model and conduct a sim-
ulation of the component’s performance on a computer. Or it may be necessary to 
construct a full-size prototype model and test it to destruction at a proving ground. 
Whatever it is, the operation produces one or more alternatives that, again, may take 
many forms. It can be 30 megabytes of data on a memory stick, a rough sketch with 
critical dimensions, or a 3-D CAD model. At this stage the design outcome must 
be evaluated, often by a team of impartial experts, to decide whether it is adequate 
to meet the need. If so, the designer may go on to the next step. If the evaluation 
uncovers defi ciencies, then the design operation must be repeated. The information 
from the fi rst design is fed back as input, together with new information that has 
been developed as a result of questions raised at the evaluation step. We call this 
 iteration.  
 The fi nal result of the chain of design modules, each like Fig. 1.2, is a new work-
ing object (often referred to as a prototype) or a collection of objects that is a new 
system. However, the goal of many design projects is not the creation of new hardware 
or systems. Instead, the goal may be the development of new information that can be 
used elsewhere in the organization. It should be realized that not all system designs 
are carried through to completion; they are stopped because it has become clear that 
the objectives of the project are not technically and/or economically feasible. Regard-
less, the system design process creates new information which, if stored in retrievable 
form, has future value, since it represents experience. 
 The simple model shown in Fig. 1.2 illustrates a number of important aspects of 
the design process. First, design of even the most complex system can be broken down 
into a  sequence of design processes. Each outcome requires evaluation, and it is com-
mon for design to involve repeated trials or iterations. Of course, the more knowledge 
we have and can apply to the problem the faster we can arrive at an acceptable solu-
tion. This iterative aspect of design may take some getting used to. You will have to 
acquire a high tolerance for failure and the tenacity and determination to persevere 
and work the problem out one way or the other. 
General
information
Design operation
NO
YES
Feedback loop
Outcome
Evaluation
GO TO
THE
NEXT
STEP
Specific
information
 FIGURE 1.2 
 Basic module in the design process. ( After Asimow .) 

8 
engineering design 
1
 The iterative nature of design provides an opportunity to improve the design on 
the basis of a preceding outcome. That, in turn, leads to the search for the best pos-
sible technical condition—for example, maximum performance at minimum weight 
(or cost). Many techniques for optimizing a design have been developed, and some of 
them are covered in Chap. 15. Although optimization methods are intellectually pleas-
ing and technically interesting, they often have limited application in a complex de-
sign situation. Few designers have the luxury of working on a design task long enough 
and with a large enough budget to create an optimal system. In the usual situation the 
design parameters chosen by the engineer are a compromise among several alterna-
tives. There may be too many variables to include all of them in the optimization, or 
nontechnical considerations like available time or legal constraints may have to be 
considered, so that trade-offs must be made. The parameters chosen for the design 
are then close to but not at optimum values. We usually refer to them as  near-optimal 
values, the best that can be achieved within the total constraints of the system. 
 1.3.2 Design Method Versus Scientifi c Method 
 In your scientifi c and engineering education you may have heard reference to the sci-
entifi c method, a logical progression of events that leads to the solution of scientifi c 
problems. Percy Hill 1  has diagramed the comparison between the scientifi c method 
and the design method (Fig. 1.3). The scientifi c method starts with a body of exist-
ing knowledge based on observed natural phenomena. Scientists have curiosity that 
causes them to question these laws of science; and as a result of their questioning, 
they eventually formulate a hypothesis. The hypothesis is subjected to logical analysis 
that either confi rms or denies it. Often the analysis reveals fl aws or inconsistencies, 
so the hypothesis must be changed in an iterative process. 
 Finally, when the new idea is confi rmed to the satisfaction of its originator, it must 
be accepted as proof by fellow scientists. Once accepted, it is communicated to the 
community of scientists and it enlarges the body of existing knowledge. The knowl-
edge loop is completed. 
 The design method is very similar to the scientifi c method if we allow for differ-
ences in viewpoint and philosophy. The design method starts with knowledge of the 
state of the art. That includes scientifi c knowledge, but it also includes devices, com-
ponents, materials, manufacturing methods, and market and economic conditions. 
Rather than scientifi c curiosity, it is really the needs of society (usually expressed 
through economic factors) that provide the impetus. When a need is identifi ed, it must 
be conceptualized as some kind of model. The purpose of the model is to help us 
predict the behavior of a design once it is converted to physical form. The outcomes 
of the model, whether it is a mathematical or a physical model, must be subjected 
to a feasibility analysis, almost always with iteration, until an acceptable product is 
produced or the project is abandoned. When the design enters the production phase, 
it begins to compete in the world of technology. The design loop is closed when the 
 1 .  P. H .  Hill ,  The Science of Engineering Design,  Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York ,  1970 . 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
9
1
product is accepted as part of the current technology and thereby advances the state of 
the art of the particular area of technology. 
 A more philosophical differentiation between science and design has been ad-
vanced by the Nobel Prize–winning economist Herbert Simon. 1  He points out that 
science is concerned with creating knowledge about naturally occurring phenomena 
and objects, while design is concerned with creating knowledge about phenomena 
and  objects of the artifi cial . Artifi cial objects are those made by humans rather than 
nature. Thus, science is based on studies of the observed, while design is based on 
artifi cial concepts characterized in terms of functions, goals, and adaptation. 
 In the preceding brief outline of the design method, the identifi cation of a need 
requires further elaboration. Needs are identifi ed at many points in a business or or-
ganization. Most organizations have research or development departments whose job 
it is to create ideas that are relevant to the goals of the organization. A very important 
avenue for learning about needs is the customers for the product or services that the 
company sells. Managing this input is usually the job of the marketing organization of 
the company. Other needs are generated by government agencies, trade associations, 
or the attitudes or decisions of the general public. Needs usually arise from dissatis-
faction with the existing situation. The need drivers may be to reduce cost, increase 
reliability or performance, or just change because the public has become bored with 
the product. 
Existing
knowledge
Scientific
curiosity
Hypothesis
Logical
analysis
Proof
Scientific method
Communication
State of the
art
Identification
of need
Conceptualization
Feasibility
analysis
Production
Design method
Acceptance
 FIGURE 1.3 
 Comparison between the scientifi c method and the design method. ( After Percy Hill .) 
 1 .  H. A .  Simon ,  The Sciences of the Artifi cial , 3rd ed.,  The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA ,  1996 . 

10 
engineering design 
1
 1.3.3 A Problem-Solving Methodology 
 Designing can be approached as a problem to be solved. A problem-solving methodol-
ogy that is useful in design consists of the following steps. 1 
●  Defi nition of the problem 
●  Gathering of information 
●  Generation of alternative solutions 
●  Evaluation of alternatives and decision making 
●  Communication of the results 
 This problem-solving method can be used at any point in the design process, whether 
at the conception of a product or the design of a component. 
 Defi nition of the Problem 
 The most critical step in the solution of a problem is the  problem defi nition or 
formulation. The true problem is not always what it seems at fi rst glance. Because 
this step seemingly requires such a small part of the total time to reach a solution, its 
importance is often overlooked. Figure 1.4 illustrates how the fi nal design can differ 
greatly depending upon how the problem is defi ned.  
 The formulation of the problem should start by writing down a problem state-
ment. This document should express as specifi cally as possible what the problem is. It 
should include objectives and goals, the current state of affairs and the desired state, 
any constraints placed on solution of the problem, and the defi nition of any special 
technical terms. The problem-defi nition step in a design project is covered in detail in 
Chap. 3. 
 Problem defi nition often is called  needs analysis . While it is important to identify 
the needs clearly at the beginning of a design process, it should be understood that 
this is diffi cult to do for all but the most routine design. It is the nature of the design 
process that new needs are established as the design process proceeds because new 
problems arise as the design evolves. At this point, the analogy of design as problem 
solving is less fi tting. Design is problem solving only when all needs and potential is-
sues with alternatives are known. Of course, if these additional needs require rework-
ing those parts of the design that have been completed, then penalties are incurred 
in terms of cost and project schedule. Experience is one of the best remedies for this 
aspect of designing, but modern computer-based design tools help ameliorate the ef-
fects of inexperience.  
 Gathering Information 
 Perhaps the greatest frustration you will encounter when you embark on 
your fi rst design project will be either the dearth or the plethora of information. 
Your assigned problem may be in a technical area in which you have no previous 
  1 . A similar process called the guided iteration methodology has been proposed by    J. R .  Dixon   ; see    J. R . 
 Dixon and  C .  Poli ,  Engineering Design and Design for Manufacturing,   Field Stone Publishers, Conway, 
MA ,  1995 . A different but very similar problem-solving approach using TQM tools is given in Sec. 4.6. 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
11
1
background, and you may not have even a single basic reference on the subject. At 
the other extreme you may be presented with a mountain of reports of previous 
work, and your task will be to keep from drowning in paper. Whatever the situa-
tion, the immediate task is to identify the needed pieces of information and fi nd or 
develop that information. 
 An important point to realize is that the information needed in design is different 
from that usually associated with an academic course. Textbooks and articles pub-
lished in the scholarly technical journals usually are of lesser importance. The need 
often is for more specifi c and current information than is provided by those sources. 
Technical reports published as a result of government-sponsored R&D, company re-
ports, trade journals, patents, catalogs, and handbooks and literature published by 
vendors and suppliers of material and equipment are important sources of informa-
tion. The Internet is a very useful resource. Often the missing piece of information 
can be supplied by an Internet search, or by a telephone call or an e-mail to a key 
supplier. Discussions with in-house experts (often in the corporate R&D center) and 
outside consultants may prove helpful. 
 The following are some of the questions concerned with obtaining information: 
 What do I need to fi nd out? 
 Where can I fi nd it and how can I get it? 
As proposed by the project sponsor
As specified in the project request
As designed by the senior designer
As produced by manufacturing
As installed at the user's site
What the user wanted
 FIGURE 1.4 
 Note how the design depends on the viewpoint of the individual who defi nes the problem. 

12 
engineering design 
1
 How credible and accurate is the information? 
 How should the information be interpreted for my specifi c need? 
 When do I have enough information? 
 What decisions result from the information? 
 Some suggestions for fi nding relevant information can be found in Chap. 5. 
 Generation of Alternative Solutions 
 Generating alternative solutions or design concepts involves the use of creativity-
stimulation methods, the application of physical principles and qualitative reasoning, 
and the ability to fi nd and use information. Of course, experience helps greatly in this 
task. The ability to generate high-quality alternative solutions is vital to a successful 
design. This important subject is covered in Chap. 6, Concept Generation. 
 Evaluation of Alternatives and Decision Making 
 The evaluation of alternatives involves systematic methods for selecting the best 
among several concepts, often in the face of incomplete information. Engineering 
analysis procedures provide the basis for making decisions about service performance. 
Design for manufacturing analyses (Chap. 13) and cost estimation (Chap. 17) provide 
other important information. Various other types of engineering analysis also pro-
vide information. Simulation of performance with computer models is fi nding wide 
usage. Simulated service testing of an experimental model and testing of full-sized 
prototypes often provide critical data. Without this quantitative information it is not 
possible to make valid evaluations.  Several methods for evaluating design concepts, or 
any other problem solution, are given in Chap. 7. 
 An important activity at every step in the design process, but especially as the de-
sign nears completion, is  checking . In general, there are two types of checks that can 
be made: mathematical checks and engineering-sense checks. Mathematical checks 
are concerned with checking the arithmetic and the equations for errors in the conver-
sion of units used in the analytical model. Incidentally, the frequency of careless math 
errors is a good reason why you should adopt the practice of making all your design 
calculations in a bound notebook. In that way you won’t be missing a vital calcula-
tion when you are forced by an error to go back and check things out. Just draw a line 
through the section in error and continue. It is of special importance to ensure that 
every equation is dimensionally consistent. 
 Engineering-sense checks have to do with whether the answers “seem right.” Even 
though the reliability of your intuition increases with experience, you can now develop 
the habit of staring at your answer for a full minute, rather than rushing on to do the 
next calculation. If the calculated stress is 106 psi, you know something went wrong! 
Limit checks are a good form of engineering-sense check. Let a critical parameter in 
your design approach some limit (zero, infi nity, etc.), and observe whether the equa-
tion behaves properly. 
 We have stressed the i terative  nature of design. An optimization technique aimed 
at producing a  robust design  that is resistant to environmental infl uences (water vapor, 
temperature, vibration, etc.) most likely will be employed to select the best values of 
key design parameters (see Chap. 15).  

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
13
1
 Communication of the Results 
 It must always be kept in mind that the purpose of the design is to satisfy the 
needs of a customer or client. Therefore, the fi nalized design must be properly com-
municated, or it may lose much of its impact or signifi cance. The communication is 
usually by oral presentation to the sponsor as well as by a written design report. Sur-
veys typically show that design engineers spend 60 percent of their time in discussing 
designs and preparing written documentation of designs, while only 40 percent of the 
time is spent in analyzing and testing designs and doing the designing. Detailed en-
gineering drawings, computer programs, 3-D computer models, and working models 
are frequently among the “deliverables” to the customer. 
 It hardly needs to be emphasized that communication is not a one-time occur-
rence to be carried out at the end of the project. In a well-run design project there is 
continual oral and written dialog between the project manager and the customer.  
 Note that the problem-solving methodology does not necessarily proceed in the 
order just listed. While it is important to defi ne the problem early on, the understand-
ing of the problem improves as the team moves into solution generation and evaluation. 
In fact, design is characterized by its iterative nature, moving back and forth between 
partial solutions and problem defi nition. This is in marked contrast with engineering 
analysis, which usually moves in a steady progression from problem setup to solution. 
 There is a paradox inherent in the design process between the accumulation of 
problem (domain) knowledge and freedom to improve the design. When one is creating 
an original design, very little is known about its solution. As the design team proceeds 
with its work, it acquires more knowledge about the technologies involved and the pos-
sible solutions (Fig. 1.5). The team has moved up the learning curve. However, as the 
design process proceeds, the design team is forced to make many decisions about design 
Knowledge about
the design problem
Design
freedom
Percentage
100
80
60
40
20
0
Time into design process
 FIGURE 1.5 
 The design paradox between design knowledge and design freedom. 

14 
engineering design 
1
details, technology approaches, perhaps to let contracts for long-lead-time equipment, 
and so on. Thus, as Fig. 1.5 shows, the freedom of the team to go back and start over 
with their newly gained knowledge (experience) decreases greatly as their knowledge 
about the design problem grows. At the beginning the designer has the freedom to make 
changes without great cost penalty, but may not know what to do to make the design 
better. The paradox comes from the fact that when the design team fi nally masters the 
problem, their design is essentially frozen because of the great penalties involved with a 
change. The solution is for the design team to learn as much about the problem as early 
in the design process as it possibly can. This also places high priority on the team mem-
bers learning to work independently toward a common goal (Chap. 4), being skilled in 
gathering information (Chap. 5), and being good at communicating relevant knowledge 
to their teammates. Design team members must become stewards of the knowledge they 
acquire. Figure 1.5 also shows why it is important to document in detail what has been 
done, so that the experience can be used by subsequent teams in future projects.  
 1.4 
DESCRIPTION OF DESIGN PROCESS 
 Morris Asimow 1  was among the fi rst to give a detailed description of the complete de-
sign process in what he called the morphology of design. Figure 1.6 shows the various 
activities that make up the fi rst three phases of design: conceptual design, embodi-
ment design, and detail design. The purpose of this graphic is to remind you of the 
logical sequence of activities that leads from problem defi nition to the detail design. 
 1.4.1 Phase I. Conceptual Design 
 Conceptual design is the process by which the design is initiated, carried to the point 
of creating a number of possible solutions, and narrowed down to a single best con-
cept. It is sometimes called the feasibility study. Conceptual design is the phase that 
requires the greatest creativity, involves the most uncertainty, and requires coordina-
tion among many functions in the business organization. The following are the dis-
crete activities that we consider under conceptual design. 
●  Identifi cation of customer needs : The goal of this activity is to completely under-
stand the customers’ needs and to communicate them to the design team. 
●  Problem defi nition : The goal of this activity is to create a statement that describes 
what has to be accomplished to satisfy the needs of the customer. This involves 
analysis of competitive products, the establishment of target specifi cations, and the 
listing of constraints and trade-offs. Quality function deployment (QFD) is a valu-
able tool for linking customer needs with design requirements. A detailed listing of 
the product requirements is called a product design specifi cation (PDS). Problem 
defi nition, in its full scope, is treated in Chap. 3. 
 1 .  I. M .  Asimow ,  Introduction to Design,  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ ,  1962 . 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
15
1
●  Gathering information:  Engineering design presents special requirements over en-
gineering research in the need to acquire a broad spectrum of information. This 
subject is covered in Chap. 5. 
●  Conceptualization : Concept generation involves creating a broad set of concepts 
that potentially satisfy the problem statement. Team-based creativity methods, 
combined with effi cient information gathering, are the key activities. This subject is 
covered in Chap. 6. 
●  Concept selection : Evaluation of the design concepts, modifying and evolving into 
a single preferred concept, are the activities in this step. The process usually re-
quires several iterations. This is covered in Chap. 7. 
●  Refi nement of the PDS : The product design specifi cation is revisited after the con-
cept has been selected. The design team must commit to achieving certain critical 
values of design parameters, usually called critical-to-quality (CTQ) parameters, 
and to living with trade-offs between cost and performance. 
●   Design review : Before committing funds to move to the next design phase, a design re-
view will be held. The design review will assure that the design is physically realizable 
and that it is economically worthwhile. It will also look at a detailed product-development 
schedule. This is needed to devise a strategy to minimize product cycle time and to iden-
tify the resources in people, equipment, and money needed to complete the project.  
 1.4.2 Phase II. Embodiment Design 
 Structured development of the design concept occurs in this engineering design 
phase. It is the place where fl esh is placed on the skeleton of the design concept. An 
Define
problem
Problem statement
Benchmarking
Product dissection
House of Quality
PDS
Gather
information
Conceptual design
Internet
Patents
Technical articles
Trade journals
Consultants
Concept
generation
Creativity methods
Brainstorming
Functional models
Decomposition
Systematic design
methods
Evaluation
of concepts
Decision making
Selection criteria
Pugh chart
Decision matrix
AHP
Product
architecture
Arrangement of
physical elements
Modularity
Configuration
design
Preliminary selection
of materials and
manufacturing
processes
Modeling 
Sizing of parts
Parametric
design
Robust design
Set tolerances
DFM, DFA, DFE
Tolerances
Detail
design
Engineering
drawings
Finalize PDS
Embodiment design
FIGURE 1.6
The design activities that make up the fi rst three phases of the engineering design process.

16 
engineering design 
1
embodiment of all the main functions that must be performed by the product must 
be undertaken. It is in this design phase that decisions are made on strength, mate-
rial selection, size, shape, and spatial compatibility. Beyond this design phase, major 
changes become very expensive. This design phase is sometimes called preliminary 
design. Embodiment design is concerned with three major tasks—product architec-
ture, confi guration design, and parametric design. 
●  Determining product architecture : Product architecture is concerned with divid-
ing the overall design system into subsystems or modules. In this step we decide 
how the physical components of the design are to be arranged and combined to 
carry out the functional duties of the design. 
●  Confi guration design of parts and components : Parts are made up of features like 
holes, ribs, splines, and curves. Confi guring a part means to determine what fea-
tures will be present and how those features are to be arranged in space relative 
to each other. While modeling and simulation may be performed in this stage to 
check out function and spatial constraints, only approximate sizes are determined 
to assure that the part satisfi es the PDS. Also, more specifi city about materials and 
manufacturing is given here. The generation of a physical model of the part with 
rapid prototyping processes may be appropriate. 
●  Parametric design of parts : Parametric design starts with information on the con-
fi guration of the part and aims to establish its exact dimensions and tolerances. 
Final decisions on the material and manufacturing processes are also established 
if this has not been done previously. An important aspect of parametric design is 
to examine the part, assembly, and system for design robustness.  Robustness refers 
to how consistently a component performs under variable conditions in its service 
environment. The methods developed by Dr. Genichi Taguchi for achieving robust-
ness and establishing the optimum tolerance are discussed in Chap. 15. Paramet-
ric design also deals with determining the aspects of the design that could lead to 
failure (see Chap. 14). Another important consideration in parametric design is to 
design in such a way that manufacturability is enhanced (see Chap. 13). 
 1.4.3 Phase III. Detail Design 
 In this phase the design is brought to the stage of a complete engineering description 
of a tested and producible product. Missing information is added on the arrangement, 
form, dimensions, tolerances, surface properties, materials, and manufacturing pro-
cesses of each part. This results in a specifi cation for each  special-purpose part and 
for each  standard part  to be purchased from suppliers. In the detail design phase the 
following activities are completed and documents are prepared: 
●  Detailed engineering drawings suitable for manufacturing. Routinely these are 
computer-generated drawings, and they often include three-dimensional CAD models.   
●  Verifi cation testing of prototypes is successfully completed and verifi cation data 
is submitted. All critical-to-quality parameters are confi rmed to be under control. 
Usually the building and testing of several preproduction versions of the product 
will be accomplished. 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
17
1
●  Assembly drawings and assembly instructions also will be completed. The bill of 
materials for all assemblies will be completed.  
●  A detailed product specifi cation, updated with all the changes made since the con-
ceptual design phase, will be prepared. 
●  Decisions on whether to make each part internally or to buy from an external sup-
plier will be made. 
●  With the preceding information, a detailed cost estimate for the product will be 
carried out. 
● Finally, detail design concludes with a design review before the decision is made to 
pass the design information on to manufacturing.
 Phases I, II, and III take the design from the realm of possibility to the real world 
of practicality. However, the design process is not fi nished with the delivery of a set of 
engineering drawings and specifi cations to the manufacturing organization. Many 
other technical and business decisions must be made to bring the design to the point 
where it can be delivered to the customer. Chief among these, as discussed in Sec. 9.5, 
are detailed plans for manufacturing the product, for planning its launch into the mar-
ketplace, and for disposing of it in an environmentally safe way after it has completed 
its useful life.
 1.5 
CONSIDERATIONS OF A GOOD DESIGN 
 Design is a multifaceted process. To gain a broader understanding of engineering 
design, we group various considerations of good design into three categories: (1) achieve-
ment of performance requirements, (2) life-cycle issues, and (3) social and regulatory 
issues.  
 1.5.1 Achievement of Performance Requirements 
 It is obvious that to be feasible the design must demonstrate the required performance. 
Performance measures both the function and the behavior of the design, that is, how 
well the device does what it is designed to do. Performance requirements can be di-
vided into primary performance requirements and complementary performance re-
quirements. A major characteristic of a design is its  function . The function of a design 
is how it is expected to behave. For example, the design may be required to grasp an 
object of a certain mass and move it 50 feet in one minute. Functional requirements 
are usually expressed in capacity measures such as forces, strength, defl ection, or en-
ergy or power output or consumption. Complementary performance requirements are 
concerns such as the useful life of the design, its robustness to factors occurring in the 
service environment (see Chap. 15), its reliability (see Chap. 14), and ease, economy, 
and safety of maintenance. Issues such as built-in safety features and the noise level 
in operation must be considered. Finally, the design must conform to all legal require-
ments and design codes. 

18 
engineering design 
1
1. Another term for product is device, something devised or constructed for a particular purpose, like a 
machine.
2. In product development the term feature has an entirely different meaning as “an aspect or character-
istic of the product.” For example, a product feature for a power drill could be a laser beam attachment 
for alignment of the drill when drilling a hole.
 A product1 is usually made up of a collection of parts, sometimes called piece-
parts. A  part is a single piece requiring no assembly. When two or more parts are 
joined it is called an  assembly.  Often large assemblies   are composed of a collection of 
smaller assemblies called  subassemblies . A similar term for part is  component . The 
two terms are used interchangeably in this book, but in the design literature the word 
component sometimes is used to describe a subassembly with a small number of parts. 
Consider an ordinary ball bearing. It consists of an outer ring, inner ring, 10 or more 
balls depending on size, and a retainer to keep the balls from rubbing together. A ball 
bearing is often called a component, even though it consists of a number of parts.  
 Closely related to the function of a component in a design is its form.  Form is 
what the component looks like, and encompasses its shape, size, and surface fi nish. 
These, in turn, depend upon the material it is made from and the manufacturing pro-
cesses that are used to make it. 
 A variety of analysis techniques must be employed in arriving at the features of 
a component in the design. By  feature  we mean specifi c physical attributes, such as 
the fi ne details of geometry, dimensions, and tolerances on the dimensions. 2 Typical 
geometrical features would be fi llets, holes, walls, and ribs. The computer has had 
a major impact in this area by providing powerful analytical tools based on fi nite- 
element analysis. Calculations of stress, temperature, and other fi eld-dependent vari-
ables can be made rather handily for complex geometry and loading conditions. When 
these analytical methods are coupled with interactive computer graphics, we have the 
exciting capability known as computer-aided engineering (CAE); see Sec. 1.6. Note 
that with this enhanced capability for analysis comes greater responsibility for provid-
ing better understanding of product performance at early stages of the design process. 
 Environmental requirements for performance deal with two separate aspects. 
The fi rst concerns the service conditions under which the product must operate. The 
extremes of temperature, humidity, corrosive conditions, dirt, vibration, and noise, 
must be predicted and allowed for in the design. The second aspect of environmen-
tal requirements pertains to how the product will behave with regard to maintaining 
a safe and clean environment, that is, green design. Often governmental regulations 
force these considerations in design, but over time they become standard design prac-
tice. Among these issues is the disposal of the product when it reaches its useful life. 
Design for the Environment (DFE) is discussed in detail in Chap.10. 
 Aesthetic requirements refer to “the sense of the beautiful.” They are concerned 
with how the product is perceived by a customer because of its shape, color, surface 
texture, and also such factors as balance, unity, and interest. This aspect of design 
usually is the responsibility of the industrial designer, as opposed to the engineer-
ing designer. The industrial designer is in part an applied artist. Decisions about the 
appearance of the product should be an integral part of the initial design concept. 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
19
1
An important design consideration is adequate attention to  human factors engineer-
ing, which uses the sciences of biomechanics, ergonomics, and engineering psy-
chology to assure that the design can be operated effi ciently by humans. It applies 
physiological and anthropometric data to such design features as visual and auditory 
display of instruments and control systems. It is also concerned with human muscle 
power and response times. The industrial designer often is responsible for considering 
the human factors. For further information, see Sec. 8.9. 
 Manufacturing technology must be closely integrated with product design. There 
may be restrictions on the manufacturing processes that can be used, because of either 
selection of material or availability of equipment within the company. 
 The fi nal major design requirement is cost. Every design has requirements of an 
economic nature. These include such issues as product development cost, initial prod-
uct cost, life cycle product cost, tooling cost, and return on investment. In many cases 
cost is the most important design requirement. If preliminary estimates of product 
cost look unfavorable, the design project may never be initiated. Cost enters into every 
aspect of the design process.  
 1.5.2 Total Life Cycle 
 The total life cycle of a part starts with the conception of a need and ends with the 
retirement and disposal of the product. 
 Material selection is a key element in shaping the total life cycle (see Chap. 11). In 
selecting materials for a given application, the fi rst step is evaluation of the service con-
ditions. Next, the properties of materials that relate most directly to the service require-
ments must be determined. Except in almost trivial conditions, there is never a simple 
relation between service performance and material properties. The design may start 
with the consideration of static yield strength, but properties that are more diffi cult to 
evaluate, such as fatigue, creep, toughness, ductility, and corrosion resistance may have 
to be considered. We need to know whether the material is stable under the environmen-
tal conditions. Does the microstructure change with temperature and therefore change 
the properties? Does the material corrode slowly or wear at an unacceptable rate? 
 Material selection cannot be separated from  manufacturability  (see Chap. 13). 
There is an inherent connection between design and material selection and the manu-
facturing processes. The objective in this area is a trade-off between the opposing fac-
tors of minimum cost and maximum durability. Durability is increased by designing 
so as to minimize material deterioration by corrosion, wear, or fracture. It is a general 
property of the product measured by months or years of successful service, and is 
closely related to reliability, a technical term that is measured by the probability of 
achieving a specifi ed service life. Current societal issues of energy conservation, ma-
terial conservation, and protection of the environment result in new pressures in the 
selection of materials and manufacturing processes. Energy costs, once nearly ignored 
in design, are now among the most prominent design considerations. Design for mate-
rials recycling also is becoming an important design consideration.  
 The life cycle of production and consumption that is characteristic of all products 
is illustrated by the materials cycle shown in Fig. 1.7. This starts with the mining of a 

1
FIGURE 1.7
The total materials cycle. (Reproduced from “Materials and Man’s Needs,” National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C., 1974.)
Mine
Drill
Harvest
The Earth
Wood
Oil
Ore
Extract
Refine
Process
BULK MATERIALS
RAW MATERIALS
Process
Design
Manufacturing
Assembly
Metals
Recycle
Chemicals
Cement
Ore
Coal
Sand
Wood
Oil
Rock
Plants
Paper
Crystals
ENGINEERING
MATERIALS
Textiles
Alloys
Plastics
Ceramics
Products
Devices
Machines
Structures
Concrete
Fibers
Performance
Service
Use
Dispose
Waste
Junk
20

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
21
1
mineral or the drilling for oil or the harvesting of an agricultural fi ber such as cotton. 
These raw materials must be processed to extract or refi ne a bulk material (e.g., an 
aluminum ingot) that is further processed into a fi nished engineering material (e.g., 
an aluminum sheet). At this stage an engineer designs a product that is manufactured 
from the material, and the part is put into service. Eventually the part wears out or be-
comes obsolete because a better product comes on the market. At this stage, one option 
is to junk the part and dispose of it in some way that eventually returns the material 
to the earth. However, society is becoming increasingly concerned with the depletion 
of natural resources and the haphazard disposal of solid materials. Thus, we look for 
economical ways to recycle waste materials (e.g., aluminum beverage cans). 
 1.5.3 Regulatory and Social Issues 
 Specifi cations and standards have an important infl uence on design practice. The stan-
dards produced by such societies as ASTM and ASME represent voluntary agreement 
among many elements (users and producers) of industry. As such, they often represent 
minimum or least-common-denominator standards. When good design requires more 
than that, it may be necessary to develop your own company or agency standards. On 
the other hand, because of the general nature of most standards, a standard sometimes 
requires a producer to meet a requirement that is not essential to the particular func-
tion of the design. 
 The codes of ethics of all professional engineering societies require the engineer 
to protect public health and safety. Increasingly, legislation has been passed to require 
federal agencies to regulate many aspects of safety and health. The requirements of 
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), the Consumer Product 
Safety Commission (CPSC), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) place direct constraints on the designer in 
the interests of protecting health, safety, and security. Several aspects of the CPSC 
regulations have far-reaching infl uence on product design. Although the intended pur-
pose of a product normally is quite clear, the unintended uses of that product are not 
always obvious. Under the CPSC regulations, the designer has the obligation to fore-
see as many unintended uses as possible, then develop the design in such a way as to 
prevent hazardous use of the product in an unintended but foreseeable manner. When 
unintended use cannot be prevented by functional design, clear, complete, unambigu-
ous warnings must be permanently attached to the product. In addition, the designer 
must be cognizant of all advertising material, owner’s manuals, and operating instruc-
tions that relate to the product to ensure that the contents of the material are consistent 
with safe operating procedures and do not promise performance characteristics that 
are beyond the capability of the design. 
 An important design consideration is adequate attention to human factors engi-
neering, which uses the sciences of biomechanics, ergonomics, and engineering psy-
chology to assure that the design can be operated effi ciently and safely by humans. It 
applies physiological and anthropometric data to such design features as visual and 
auditory display of instruments and control systems. It is also concerned with human 
muscle power and response times. For further information, see Sec. 8.8. 

22 
engineering design 
1
 1.6 
COMPUTER-AIDED ENGINEERING 
 The advent of plentiful computing has produced a major change in the way engineer-
ing design is practiced. While engineers were among the fi rst professional groups to 
adapt the computer to their needs, the early applications chiefl y were computationally 
intensive ones, using a high-level language like FORTRAN. The fi rst computer appli-
cations were conducted in batch mode, with the code prepared on punch cards. Over-
night turnaround was the norm. Later, remote access to computer mainframes through 
terminals became common, and the engineer could engage in interactive (if still slow) 
computation. The development of the microprocessor and the proliferation of personal 
computers and engineering workstations with computational power equivalent to that 
of a mainframe has created a revolution in the way an engineer approaches and carries 
out problem solving and design.  
 The greatest impact of computer-aided engineering has been in engineering 
drawing. The automation of drafting in two dimensions has become commonplace. 
The ready ability to make changes and to use parts of old designs in new drawings 
offers a great saving in time. Three-dimensional modeling has become prevalent as it 
has become available on desktop computers. Three-dimensional solid modeling pro-
vides a complete geometric and mathematical description of the part geometry. Solid 
models can be sectioned to reveal interior details, or they can be readily converted 
into conventional two-dimensional engineering drawings. Such a model is very rich 
in intrinsic information so that it can be used not only for physical design but also for 
analysis, design optimization, simulation, rapid prototyping, and manufacturing. For 
example, geometric three-dimensional modeling ties in nicely with the extensive use 
of fi nite-element modeling (FEM) and makes possible interactive simulations in such 
problems as stress analysis, fl uid fl ow, the kinematics of mechanical linkages, and 
numerically controlled tool-path generation for machining operations. The ultimate 
computer simulation is  virtual reality,  where the viewer feels like a part of the graphi-
cal simulation on the computer screen.  
 The computer extends the designer’s capabilities in several ways. First, by orga-
nizing and handling time-consuming and repetitive operations, it frees the designer to 
concentrate on more complex design tasks. Second, it allows the designer to analyze 
complex problems faster and more completely. Both of these factors make it possible 
to carry out more iterations of design. Finally, through a computer-based informa-
tion system the designer can share more information sooner with people in the com-
pany, like manufacturing engineers, process planners, tool and die designers, and pur-
chasing agents. The link between computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided 
manufacturing (CAM) is particularly important. Moreover, by using the Internet and 
satellite telecommunication, these persons can be on different continents 10 time 
zones away.  
 Concurrent engineering is greatly facilitated by the use of computer-aided en-
gineering.  Concurrent engineering  is a team-based approach in which all aspects 
of the product development process are represented on a closely communicating 
team. Team members perform their jobs in an overlapping and concurrent man-
ner so as to minimize the time for product development (see Sec 2.4.4). A computer 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
23
1
database in the form of a solid model that can be accessed by all members of the 
design team, as in the Boeing 777 example, is a vital tool for this communication. 
More and more the Internet, with appropriate security, is being used to transmit 3-D 
CAD models to tool designers, part vendors, and numerical-control programmers for 
manufacturing development in a highly networked global design and manufacturing 
system. 
 Computer-aided engineering  became a reality when the power of the PC work-
station, and later the laptop PC, became great enough at an acceptable cost to free 
the design engineer from the limitations of the mainframe computer. Bringing the 
computing power of the mainframe computer to the desktop of the design engineer 
has created great opportunities for more creative, reliable, and cost-effective designs.  
 CAE developed in two major domains: computer graphics and modeling, and 
mathematical analysis and simulation of design problems. The ability to do 3-D 
modeling is within the capability of every engineering student. The most common 
computer modeling software packages at the undergraduate level are AutoCAD, ProE, 
and SolidWorks. CAE analysis tools run the gamut from spreadsheet calculations to 
complex fi nite-element models involving stress, heat transfer, and fl uid fl ow. 
 Spreadsheet applications may seem quaint to engineering students, but spread-
sheet programs are useful because of their ability to quickly make multiple calcula-
tions without requiring the user to reenter all of the data. Each combination of row 
and column in the spreadsheet matrix is called a cell. The quantity in each cell can 
represent either a number entered as input or a number that the spreadsheet program 
 Boeing 777 
 The boldest example of the use of CAD is with the Boeing 777 long-range trans-
port. Started in fall 1990 and completed in April 1994, this was the world’s fi rst 
completely paperless transport design. Employing the CATIA 3-D CAD system, 
it linked all of Boeing’s design and manufacturing groups in Washington, as well 
as suppliers of systems and components worldwide. At its peak, the CAD system 
served some 7000 workstations spread over 17 time zones. 
 As many as 238 design teams worked on the project at a single time. Had they 
been using conventional paper design, they might have experienced many interfer-
ences among hardware systems, requiring costly design changes and revised draw-
ings. This is a major cost factor in designing a complex system. The advantage of 
being able to see what everyone else was doing, through an integrated solid model 
and digital data system, saved in excess of 50 percent of the change orders and re-
work expected for a design of this magnitude. 
 The Boeing 777 has more than 130,000 unique engineered parts, and when 
rivets and other fasteners are counted, there are more than 3 million individual 
parts. The ability of the CAD system to identify interferences eliminated the need 
to build a physical model (mockup) of the airplane. Nevertheless, those experi-
enced with transport design and construction reported that the parts of the 777 fi t 
better the fi rst time than those of any earlier commercial airliner. 

24 
engineering design 
1
calculates according to a prescribed equation. 1  The power of the spreadsheet is based 
on its ability to automatically recalculate results when new inputs have been entered 
in some cells. This can serve as a simple optimization tool as the values of one or two 
variables are changed and the impact on the output is readily observed. The useful-
ness of a spreadsheet in cost evaluations is self-evident. Most spreadsheet software 
programs contain built-in mathematical functions that permit engineering and statisti-
cal calculations. It is also possible to use them to solve problems in numerical analysis.  
 The solution of an equation with a spreadsheet requires that the equation be 
set up so that the unknown term is on one side of the equal sign. In working with 
equations it often is useful to be able to solve for any variable. Therefore, a class of 
 equation- solving programs has been developed for small computations on the personal 
computer. The best-known examples are TK Solver, MathCAD, and EES (Engineer-
ing Equation Solver). Another important set of computational tools are the symbolic 
languages that manipulate the symbols representing the equation. Most common are 
Mathematica, Maple, and  MATLAB. MATLAB 2  has found a special niche in many 
engineering departments because of its user-friendly computer interface, its ability to 
be programmable (and thus replace Fortran, Basic, and Pascal as programming lan-
guages), its excellent graphics features, excellent ability to solve differential equations, 
and the availability of more than 20 “toolboxes” in various applications areas.  
 Specialized application programs to support engineering design are appearing 
at a rapid rate. These include software for fi nite-element modeling, QFD, creativity 
enhancement, decision making, manufacturing process modeling and statistical mod-
eling. Useful software packages of this type will be mentioned as these topics are 
introduced throughout the text. 
 1.7 
DESIGNING TO CODES AND STANDARDS 
 While we have often talked about design being a creative process, the fact is that much 
of design is not very different from what has been done in the past. There are obvious 
benefi ts in cost and time saved if the best practices are captured and made available 
for all to use. Designing with codes and standards has two chief aspects: (1) it makes 
the best practice available to everyone, thereby ensuring effi ciency and safety, and 
(2) it promotes interchangeability and compatibility. With respect to the second point, 
anyone who has traveled widely in other countries will understand the compatibility 
problems with connecting plugs and electrical voltage and frequency when trying to 
use small appliances. 
 A  code is a collection of laws and rules that assists a government agency in 
meeting its obligation to protect the general welfare by preventing damage to prop-
erty or injury or loss of life to persons. A  standard  is a generally agreed-upon set 
 1 .  B. S .  Gottfried ,  Spreadsheet Tools for Engineers,  McGraw-Hill, New York ,  1996 ;  S. C .  Bloch ,  EXCEL 
for Engineers and Scientists,  John Wiley & Sons, New York ,  2000 . 
 2 .  W. J .  Palm III ,  Introduction to MATLAB 7 for Engineers, 2d ed.,  McGraw-Hill, New York ,  2005 ;  E. B . 
 Magrab , et al,  An Engineer’s Guide to MATLAB, 2d ed.,  Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ .  2005 . 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
25
1
of procedures, criteria, dimensions, materials, or parts. Engineering standards may 
describe the dimensions and sizes of small parts like screws and bearings, the mini-
mum properties of materials, or an agreed-upon procedure to measure a property like 
fracture toughness.  
 The terms standards and specifi cations are sometimes used interchangeably. The 
distinction is that standards refer to generalized situations, while specifi cations refer 
to specialized situations. Codes tell the engineer what to do and when and under what 
circumstances to do it. Codes usually are legal requirements, as in the building code 
or the fi re code. Standards tell the engineer how to do it and are usually regarded 
as recommendations that do not have the force of law. Codes often incorporate na-
tional standards into them by reference, and in this way standards become legally 
enforceable. 
 There are two broad forms of codes: performance codes and prescriptive codes. 
 Performance codes  are stated in terms of the specifi c requirement that is expected to 
be achieved. The method to achieve the result is not specifi ed.  Prescriptive  or specifi -
cation codes state the requirements in terms of specifi c details and leave no discretion 
to the designer. A form of code is government regulations. These are issued by agen-
cies (federal or state) to spell out the details for the implementation of vaguely writ-
ten laws. An example is the OSHA regulations developed by the U.S. Department of 
Labor to implement the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA). 
 Design standards fall into three categories: performance, test methods, and codes 
of practice. There are published performance standards for many products such as seat 
belts, lumber, and auto crash safety. Test method standards set forth methods for mea-
suring properties such as yield strength, thermal conductivity, or electrical resistivity. 
Most of these are developed for and published by the American Society for Testing 
and Materials (ASTM). Another important set of testing standards for products are 
developed by the Underwriters Laboratories (UL). Codes of practice give detailed de-
sign methods for repetitive technical problems such as the design of piping, heat ex-
changers, and pressure vessels. Many of these are developed by the American Society 
of Mechanical Engineers (ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code), the American 
Nuclear Society, and the Society of Automotive Engineers. 
 Standards are often prepared by individual companies for their own proprietary 
use. They address such things as dimensions, tolerances, forms, manufacturing pro-
cesses, and fi nishes. In-house standards are often used by the company purchasing de-
partment when outsourcing. The next level of standard preparation involves groups of 
companies in the same industry arriving at industry consensus standards. Often these 
are sponsored through an industry trade association, such as the American Institute of 
Steel Construction (AISC) or the Door and Hardware Institute. Industry standards of 
this type are usually submitted to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
for a formal review process, approval, and publication. A similar function is played 
by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in Geneva, Switzerland. 
Another important set of standards are government (federal, state, and local) speci-
fi cation standards. Because the government is such a large purchaser of goods and 
services, it is important for the engineer to have access to these standards. Engineers 
working in high-tech defense areas must be conversant with MIL standards and hand-
books of the Department of Defense.  

26 
engineering design 
1
 In addition to protecting the public, standards play an important role in reducing 
the cost of design and of products. The use of standard components and materials 
leads to cost reduction in many ways. The use of design standards saves the designer, 
when involved in original design work, from spending time on fi nding solutions to 
a multitude of recurring identical problems. Moreover, designs based on standards 
provide a fi rm basis for negotiation and better understanding between the buyer and 
seller of a product. Failure to incorporate up-to-date standards in a design may lead to 
diffi culties with product liability (see Chap. 18).  
 The engineering design process is concerned with balancing four goals: proper 
function, optimum performance, adequate reliability, and low cost. The greatest cost 
saving comes from reusing existing parts in design. The main savings come from 
eliminating the need for new tooling in production and from a signifi cant reduction 
in the parts that must be stocked to provide service over the lifetime of the product. In 
much of new product design only 20 percent of the parts are new, about 40 percent are 
existing parts used with minor modifi cation, while the other 40 percent are existing 
parts reused without modifi cation. 
 An important aspect of standardization in CAD-CAM is in interfacing and com-
municating information between various computer devices and manufacturing ma-
chines. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has been instru-
mental in developing and promulgating the IGES code, and more recently the Product 
Data Exchange Specifi cation (PDES). Both of these standards represent a neutral data 
format for transferring geometric data between equipment from different vendors of 
CAD systems. This is an excellent example of the role of, and need for, a national 
standards organization. 
 1.8
 DESIGN REVIEW 
 The design review is a vital aspect of the design process. It provides an opportunity 
for specialists from different disciplines to interact with generalists to ask critical 
questions and exchange vital information. A  design review is a retrospective study 
of the design up to that point in time. It provides a systematic method for identifying 
problems with the design, determining future courses of action, and initiating action 
to correct any problem areas. 
 To accomplish these objectives, the review team should consist of representa-
tives from design, manufacturing, marketing, purchasing, quality control, reliability 
engineering, and fi eld service. The chairman of the review team is normally a chief 
engineer or project manager with a broad technical background and broad knowl-
edge of the company’s products. In order to ensure freedom from bias, the chairman 
of the design review team should not have direct responsibility for the design under 
review. 
 Depending on the size and complexity of the product, design reviews should be 
held from three to six times in the life of the project. The minimum review schedule 
consists of conceptual, interim, and fi nal reviews. The conceptual review occurs once 
the conceptual design (Chap. 7) has been established. This review has the greatest 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
27
1
impact on the design, since many of the design details are still fl uid and changes can 
be made at this stage with least cost. The interim review occurs when the embodiment 
design is fi nalized and the product architecture, subsystems, performance characteris-
tics, and critical design parameters are established. It looks critically at the interfaces 
between the subsystems. The fi nal review takes place at completion of the detail 
design and establishes whether the design is ready for transfer to manufacturing. 
 Each review looks at two main aspects. The fi rst is concerned with the technical 
elements of the design, while the second is concerned with the business aspects of the 
product (see Chap. 2). The essence of the technical review of the design is to compare 
the fi ndings against the detailed product design specifi cation (PDS) that is formulated 
at the problem defi nition phase of the project. The PDS is a detailed document that 
describes what the design must be in terms of performance requirements, the envi-
ronment in which it must operate, the product life, quality, reliability, cost, and a host 
of other design requirements. The PDS is the basic reference document for both the 
product design and the design review. The business aspect of the review is concerned 
with tracking the costs incurred in the project, projecting how the design will affect 
the expected marketing and sales of the product, and maintaining the time sched-
ule. An important outcome of the review is to determine what changes in resources, 
people, and money are required to produce the appropriate business outcome. It must 
be realized that a possible outcome of any review is to withdraw the resources and 
terminate the project. 
 A formal design review process requires a commitment to good documentation 
of what has been done, and a willingness to communicate this to all parties involved 
in the project. The minutes of the review meeting should clearly state what decisions 
were made and should include a list of “action items” for future work. Since the PDS 
is the basic control document, care must be taken to keep it always updated. 
 1.8.1 Redesign 
 A common situation is redesign. There are two categories of redesigns:  fi xes  and  up-
dates . A fi x is a design modifi cation that is required due to less than acceptable perfor-
mance once the product has been introduced into the marketplace. On the other hand, 
updates are usually planned as part of the product’s life cycle before the product is 
introduced to the market. An update may add new features and improve performance 
to the product or improve its appearance to keep it competitive. 
 The most common situation in redesign is the modifi cation of an existing prod-
uct to meet new requirements. For example, the banning of the use of fl uorinated 
hydrocarbon refrigerants because of the “ozone-hole problem” required the extensive 
redesign of refrigeration systems. Often redesign results from failure of the product in 
service. A much simpler situation is the case where one or two dimensions of a com-
ponent must be changed to match some change made by the customer for that part. 
Yet another situation is the continuous evolution of a design to improve performance. 
An extreme example of this is shown in Fig. 1.8. The steel railroad wheel had been 
in its present design for nearly 150 years. In spite of improvements in metallurgy and 
the understanding of stresses, the wheels still failed at the rate of about 200 per year, 

28 
engineering design 
1
often causing disastrous derailments. The chief cause of failure was thermal buildup 
caused by failure of a railcar’s braking system. Long-term research by the Associa-
tion of American Railroads has resulted in the improved, current design. The chief 
design change is that the fl at plate, the web between the bore and the rim, has been 
replaced by an S-shaped plate. The curved shape allows the plate to act like a spring, 
fl exing when overheated, avoiding the buildup of stresses that are transmitted through 
the rigid fl at plates. The wheel’s tread has also been redesigned to extend the rolling 
life of the wheel. Car wheels last for about 200,000 miles. Traditionally, when a new 
wheel was placed in service it lost from 30 to 40 percent of its tread and fl ange while 
it wore away to a new shape during the fi rst 25,000 miles of service. After that the ac-
celerated wear stopped and normal wear ensued. In the new design the curve between 
the fl ange and the tread has been made less concave, more like the profi le of a “worn” 
wheel. The new wheels last for many thousands of miles longer, and the rolling resis-
tance is lower, saving on fuel cost. 
 1.9 
SOCIETAL CONSIDERATIONS IN ENGINEERING DESIGN 
 The fi rst fundamental canon of the ABET Code of Ethics states that “engineers shall 
hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of the public in the performance of their 
profession.” A similar statement has been in engineering codes of ethics since the early 
1920s, yet there is no question that what society perceives to be proper  treatment by 
the profession has changed greatly in the intervening time. Today’s 24-hour news cycle 
Old-style wheel
New wheel designs
Plate
Plate
Flange
Tread
Shallow curve
Bore
Rail
Hub
Rim
 FIGURE 1.8 
 An example of a design update. Old design of railcar wheel versus improved design. 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
29
1
and Internet make the general public, in a matter of hours, aware of events taking place 
anywhere in the world. That, coupled with a generally much higher standard of educa-
tion and standard of living, has led to the development of a society that has high ex-
pectations, reacts to achieve change, and organizes to protest perceived wrongs. At the 
same time, technology has had major effects on the everyday life of the average citizen. 
Whether we like it or not, all of us are intertwined in complex technological systems: 
an electric power grid, a national network of air traffi c controllers, and a gasoline and 
natural gas distribution network. Much of what we use to provide the creature comforts 
in everyday life has become too technologically complex or too physically large for the 
average citizen to comprehend. Moreover, our educational system does little to educate 
students to understand the technology within which they are immersed. 
 Thus, in response to real or imagined ills, society has developed mechanisms for 
countering some of the ills and/or slowing down the rate of social change. The major 
social forces that have had an important impact on engineering design are occupa-
tional safety and health, consumer rights, environmental protection, the antinuclear 
movement, and the freedom of information and public disclosure movement. The re-
sult of these social forces has been a great increase in federal regulations (in the in-
terest of protecting the public) over many aspects of commerce and business and/or 
a drastic change in the economic payoff for new technologically oriented ventures. 
Those new factors have had a profound effect on the practice of engineering and the 
rate of innovation. 
 The following are some general ways in which increased societal awareness of tech-
nology, and subsequent regulation, have infl uenced the practice of engineering design:  
●  Greater infl uence of lawyers on engineering decisions, often leading to product li-
ability actions 
●  More time spent in planning and predicting the future effects of engineering 
projects 
●  Increased emphasis on “defensive research and development,” which is designed to 
protect the corporation against possible litigation 
●  Increased effort expended in research, development, and engineering in environ-
mental control and safety 
 Clearly, these societal pressures have placed much greater constraints on how engi-
neers can carry out their designs. Moreover, the increasing litigiousness of U.S. soci-
ety requires a greater awareness of legal and ethical issues on the part of each engi-
neer (see Chap. 18). 
 One of the most prevalent societal pressures at the present time is the environ-
mental movement. Originally, governmental regulation was used to clean up rivers and 
streams, to ameliorate smog conditions, and to reduce the volume of solid waste that is 
sent to landfi lls. Today, there is a growing realization that placing environmental issues 
at a high priority (not doing them because the government demands it) represents smart 
business. Several major oil producers publicly take seriously the link between carbon 
dioxide emissions and rising global temperatures and have embarked on a major ef-
fort to become the leaders in renewable energy sources like solar power and fuel from 
biomass. A major chemical company has placed great emphasis on developing envi-
ronmentally friendly products. Its biodegradable herbicides allow for a hundredfold

30 
engineering design 
1
reduction in the herbicide that must be applied per acre, greatly reducing toxic runoff 
into streams. This reorientation of business thinking toward environmental issues is often 
called  sustainable development , businesses built on renewable materials and fuels. 
 The change in thinking, from fi xing environmental problems at the discharge end 
of the pipe or smokestack to sustainable development, places engineering design at 
the heart of the issue. Environmental issues are given higher priority in design. Prod-
ucts must be designed to make them easier to reuse, recycle, or incinerate—a concept 
often called green design. 1  Green design also involves the detailed understanding of 
the environmental impact of products and processes over their entire life cycle. For 
example, life-cycle analysis would be used to determine whether paper or plastic gro-
cery bags are more environmentally benign. Table 1.1 gives the chief aspects of an 
environmentally responsible design. 
 It seems clear that the future is likely to involve more technology, not less, so that 
engineers will face demands for innovation and design of technical systems of unprec-
edented complexity. While many of these challenges will arise from the requirement 
to translate new scientifi c knowledge into hardware, others will stem from the need 
to solve problems in “socialware.” By socialware we mean the patterns of organiza-
tion and management instructions needed for the hardware to function effectively. 2 
Such designs will have to deal not only with the limits of hardware, but also with the 
vulnerability of any system to human ignorance, human error, avarice, and hubris. 
A good example of this point is the delivery system for civilian air transportation. 
While the engineer might think of the modern jet transport, with all of its complexity 
and high technology, as the main focus of concern, such a marvelous piece of hard-
ware only satisfi es the needs of society when embedded in an intricate system that 
includes airports, maintenance facilities, traffi c controllers, navigation aids, baggage 
handling, fuel supply, meal service, bomb detection, air crew training, and weather 
monitoring. It is important to realize that almost all of these socialware functions are 
 TABLE 1.1 
Characteristics of an Environmentally Responsible Design
● Easy to dissassemble
● Able to be recycled
● Contains recycled materials
● Uses identifi able and recyclable plastics
● Reduces use of energy and natural materials in its manufacture
● Manufactured without producing hazardous waste
● Avoids use of hazardous materials
● Reduces product chemical emissions
● Reduces product energy consumption
 1 . Offi ce of Technology Assessment, “ Green Products by Design: Choices for a Cleaner Environment, ” 
OTA-E-541,  Government Printing Offi ce, Washington, DC ,  1992 . 
 2 .  E .  Wenk, Jr .,  Engineering Education, November 1988,  pp. 99–102 . 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
31
1
driven by federal or local rules and regulations. Thus, it should be clear that the en-
gineering profession is required to deal with much more than technology. Techniques 
for dealing with the complexity of large systems have been developed in the discipline 
of  systems engineering . 1 
 TABLE 1.2 
 Future Trends in Interaction of Engineering with Society 
● The future will entail more technology, not less.
● Because all technologies generate side effects, designers of technological systems will be challenged 
to prevent, or at least mitigate, adverse consequences.
● The capacity to innovate, manage information, and nourish knowledge as a resource will dominate 
economic growth as natural resources, capital, and labor once did. This places a high premium on the 
talent to design not simply hardware, but complex technology-based systems.
● Globalization will proceed at a rapid pace, with low-tech manufacturing moving to countries with low 
wage rates.
● Globalization will force developed countries to place great emphasis on creative, innovative design of 
products.
● Distribution of benefi ts in society will not be uniform, so disparity will grow between the “haves” 
and the “have nots.”
● Confl icts between winners and losers will become more strenuous as we enter an age of scarcity, 
global economic competition, higher energy costs, increasing populations, associated political insta-
bilities, and larger-scale threats to human health and the environment.
● Because of technology, we may be moving to “one world,” with people, capital, commodities, infor-
mation, culture, and pollution freely crossing borders. But as economic, social, cultural, and environ-
mental boundaries dissolve, political boundaries will be stubbornly defended. The United States will 
sense major economic and geopolitical challenges to its position of world leadership in technology.
● Complexity of technological systems will increase, as will interdependencies, requiring management 
with a capacity for both systems planning and trouble-free, safe operations.
● Decision making will become more complex because of increases in the number and diversity of 
interconnected organizations and their separate motivations, disruptions in historical behavior, and 
the unpredictability of human institutions.
● Mass media will play an ever more signifi cant role in highlighting controversy and publicizing 
technological dilemmas, especially where loss of life may be involved. Since only the mass media can 
keep everyone in the system informed, a special responsibility falls on them for both objective and 
courageous inquiry and reporting.
● Amidst this complexity and the apparent domination of decision making by experts and the com-
mercial or political elite, the general public is likely to feel more vulnerable. Public interest lobbies 
will demand to know what is being planned that may affect people’s lives and environment, to have 
estimates of a wide range of impacts, to weigh alternatives, and to have the opportunity to intervene 
through legitimate processes.
● Given the critical choices ahead, greater emphasis will be placed on moral vision and the exercise of 
ethical standards in delivering technology to produce socially satisfactory results. Accountability will 
be demanded more zealously.
Adapted from  E .  Wenk, Jr ., “Tradeoffs,”  Johns Hopkins University Press ,  1986 .  
 1 .  A. P .  Sage ,  Systems Enginering,  John Wiley & Sons, New York ,  1992 ;  B. S .  Blanchard and  W. K .  Fabrycky , 
 Systems Engineering and Analysis,  Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ .  1998 . 

32 
engineering design 
1
 Another area where the interaction between technical and human networks is be-
coming stronger is in consideration of risk, reliability, and safety (see Chap. 14). No 
longer can safety factors simply be looked up in codes or standards. Engineers must 
recognize that design requirements depend on public policy as much as industry per-
formance requirements. This is an area of design where government infl uence has 
become much stronger. 
 There are fi ve key roles of government in interacting with technology: 
●  As a stimulus to free enterprise through manipulation of the tax system 
●  By infl uencing interest rates and the supply of venture capital through changes in 
fi scal policy to control the growth of the economy 
●  As a major customer for high technology, chiefl y in military systems 
●  As a funding source (patron) for research and development 
●  As a regulator of technology 
 Table 1.2 lists some major trends concerning the interaction of technology with a 
changing world society.  
 Engineering is concerned with problems whose solution is needed and/or desired 
by society. The purpose of this section is to reinforce that point, and hopefully to show 
the engineering student how important a broad knowledge of economics and social 
science is to modern engineering practice. 
1.10 
SUMMARY 
 Engineering design is a challenging activity because it deals with largely unstructured 
problems that are important to the needs of society. An engineering design process cre-
ates something that did not exist before, requires choices between many variables and 
parameters, and often requires balancing multiple and sometimes confl icting require-
ments. Product design has been identifi ed as the real key to world-competitive business. 
 The steps in the design process are: 
 Phase I. Conceptual design 
●  Recognition of a need 
●  Defi nition of the problem 
●  Gathering of information 
●  Developing a design concept 
●  Choosing between competing concepts (evaluation) 
 Phase II: Embodiment design 
●  Determining product architecture—arrangement of the physical functions 
●  Confi guration design—preliminary selection of materials, modeling and sizing 
of parts 
●  Parametric design—creating a robust design, and selection of final dimen-
sions and tolerances 
 Phase III: Detail design— fi nalizing all details of design. Creation of fi nal draw-
ings and specifi cations. 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
33
1
 While many consider that the engineering design process ends with detail design, 
there are many issues that must be resolved before a product can be shipped to the 
customer. These additional phases of design are often folded into what is called the 
product development process; see Chap. 2. 
 Engineering design must consider many factors, which are documented in the 
product design specifi cation (PDS). Among the most important of these factors are 
required functions with associated performance characteristics, environment in which 
it must operate, target product cost, service life, provisions for maintenance and logis-
tics, aesthetics, expected market and quantity to be produced, man-machine interface 
requirements (ergonomics), quality and reliability, safety and environmental concerns, 
and provision for testing.   
 NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS 
 Analysis 
 Code 
 Component 
 Computer-aided engineering 
 Confi guration design  
 Critical to quality 
 Design feature 
 Detail design 
 Embodiment design 
 Form 
 Function 
 Green design 
 Human factors engineering 
 Iterative 
 Needs analysis 
 Product design specifi cation  
 Problem defi nition 
 Product architecture 
 Robust design 
 Specifi cation  
 Standard 
 Subsystem 
 Synthesis 
 System 
 Total life cycle 
 Useful life 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Dym ,  C. I . and  P .  Little ,  Engineering Design: A Project-Based Introduction,  2d ed.,  John 
Wiley & Sons, New York,  2004 . 
 Eggert ,  R. J .,  Engineering Design,  Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ,  2005 . 
 Magrab ,  E. B . S.K. Gupta, F.P. McCluskey and P.A. Sandborn,  Integrated Product and Process 
Design and Development, 2d ed.,  CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL ,  1997 , 2010. 
 Pahl ,  G . and  W .  Beitz ,  Engineering Design, 3d ed.,  Springer-Verlag, New York ,  2006 . 
 Stoll ,  H. W .,  Product Design Methods and Practices,  Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York ,  1999 . 
 Ullman ,  D. G .,  The Mechanical Design Process, 4th ed.,  McGraw-Hill, New York ,  2010 . 
 PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES 
 1.1.  A major manufacturer of snowmobiles needs to fi nd new products in order to keep the 
workforce employed all year round. Starting with what you know or can fi nd out about 
snowmobiles, make reasonable assumptions about the capabilities of the company. Then 
develop a needs analysis that leads to some suggestions for new products that the com-
pany could make and sell. Give the strengths and weaknesses of your suggestions. 
 1.2.  Take a problem from one of your engineering science classes, and add and subtract those 
things that would frame it more as an engineering design problem. 

34 
engineering design 
1
 1.3.  There is a need in underdeveloped countries for building materials. One approach is to 
make building blocks (4 by 6 by 12 in.) from highly compacted soil. Your assignment is 
to design a block-making machine with the capacity for producing 600 blocks per day 
at a capital cost of less than $300. Develop a needs analysis, a defi nitive problem state-
ment, and a plan for the information that will be needed to complete the design. 
 1.4.  The steel wheel for a freight car has three basic functions: (1) to act as a brake drum, 
(2) to support the weight of the car and its cargo, and (3) to guide the freight car on the 
rails. Freight car wheels are produced by either casting or rotary forging. They are sub-
jected to complex conditions of dynamic thermal and mechanical stresses. Safety is of 
great importance, since derailment can cause loss of life and property. Develop a broad 
systems approach to the design of an improved cast-steel car wheel. 
 1.5.  The need for material conservation and reduced cost has increased the desirability 
of corrosion-resistant coatings on steel. Develop several design concepts for produc-
ing 12-in.-wide low-carbon-steel sheet that is coated on one side with a thin layer, e.g., 
0.001 in., of nickel. 
 1.6.  The support of thin steel strip on a cushion of air introduces exciting prospects for the 
processing and handling of coated steel strip. Develop a feasibility analysis for the 
concept. 
 1.7.  Consider the design of aluminum bicycle frames. A prototype model failed in fatigue 
after 1600 km of riding, whereas most steel frames can be ridden for over 60,000 km. 
Describe a design program that will solve this problem. 
 1.8.  (a) Discuss the societal impact of a major national program to develop synthetic fuel 
(liquid and gaseous) from coal. (It has been estimated that to reach the level of supply 
equal to the imports from OPEC countries would require over 50 installations, each 
costing several billion dollars.) 
 (b) Do you feel there is a basic difference in the perception by society of the impact of a 
synthetic fuel program compared with the impact of nuclear energy? Why? 
 1.9.  You are a design engineer working for a natural gas transmission company. You are as-
signed to a design team that is charged with preparing the proposal to the state Public 
Utility Commission to build a plant to receive liquefi ed natural gas from ocean-going 
tankers and unload it into your company’s gas transmission system. What technical is-
sues and societal issues will your team have to deal with? 
1.10.  You are a senior design engineer at the design center of a major U.S. manufacturer of 
power tools. Over the past fi ve years your company has outsourced component manu-
facturing and assembly to plants in Mexico and China. While your company still has a 
few plants operating in the United States, most production is overseas. Think about how 
your job as the leader of a product development team has changed since your company 
made this change, and suggest how it will evolve in the future.
1.11   The oil spill from BP well Deepwater Horizon is one of the world’s greatest environ-
mental disasters. Nearly 5 million barrels of crude oil spewed into the Gulf of Mexico 
for three months. As a team, do research on the following issues: (a) the technology 

 
chapter 1: Engineering Design 
35
1
of drilling for oil in water deeper than 1000 feet; (b) the causes of the well blowout; 
(c) the short-term damage to the U.S. economy; (d) the long-term effects on the U.S.; 
and (e) the impact on the owner of the well, BP Global.
1.12. Brazil is rapidly developing into one of the world’s most dynamic economies. As a coun-
try it is blessed with great mineral resources, abundant unused farm land, and network 
of free fl owing rivers. But, to achieve its potential, it will need a much expanded trans-
portation network and considerably expanded electric generation capacity. Much of this 
expansion will occur in the undeveloped center of the country including the Amazon 
region. Defi ne the major obstacles to large-scale development and suggest the best tech-
nologies to achieve it.   

2
36
 2 
 PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS  
 2.1 
 INTRODUCTION 
 This text emphasizes the design of consumer and engineered products. Having de-
fi ned the engineering design process in considerable detail in Chap. 1, we now turn 
to the consideration of the product development process. The engineering design of a 
product is a vital part of this process, but product development involves much more 
than design. The development of a product is undertaken by a company to make a 
profi t for its stakeholders. There are many business issues, desired outcomes, and 
strategies that infl uence the structure of the product development process (PDP). The 
infl uence of business considerations, in addition to engineering performance, is seen 
in the structure of the PDP. 
 This chapter lays out a product development process that is more encompassing 
than the engineering design process described in Chap. 1. This chapter presents orga-
nizational structures for the design and product development functions and discusses 
markets and the vital function of marketing in detail. Since the most successful prod-
ucts are often innovative products, we conclude the chapter with some ideas about 
technological innovation. 
 2.2 
 PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 
 A generally accepted model of the product development process is shown in Fig. 
2.1. The six phases shown in this diagram generally agree with those proposed 
by Asimow for the design process (see Sec.1.4) with the addition of the Phase 0, 
Planning.  
 Note that each phase in Fig. 2.1 narrows down to a point. This symbolizes the 
 “gate”  or review that the project must successfully pass through before moving on 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
37
2
to the next stage or phase of the process. This stage-gate product development pro-
cess is used by many companies in order to encourage rapid product development and 
to cull out the least promising projects before large sums of money are committed. 
The amount of money to develop a project increases exponentially from Phase 0 to 
Phase 5. However, the money spent in product development is small compared to what 
it would cost in sunk capital and lost brand reputation if a defective product has to be 
recalled from the market. Thus, an important reason for using the  stage-gate process 
is to quickly “get it right.” 
 Phase 0  is the planning that should be done before the approval of the product 
development project. Product planning is usually done in two steps. The fi rst step is 
a quick investigation and scoping of the project to determine the possible markets 
and whether the product is in alignment with the corporate strategic plan. It also 
involves a preliminary engineering assessment to determine technical and manufac-
turing feasibility. This preliminary assessment usually is completed in a month. If 
things look promising after this quick examination, the planning operation goes into 
a detailed investigation to build the  business  case  for the project. This could take 
several months to complete and involves personnel from marketing, design, manufac-
turing, fi nance, and possibly legal. In making the business case, marketing completes 
a detailed marketing analysis that involves market segmentation to identify the target 
market, the product positioning, and the product benefi ts. Design digs more deeply to 
evaluate the technical capability, possibly including some proof-of-concept analysis 
or testing to validate some very preliminary design concepts, while manufacturing 
identifi es possible production constraints, costs, and thinks about a supply chain strat-
egy. A critical part of the business case is the fi nancial analysis, which uses sales and 
cost projections from marketing to predict the profi tability of the project. Typically 
this involves a discounted cash fl ow analysis (see Chap. 16) with a sensitivity analy-
sis to project the effects of possible risks. The gate at the end of Phase 0 is crucial, 
and the decision of whether to proceed is made in a formal and deliberate manner, 
for costs will become considerable once the project advances to Phase 1. The review 
board makes sure that the corporate policies have been followed and that all of the 
necessary criteria have been met or exceeded. High among these is exceeding a cor-
porate goal for return on investment (ROI). If the decision is to proceed, then a mul-
tifunctional team with a designated leader is established. The product design project 
is formally on its way. 
 Phase 1,  Concept Development, considers the different ways the product and each 
subsystem can be designed. The development team takes what is known about the po-
tential customers from Phase 0, adds its own knowledge base and fashions this into a 
carefully crafted  product design specifi cation (PDS).  This process of determining the 
 FIGURE 2.1 
 The product development process in stage-gate format. 
Phase 5
Production
Ramp-up
Phase 4
Testing and
Refinement
Phase 3
Detail
Design
Phase 2
System-level
Design
Phase 1
Concept
Development
Phase 0
Planning

38 
engineering design 
2
needs and wants of the customer is more detailed than the initial market survey done 
in Phase 0. It is aided by using tools such as surveys and focus groups, benchmark-
ing, and quality function deployment (QFD). The generation of a number of product 
concepts follows. The designers’ creative instincts must be stimulated, but again tools 
are used to assist in the development of promising concepts. Now, having arrived at a 
small set of feasible concepts, the one best suited for development into a product must 
be determined using selection methods. Conceptual design is the heart of the product 
development process, for without an excellent concept you cannot have a highly suc-
cessful product. These aspects of conceptual design are covered in Chapters 3, 6, and 7. 
 Phase 2,  System-Level Design, is where the functions of the product are exam-
ined, leading to the division of the product into various subsystems. In addition, alter-
native ways of arranging the subsystems into a  product architecture  are studied. The 
interfaces between subsystems are identifi ed and studied. Successful operation of the 
entire system relies on careful understanding of the interface between each subsys-
tem. Phase 2 is where the form and features of the product begin to take shape, and 
for this reason it is often called  embodiment design . 1  Selections are made for materi-
als and manufacturing processes, and the confi guration and dimensions of parts are 
established. Those parts whose function is  critical to quality  are identifi ed and given 
special analysis to ensure  design robustness . 2  Careful consideration is given to the 
product-human interface (ergonomics), and changes to form are made if needed. Like-
wise, fi nal touches will be made to the styling introduced by the industrial designers. 
In addition to a complete computer-based geometrical model of the product, critical 
parts may be built with rapid protyping methods and physically tested. At this stage of 
development, marketing will most likely have enough information to set a price target 
for the product. Manufacturing will begin to place contracts for long-delivery tooling 
and will begin to defi ne the assembly process. By this time legal will have identifi ed 
and worked out any patent licensing issues.  
 Phase 3,  Detail Design, is the phase where the design is brought to the state of a 
complete engineering description of a tested and producible product. Missing infor-
mation is added on the arrangement, form, dimensions, tolerances, surface properties, 
materials, and manufacturing of each part in the product. These result in a specifi ca-
tion for each special-purpose part to be manufactured, and the decision whether it will 
be made in the factory of the corporation or outsourced to a supplier. At the same time 
the design engineers are wrapping up all of these details, the manufacturing engineers 
are fi nalizing a process plan for each part, as well as designing the tooling to make 
these parts. They also work with design engineers to fi nalize any issue of product 
robustness and defi ne the quality assurance processes that will be used to achieve a 
quality product. The output of the detail design phase is the  control documentation 
for the product. This takes the form of CAD fi les for the product assembly and for 
each part and its tooling. It also involves detailed plans for production and quality 
assurance, as well as many legal documents in the form of contracts and documents 
 1 . Embodiment means to give a perceptible shape to a concept. 
  2 . Robustness in a design context does not mean strong or tough. It means a design whose performance 
is insensitive to the variations introduced in manufacturing, or by the environment in which the product 
operates. 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
39
2
protecting intellectual property. At the end of Phase 3, a major review is held to de-
termine whether it is appropriate to let contracts for building the production tooling, 
although contracts for long lead-time items such as polymer injection molding dies are 
most likely let before this date. 
 Phase 4,  Testing and Refi nement, is concerned with making and testing many 
preproduction versions of the product. The fi rst (alpha) prototypes are usually made 
with  production-intent parts . These are working models of the product made from 
parts with the same dimensions and using the same materials as the production ver-
sion of the product but not necessarily made with the actual processes and tooling 
that will be used with the production version. This is done for speed in getting parts 
and to minimize the cost of product development. The purpose of the alpha test is 
to determine whether the product will actually work as designed and whether it will 
satisfy the most important customer needs. The beta tests are conducted on products 
assembled from parts made by the actual production processes and tooling. They are 
extensively tested in-house and by selected customers in their own use environments. 
The purpose of these tests is to satisfy any doubts about the performance and reliabil-
ity of the product, and to make the necessary engineering changes before the product 
is released to the general market. Only in the case of a completely “botched design” 
would a product fail at this stage gate, but it might be delayed for a serious fi x that 
could delay the product launch. During Phase 4 the marketing people work on devel-
oping promotional materials for the product launch, and the manufacturing people 
fi ne-tune the fabrication and assembly processes and train the workforce that will 
make the product. Finally, the sales force puts the fi nishing touches on the sales plan. 
 At the end of Phase 4 a major review is carried out to determine whether the 
work has been done in a quality way and whether the developed product is consistent 
with the original intent. Because large monetary sums must be committed beyond this 
point, a careful update is made of the fi nancial estimates and the market prospects 
before funds are committed for production. 
 At  Phase 5,  Production Ramp-Up, the manufacturing operation begins to make 
and assemble the product using the intended production system. Most likely they will 
go through a  learning curve  as they work out any production yield and quality prob-
lems. Early products produced during ramp-up often are supplied to preferred custom-
ers and studied carefully to fi nd any defects. Production usually increases gradually 
until full production is reached and the product is  launched  and made available for 
general distribution. For major products there will certainly be a public announce-
ment, and often special advertising and customer inducements. Some 6 to 12 months 
after product launch there will be a fi nal major review. The latest fi nancial informa-
tion on sales, costs, profi ts, development cost, and time to launch will be reviewed, but 
the main focus of the review is to determine what were the strengths and weaknesses 
of the product development process. The emphasis is on  lessons learned  so that the 
next product development team can do even better. 
 The stage-gate development process is successful because it introduces schedule 
and approval to what is often an  ad hoc process. 1  The process is relatively simple, and 
 1 .  R. G .  Cooper ,  Winning at New Products , 3d ed.,  Perseus Books, Cambridge, MA ,  2001 . 

40 
engineering design 
2
the requirements at each gate are readily understood by managers and engineers. It is 
not intended to be a rigid system. Most companies modify it to suit their own circum-
stances. Neither is it intended to be a strictly serial process, although Fig. 2.1 gives 
that impression. Since the PDP teams are multifunctional, the activities as much as 
possible are carried out concurrently. Thus, marketing will be going on at the same 
time that the designers are working on their tasks, and manufacturing does their 
thing. However, as the team progresses through the stages, the level of design work 
decreases and manufacturing activities increase. 
 2.2.1 Factors for Success 
 In commercial markets the cost to purchase a product is of paramount importance. 
It is important to understand what the product cost implies and how it relates to the 
product price. More details about costing can be found in Chap. 17. Cost and price are 
distinctly different concepts. The product cost includes the cost of materials, compo-
nents, manufacturing, and assembly. The accountants also include other less obvious 
costs such as the prorated costs of capital equipment (the plant and its machinery), 
tooling cost, development cost, inventory costs, and likely warranty costs, in deter-
mining the total cost of producing a unit of product. The price is the amount of money 
that a customer is willing to pay to buy the product. The difference between the price 
and the cost is the profi t per unit of product sold. 
 
 Profi t  Product Price  Product Cost 
(2.1)
 This equation is the most important equation in engineering and in the operation of 
any business. If a corporation cannot make a profi t, it soon is forced into bankruptcy, 
its employees lose their positions, and the owner or stockholders lose their investment. 
Everyone employed by a corporation seeks to maximize this profi t while maintaining 
the strength and vitality of the product lines. The same statement can be made for a 
business that provides services instead of products. The price paid by the customer for 
a specifi ed service must be more than the cost to provide that service if the business is 
to make a profi t and prosper. 
 There are four key factors that determine the success of a product in the 
marketplace. 
 
●  The quality, performance, and price of the product. 
 
●  The cost to manufacture the product over its life cycle. 
 
●  The cost of product development. 
 
●  The time needed to bring the product to the market. 
 Let’s discuss the product fi rst. Is it attractive and easy to use? Is it reliable? Does 
it meet the needs of the customer? Is it better than the products now available in the 
marketplace? If the answer to all of these questions is an unqualifi ed Yes, the cus-
tomer may want to buy the product, but only if the price is right. 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
41
2
 Equation (2.1) offers only two ways to increase profi t on an existing product line 
with a mature market base. We can increase the product’s price, justifi ed by adding 
new features or improving quality, or we can reduce the product’s cost, through im-
provements in the production process. In the highly competitive world market for con-
sumer products the latter is more likely than the former. 
 Developing a product involves many people with talents in different disciplines. It 
takes time, and it costs a lot of money. Thus, if we can reduce the product development 
cost, the profi t will be increased. First, consider development time. Development time, 
also known as the time to market, is the time interval from the start of the product devel-
opment process (the kickoff) to the time that the product is available for purchase (the 
product release date). The product release date is a very important target for a develop-
ment team because many signifi cant benefi ts follow from being fi rst to market. There 
are at least three competitive advantages for a company that has development teams that 
can develop products quickly. First, the product’s life is extended. For each month cut 
from the development schedule, a month is added to the life of the product in the mar-
ketplace, generating an additional month of revenues from sales, and profi t. We show 
the revenue benefi ts of being fi rst to market in Fig. 2.2. The shaded region between the 
two curves showing time of market entry is the enhanced revenue due to the extra sales. 
 A second benefi t of early product release is increased market share. The fi rst 
product to market has 100 percent of the market share in the absence of a competing 
product. For existing products with periodic development of new models it is gener-
ally recognized that the earlier a product is introduced to compete with older models, 
without sacrifi cing quality, reliability, or performance and price, the better chance it 
has for acquiring and retaining a large share of the market. The effect of gaining a 
larger market share on sales revenue is illustrated in Fig. 2.2. The crosshatched region 
between the two curves at the top of the graph shows the enhanced sales revenue due 
to increased market share.  
 FIGURE 2.2 
 Increased sales revenue due to extended product life and larger market share. 
Added revenue
larger market share
Enhanced revenue
longer sales life
Second to market
Time
First to market
Sales and revenue $

42 
engineering design 
2
 A third advantage of a short development cycle is higher  profi t margins . Profi t 
margin is the net profi t divided by the sales. If a new product is introduced before 
competing products are available, the corporation can command a higher price for 
the product, which enhances the profi t. With time, competitive products will enter 
the market and force prices down. However, in many instances, relatively large 
profi t margins can be maintained because the company that is fi rst to market has 
more time than the competitor to learn methods for reducing manufacturing costs. 
They also learn better processing techniques and have the opportunity to modify 
assembly lines and manufacturing cells to reduce the time needed to manufacture 
and assemble the product. The advantage of being fi rst to market, when a manu-
facturing  learning curve  exists, is shown graphically in Fig. 2.3. The manufactur-
ing learning curve refl ects the reduced cost of processing, production, and assembly 
with time. These cost reductions are due to many innovations introduced by the 
workers after mass production begins. With experience, it is possible to drive down 
production costs. 
 Development costs represent a very important investment for the company in-
volved. Development costs include the salaries of the members of the development 
team, money paid to subcontractors, costs of preproduction tooling, and costs of sup-
plies and materials. These development costs can be signifi cant, and most companies 
must limit the number of development projects in which they invest. The size of the 
investment can be appreciated by noting that the development cost of a new automo-
bile is an estimated $1 billion, with an additional investment of $500 to $700 million 
for the new tooling required for high-volume production. For a product like a power 
tool, the development cost can be one to several million dollars, depending on the fea-
tures to be introduced with the new product.  
 FIGURE 2.3 
 The team that brings the product fi rst to market enjoys an initial price advantage and subse-
quent cost advantages from manufacturing effi ciencies. 
Market price
Competitor’s cost
Manufacturing
cost differential
Time
First to market
Competitor
enters market
Cost and price
Stable price
Early price advantage
First to
market cost

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
43
2
 2.2.2 Static Versus Dynamic Products 
 Some product designs are static, in that the changes in their design take place over 
long time periods through incremental changes occurring at the subsystem and com-
ponent levels. Examples of static products are automobiles and most consumer ap-
pliances like refrigerators and dishwashers. Dynamic products like wireless mobile 
phones, digital video recorders and players, and software change the basic design con-
cept as often as the underlying technology changes. 
 Static products exist in a market where the customer is not eager to change, tech-
nology is stable, and fashion or styling play little role. These are markets character-
ized by a stable number of producers with high price competition and little product 
research. There is a mature, stable technology, with competing products similar to 
each other. The users are generally familiar with the technology and do not demand 
signifi cant improvement. Industry standards may even restrict change, and parts of the 
product are assembled from components made by others. Because of the importance 
of cost, emphasis is more on manufacturing research than on product design research. 
 With dynamic products, customers are willing to, and may even demand, change. 
The market is characterized by many small producers, doing active market research 
and seeking to reduce product cycle time. Companies actively seek new products em-
ploying rapidly advancing technology. There is high product differentiation and low 
industry standardization. More emphasis is placed on product research than on manu-
facturing research. 
 A number of factors serve to protect a product from competition. A product that 
requires high capital investment to manufacture or requires complex manufacturing 
processes tends to be resistant to competition. At the other end of the product chain, 
the need for an extensive distribution system may be a barrier to entry. 1  A strong pat-
ent position may keep out competition, as may strong brand identifi cation and loyalty 
on the part of the customer.  
 2.2.3 Variations on the Generic Product Development Process 
 The product development process (PDP) described at the beginning of Sec. 2.2 was 
based on the assumption that the product is being developed in response to an identi-
fi ed market need, a  market  pull  situation. This is a common situation in product devel-
opment, but there are other situations that need to be recognized. 2  
 The opposite of market pull is  technology push . This is the situation where the 
company starts with a new proprietary technology and looks for a market in which to 
apply this technology. Often successful technology push products involve basic ma-
terials or basic process technologies, because these can be deployed in thousands of 
applications, and the probability of fi nding successful applications is therefore high. 
 1 . The Internet has made it easier to set up direct marketing systems for products.  
 2 .  K. T .  Ulrich and  S. D .  Eppinger ,  Product Design and Development,   3d ed.,  pp. 18–21,   McGraw-Hill, 
New York ,  2004 . 

44 
engineering design 
2
The discovery of nylon by the DuPont Company and its successful incorporation into 
thousands of new products is a classic example. The development of a technology 
push product begins with the assumption that the new technology will be employed. 
This can entail risk, because unless the new technology offers a clear competitive ad-
vantage to the customer the product is not likely to succeed. 
 A  platform product  is built around a preexisting technological subsystem. Ex-
amples of such a platform are the Apple Macintosh operating system or the Black & 
Decker doubly insulated universal motor. A platform product is similar to a  technology 
push product in that there is an  a priori  assumption concerning the technology to be 
employed. However, it differs in that the technology has already been demonstrated in 
the marketplace to be useful to a customer, so that the risk for future products is less. 
Often when a company plans to utilize a new technology in their products they plan to 
do it as a series of platform products. Obviously, such a strategy helps justify the high 
cost of developing a new technology. 
 For certain products the manufacturing process places strict constraints on the 
properties of the product, so product design cannot be separated from the design of 
the production process. Examples of  process-intensive products  are automotive sheet 
steel, food products, semiconductors, chemicals, and paper. Process-intensive products 
typically are made in high volume, often with continuous fl ow processes as opposed 
to discrete goods manufacturing. With such a product, it might be more typical to start 
with a given process and design the product within the constraints of the process. 
 Customized products  are those in which variations in confi guration and content are 
created in response to a specifi c order of a customer. Often the customization is with re-
gard to color or choice of materials but more frequently it is with respect to content, as 
when a person orders a personal computer by phone, or the accessories with a new car. 
Customization requires the use of modular design and depends heavily on information 
technology to convey the customer’s wishes to the production line. In a highly competi-
tive world marketplace,  mass customization appears to be one of the future trends. 
 2.3 
 PRODUCT AND PROCESS CYCLES 
 Every product goes through a cycle from birth, into an initial growth stage, into a rela-
tively stable period, and fi nally into a declining state that eventually ends in the useful 
life of the product (Fig. 2.4). Since there are challenges and uncertainties any time a 
new product is brought to market, it is useful to understand these cycles. 
 2.3.1 Stages of Development of a Product 
 In the introductory stage the product is new and consumer acceptance is low, so sales 
are low. In this early stage of the product life cycle the rate of product change is rapid 
as management tries to maximize performance or product uniqueness in an attempt to 
enhance customer acceptance. When the product has entered the growth stage, knowl-
edge of the product and its capabilities has reached an increasing number of  customers, 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
45
2
and sales growth accelerates. There may be an emphasis on custom tailoring the prod-
uct by making accessories for slightly different customer needs. At the maturity stage 
the product is widely accepted and sales are stable and are growing at the same rate 
as the economy as a whole. When the product reaches this stage, attempts should be 
made to rejuvenate it by the addition of new features or the development of still new 
applications. Products in the maturity stage usually experience considerable competi-
tion. Thus, there is great emphasis on reducing the cost of a mature product. At some 
point the product enters the decline stage. Sales decrease because a new and better 
product has entered the market to fulfi ll the same societal need.  
 During the product introduction phase, where the volume of production is mod-
est, expensive to operate but fl exible manufacturing processes are used and product 
cost is high. As we move into the period of product market growth, more automated, 
higher-volume manufacturing processes can be justifi ed to reduce the unit cost. In the 
product maturity stage, emphasis is on prolonging the life of the product by modest 
product improvement and signifi cant reduction in unit cost. This might result in out-
sourcing to a lower-labor-cost location. 
 If we look more closely at the product life cycle, we will see that the cycle is made 
up of many individual processes (Fig. 2.5). In this case the cycle has been divided into 
the premarket and market phases. The former extends back to the product concept 
and includes the research and development and marketing studies needed to bring the 
product to the market phase. This is essentially the product development phases shown 
in Fig. 2.1. The investment (negative profi ts) needed to create the product is shown 
along with the profi t. The numbers along the profi t versus time curve correspond to 
the processes in the product life cycle. Note that if the product development process is 
terminated prior to entering the market, the company must absorb the PDP costs. 
 2.3.2 Technology Development and Insertion Cycle 
 The development of a new technology follows an S-shaped growth curve (Fig. 2.6a) 
similar to that for the growth of sales of a product. In its early stage, progress in 
technology tends to be limited by the lack of ideas. A single good idea can make 
 FIGURE 2.4 
 Product life cycle. 
Introduction
Growth
Maturity
Decline
Sales
Time

46 
engineering design 
2
 FIGURE 2.5 
 Expanded view of product development cycle. 
Profits
+
–
Premarket phase
Market phase
Sales
Time
R & D
Market
study
10
9
7
8
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
11
12
13
14
15
Premarket phase 
Market phase
1. Idea generation 
 9. Product introduction
2. Idea evaluation 
10. Market development
3. Feasibility analysis 
11. Rapid growth
4. Technical R&D 
12. Competitive market
5. Product (market) R&D 
13. Maturity
6. Preliminary production 
14. Decline
7. Market testing 
15. Abandonment
8. Commercial production
 FIGURE 2.6 
 (a) Simplifi ed technology development cycle. (b) Transferring from one technology growth 
curve (A) to another developing technology (B). 
Technological limit
Performance
Effort
Limit A
Technology B
Technology A
Performance
Effort
Limit B
(a)
(b)

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
47
2
several other good ideas possible, and the rate of progress becomes exponential as 
indicated by a steep rise in performance that creates the lower steeply rising curve 
of the S. During this period a single individual or a small group of individuals can 
have a pronounced effect on the direction of the technology. Gradually the growth 
becomes more nearly linear when the fundamental ideas are in place, and technical 
progress is concerned with fi lling in the gaps between the key ideas. This is the period 
when commercial exploitation fl ourishes. Specifi c designs, market applications, and 
manufacturing occur rapidly in a fi eld that has not yet matured. Smaller entrepre-
neurial fi rms can have a large impact and capture a dominant share of the market. 
However, with time the technology begins to run dry, and improvements come with 
greater diffi culty. Now the market tends to become stabilized, manufacturing methods 
become fi xed in place, and more capital is expended to reduce the cost of manufactur-
ing. The business becomes capital-intensive; the emphasis is on production know-how 
and fi nancial expertise rather than scientifi c and technological expertise. The matur-
ing technology grows slowly, and it approaches a limit asymptotically. The limit may 
be set by a social consideration, such as the fact that the legal speed of automobiles 
is set by safety and fuel economy considerations, or it may be a true technological 
limit, such as the fact that the speed of sound defi nes an upper limit for the speed of a 
propeller-driven aircraft.  
 The success of a technology-based company lies in recognizing when the core tech-
nology on which the company’s products are based is beginning to mature and, through 
an active R&D program, transferring to another technology growth curve that offers 
greater possibilities (Fig. 2.6b). To do so, the company must manage across a  tech-
nological discontinuity  (the gap between the two S-curves in Fig. 2.6b ),  and a new 
technology must replace the existing one ( technology insertion ). Past examples of 
technological discontinuity are the change from vacuum tubes to transistors and from 
the three- to the two-piece metal can. Changing from one technology to another may 
be diffi cult because it requires different kinds of technical skills, as in the change 
from vacuum tubes to transistors. 
 A word of caution. Technology usually begins to mature before profi ts top out, 
so there is often is a management reluctance to switch to a new technology, with its 
associated costs and risks, when business is doing so well. Farsighted companies are 
always on the lookout for the possibility for technology insertion because it can give 
them a big advantage over the competition.  
 2.3.3 Process Development Cycle 
 Most of the emphasis in this text is on developing new products or existing  products. 
However, the development process shown in Fig. 2.1 can just as well be used to de-
scribe the development of a process rather than a product. Similarly, the design pro-
cess described in Sec. 1.5 pertains to process design as well as product design. One 
should be aware that there may be differences in terminology when dealing with pro-
cesses instead of products. For example in product development we talk about the 
 prototype  to refer to the early physical embodiment of the product, while in process 
design one is more likely to call this the  pilot plant or  semi works . 

48 
engineering design 
2
 Process development is most important in the materials, chemicals, or food pro-
cessing industries. In such businesses the product that is sold may be a coil of alu-
minum to be made into beverage cans or a silicon microchip containing hundreds of 
thousands of transistors and other circuit elements. The processes that produced this 
product create most of its value.  
 We also need to recognize that process development often is an enabler of new 
products. Typically, the role of process development is to reduce cost so that a product 
becomes more competitive in the market. However, revolutionary processes can lead to 
remarkable products. An outstanding example is the creation of microelectromechani-
cal systems (MEMS) by adapting the fabrication methods from integrated circuits.  
 2.4 
 ORGANIZATION FOR DESIGN AND PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 
 The organization of a business enterprise can have a major infl uence on how effec-
tively design and product development are carried out. There are two fundamental 
ways for organizing a business: with regard to  function or with respect to  projects . 
 A brief listing of the functions that encompass engineering practice is given in 
Fig. 2.7. At the top of this ladder is research, which is closest to the academic 
 experience, and as we progress downward we fi nd that more emphasis in the job func-
tion is given to fi nancial and administrative matters and less emphasis is given to 
strictly technical matters. Many engineering graduates fi nd that with time their ca-
reers follow the progression from heavy emphasis on technical matters to more em-
phasis on administrative and management issues.  
 A  project  is a grouping of activities aimed at accomplishing a defi ned objective, 
like introducing a particular product into the marketplace. It requires certain activities: 
 FIGURE 2.7 
 Spectrum of engineering functions. 
Research
Development
Design
Application of
scientific principles
Concern for finances and
administrative matters
Marketing
Sales
Management
Production and
construction
Operation and
maintenance

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
49
2
identifying customer needs, creating product concepts, building prototypes, designing 
for manufacture, and so on. These tasks require people with different functional special-
ties. As we shall see, the two organizational arrangements, by function or by project, 
represent two disparate views of how the specialty talents of people should be organized. 
 An important aspect of how an enterprise should be organized is concerned with 
the links between individuals. These links have to do with: 
 
●  Reporting relationships: A subordinate is concerned about who his or her super-
visor is, since the supervisor infl uences evaluations, salary increases, promotions, 
and work assignments. 
 
●  Financial arrangements: Another type of link is budgetary. The source of funds to 
advance the project, and who controls these funds, is a vital consideration. 
 
●  Physical arrangement: Studies have shown that communication between individu-
als is enhanced if their offi ces are within 50 feet of each other. Thus, physical lay-
out, whether individuals share the same offi ce, fl oor, or building, or are even in the 
same country, can have a major impact on the spontaneous encounters that occur 
and hence the quality of the communication. The ability to communicate effectively 
is most important to the success of a product development project. The use of video 
teleconferencing using the Internet has greatly reduced the need for travel, but it does 
not replace the importance of face-to-face discussion at critical times in a project.  
 We now discuss the most common types of organizations for carrying out product de-
velopment activities. As each is presented, examine it with regard to the links between 
people. 
 2.4.1 A Typical Functional Organization  
 Figure 2.8 shows an organization chart of a typical manufacturing company of modest 
size organized along conventional functional reporting lines. All research and engi-
neering report to a single vice president; all manufacturing activity is the  responsibility 
of another vice president. Take the time to read the many functions under each vice 
president that are needed even in a manufacturing enterprise that is modest in size. 
Note that each function is a column in the organizational chart. These reporting chain 
columns are often called “silos” or “stove pipes” because they can represent barriers 
to communication between functions. A chief characteristic of a functional organi-
zation is that each individual has only one boss. By concentrating activities in units 
of common professional background, there are economies of scale, opportunities to 
develop deep expertise, and clear career paths for specialists. Generally, people gain 
satisfaction from working with colleagues who share similar professional interests. 
Since the organizational links are primarily among those who perform similar func-
tions, formal interaction between different functional units, as between engineering 
and manufacturing, is forced to the level of the unit manager or higher. 
Concentrating technical talent in a single organization produces economies of scale 
and opportunities to develop in-depth technical knowledge. This creates an effi cient 
organization for delivering technical solutions, but because of communication problems 
inherent in this structure it may not be the optimum organization for effective product 

50 
engineering design 
2
 FIGURE 2.8 
 Example of a functional organization. 
Stockholders
Board of directors
President
Legal staff
Vice president
of
administration
Industrial
relations
Personnel
Employee
relations
Training
Safety
Medical
Management
services
Security
Food
services
Technical
services
Report Publ.
Library
Drafting
Vice president
of
research and
engineering
Research
Engineering
Mechanical
design
Electrical
design
Materials
engineering
Systems
engineering
Design support
Reliability
Maintainability
Value engineering
Logistical support
Prototype
development
Test and
evaluation
Vice president
of
manufacturing
Industrial
engineering
Manufacturing
engineering
Plant
engineering
Production
operations
Tooling
Fabrication
Subassembly
Assembly and
testing
Inspection
Production
shops
Quality
control
Vice president
of
finance
Budgeting
General
accounting
Cost
accounting
Payroll
Forecasting
Financial
planning
Vice president
of
sales and
marketing
Market
analysis
Customer
liaison
Sales
Supply
support
Field
service
Vice president
of
purchasing
Purchasing
Price
estimating
Contracts
management
Subcontracts
development. It may be acceptable for a business with a narrow and slowly changing set 
of product lines, but the inevitable slow and bureaucratic decision making that this type 
of structure imposes can be a problem in a dynamic product situation. Unless effective 
communication can be maintained between engineering and manufacturing and mar-
keting, it will not produce the most cost-effective and customer-oriented designs.  

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
51
2
 2.4.2 Organization by Projects 
 The other extreme in organizational structure is the  project organization, where 
people with the various functional abilities needed for the product development are 
grouped together to focus on the development of a specifi c product or product line 
(Fig. 2.9). These people often come on special assignment from the functional units 
of the company. Each development team reports to a project manager, who has full 
authority and responsibility for the success of the project. Thus the project teams are 
autonomous units, charged with creating a specifi c product. The chief advantage of 
a project organization is that it focuses the needed talents exclusively on the project 
goal, and it eliminates issues with communication between functional units by creat-
ing teams of different functional specialists. Thus, decision-making delays are mini-
mized. Another advantage of the project organization is that members of a project 
team are usually willing to work outside of their specialty area to get the work done 
when bottlenecks arise in completing the many tasks required to complete a design. 
They do not have to wait for some functional specialist to fi nish her current assign-
ment to work on their project. Therefore, working in a project team develops technical 
breadth and management skills.  
 A product created by a project organization is not as economical in its utiliza-
tion of scarce technical expertise as the functional organization. While an autono-
mous project team will create a product much more quickly than the functional 
team, it often is not as good a design as would be produced by the functional design 
organization. 1  The problem arises when the project team really believes that it is an in-
dependent unit and ignores the existing knowledge base of the organization. It tends to 
 FIGURE 2.9 
 A simplifi ed project organization. 
President
Vice president
of
research and
engineering
Manager,
project Y
Engineering
Engineering
support
Manager,
project Z
Engineering
Engineering
support
Manager,
project X
Engineering
Engineering
support
 1 .  D. G .  Reinertsen ,  Managing the Design Factory,  The Free Press, New York ,  1997 ,  pp. 102–5 . 

52 
engineering design 
2
“reinvent the wheel,” ignores company standards, and generally does not produce the 
most cost-effective, reliable design. However, the project organization is very common 
in start-up companies, where indeed, the project and the company are synonymous.  
 In large companies a project organization often is time limited; once the goal of 
the project is achieved, the people are reassigned to their functional units. This helps 
to address a major disadvantage of this type of organization: that technical experts 
tend to lose their “cutting edge” functional capabilities with such intense focus on the 
project goal. 
 2.4.3 Hybrid Organizations 
 Midway between these two types of organizations is the hybrid organization, often 
called the  matrix organization, which attempts to combine the advantages of the 
functional and project organizations. In the matrix organization each person is linked 
to others according to both their function and the project they work on. As a conse-
quence, each individual has two supervisors, one a functional manager and the other 
a project manager. While this may be true in theory, in practice either the functional 
manager or the project manager predominates. 1  In the  lightweight project organiza-
tion the functional links are stronger than the project links (Fig. 2.10a). In this matrix 
the functional specialties are shown along the y-axis and the various project teams 
along the x-axis. The project managers assign their personnel as required by the proj-
ect teams. While the project managers are responsible for scheduling, coordination, 
and arranging meetings, the functional managers are responsible for budgets, person-
nel matters, and performance evaluations. Although an energetic project manager can 
move the product development along faster than with a strict functional organization 
because there is one person who is dedicated and responsible for this task, in fact he or 
she does not have the authority to match the responsibility. A lightweight matrix orga-
nization may be the worst of all possible product development organizations because 
the top management may be deluded into thinking that they have adopted a modern 
project management approach when in effect they have added one layer of bureau-
cracy to the traditional functional approach. 2   
 In the  heavyweight matrix organization  the project manager has complete budget-
ary authority, makes most of the resource allocation decisions, and plays a strong role 
in evaluating personnel (Fig. 2.10b). Although each participant belongs to a functional 
unit, 3  the functional manager has little authority and control over project decisions. 
However, he continues to write his people’s reviews, and they return to his organiza-
tion at the end of the project. The functional organization or the lightweight project 
organization works well in a stable business environment, especially one where the 
product predominates in its market because of technical excellence. A heavyweight 
 1 .  R. H .  Hayes ,  S. C .  Wheelwright , and  K. B .  Clark ,  Dynamic Manufacturing: Creating the Learning 
 Organization,  The Free Press, New York ,  1988 ,  pp. 319–23 . 
 2 .  P. G .  Smith and  D. G .  Reinertsen ,  Developing Products in Half the Time,  Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
New York ,  1991 ,  pp. 134–45 . 
 3 . Sometimes a functional specialist may be working on different product teams at the same time. 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
53
2
project organization has advantages in introducing radically new products, espe-
cially where speed is important. Some companies have adopted the project form of 
organization where the project team is an organizationally separate unit in the com-
pany. Often this is done when they plan to enter an entirely new product area that does 
not fi t within the existing product areas.   
 We have mentioned the concern that an empowered product development team 
may get carried away with its freedom and ignore the corporate knowledge base to 
create a fast-to-market product that is less than optimum in some aspects such as cost 
or reliability. To prevent this from occurring, the product team must clearly under-
stand the boundaries on its authority. For example, the team may be given a limit on 
the cost of tooling, which if exceeded requires approval from an executive outside the 
team. Or, they may be given an approved parts list, test requirements, or vendors from 
which to make their selections, and any exceptions require higher approval. 1  It is im-
portant to defi ne the boundaries on team authority early in the life of the team so that 
it has a clear understanding of what it can and cannot do. Moreover, the stage-gate re-
view process should provide a deterrent to project teams ignoring important company 
procedures and policy.2  
 2.4.4 Concurrent Engineering Teams 
 The conventional way of doing product design has been to carry out all of the steps 
serially. Thus, product concept, product design, and product testing have been done 
prior to process planning, manufacturing system design, and production. Commonly 
 1 .  D. G .  Reinertsen ,  op. cit .,  pp. 106–8 . 
2. For current examples of successful use of matrix organizations see J. R. Galbraith, Designing Matrix 
Organizations That Actually Work, Jossey-Bass, San Franciso, CA, 2009.
 FIGURE 2.10 
 (a) A lightweight project organization; (b) a heavyweight project organization. 
Product
team 1
Mechanical
design
Product
team 2
(a)
(b)
Product
team 3
Electronic
design
Manufacturing
Finance
Marketing
Product
team 1
Mechanical
design
Product
team 2
Product
team 3
Electronic
design
Manufacturing
Finance
Marketing

54 
engineering design 
2
these serial functions have been carried out in distinct and separate organizations with 
little interaction between them. Thus, it is easy to see how the design team will make 
decisions, many of which can be changed only at great cost in time and money, with-
out adequate knowledge of the manufacturing process. Refer to Fig. 1.1 to reinforce 
the concept that a large percentage of a product’s cost is committed during the con-
ceptual and embodiment phases of design. Very roughly, if the cost to make a change 
at the product concept stage is $1, the cost is $10 at the detail design stage and $100 at 
the production stage. The use of a serial design process means that as changes become 
necessary there is a doubling back to pick up the work, and the actual process is more 
in the nature of a spiral. 
 Starting in the 1980s, as companies met increasing competitive pressure, a new ap-
proach to integrated product design evolved, which is called  concurrent engineering . 
The impetus came chiefl y from the desire to shorten product development time, but 
other drivers were the improvement of quality and the reduction of product life-cycle 
costs. Concurrent engineering is a systematic approach to the integrated concurrent de-
sign of products and their related processes, including manufacture and support. With 
this approach, product developers, from the outset, consider all aspects of the product 
life cycle, from concept to disposal, including quality, cost, schedule, and user require-
ments. A main objective is to bring many viewpoints and talents to bear in the design 
process so that these decisions will be valid for downstream parts of the product de-
velopment cycle like manufacturing and fi eld service. Toward this end, computer-aided 
engineering (CAE) tools have been very useful (see Sec. 1.6). Concurrent engineering 
has three main elements: cross-functional teams, parallel design, and vendor partnering. 
 Of the various organizational structures for design that were discussed previ-
ously, the heavyweight project organization, usually called just a  cross-functional 
design team  or an  integrated product and process product development  (IPPD) team, 
is used most frequently with concurrent engineering. Having the skills from the func-
tional areas embedded in the team provides for quick and easy decision making, and 
aids in communication with the functional units. For cross-functional teams to work, 
their leader must be empowered by the managers of the functional units with decision-
making authority. It is important that the team leader engender the loyalty of the team 
members toward the product and away from the functional units from which they came. 
Functional units and cross-functional teams must build mutual respect and understand-
ing for each other’s needs and responsibilities. The importance of teams in current de-
sign practice is such that Chap. 4 is devoted to an in-depth look at team behavior. 
 Parallel design,  sometimes called simultaneous engineering, refers to each 
functional area implementing their aspect of the design at the earliest possible time, 
roughly in parallel. For example, the manufacturing process development group starts 
its work as soon as the shape and materials for the product are established, and the 
tooling development group starts its work once the manufacturing process has been 
selected. These groups have had input into the development of the product design 
specifi cation and into the early stages of design. Of course, nearly continuous com-
munication between the functional units and the design team is necessary in order to 
know what the other functional units are doing. This is decidedly different from the 
old practice of completely fi nishing a design package of drawings and specifi cations 
before transmitting it to the manufacturing department. 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
55
2
 Vendor partnering is a form of parallel engineering in which the technical ex-
pertise of the vendor or supplier for certain components is employed as an integral 
member of the cross-functional design team. Traditionally, vendors have been selected 
by a bidding process after the design has been fi nalized. In the concurrent engineering 
approach, key suppliers known for profi cient technology, reliable delivery, and reason-
able cost are selected early in the design process before the parts have been designed. 
Generally, these companies are called  suppliers,  rather than vendors, to emphasize 
the changed nature of the relationship. A strategic partnership is developed in which 
the supplier becomes responsible for both the design and production of components, 
in return for a major portion of the business. Rather than simply supplying standard 
components, a supplier can partner with a company to create customized components 
for a new product. Supplier partnering has several advantages. It reduces the amount 
of component design that must be done in-house, it integrates the supplier’s manufac-
turing expertise into the design, and it ensures a degree of allegiance and cooperation 
that should minimize the time for receipt of components. 
 2.5 
 MARKETS AND MARKETING 
 Marketing is concerned with the interaction between the corporation and the cus-
tomer. Customers are the people or organizations that purchase products. However, 
we need to differentiate between the customer and the user of the product. The corpo-
rate purchasing agent is the customer in so far as the steel supplier is concerned, for 
she negotiates price and contract terms, but the design engineer who developed the 
specifi cation for a highly weldable grade of steel is the end user (indirect customer), 
as is the production supervisor of the assembly department. Note that the customer 
of a consulting engineer or lawyer is usually called a client. Methods for identifying 
customer needs and wants are considered in Sec. 3.2. 
 2.5.1 Markets 
 The market is an economic construct to identify those persons or organizations that 
have an interest in purchasing or selling a particular product, and to create an arena 
for their transactions. We generally think of the stock market as the prototypical 
market. 
 A quick review of the evolution of consumer products is a good way to better un-
derstand markets. At the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, markets were mainly 
local and consisted of close-knit communities of consumers and workers in manufac-
turing companies. Because the manufacturing enterprise was locally based, there was 
a close link between the manufacturers and the users of their product, so direct feed-
back from customers was easily acquired. With the advent of railroads and telephone 
communication, markets expanded across the country and very soon became national 
markets. This created considerable  economy of  scale,  but it required new ways 
of making products available to the customer. Many companies created a national 

56 
engineering design 
2
distribution system to sell their products through local stores. Others depended on re-
tailers who offered products from many manufacturers, including direct competitors. 
Franchising evolved as an alternative way of creating local ownership while retaining 
a nationally recognized name and product. Strong  brand names  evolved as a way of 
building customer recognition and loyalty. 
 As the capability to produce products continued to grow, the markets for those prod-
ucts expanded beyond the borders of one country. Companies then began to think of ways 
to market their products in other countries. The Ford Motor Company was one of the 
fi rst U.S. companies to expand into overseas markets. Ford took the approach of develop-
ing a wholly owned subsidiary in the other country that was essentially self-contained. 
The subsidiary designed, developed, manufactured, and marketed products for the local 
national market. The consumer in that country barely recognized that the parent com-
pany was based in the United States. This was the beginning of  multinational compa-
nies . The chief advantage of this approach was the profi ts that the company was able to 
bring back to the United States. However, the jobs and physical assets remained overseas. 
 Another approach to multinational business was developed by the Japanese au-
tomakers. These companies designed, developed, and manufactured the product in 
the home nation and marketed the product in many locations around the world. This 
became possible with a product like automobiles when roll-on/roll-off ships made 
low-cost transportation a reality. Such an approach to marketing gives the maximum 
benefi t to the home nation, but with time a backlash developed because of the lost jobs 
in the customer countries. Also, developing a product at a long distance from the mar-
ket makes it more diffi cult to satisfy customer needs when there is a physical separa-
tion in cultural backgrounds between the development team and the customers. More 
recently, Japanese companies have established design centers and production facilities 
in their major overseas markets. 
 It is very clear that we are now dealing with a  world market . Improved manufactur-
ing capabilities in countries such as China and India, coupled with low-cost transpor-
tation using container ships, and instant worldwide communication with the Internet, 
have enabled an increasing fraction of consumer products to be manufactured overseas. 
In 2010, manufacturing jobs in the United States accounted for only one in eleven jobs, 
down from one in three in 1950. This is not a new trend. The United States became a 
net importer of manufactured goods in 1981, but in recent years the negative balance of 
trade has grown to possibly unsustainable proportions. The reduction in the percentage 
of the U.S. engineering workforce engaged in manufacturing places greater incentive 
and emphasis on knowledge-based activities such as innovative product design.  
 2.5.2 Market Segmentation 
 Although the customers for a product are called a “market” as though they were a 
homogeneous unit, this generally is not the case. In developing a product, it is impor-
tant to have a clear understanding of which segments of the total market the product is 
intended to serve. There are many ways to segment a market. Table 2.1 lists the broad 
types of markets that engineers typically address in their design and product develop-
ment activities. 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
57
2
 One-of-a-kind installations, such as a large offi ce building or a chemical plant, 
are expensive, complex design projects. With these types of projects the design and 
the construction are usually separate contracts. Generally these types of projects are 
sold on the basis of a prior successful record of designing similar installations, and a 
reputation for quality, on-time work. Typically there is frequent one-on-one interac-
tion between the design team and the customer to make sure the user’s needs are met.  
 For small-batch engineered products, the degree of interaction with the customer 
depends on the nature of the product. For a product like railcars the design specifi ca-
tion would be the result of extensive direct negotiation between the user’s engineers 
and the vendor. For more standard products like a CNC lathe, the product would be 
considered an “off-the-shelf” item available for sale by regional distributors or direct 
from catalog sales. 
 Raw materials, such as iron ore, crushed rock, grain and oil, are  commodities 
whose characteristics are well understood. Thus, there is little interaction between the 
buyer’s engineers and the seller, other than to specify the quality level (grade) of the 
commodity. Most commodity products are sold chiefl y on the basis of price. 
 When raw materials are converted into processed materials, such as sheet steel or a 
silicon wafer, the purchase is made with agreed-upon industry standards of quality, or in 
extreme cases with specially engineered specifi cations. There is little interaction of the 
buyer’s and seller’s engineers. Purchase is highly infl uenced by cost and quality. 
Type of Product Market
Examples
Degree of Engineering 
Involvement with Customer
Large one-off design
Petrochemical plant; skyscraper; 
automated production line
Heavy: close consultation with 
customer. Job sold on basis of past 
experience and reputation
Small batch
Typically 10–100 items per batch. 
Machine tools; specialized control 
systems
Moderate: based mostly on specifi -
cations developed with customer
Raw materials
Ores, oil, agricultural products
Low: buyer sets standards
Processed materials
Steel, polymer resins, Si crystal
Low: buyer’s engineers set 
specifi cations
High-volume engineered 
products
Motors, microprocessors, bearings, 
pumps, springs, shock absorbers, 
instruments
Low: vendor’s engineers design 
parts for general customer
Custom-made parts
Made for specifi c design to per-
form function in product
Moderate: buyer’s engineers 
design and specify; vendors bid on 
manufacture
High-volume consumer 
products
Automobiles, computers, elec-
tronic products, food, clothing
Heavy in best of companies
Luxury consumer goods
Rolex watch; Harley Davidson
Heavy, depending on product
Maintenance and repair
Replacement parts
Moderate, Depending on product
Engineering services
Specialized consultant fi rms
Heavy: Engineers sell as well as do 
technical work
 TABLE 2.1 
 Markets for Engineered Products, Broadly Defi ned

58 
engineering design 
2
 Most technical products contain standard components or subassemblies (COTS, 
or commercial off-the-shelf products) that are made in high volumes and purchased 
from distributors or directly from the manufacturer. Companies that supply these 
parts are called  vendors  or suppliers,  and the companies that use these parts in their 
products are called  original equipment manufacturers (OEM). Usually, the buyer’s 
engineers depend on the specifi cations provided by the vendor and their record for 
reliability, so their interaction with the vendor is low. However, it will be high when 
dealing with a new supplier, or a supplier that has developed quality issues with its 
product.  
 All products contain parts that are custom designed to perform one or more func-
tions required by the product. Depending on the product, the production run may 
vary from several thousand to a few million piece parts. Typically these parts will be 
made as castings, metal stampings, or plastic injection moldings. These parts will be 
made in either the factory of the product producer or the factory of independent parts -
producing companies. Generally these companies specialize in a specifi c manufactur-
ing process, like precision forging, and increasingly they may be located worldwide. 
This calls for considerable interaction by the buyer’s engineers to decide, with the as-
sistance of purchasing agents, where to place the order to achieve reliable delivery of 
high-quality parts at lowest cost. 
 Luxury consumer products are a special case. Generally, styling and quality ma-
terials and workmanship play a major role in creating the brand image. In the case of 
a high-end sports car, engineering interaction with the customer to ensure quality may 
be high, but in most products of this type styling and salesmanship play a major role. 
 After-sale maintenance and service can be a very profi table market for a product 
producer. The manufacturers of inkjet printers make most of their profi t from the sale 
of replacement cartridges. The maintenance of highly engineered products like eleva-
tors and gas turbine engines increasingly is being done by the same companies that 
produced them. The profi ts over time for this kind of engineering work can easily 
exceed the initial cost of the product. 
 The corporate downsizings of their staff specialists that occurred in the 1990s 
resulted in many engineers organizing specialist consulting groups. Now, rather than 
using their expertise exclusively for a single organization, they make this talent avail-
able to whoever has the need and ability to pay for it. The marketing of engineering 
services is more diffi cult than the marketing of products. It depends to a considerable 
degree on developing a track record of delivering competent, on-time results, and in 
maintaining these competencies and contacts. Often these fi rms gain reputations for 
creative product design, or for being able to tackle the most diffi cult computer mod-
eling and analysis problems. An important area of engineering specialist service is 
 systems integration . Systems integration involves taking a system of separately pro-
duced subsystems or components and making them operate as an interconnected and 
interdependent engineering system. 
 Having looked at the different types of markets for engineering products, we now 
look at the way any one of these markets can be segmented. Market segmentation rec-
ognizes that markets are not homogeneous, but rather consist of people buying things, 
no two of whom are exactly alike in their purchasing patterns.  Market segmentation 
is the attempt to divide the market into groups so that there is relative homogeneity 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
59
2
within each group and distinct differences between groups. Cooper  1  suggests that four 
broad categories of variables are useful in segmenting a market. 
 
●  State of Being 
a.  Sociological factors—age, gender, income, occupation 
b.  For industrial products—company size, industry classifi cation (NAICS code), 
nature of the buying organization 
c.  Location—urban, suburban, rural; regions of the country or world 
 
●  State of Mind—   This category attempts to describe the attitudes, values, and life-
styles of potential customers. 
 
●  Product Usage— looks at how the product is bought or sold 
a.  Heavy user; light user; nonuser 
b.  Loyalty: to your brand; to competitor’s brand; indifferent 
 
●  Benefi t Segmentation—   attempts to identify the benefi ts people perceive in buying 
the product. This is particularly important when introducing a new product. When 
the target market is identifi ed with benefi ts in mind, it allows the product develop-
ers to add features that will provide those benefi ts. Methods for doing this are given 
in Chap. 3.  
 For more details on methods for segmenting markets see the text by Urban and 
Hauser. 2  
 2.5.3 Functions of a Marketing Department 
 The marketing department in a company creates and manages the company’s relation-
ship with its customers. It is the company’s window on the world with its customers. It 
translates customer needs into requirements for products and infl uences the creation 
of services that support the product and the customer. It is about understanding how 
people make buying decisions and using this information in the design, building, and 
selling of products. Marketing does not make sales; that is the responsibility of the 
sales department. 
 The marketing department can be expected to do a number of tasks. First is a 
preliminary marketing assessment, a quick scoping of the potential sales, competition, 
and market share at the very early stages of the product planning. Then they will do a 
detailed market study. This involves face-to-face interviews with potential customers 
to determine their needs, wants, preferences, likes, and dislikes. This will be done be-
fore detailed product development is carried out. Often this involves meeting with the 
end user in the location where the product is used, usually with the active participation 
of the design engineer. Another common method for doing this is the focus group. In 
this method a group of people with a prescribed knowledge about a product or service 
is gathered around a table and asked their feelings and attitudes about the product 
 1 .  R. G .  Cooper ,  Winning at New Products, 3d ed.,  Perseus Books, Cambridge, MA ,  2001 . 
 2 .  G. L .  Urban and  J. R .  Hauser ,  Design and Marketing of New Products,   2d ed.,  Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ ,  1993 . 

60 
engineering design 
2
under study. If the group is well selected and the facilitator of the focus group is expe-
rienced, the sponsor can expect to receive a wealth of opinions and attitudes that can 
be used to determine important attributes of a potential product.  
 The marketing department also plays a vital role in assisting with the introduction 
of the product into the marketplace. They perform such functions as undertaking cus-
tomer tests or fi eld trials (beta test) of the product, planning for test marketing (sales) 
in restricted regions, advising on product packaging and warning labels, preparing 
user instruction manuals and documentation, arranging for user instruction, and ad-
vising on advertising. Marketing may also be responsible for providing for a product 
support system of spare parts, service representatives, and a warranty system.   
 2.5.4 Elements of a Marketing Plan 
 The marketing plan starts with the identifi cation of the target market based on market 
segmentation. The other main input of the marketing plan is the  product strategy, 
which is defi ned by product positioning and the benefi ts provided to the customer by 
the product. A key to developing the product strategy is the ability to defi ne in one or 
two sentences the  product positioning,  that is, how the product will be perceived by 
potential customers. Of equal importance is to be able to express the  product ben-
efi ts . A product benefi t is not a product feature, although the two concepts are closely 
related. A product benefi t is a brief description of the main advantage to using the 
product as seen through the eyes of the customer. The chief features of the product 
should derive from the product benefi t.  
 E X A M P L E 2 .1 
 A manufacturer of garden tools might decide to develop a power lawnmower targeted at 
the elderly population. Demographics show that this segment of the market is growing 
 rapidly, and that they have above-average disposable income. The product will be posi-
tioned for the upper end of the elderly with ample disposable income. The chief benefi t 
would be ease of use by elderly people. The chief features to accomplish this goal would 
be power steering, an automatic safety shutoff while clearing debris from the blade, 
an easy-to-use device for raising the mower deck to get at the blade, and a clutchless 
transmission. 
 A marketing plan should contain the follow information: 
 
●  Evaluation of market segments, with clear explanation of reasons for choosing 
the target market 
 
●  Identifi cation of competitive products 
 
●  Identifi cation of early product adopters 
 
●  Clear understanding of benefi ts of product to customers 
 
●  Estimation of the market size in terms of dollars and units sold, and market share  
 
●  Determination of the breadth of the product line, and number of product variants   
 
●  Estimation of product life 
 
●  Determination of the product volume and price relationships 
 
●  Complete fi nancial plan including time to market, 10-year projection of costs 
and income 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
61
2
 2.6 
 TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
 Many of the products that engineers are developing today are the result of new tech-
nology. Much of the technology explosion started with the invention of the digital 
computer and transistor in the 1940s and their subsequent development through the 
1950s and 1960s. The transistor evolved into micro-integrated circuits, which allowed 
the computer to shrink in size and cost, becoming the desktop computer we know 
today. Combining the computer with communications systems and protocols like 
optical fi ber communications gave us the Internet and cheap, dependable worldwide 
communications. At no other time in history have several breakthrough technologies 
combined to so substantially change the world we live in. Yet, if the pace of technol-
ogy development continues to accelerate, the future will see even greater change. 
 2.6.1 Invention, Innovation, and Diffusion 
 Generally, the advancement of technology occurs in three stages: 
 
●  Invention: The creative act whereby an idea is conceived, articulated, and recorded.   
 
●  Innovation: The process by which an invention or idea is brought into successful 
practice and is utilized by the economy. 
 
●  Diffusion: The successive and widespread implementation and adoption of success-
ful innovations. 
 Without question, innovation is the most critical and most diffi cult of the three stages. 
Developing an idea into a product that people will buy requires hard work and skill 
at identifying market needs. Diffusion of technology throughout society is necessary 
to preserve the pace of innovation. As technologically advanced products are put into 
service, the technological sophistication of consumers increases. This ongoing educa-
tion of the customer base paves the way for the adoption of even more sophisticated 
products. A familiar example is the proliferation of bar codes and bar code scanners. 
 Many studies have shown that the ability to introduce and manage technologi-
cal innovation is a major factor in a country’s leadership in world markets and also a 
major factor in raising its standard of living. Science-based innovation in the United 
States has spawned such key industries as jet aircraft, computers, plastics, and wire-
less communication. Relative to other nations, however, the importance of the United 
States’ role in innovation appears to be decreasing. If the trend continues, it will affect 
our well-being. 
 Likewise, the nature of innovation has changed over time. Opportunities for the 
lone inventor have become relatively more limited. As one indication, independent 
investigators obtained 82 percent of all U.S. patents in 1901, while by 1937 this num-
ber had decreased to 50 percent, indicating the rise of corporate research laboratories. 
Today the number is about 25 percent, but it is on the rise as small companies started 
by entrepreneurs become more prevalent. This trend is attributable to the venture cap-
ital industry, which stands ready to lend money to promising innovators, and to vari-
ous federal programs to support small technological companies. 

62 
engineering design 
2
 Figure 2.11 shows the generally accepted model for a technologically inspired 
product.   This model differs from one that would have been drawn in the 1960s, which 
would have started with basic research at the head of the innovation chain. The idea 
then was that basic research results would lead to research ideas that in turn would 
lead directly to commercial development. Although strong basic research obviously is 
needed to maintain the storehouse of new knowledge and ideas, it has been well estab-
lished that innovation in response to a market need has greater probability of success 
than innovation in response to a technological research opportunity. Market pull is far 
stronger than technology push when it comes to innovation. 
 The introduction of new products into the marketplace is like a horse race. The 
odds of picking a winner at the inception of an idea are about 5 or 10 to 1. The failure 
rate of new products that actually enter the marketplace is around 35 to 50 percent. 
Most of the products that fail stumble over market obstacles, such as not appreciating 
the time it takes for customers to accept a new product. 1  The next most common cause 
of new product failure is management problems, while technical problems comprise 
the smallest category for failure.  
 The digital imaging example illustrates how a basic technological development cre-
ated for one purpose can have greater potential in another product area. However, its ini-
tial market acceptance is limited by issues of performance and manufacturing cost. Then 
a new market develops where the need is so compelling that large development funding 
is forthcoming to overcome the technical barriers, and the innovation becomes wildly 
successful in the mass consumer market. In the case of digital imaging, the innovation 
period from invention to widespread market acceptance was about thirty-fi ve years.  
 2.6.2 Business Strategies Related to Innovation and Product Development 
 A common and colorful terminology for describing business strategy dealing with 
innovation and investment was advanced by the Boston Consulting Group in the 
1970s. Most established companies have a portfolio of businesses, usually called 
business units. According to the BCG scheme, these business units can be placed 
into one of four categories, depending on their prospects for sales growth and gain in 
market share.  
 
●  Star businesses : High sales growth potential, high market share potential 
 
●  Wildcat businesses : High sales growth potential, low market share 
 
●  Cash-cow businesses : Low growth potential, high market share 
 
●  Dog businesses : Low growth potential, low market share 
 FIGURE 2.11 
 A market-pull model for technological innovation. 
Identification of
market need
Product
idea
Development
Pilot
lot
Trial
sales
Commercial
exploitation
 1 .  R.  G .  Cooper ,  Research Technology Management July–August,  1994 ,  pp. 40–50 . 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
63
2
 The Innovation of Digital Imaging 
 It is instructive to trace the history of events that led to the innovation of digital 
imaging, the technology at the heart of the digital camera. 
 In the late 1960s Willard Boyle worked in the division of Bell Laboratories 
concerned with electronic devices. The VP in charge of this division was enam-
ored with  magnetic bubbles,  a new solid-state technology for storing digital data. 
Boyle’s boss was continually asking him what Boyle was contributing toward this 
activity.  
 In late 1969, in order to appease his boss, Boyle and his collaborator George 
Smith sat down and in a one-hour brainstorming session came up with the basic 
design for a new memory chip they called a  charge-coupled device  or CCD. The 
CCD worked well for storing digital data, but it soon became apparent that it had 
outstanding potential for capturing and storing digital images, a need that had not 
yet been satisfi ed by technology in the rapidly developing semiconductor industry. 
Boyle and Smith built a proof-of-concept model containing only six pixels, pat-
ented their invention, and went on to other exciting research discoveries. 
 While the CCD was a good digital storage device, it never became a practical 
storage device because it was expensive to manufacture and was soon supplanted 
by various kinds of disks coated with fi ne magnetic particles, and fi nally the hard 
drive went on to capture the digital storage market. 
 In the meantime, two space-related applications created the  market pull  to de-
velop the CCD array to a point where it was a practical device for digital photog-
raphy. The critical issues were decreasing the size and the cost of a CCD array that 
captures the image. 
 Astronomers had never been really happy about capturing the stars on 
chemical-based fi lm, which lacks the sensitivity to record events occurring far out 
into space. The early CCD arrays, although heavy, bulky, and costly, had much 
greater inherent sensitivity. By the late 1980s they became standard equipment at 
the world’s astronomical observatories. 
 An even bigger challenge came with the advent of military satellites. The pho-
tographs taken from space were recorded on fi lm, which was ejected from space 
and picked out of the air by airplanes or fi shed out of the ocean, both rather prob-
lematic operations. When further development reduced the size and weight of CCD 
arrays and increased their sensitivity, it became possible to digitally transmit im-
ages from space, and we saw the rings of Saturn and the landscape of Mars in 
graphic detail. The technology advances achieved in these application areas made 
it possible for digital still and video cameras to become a commercial success 
roughly thirty years after the invention of the CCD. 
 In 2006 Willard Boyle and George Smith received the Draper Prize of the 
National Academy of Engineering, the highest award for technological innovation 
in the United States, and shared the Nobel prize for physics in 2009. 
 Excerpted from  G .  Gugliotta , “ One-Hour Brainstorming Gave Birth to Digital Imaging ,”  Wall Street Journal, 
February 20,  2006 ,  p. A09 . 

64 
engineering design 
2
 In this classifi cation scheme, the break between high and low market share is the 
point at which a company’s share equals that of its largest competitor. For a cash-cow 
business, cash fl ow should be maximized but investment in R&D and new plant costs 
should be kept to a minimum. The cash these businesses generate should be used in 
star and wildcat businesses, or for new technological opportunities. Heavy investment 
is required in star businesses so they can increase their market share. By pursuing this 
strategy, a star becomes a cash-cow business over time, and eventually a dog business. 
Wildcat businesses require generous funding to move into the star category. That only 
a limited number of wildcats can be funded will result in the survival of the fi ttest. 
Dog businesses receive no investment and are sold or abandoned as soon as possible. 
This whole approach is artifi cial and highly stylized, but it is a good characteriza-
tion of corporate reasoning concerning business investment with respect to available 
product areas or business units. Obviously, the innovative engineer should avoid be-
coming associated with the dogs and cash cows, for there will be little incentive for 
creative work. 
 There are other business strategies that can have a major infl uence on the role 
engineers play in engineering design. A company that follows a  fi rst in the fi eld strat-
egy is usually a high-tech innovator. Some companies may prefer to let others pioneer 
and develop the market. This is the strategy of being a  fast follower  that is content to 
have a lower market share at the avoidance of the heavy R&D expense of the pioneer. 
Other companies may emphasize process development with the goal of becoming the 
high-volume, low-cost producer. Still other companies adopt the strategy of being the 
key supplier to a few major customers that market the product to the public. 
 A company with an active research program usually has more potential prod-
ucts than the resources required to develop them. To be considered for development, 
a product should fi ll a need that is presently not adequately served, or serve a current 
market for which the demand exceeds the supply, or has a differential advantage over 
an existing product (such as better performance, improved features, or lower price). 
 2.6.3 Characteristics of Innovative People 
 Studies of the innovation process by Roberts  1  have identifi ed fi ve behavioral types of 
people who are needed in a product team devoted to technological innovation. 
 
●  Idea generator: The creative individual 
 
●  Entrepreneur: The person who “carries the ball” and takes the risks 
 
●  Gatekeepers: People who provide technical communication from outside to inside 
the product development organization 
 
●  Program manager: The person who manages without inhibiting creativity 
 
●  Sponsor: The person who provides fi nancial and moral support, often senior man-
agement or a venture capital company  
 1 .  E. B .  Roberts and  H. A .  Wainer ,  IEEE Trans. Eng. Mgt., vol. EM-18, no. 3,  pp. 100–9 ,  1971 ; 
E. B .  Roberts (ed.),  Generation of Technological Innovation,  Oxford University Press, New York ,  1987 . 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
65
2
 Roughly 70 to 80 percent of the people in a technical organization are routine prob-
lem solvers and are not involved in innovation. Therefore, it is important to be able 
to identify and nurture the small number who show promise of becoming technical 
innovators. 
 Innovators tend to be the people in a technical organization who are the most 
familiar with current technology and who have well-developed contacts with techni-
cal people outside the organization. 1  These innovators receive information directly 
and then diffuse it to other technical employees. Innovators tend to be predisposed to 
“do things differently” as contrasted with focusing on “doing things better.” Innova-
tors are early adopters of new ideas. They can deal with unclear or ambiguous situa-
tions without feeling uncomfortable. That is because they tend to have a high degree 
of self-reliance and self-esteem. Age is not a determinant or barrier to becoming an 
innovator, nor is experience in an organization, so long as it is suffi cient to estab-
lish credibility and social relationships. It is important for an organization to iden-
tify the true innovators and provide a management structure that helps them develop. 
Innovators respond well to the challenge of diverse projects and the opportunity to 
communicate with people of different backgrounds.  
 A successful innovator is a person who has a coherent picture of what needs to 
be done, although not necessarily a detailed picture. Innovators emphasize goals, not 
methods of achieving the goal. They can move forward in the face of uncertainty 
because they do not fear failure. Many times the innovator is a person who has failed 
in a previous venture and knows why. The innovator is a person who identifi es what 
he or she needs in the way of information and resources and gets them. The innovator 
aggressively overcomes obstacles by breaking them down, or hurdling over them, or 
running around them. Frequently the innovator works the elements of the problem in 
parallel, not serially. 
 2.6.4 Types of Technology Innovation 
 We have seen in Fig. 2.6 that a natural evolution of a technology-based business is for 
a new technology to substitute for the old. There are two basic ways for the new tech-
nology to arise. 
 
●  Need-driven innovation,  where the development team seeks to fi ll an identifi ed gap 
in performance or product cost (technology pull) 
 
●  Radical innovation,  which leads to widespread change and a whole new technol-
ogy, and arises from basic research (technology push) 
 Most product development is of the need-driven type. It consists of small, almost 
imperceptible improvements, which when made over a long time add up to major 
progress. These innovations are most valuable if they lead to patent protection for 
the existing product line. Typically these improvements come about by redesign of 
 1 .  R. T .  Keller ,  Chem. Eng., Mar. 10,  1980 ,  pp. 155–58 . 

66 
engineering design 
2
products for easier manufacture or the addition of new features, or the substitution 
of less expensive components for those used in the earlier design. Also important are 
changes in the manufacturing processes to improve quality and decrease cost. A meth-
odology for conducting  continuous product improvement is presented in Sec. 4.6. 
 Radical innovation is based on a  breakthrough idea 1  that is outside the scope 
of conventional thinking. It is an invention that is surprising and discontinuous from 
previous thought. Such a creative leap usually requires a completely new perspective 
of the problem (a shift to a new location in the design space). Breakthrough ideas cre-
ate something new or satisfy a previously undiscovered need, and when converted 
to a radical innovation they can create new industries or product lines. An extreme 
example is the transistor that replaced the vacuum tube and fi nally made possible the 
digital revolution in computing and communication.  
  2.7
 SUMMARY 
 Product development encompasses much more than conceiving and designing a prod-
uct. It involves the preliminary assessment of the market for the product, the align-
ment of the product with the existing product lines of the company, and an estimate of 
the projected sales, cost of development, and profi ts. These activities take place before 
permission is given to proceed with concept development, and they occur throughout 
the product development process as better estimates are obtained for the cost of devel-
opment and estimated sales. 
 The keys to creating a winning product are: 
 
●  Designing a quality product with the features and performance desired by its cus-
tomers at a price they are willing to pay 
 
●  Reducing the cost to manufacture the product over its life cycle 
 
●  Minimizing the cost to develop the product 
 
●  Quickly bringing the product to market 
 The organization of a product development team can have a major infl uence on 
how effectively product development is carried out. For minimizing the time to mar-
ket, some kind of project team is required. Generally, a heavyweight matrix organiza-
tion with appropriate management controls works best. 
 Marketing is a key function in product development. Marketing managers must un-
derstand market segmentation, the wants and needs of customers, and how to advertise 
and distribute the product so it can be purchased by the customer. Products can be clas-
sifi ed with respect to markets in several ways:  
 
●  A product developed in response to market pull or technology push 
 
●  A platform product that fi ts into an existing product line and uses its core technology   
1. M. Stefi k and B. Stefi k, Breakthrough: Stories and Strategies of Radical Innovation, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 2004.

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
67
2
 
●  A process-intensive product whose chief attributes are due to the processing 
 
●  A customized product whose confi guration and content are created in response to a 
specifi c customer order 
 Many products today are based on new and rapidly developing technologies. A 
technology evolves in three stages: 
 
●  Invention—the creative act by which a novel idea is conceived 
 
●  Innovation—the process by which an invention is brought into successful practice 
and is utilized by the economy 
 
●  Diffusion—the widespread knowledge of the capabilities of the innovation 
 Of these three stages, innovation is the most diffi cult, most time consuming, and most 
important. While technological innovation used to be the purview of a relatively small 
number of developed nations, in the 21st century it is occurring worldwide at a rapid pace.   
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
 Brand name 
 Concurrent engineering team 
 Control document 
 Economy of scale 
 Functional organization 
 Learning curve 
 Lessons learned 
 Lightweight matrix organization 
 Market 
  Market pull  
  Marketing  
 Matrix organization 
 OEM supplier 
 Product development cycle 
  Platform product  
 Profi t margins  
 Project organizations 
 Product positioning 
 PDS 
 Supply chain 
 Systems integration 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Cooper ,  R. G .,  Winning at New Products, 3d ed.,  Perseus Books, Reading, MA ,  2001 . 
 Otto ,  K . and  K .  Wood ,  Product Design: Techniques in Reverse Engineering and New Product 
Development,  Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ ,  2001 . 
 Reinertsen ,  D. G .,  Managing the Design Factory,  The Free Press, New York ,  1997 . 
 Smith ,  P. G . and  D. G .  Reinertsen ,  Developing Products in Half the Time: New Rules, New 
Tools, 2d ed.,  John Wiley & Sons, New York ,  1996 . 
 Ulrich ,  K. T . and  S. D .  Eppinger ,  Product Design and Development,   5th ed.,  McGraw-Hill, 
New York ,  2011 . 
 PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES 
 2.1.  Consider the following products: (a) a power screwdriver for use in the home; (b) a 
desktop inkjet printer; (c) an electric car. Working in a team, make your team estimate 
of the following factors needed for the development project to launch each of the prod-
ucts: (i) annual units sold, (ii) sales price, (iii) development time, years, (iv) size of de-
velopment team, (v) development cost.   

68 
engineering design 
2
 2.2.  List three products that are made from a single component. 
 2.3.  Discuss the spectrum of engineering job functions shown in Fig. 2.7 with regard to 
such factors as (a) need for advanced education, (b) intellectual challenge and satisfac-
tion, (c) fi nancial reward, (d) opportunity for career advancement, and (e) people versus 
“thing” orientation. 
 2.4.  Strong performance in your engineering discipline ordinarily is one necessary condi-
tion for becoming a successful engineering manager. What other conditions are there? 
 2.5.  Discuss the pros and cons of continuing your education for an MS in an engineering 
discipline or an MBA on your projected career progression. 
 2.6.  Discuss in some detail the relative roles of the project manager and the functional man- 
ager in the matrix type of organization. 
 2.7.  List the factors that are important in developing a new technologically oriented 
product. 
 2.8.  In Sec. 2.6.2 we briefl y presented the four basic strategies suggested by the Boston Con-
sulting Group for growing a business. This is often called the BCG growth-share ma-
trix. Plot the matrix on coordinates of market growth potential versus market share, and 
discuss how a company uses this model to grow its overall business. 
 2.9.  List the key steps in the technology transfer (diffusion) process. What are some of the 
factors that make technology transfer diffi cult? What are the forms in which informa-
tion can be transferred? 
2.10.  John Jones is an absolute whiz in computer modeling and fi nite-element analysis. These 
skills are badly needed on your product development team. However, Jones is also the 
absolute loner who prefers to work from 4 p.m. to midnight, and when asked to serve on 
a product development team he turns the offer down. If ordered to work on a team he 
generally fails to turn up for team meetings. As team leader, what would you do to cap-
ture and effectively utilize John Jones’s strong expertise? 
2.11.  An important issue in most product development projects is making sure that the project 
schedule can take advantage of the “window of opportunity.” Use Fig. 2.6b to help ex-
plain what is meant by this concept. 
2.12.  The development of the steel shipping container that can be transferred from a ship to 
a truck or train has had a huge impact on world economies. Explain how such a simple 
engineering development could have such far-reaching consequences. 
2.13. Explain the physics behind the charge-coupled device (CCD) discussed in Section 2.6.1, 
and explain why this was the invention that made digital photography practical.
2.14.  What other technological developments besides the steel shipping container were re-
quired to produce the global marketplace that we have today? Explain how each con-
tributed to the global marketplace. 

 
chapter 2: Product Development Process 
69
2
2.15.  The demand for most edible fi sh exceeds the supply. While fi sh can be raised in ponds 
on land or in ocean enclosures close to shore, there are limitations of scale. The next 
step is mariculture—fi sh farming in the open sea. Develop a new product business de-
velopment plan for such a venture.
2.16. Conventional thinking in product development has been that innovation starts in ad-
vanced developed countries like the United States and Japan. Products marketed in 
countries where the average income is much lower often are older models of U.S. prod-
ucts or used but still serviceable equipment.  Several U.S. multinational companies have 
established R&D labs in India and China. Originally this was to take advantage of the 
large number of well-educated engineers who could be employed at salaries much lower 
than the going U.S. rate, but soon it was found that these engineers were adept at devel-
oping products for sale to the mass markets in these local countries. Typically these are 
products with somewhat reduced functionality, but they still are useful quality products. 
Now these U.S. companies are beginning to market these products in the United States 
as a low-cost product line that is attractive to a new low-end market segment.
 
Search the business literature for examples of this new approach to trickle-up product 
innovation. Discuss advantages of this new approach to product development and dis-
cuss possible risks. 

3
70
 3 
 PROBLEM DEFINITION AND 
NEED IDENTIFICATION  
 3.1
INTRODUCTION 
 The engineering design process has been depicted as a stream of potential designs for a 
new product that will fi t the needs of a targeted group of consumers. The stream is chan-
neled through a pipeline of narrowing diameter with fi lters at key junctions that screen 
out less valuable candidate designs. At the end of the pipeline, a nearly ideal single design 
(or a very small set of designs) emerges. The fi lters represent key decision points in the 
design evaluation process where candidate designs are evaluated by a panel of review-
ers overseeing product development for the business unit. Candidate designs are rejected 
when they fail to meet one or more of the engineering or business objectives of the unit. 
 Candidate design concepts are not stored and waiting to be released like ice cubes 
dispensed one glassful at a time from a port in a refrigerator door. Design is a much 
more complex activity that requires intense focus at the very beginning to determine 
the full and complete description of what the fi nal product will do for a particular cus-
tomer base with a set of specifi c needs. The design process only proceeds into concept 
generation once the product is so well described that it has met with the approval of 
groups of technical and business discipline specialists and managers. These review 
groups include the R&D division of the corporation and may also include employees 
anywhere in the company, as well as customers and key suppliers. New product ideas 
must be checked for their fi t with the technology and product market strategies of the 
company, and their requirement for resources. A senior management team will review 
competing new product development plans championed by different product managers 
to select those in which to invest resources. The issues involved in planning for the 
design of a new product are discussed in various sections of Chap. 2 namely: Product 
and Process Cycles; Markets and Marketing, and Technological Innovation. Certain 
decisions about the PDP are made even before the engineering design process begins. 
Chap. 2 sections point out certain types of  development work and decision making 
that must be completed before the design problem defi nition starts. 
70

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
71
3
 Product development begins by determining what the needs are that a product 
must meet. Problem defi nition is the most important of the steps in the PDP (Fig. 3.1). 
Understanding any problem thoroughly is crucial to reaching an outstanding solution. 
This axiom holds for all kinds of problem solving, whether it be math problems, pro-
duction problems, or design problems. In product design the ultimate test of a solution 
is meeting management’s goal in the marketplace, so it is vital to work hard to under-
stand and provide what it is that the customer wants.   
 This chapter emphasizes the customer satisfaction aspect of problem defi nition, 
an approach not always taken in engineering design. This view turns the design prob-
lem defi nition process into the identifi cation of the outcome the customer or end user 
of the product wants to achieve.  Therefore, in product development, the problem defi -
nition process is mainly the need identifi cation step . The need identifi cation methods 
in this chapter draw heavily on processes introduced and proven effective by the total 
quality management (TQM) movement. TQM emphasizes customer satisfaction. The 
TQM tool of  quality function deployment  (QFD) will be introduced. QFD is a process 
devised to identify the  voice of the customer  and channel it through the entire product 
development process. The most popular step of QFD, producing the House of Quality 
(HOQ), is presented here in detail. The chapter ends by proposing an outline of the 
 product design specifi cation  (PDS), which serves as the governing document for the 
product design. A design team must generate a starting PDS at this point in the design 
process to guide its design generation. However, the PDS is an evolving document that 
will not be fi nalized until the detail design phase of the PDP process. 
 FIGURE 3.1 
 The engineering design process showing problem defi nition as the start of the conceptual 
design process. 
Define
problem
Problem statement
Benchmarking
Product dissection
House of Quality
PDS
Gather
information
Conceptual design
Internet
Patents
Technical articles
Trade journals
Consultants
Concept
generation
Creativity methods
Brainstorming
Functional models
Decomposition
Systematic design
methods
Evaluation
of concepts
Decision making
Selection criteria
Pugh chart
Decision matrix
AHP
Product
architecture
Arrangement of
physical elements
Modularity
Configuration
design
Preliminary selection
of materials and
manufacturing
processes
Modeling 
Sizing of parts
Parametric
design
Robust design
Set tolerances
DFM, DFA, DFE
Tolerances
Detail
design
Engineering
drawings
Finalize PDS
Embodiment design

72 
engineering design 
3
 3.2
IDENTIFYING CUSTOMER NEEDS 
 Increasing worldwide competitiveness creates a need for greater focus on the custom-
er’s wishes. Engineers and businesspeople are seeking answers to such questions as: 
Who are my customers? What does the customer want? How can the product satisfy 
the customer while generating a profi t? 
 Webster defi nes a customer as “one that purchases a product or service.” This is 
the defi nition of the customer that most people have in mind, the  end user.  These are 
the people or organizations that buy what the company sells because they are going 
to be using the product. However, engineers performing product development must 
broaden their defi nition of  customer to be most effective. 
 From a total quality management viewpoint, the defi nition of  customer  can be 
broadened to “anyone who receives or uses what an individual or organization pro-
vides.” However, not all customers who make purchasing decisions are end users. 
Clearly the parent who is purchasing action fi gures, clothes, school supplies, and even 
breakfast cereal for his or her children is not the end user but still has critical input for 
product development. Large retail customers who control distribution to a majority of 
end users also have increasing infl uence. In the do-it-yourself tool market, Home Depot 
and Lowes act as customers but they are not end users. Therefore, both customers  and 
those who infl uence them must be consulted to identify needs the new product must 
satisfy.  
 The needs of customers outside of the company are important to the develop-
ment of the product design specifi cations for new or improved products. A second set 
of critical constituents are the internal customers, such as a company’s own corpo-
rate management, manufacturing personnel, the sales staff, and fi eld service person-
nel whose needs must be considered. For example, the design engineer who requires 
information on the properties of three potential materials for his or her design is an 
 internal customer of the company’s materials specialist. 
 The product under development defi nes the range of customers that a design team 
must consider. Remember that the term  customer  implies that the person is engag-
ing in more than just a one-time transaction. Every great company strives to convert 
each new buyer into a customer for life by delivering quality products and services. 
A customer base is not necessarily captured by a fi xed demographic range. Marketing 
professionals are attuned to changes in customer bases that will lead to new defi ni-
tions of markets for existing product improvements and new target markets for prod-
uct innovations. 
 3.2.1 Preliminary Research on Customers Needs 
 In a large company, the research on customer needs for a particular product or for 
the development of a new product is done using a number of formal methods and by 
different business units. The initial work may be done by a marketing department 
specialist or a team made up of marketing and design professionals (see Sec. 2.5). The 

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
73
3
 The Shot-Buddy: A Product Developed by a Team of Engineering Students 
 A great basketball player has the ability to make shots from a variety of distances 
and at a variety of angles measured from the basketball hoop. Michael Jordan may 
be known for his great leaping ability, but it was his game winning shots that al-
lowed the Chicago Bulls to win seven NBA titles. In order to develop a great jump 
or set shot, an athlete must practice for hours, taking hundreds or thousands of 
shots. For amateur players most of the practice time is spent retrieving the basket-
ball after it goes careening off the rim or backboard or after it falls through the 
basket. As a result, there is a need to allow players to maximize shooting time by 
minimizing the time spent retrieving basketballs. 
A senior design course team, JSR Design, is developing a product called the 
Shot-Buddy, a system that returns a thrown basketball to the place of the shooter 
without manual rotation of the shooting return device. There are products on the 
market for rotationally adjustable ball returns, but all of them require manual ad-
justment and will not change automatically as the shooter moves around the court.
Driving ranges are popular because they allow the golfer to hit hundreds of 
golf balls, one after the other, without ever having to chase down or locate a golf 
ball. This allows the golfer to focus the entire practice time on technique.
In contrast, a young basketball player practicing on his or her jump shot will 
usually have only one basketball with which to shoot. This means that a large por-
tion of practice time involves not only shooting the basketball, but retrieving both 
made and missed shots. Depending on the distance the shooter is from the bas-
ket, errant shots can rebound in almost any direction, with nearly the same veloc-
ity with which the basketball was shot. Coaches and experts estimate that nearly 
70 percent of shots taken from the wings (or sides of the basket) will rebound to 
the weak (or opposite) side from which the ball was shot.1 Figure 3.2 illustrates 
this point. Even in the case where the shooter is successful in making a basket, the 
ball still needs to be retrieved from underneath the hoop, which can be as far as 
24 feet away. More time is spent running after the ball than actually shooting. The 
Shot-Buddy will allow basketball players to spend more time practicing their ball 
shooting skills.
1. “Basketball Zone Defense—Rebounding out of the Zone”, The Coach’s Clipboard, n.d., 8/15/2010 
<www.coachesclipboard.net/ZoneRebounding.html>.
natural focus of marketing specialists is the buyer of the product and similar products. 
Designers focus on needs that are unmet in the marketplace, products that are similar 
to the proposed product, historical ways of meeting the need and technological ap-
proaches to engineering similar products of the type under consideration. Clearly, in-
formation gathering is critical for this stage of design. Chapter 5 outlines sources and 
search strategies for fi nding published information on existing designs. Design teams 
will also need to gather information directly from potential customers. 

74 
engineering design 
3
 Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, “JSR 
Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010. 
 E X A M P L E  3 .1  Determining the Market 
 The JSR Design team must begin the Shot-Buddy product development process by deter-
mining their target end-user.
The market for the Shot-Buddy will be focused on, but not limited to, the parents of bas-
ketball players between the ages of 10 and 18 years old. The reason that 10 years old was cho-
sen as the lower limit is that JSR Design members feel it is at this age when a person usually 
has developed the necessary strength and motor skills required to begin training for basket-
ball team play. Younger athletes, who have not yet developed the upper body strength to shoot 
from long range, are not concerned with the unpredictable rebounds that result from longer 
range shooting. Children under age 10 are also not usually as competitive and serious regard-
ing their athletics, which means they will have less of a need for individual practice time.
At age 18, the upper limit, many young adults are transitioning into a time when their 
need for a product such as this diminishes, as new life changes become more of a prior-
ity. At this age students either enter college athletics or become more focused on their 
careers and academics. If they become involved in college athletics, improved facilities 
and increased coaching staff make the need for this product obsolete. Nevertheless, the 
Shot-Buddy would still be a useful practice tool for young adults who continue to play 
basketball for recreation and have a hoop at their homes. 
 One way to begin to understand needs of the targeted customers is for the devel-
opment team to use their own experience. The team can begin to identify the needs 
that current products in their area of interest do not meet and those that an ideal new 
product should meet. In fact, there’s no better group of people to start articulating 
unmet needs than members of a product development team who also happen to be end 
users of what they are designing. Thus members of JSR Design are well-suited to start 
describing performance and features of a basketball return system. 
FIGURE 3.2
Shot from the “left wing” on basketball court.

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
75
3
 Brainstorming is a natural idea generation tool that can be used at this point in the 
process. Brainstorming will be covered in more detail in Chap. 4. It is such a familiar 
process that a brief example of how brainstorming can be carried out to provide in-
sight into customer needs is given here. 
 EXAMPLE 3.2 Brainstorming Product Performance and Features 
JSR Design team members play basketball for recreation. As a group they can use the guide-
lines of brainstorming to begin to determine the performance the Shot-Buddy must provide. 
JSR Design developed the following problem statement for their brainstorming session:
Problem Statement: Design a basketball return device for players from about age 10 
to age 18 that will automatically return the ball to the shooting player. 
The following list is a subset of the team’s ideas for the Shot-Buddy.
1. Return missed shots near the hoop
2. Return missed shots even when they aren’t hitting the hoop or the backstop
3. Track where the shooter is on the court
4. Return the ball to the position of the shooter
5. Return the ball quickly
6. Do not block the shooter’s access to the basket
7. Fit any kind of hoop that a young player might have (e.g., a height adjustable hoop)
8. Be easily set up on a hoop and court
9. Fit hoops that are set up on home courts (e.g., free standing systems and those 
mounted on a garage or home wall)
10. Be able to be stored in small space
11. Withstand the elements if left attached to a hoop for an extended period of time
12. Return shots taken from the wings of the baskets (not just in front of the basket)
13. Return balls with enough energy to reach a shooter standing as far away as the three-
point line
14. Return the ball accurately—so the shooter doesn’t have to move to get the ball
         Next, the ideas for improvement were grouped into common areas by using an  affi n-
ity diagram  (see Chap. 4). A good way to achieve this is to write each of the ideas on a 
Post-it note and place them randomly on a wall. The team then examines the ideas and ar-
ranges them into columns of logical groups. After grouping, the team determines a head-
ing for the column and places that heading at the top of the column. The team created an 
affi nity diagram for their improvement ideas, and it is shown in Table 3.1. 
 TABLE 3.1 
Affi nity Diagram Created from Brainstormed 
Shot-Buddy Features
Ball Catch 
Area
Return 
Direction
Return 
Characteristics
Size and Shape
Other
1
3
 4
 6
11
2
 5
 7
6
13
 8
12
14
 9
 
10 
 

76 
engineering design 
3
 The fi ve product improvement categories appearing in Table 3.1 emerged from the 
within-team brainstorming session. This information helps to focus the team’s design 
scope. It also aids the team in determining areas of particular interest for more research 
from direct interaction with customers and from the team’s own testing processes.   
3.2.2  Gathering Information from Customers 
 It is the customer’s desires that ordinarily drive the development of the product, not the en-
gineer’s vision of what the customer should want. (An exception to this rule is the case of 
technology driving innovative products that customers have never seen before, Sec. 2.6.4.) 
Information on the customer’s needs is obtained through a variety of channels:  1  
 
●  Interviews with customers:  Active marketing and sales forces should be continu-
ously meeting with current and potential customers. Some corporations have ac-
count teams whose responsibility is to visit key customer accounts to probe for 
problem areas and to cultivate and maintain friendly contact. They report informa-
tion on current product strengths and weaknesses that will be helpful in product 
upgrades. An even better approach is for the design team to interview customers in 
the service environment where the product will be used. Key questions to ask are: 
What do you like or dislike about this product? What factors do you consider when 
purchasing this product? What improvements would you make to this product? 
 
●  Focus groups:  A focus group is a moderated discussion with 6 to 12 customers or 
targeted customers of a product. The moderator is a facilitator who uses prepared 
questions to guide the discussion about the merits and disadvantages of the product. 
A trained moderator will follow up on any surprise answers in an attempt to uncover 
implicit needs and latent needs of which the customer is not consciously aware.  
 
●  Customer complaints:  A sure way to learn about needs for product improvement is 
from customer complaints. These may be recorded by communications (by telephone, 
letter, or email) to a customer information department, service center or warranty 
department, or a return center at a larger retail outlet. Third-party Internet websites 
can be another source of customer input on customer satisfaction with a product. Pur-
chase sites often include customer rating information. Savvy marketing departments 
monitor these sites for information on their products and competing products.  
 
●  Warranty data:  Product service centers and warranty departments are a rich and 
important source of data on the quality of an existing product. Statistics on war-
ranty claims can pinpoint design defects. However, gross return numbers can be 
misleading. Some merchandise is returned with no apparent defect. This refl ects 
customer dissatisfaction with paying for things, not with the product. 
 
●  Customer surveys:  A written questionnaire is best used for gaining opinions about 
the redesign of existing products or new products that are well understood by the 
public. Other common reasons for conducting a survey are to identify or prioritize 
problems and to assess whether an implemented solution to a problem was success-
ful. A survey can be done by mail, e-mail, telephone, or in person.  
 The creation of customer surveys is now presented in more detail. 
 1.  K. T .  Ulrich and  S. D .  Eppinger ,  Product Design and Development,   4th ed.,  McGraw-Hill, New York ,  2007 . 

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
77
3
 Constructing a Survey Instrument 
 Regardless of the method used to gain information from customers, considerable 
thought needs to go into developing the survey instrument.  1  Creating an effective 
survey requires the following steps. The steps described here will be illustrated by 
imagining how members of the JSR Design team would follow this process to collect 
information from their targeted market for the Shot-Buddy. 
1.  Determine the survey purpose. Write a short paragraph stating the purpose of the 
survey, what will be done with the results, and by whom.  
2.  Identify what specifi c information is needed. Each question should have a clear 
purpose for eliciting responses to inform on specifi c issues. You should have no 
more questions than the absolute minimum. The sample survey for the “Shot 
Buddy” (Fig. 3.3) contains two sections of questions. The fi rst set, questions 1 to 4, 
determine if the respondent is in the target market for a basketball return. 
3.  Design the questions. Each question should be unbiased, unambiguous, clear, and 
brief. There are three categories of questions: (1) attitude questions—how the cus-
tomers feel or think about something; (2) knowledge questions—questions asked 
to determine whether the customer knows the specifi cs about a product or ser-
vice; and (3) behavior questions—usually contain phrases like “how often,” “how 
much,” or “when.” Some general rules to follow in writing questions are: 
●  Do not use jargon or sophisticated vocabulary. 
●  Every question should focus directly on one specifi c topic. 
●   Use simple sentences. Two or more simple sentences are preferable to one com-
pound sentence. 
●  Do not lead the customer toward the answer you want. 
●  Avoid questions with double negatives because they may create misunder standing.   
●  In any list of options given to the respondents, include the choice of “Other” 
with a space for a write-in answer. 
●  Always include one open-ended question. Open-ended questions can reveal in-
sights and nuances and tell you things you would never think to ask. 
●  The number of questions should be such that they can be answered in about 
15 (but no more than 30) minutes. 
●  Design the survey form so that tabulating and analyzing data will be easy. 
●  Include instructions for completing and returning it. 
 Questions can have the following types of answers: 
●  Yes—no—don’t know 
●  A Likert-type rating scale made up of an odd number of rating responses, e.g., 
strongly disagree—mildly disagree—neutral—mildly agree—strongly agree. On a 
1–5 scale such as this, always set up the numerical scale so that a high number means 
a good answer. The question must be posed so that the rating scale makes sense.  
●  Rank order—list in descending order of preference 
●  Unordered choices—choose (b) over (d) or (b) from a, b, c, d, e. 
 1.  P .  Slanat and  D. A .  Dillman ,  How to Conduct Your Own Survey,  Wiley, New York ,  1994 and “Survey 
Design,” Creative Research Systems, n.d.,  www.surveysystem.com/sdesign.htm , accessed August 15, 2010.   

78 
engineering design 
3
 Select the type of answer option that will elicit responses in the most revealing 
format without overtaxing the respondent. 
4.  Arrange the order of questions so that they provide context to what you are trying 
to learn from the customer. Group the questions by topic, and start with easy ones. 
The second set of questions in the Shot-Buddy survey (Fig. 3.3) seek to learn the 
attitude of the respondent to basketball practice at the home. The third set of ques-
tions investigates the type of hoop the respondents have. 
5.  Pilot the survey. Before distributing the survey to the customer, always pilot 
it on a smaller sample group and review the reported information. This will 
tell you whether any of the questions are poorly worded and sometimes mis-
understood, whether the rating scales are adequate, and whether the survey is 
too long.   
 FIGURE 3.3 
 Customer survey for the Shot-Buddy. 
How much would you pay for an automatic basketball rebounding system that will attach to any standard basketball 
hoop installation and allow the ball to return to the shooter's location (circle one price range)? 
 
  I would pay
$50 < $100 
$100 < $150 
$150 < $200 
$200<$250 
$250 and over  
What features of a basketball return device would be most important to you as a potential buyer? 
Voluntary Demographic Information: Age:
Gender:
For this set of questions circle the number from 
1 to 5 that most accurately reflects your answer.
 
Response from Participant
Strongly 
Disagree
(or Never)
Neutral
Strongly
Agree
(or Always)
Basketball Return Device
Product Design Survey 
Students from a senior capstone design course are designing an improved basketball return device for
players from about ages 10 to 18. These survey answers will be used to guide the design process.
Please take 10 minutes to complete this survey.
1. Members of my family play basketball at my home 
2. Members of my family practice their shooting skills alone
3. Members of my family have more than one basketball
4. I believe that basketball practice is important to my family members 
5. Members of my family are on basketball teams
6. Members of my family wish to improve their shooting skills
7. Members of my family should practice basketball more than they do at home 
8. I like to assist my family members by practicing with them
9. Members of my family frequently give and get sports gifts
Yes       No 
For the next set of answers, check the box for “Yes” or “No”
10. My family has a basketball hoop attached to a building
11. My family has a free standing basketball hoop
12. My family has an adjustable height basketball hoop 
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
Additional 
If all your answers to the previous questions are “1” you may return the survey to the administrator
without further answers. Otherwise, please continue with your answers on a scale from 1 to 5. 

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
79
3
6.  Administer the survey. Key issues in administering the survey are assuring that 
the people surveyed constitute a representative sample for fulfi lling the purpose 
of the survey, and determining size sample must be used to achieve statistically 
signifi cant results. Answering these questions requires special expertise and ex-
perience. Consultants in the area of marketing should be used for really important 
situations.    
 Evaluating Customer Surveys 
 Evaluating a survey question depends on the type of question and the kind of in-
formation sought. To evaluate the customer responses, we could calculate the average 
score for each question, using a 1–5 scale. Those questions scoring highest would rep-
resent aspects of the product ranked highest in the minds of the customers. Alterna-
tively, we can take the number of times a feature or attribute of a design is mentioned 
in the survey and divide by the total number of customers surveyed. For the survey 
shown in Fig. 3.3, we might use the number of responses to each question rating a 
feature as either a 4 or a 5.   
 It is worth noting that a response to a questionnaire of this type really measures 
the need obviousness as opposed to need importance. To get at true need importance, 
it is necessary to conduct face-to-face interviews or focus groups and to record the 
actual words used by the persons interviewed. These responses need to be studied in 
depth. It is important to realize that often respondents will omit talking about factors 
that are very important to them because they seem so  obvious. Safety and durability 
are good examples. It is also possible for an end user to forget to mention a feature of a 
product that has become standard. This is addressed in Sec. 3.3.2. 
 The relative frequency of responses from a survey can be displayed in a bar graph 
or a Pareto chart. In a bar graph the frequency of responses to each of the questions is 
plotted in order of the question number. Figure 3.4 displays a bar graph of simulated 
responses (no actual survey was done) to one group of questions to the “Basketball 
FIGURE 3.4
Chart of simulated answers to Shot-Buddy Survey questions 5–9.
87
85
74
33
97
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
5
6
Survey Question Number
7
8
9
Number of Answers “4” and “5”
Positive Responses from 109 Subjects

80 
engineering design 
3
Return Device” survey. A similar plot would be made for questions 1–4 and 10–12. 
In a Pareto chart the frequency of responses is arranged in decreasing order with the 
item of highest frequency at the left-hand side of the plot. This plot clearly identifi es 
the most important customer  requirements—the vital few. The responses indicate that 
a basketball return would be viewed as a good gift idea for members of the family and 
that the families in this response group are in the target market. Most importantly, 
answers to question 8 indicate that respondents want a return system that frees them 
from practicing with their basketball player. A more precise question could ask how 
often the respondent rebounds for a practice session. 
 Ethnographic Studies 
 Surveys can be a powerful means of collecting answers to known questions. How-
ever, fi nding out the complete story about how customers interact with a product is 
often more diffi cult than asking for answers to a brief survey. Customers are inventive, 
and much can be discovered from them. A method called ethnographic investigation is 
valuable to learning about the way people behave in their regular environments. 1  
 Ethnography is the process of investigation and documentation of the behavior 
of a specifi c group of people under particular conditions. Ethnography entails close 
observation, even to the point of immersion, in the group being studied while they are 
experiencing the conditions of interest. This way the observer can get a comprehensive 
and integrated understanding of the scenario under investigation. It is not unusual for 
a company to support this type of study by setting up situations that enable members 
of a product development team to observe end users in their natural work settings. 
 The design team can employ this method to determine how a customer uses (or 
misuses) a product. Ethnographic study of products involves observing actual end 
users interacting with the product under typical use conditions. Team members col-
lect photographs, sketches, videos, and interview data during an ethnographic study. 
The team can further explore product use by playing the roles of typical end users. (A 
detailed interview with a few end users is more useful than a survey of students acting 
as end users.) 
 3.3
CUSTOMER REQUIREMENTS 
 Designers must compile a ranked listing of what customers need and want from the 
product being designed. This set of needs and wants is often called customer require-
ments. These are the needs that form the end user’s opinion about the quality of a 
product. As odd as it may seem, customers may not express all their requirements of a 
product when they are interviewed. If a feature has become standard on a product they 
may forget to mention it. To understand how that can happen and how the omissions 
can be mitigated, it is necessary to refl ect on how customers perceive “needs.” 
 1 .  H. Mariampolski, Ethnography for Marketers: A Guide to Consumer Immersion, Sage Publications, 
2005. 

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
81
3
 From a global viewpoint, we should recognize that there is a hierarchy of human 
needs that motivate individuals in general. 1 
 Rank of 1. Physiological needs  such as thirst, hunger, sex, sleep, shelter, and ex-
ercise. These constitute the basic needs of the body, and until they are satisfi ed, 
they remain the prime infl uence on the individual’s behavior. 
 Rank of 2. Safety and security needs,  which include protection against danger, 
deprivation, and threat. When the bodily needs are satisfi ed, the safety and se-
curity needs become dominant. 
 Rank of 3. Social needs  for love and esteem by others. These needs include be-
longing to groups, group identity, and social acceptance. 
 Rank of 4. Psychological needs  for self-esteem and self-respect and for accom-
plishment and recognition. 
 Rank of 5. Self-fulfi llment needs  for the realization of one’s full potential through 
self- development, creativity, and self-expression. 
 As each need in this ranking is satisfi ed, a person becomes driven by the next highest 
ranking need. The fi rst concerns of a parent of a 10-year-old child are food, shelter 
and clothing. No parent would be interested in the child’s sports equipment unless 
basic needs were met. Our design problem should be related to the basic human needs, 
some of which may be so obvious that in our modern technological society they are 
taken for granted. For example, in the brainstorming listing of performance and fea-
tures of the Shot-Buddy there is no mention of safety in the performance of the device. 
Nevertheless, safety is always a requirement for engineering designers.  
 3.3.1 Differing Views of Customer Requirements  
 From a design team point of view, the customer requirements fi t into a broader picture 
of the PDP requirements, which include product performance, time to market, cost, 
and quality. 
 
●  Performance  deals with what the design should do when it is completed and in 
operation. Design teams do not blindly adopt the customer requirements set deter-
mined thus far. However, that set is the foundation for design team actions. Other 
factors may include requirements by internal customers (e.g., manufacturing) or 
large retail distributors.  
 
●  The  time  dimension includes all time aspects of the design. Currently, much effort 
is being given to reducing the PDP cycle time, also known as the time to market, 
for new products. 2  For many consumer products, the fi rst to market with a great 
product captures the market (Fig. 2.2). 
 
●  Cost  pertains to all monetary aspects of the design. It is a paramount consider-
ation of the design team. When all other customer requirements are roughly equal, 
cost determines most customers’ buying decisions. From the design team’s point 
1. A. H. Maslow, Psych. Rev., vol. 50, pp. 370–396, 1943.
2. G. Stalk, Jr., and T. M. Hout, Competing against Time, The Free Press, New York, 1990.

82 
engineering design 
3
of view, cost is a result of many design decisions and must often be used to make 
trade-offs among features and deadlines. 
 
●  Quality  is a complex characteristic with many aspects and defi nitions. A good defi -
nition of quality for the design team is the totality of features and characteristics of 
a product or service that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs. 
 A more inclusive customer requirement than the four listed above is value. Value 
is the worth of a product or service. It can be expressed by the function provided 
divided by the cost, or the quality provided divided by the cost. Studies of large, suc-
cessful companies have shown that the return on investment is correlated with high 
market share and high quality. 
 Garvin  1 identifi ed the  eight basic dimensions of quality  (Table 3.2) for a manu-
factured product. These have become a standard list that design teams use as a guide 
for completeness of customer requirement data gathered in the PDP. Not all dimen-
sions of quality are equally important to each product, so not all are critical customer 
requirements. Some dimensions highlight the need for a multidisciplinary product de-
velopment team. Aesthetics in design falls into the domain of the industrial designer, 
who is part artist. An important technical issue that affects aesthetics is ergonomics, 
how well the design fi ts the human user. Ergonomics falls into the skill set of the 
industrial engineer. 
TABLE 3.2 
Garvin’s Eight Dimensions of Quality
Dimension 
Description
Performance 
 The primary operating characteristics of a product. This dimension can be 
expressed in measurable quantities and ranked objectively
Features 
 Characteristics that supplement a product’s basic functions. Features customize or 
personalize a product to the customer’s needs or taste.
Reliability 
 The probability of a product failing or malfunctioning within a specifi ed time 
period. See Chap. 14.
Durability 
 A measure of the amount of use one gets from a product before it breaks down and 
replacement is preferable to continued repair. Durability is a measure of product 
life. Durability is not the same as reliability.
Serviceability 
 Ease of repair and time to repair after breakdown. Other issues are courtesy and 
competence of repair personnel and cost and ease of repair.
Conformance 
 The degree to which a product meets both customer expectations and established 
standards. These standards include industry standards, government regulations, 
and safety and environmental standards. 
Aesthetics 
 How a product looks, feels, sounds, tastes, and smells. Customer response is a 
matter of personal judgment and individual preference.
Perceived Quality 
 Customers’ judgment of the product prior to purchase. This dimension is as-
sociated with past experience with similar products or the same manufacturer’s 
products. Advertising seeks to infl uence this perception.
1. D. A. Garvin, Harvard Business Review, November–December 1987, pp. 101–9.

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
83
3
 The challenge for the design team is to combine all the information gathered 
about customers’ needs for a product and interpret it. The customer data must be fi l-
tered into a manageable set of requirements that drive the generation of design con-
cepts. The design team must clearly identify preference levels among the customer 
requirements before adding in considerations like time to market or the requirements 
of the company’s internal customers. 
 3.3.2 Classifying Customer Requirements 
 Not all customer requirements are equal. This essentially means that customer re-
quirements have different values for different people. The design team must identify 
those requirements that are most important to the success of the product in its target 
market and must ensure that those requirements are satisfi ed by the product. 
 This is a diffi cult distinction for some design team members to make because the 
pure engineering viewpoint is to deliver the best possible performance in all product 
aspects. A Kano diagram is a good tool to visually partition customer requirements 
into categories that will allow for their prioritization. Kano recognized that there are 
four levels of customer requirements: (1) expecters, (2) spokens, (3) unspokens, and 
(4) exciters. 1 
 
●  Expecters:  These are the basic attributes that one would expect to see in the prod-
uct, i.e., standard features. Expecters are frequently easy to measure and are used 
often in benchmarking. 
 
●  Spokens:  These are the specifi c features that customers say they want in the prod-
uct. Because the customer defi nes the product in terms of these attributes, the de-
signer must be willing to provide them to satisfy the customer. 
 
●  Unspokens:  These are product attributes the customer does not generally talk 
about, but they remain important to him or her. They cannot be ignored. They may 
be attributes the customer simply forgot to mention or was unwilling to talk about 
or simply does not realize he or she wants. It takes great skill on the part of the de-
sign team to identify the unspoken requirements. 
 
●  Exciters:  Often called  delighters,  these are product features that make the product 
unique and distinguish it from the competition. Note that the absence of an exciter 
will not make customers unhappy, since they do not know what is missing.   
 A Kano diagram depicts how expected customer satisfaction (shown on y-axis) 
can vary with the success of the execution (shown on x-axis) of customer require-
ments. The success of execution can also be interpreted as product performance. The 
adequate level of performance is at the zero point on the x-axis. Performance to the 
right of the y-axis indicates higher quality than required. Performance to the left repre-
sents decreasing quality to the point where there is no performance on a requirement. 
 Figure 3.5 depicts three types of relationships between product performance and 
customer requirements. Curve 2 is the 45 line that begins in the region of “absent” 
 1 .  L .  Cohen ,  Quality Function Deployment: How to Make QFD Work for You ,  Addison-Wesley,  Pub-
lishing Company, New York ,  1995 . 

84 
engineering design 
3
performance on a requirement and lowest customer satisfaction or “disgust” and pro-
gresses to the point of high quality performance and customer delight. Since it is a 
straight line, it represents customer requirements that are basic to the intended func-
tion of the product and will, eventually, result in delight. Customer Requirements (CRs) 
in the Expecter category are represented on Curve 2. Most Spoken CRs also follow 
Curve 2. 
 Curve 1 on Fig. 3.5 begins in the region of existing but less than adequately 
implemented performance and rises asymptotically to the positive x-axis. Customer 
requirements that follow Curve 1 will never contribute to positive customer satis-
faction because the requirements are expected in the product’s performance. How-
ever, failing to meet the expected performance will disproportionately decrease 
quality perceptions. Expecter CRs follow Curve 1. Unspoken CRs will also follow 
Curve 1.  
 On Curve 3 any product performance that helps to satisfy these CRs will increase 
the customer’s impression of quality. The improvement in quality rating will increase 
dramatically as product performance increases. These are the CRs in the Exciter cat-
egory. The Kano diagram of Fig. 3.5 shows that a design team must be aware of the 
nature of each CR so that they know which ones are the most important to meet. This 
understanding of the nature of CRs is necessary for prioritizing design team efforts 
and making decisions on performance trade-offs. 
 FIGURE 3.5 
 Kano diagram. 
High satisfaction
Delighted
Low satisfaction
Disgusted
Absent
quality for performance
not achieved
Fully implemented
high quality performance
Exciters & delighters
Threshold/basic
(must haves)
Indifferent
4
1
2
3
Performance/linear

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
85
3
 Considering all the information on customer requirements that has been presented 
up to this point, the design team can now create a more accurately prioritized list of 
customer requirements. This set is comprised of  
 
● Basic CRs that are discovered by studying competitor products during benchmarking   
 
●  Unspoken CRs that are observed by ethnographic observation 
 
●  High-ranking customer requirements (CRs) found from the surveys  
 
●  Exciter or Delighter CRs that the company is planning to address with new 
technology. 
 The highest-ranked CRs are called  critical to quality customer requirements  (CTQ 
CRs). The designation of CTQ CRs means that these customer requirements will be 
the focus of design team efforts because they will lead to the biggest payoff in cus-
tomer satisfaction. 
E X A M P L E  3 . 3  Shot-Buddy Customer Requirements
The JSR Design team has been researching information on their market and end-user 
groups for the Shot-Buddy. Following is their set of customer requirements.1
1. Weatherproof—System is not vulnerable to rusting from being exposed to rain and 
snow to give the option of leaving it in its in-use position for long periods of time.
2. Accurate Shot Return—An effective ball return system must be able to return the 
ball to the place of the shooter at the time when the ball leaves the shot return system. 
3. Tool-less Installation—System does not require any tools to be used in order to as-
semble, disassemble, or install; this includes hand tools or power tools. This CR 
stems from a desire to save customer time and energy.
4. Five-year Lifetime—This includes the ability to handle environmental factors as 
well as dropping hazards from heights up to the maximum usage height of the prod-
uct (12 feet).
5. Quick Return—The Shot-Buddy must return balls quickly, even if they are missed 
shots. In practice, a shooter can get into a rhythm which helps with building and 
maintaining a particular shooting “touch.”
6. Ability to Store in Garage—System should fi t it in a small portion of owner’s garage 
or a shed without having to signifi cantly adjust the placement of other belongings. 
7. Compatibility with Most Basket Confi gurations—Basketball return system must be 
compatible to attach to any brand of basketball hoop. 
8. Does not Jam—The Shot-Buddy must return shots that are coming from all angles 
and at different velocities without letting the ball get stuck in the system and fail to 
return.
9. Ability to Catch Most Shots (Missed and Made)—The Shot-Buddy must work with a 
wide range of shots, both falling into the basket and missing the basket. 
10. Non-obtrusive—The Shot-Buddy cannot limit the number of shots that can be taken 
by having components that block a shooter’s access to the basket on the fl oor or in 
the air.
1. Adapted from: Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan 
Quinn, “JSR Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, 
May 2010.

86 
engineering design 
3
The team knows that not all customer requirements (CRs) have the same weight in 
determining customers’ attitudes about the product. The Shot-Buddy’s ability to auto-
matically return the ball to where the shooter is standing (2 in the list on the previous 
page) is the innovation. It is an Exciter CR. High-ranking CRs include Does Not Jam 
(8), Ability to Catch Most Shots (9), and Compatibility (7). CRs in these two categories 
would be considered CTQ CRs. The remaining CRs include items that improve the 
quality of the product (e.g., Quick Return) and those items that are unspoken (e.g., Tool-
less Installation).
3.4
GATHERING INFORMATION ON EXISTING PRODUCTS
Exploring and understanding performance is a crucial process in the earliest stages of 
product development. Gathering information on a product can be done by conducting 
fi rsthand observation, reading product and technical literature, and applying the prin-
cipals of physics and engineering sciences to the task.
3.4.1 Product Dissection 
Observing a product during its use is one of the most natural ways to gather informa-
tion about it and is suggested in Sec. 3.3 on ethnographic studies. The next logical step 
in product investigation is to take the object apart to see how it works. This process is 
known as both product dissection and reverse engineering. 
Product dissection is the dismantling of a product to determine the selection and 
arrangement of component parts and to gain insight about how the product is made. 
It is carried out to learn about a product from the physical artifact1 itself. Product dis-
section should be an important part of the engineering design learning process. The 
information collected during dissection can lead to an understanding of the design 
decisions made by the producers of the artifact. 
The product dissection process includes four activities. Listed with each activity 
are important questions to be answered during that step in the dissection process. 
1. Discover the operational requirements of the product. How does the product oper-
ate? What conditions are necessary for proper functioning of the product? 
2. Examine how the product performs its functions. What mechanical, electrical, 
control systems or other devices are used in the product to generate the desired 
functions? What are the energy and force fl ows through the product? What are the 
spatial constraints for subassemblies and components? Is clearance required for 
proper functioning? If a clearance is present, why is it present? 
3. Determine the relationships between parts of the product. What are the major sub-
assemblies? What are the key part interfaces?
1. An artifact is a man-made object.

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
87
3
4. Determine the manufacturing and assembly processes used to produce the prod-
uct. Of what material and by what process does it appear that is each part is made? 
What are the joining methods used on the key components? What kinds of fasten-
ers are used and where are they located on the product? 
Discovering the operational requirements of the product is the only step that pro ceeds 
with the product fully assembled. Disassembling the product is necessary to complete 
the other activities. If an assembly drawing is not available with the product, it is a good 
idea to sketch one as the product is disassembled for the fi rst time. In addition to creat-
ing an assembly drawing, creating thorough documentation during this phase is critical. 
This may include a detailed list of disassembly steps and a listing of each component. 
The term reverse engineering is typically used for the product dissection pro-
cess when the goal is to learn about a competitor’s products. Engineers d o reverse 
engineering to discover information that they cannot access any other way. Reverse 
engineering is an unsavory process when done for the sole purpose of copying a de-
sign for profi t. Reverse engineering can show a design team what the competition 
has done, but it will not explain why the choices were made. Designers doing reverse 
engineering should be careful not to assume that they are seeing the best design of 
their competition. Factors other than creating the best performance infl uence all de-
sign processes and are not captured in the physical description of the product.
3.4.2 Product and Technical Literature
Most products purchased by customers come with information on their packaging or 
labels. Both might include a version of use instructions, warnings, performance rat-
ings, certifi cations, and producer’s contact information. Simple products may have 
this information included on a label affi xed directly on the product. Others have infor-
mation printed on their exteriors, as is the case with recycling codes on plastics. Other 
products include the information on their packaging and in data sheets or manuals 
that accompany the product.
There are labeling requirements included in federal regulations for some prod-
ucts. There are standards organizations and government agencies that regulate the 
label contents for certain products. The Federal Trade Commission’s publication Title 
16, Part 305 of Title 16 Commercial Practices, includes a section (Part 305) titled, 
“Rule Concerning Disclosures Regarding Energy Consumption and Water Use of 
Certain Home Appliances and Other Products Required Under the Energy Policy and 
Conservation Act”. This act is also known as the “Appliance Labeling Rule.” Section 
305.13 provides a description of the content, size, font, and placement on fan for the 
label.1 This regulation assures that anyone can fi nd out a ceiling fan’s high-speed air 
fl ow (in cubic feet per minute), electricity usage (in watts) at high speed and an ef-
fi ciency rating determined by a standard procedure. This is an excellent example of 
the information that one can fi nd on the product’s exterior, packaging, or in literature 
1. 73 FR 63068, Oct. 23, 2008.

88 
engineering design 
3
accompanying the product as purchased. Researching product regulations is described 
in Chap. 5, Gathering Information.
Producers may choose to provide buyers with more information than can be in-
cluded on a label. Many products, like electronics, come with instruction manuals. 
Often the product will come with a “Quick Start Guide” for users who do not read in-
struction manuals. Many larger manufacturers maintain websites with product manu-
als available for download to product owners and those researching similar products. 
Consumer Product Literature
There are private nonprofi t organizations dedicated to informing consumers about 
products. One is the Consumers Union, the publisher of the popular magazine Con-
sumer Reports. This periodical is published by the Consumers Union group, an organi-
zation that conducts its own testing and research providing results through publications 
and online content to subscribers at ConsumerReports.org.1 The combination of inde-
pendence and Internet dissemination makes this one of the fi rst places buyers should 
look for product information. Consumer Reports provides information on a broad base 
of products ranging from cars and appliances to electronics and pet accessories.
There are a number of print and online consumer publications that focus on one 
particular segment of products. Edmunds, Inc. is a corporation that was founded in 
1966 to provide information to automobile buyers.2 The company established on on-
line presence in 1994 and was the fi rst online information outlet for automobiles. 
Edmunds’ offerings now cover new and used cars as well as loans and insurance for 
automobiles. This is an example of a consumer information database targeted on one 
product area.
Another subset of product literature is safety information. The United States Con-
sumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) is responsible for the identifi cation of unsafe 
consumer goods. The CPSC focuses on products that tend to be used in or around a house-
hold and products that children may be able to use or abuse. The CPSC maintains a listing 
of regulated products3 and links to other government agencies for regulated products not 
under the CPSC’s jurisdiction. Safety actions taken by the CPSC in July of 2010 include 
a recall on specifi c types of mini bikes and go carts due to the possibility of fi re hazard. 
In the same month the CPSC also proposed new rules4 for cribs to improve their safety.
Internet Shopping Sites
Internet sites exist to compile information for specialty products. A specialty 
site is Competitive Edge Products, Inc.5 That site provides information on a suite of 
1. ConsumerReports, http://www.consumerreports.org, accessed September 12, 2010.
2. “Welcome to Edmunds.com,” Edmunds, http://www.edmunds.com, accessed September 12, 2010.
3. “Regulated Products,” Consumer Product Safety Commission, http://www.cpsc.gov/businfo/reg1.
html, accessed September 12, 2010.
4. “CPSC Proposes New Rules for Full-Size and Non-Full-Size Cribs,” NEWS from CPSC, Release # 10-301, 
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/prerel/prhtml10/10301.html, 
accessed September 12, 2010.
5. “Lifetime Basketball Systems, Hoops, Goals, Backboards and Sports Accessories from Compet-
itive Edge Products,” http://www.competitiveedgeproducts.com/basketballsystems.aspx, accessed 
July 14, 2010.

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
89
3
basketball products ranging from rim and backboard set ups (in-ground and pool-side) 
to accessories like backboard shatter guards, pole padding, and ball return systems. 
Available products are displayed with photographs, labeling information, and speci-
fi cations. On some sites one can fi nd customer reviews input by purchasers. Users of 
a specialty marketing website must keep in mind that the information provided is not 
necessarily unbiased.
Technical Literature
In addition to information from special interest publications, there are scholarly 
journals that publish research quality information. These journals are peer-reviewed 
and provide material that is deemed worthy of publication to increase the body of 
knowledge in a topic area. Journal articles can provide important information on a 
technology that is new to the marketplace. Journal articles can also provide technical 
analysis that is pertinent to existing products. Using research procedures outlined in 
Chap. 5, Gathering Information, anyone can search academic journals for pertinent 
literature. For example, the team developing the Shot-Buddy needs to be able to predict 
the behavior of a basketball that is thrown at the net in a regulation court. Here are three 
articles of particular interest to the team:
1. H. Okubo and Hubbard, M. (2006), “Dynamics of the basketball shot with applica-
tion to the free throw,” Journal of Sports Sciences, 24:12, 1303–1314.
2. Tran, C. M. and Silverberg, L. M. (2008), “Optimal release conditions for the free 
throw in men’s basketball,” Journal of Sports Sciences, 26:11, 1147–1155.
3. H. Okubo and Hubbard, M. (2004), “Dynamics of basketball-rim interactions,” 
Sports Engineering, 7:1, 15–29. 
The Patent Literature 
Not all products are patented, but patent literature does include inventions that 
have become successful products. Patents are a certifi cation by the Patent and Trade-
mark Offi ce of the United States to the inventor of a novel and useful device. A discus-
sion of the U.S. Patent System is included in Chap. 5 along with sections on searching 
for patents by a variety of classifi cation tags. Patent information is easy to retrieve if 
the patent number is known. The patent system is also organized by application cat-
egory so once the proper classifi cation is found, information on inventions proposed 
(but not necessarily built) can be uncovered.
E X A M P L E  3 . 4  Finding Patents for Products Like the Proposed Shot-Buddy
U.S. Patent 55404281 is an example of a hybrid basketball retrieval apparatus. It is shown 
in Fig. 3.6. The device works by utilizing a large net (78) set underneath and around the 
rim to funnel both missed and made shots into a channel (82), at the base of the device. 
This channel eventually returns the basketball, to the user via gravity and the momentum 
of the basketball. The net used to funnel the basketballs is suffi ciently large to catch the 
majority of balls that will rebound off of the rim (36) or backboard (10). The net itself is 
attached to the rim as well as the support pole (74) of the backboard. 
1. John. G. Joseph, “Basketball Retrieval and Return Apparatus,” Patent 5540428, July 30, 1996.

90 
engineering design 
3
The two major advantages of this design are the ability to retrieve a wide range of 
missed shots and to consistently return the ball to a position at the end of the ball channel. 
This design has disadvantages in that it is large, has some fi xed supports necessary for 
use (74, 76), and only returns the ball to the one location regardless of where the shooter 
is on the court. Finally, this device is designed to be used on the pole-supported baskets 
normally found in playgrounds or household driveways. While this covers the majority of 
applications, it still leaves out those baskets found in gymnasiums and recreational cen-
ters, which are usually supported, in a more complicated fashion.
Another interesting basketball return device is shown in Fig. 3.7.1
3.4.3 Physics of the Product or System 
Engineering courses teach fi rst principles in subjects like statics, dynamics, mechanics 
of materials, electric circuits, controls, fl uids, and thermodynamics. Word problems 
are given describing a physical system and its immediate environment, and students 
learn to solve these problems using a variety of analytical, logical, mathematical, and 
empirical methods. In their engineering science courses students are typically given 
all the detail necessary to translate a description of a product, device, or system into 
a problem evaluating its performance. This process amounts to setting up models and 
using them for evaluation purposes.
Engineering Models
Effi cient analysis of products and systems requires descriptions of each design 
or system option which is just detailed enough that performance measures of interest 
can be accurately calculated. This description required for analysis is called a model. 
FIGURE 3.6
Basketball retrieval and return device fi gure from Patent 5540428.
30
10
58
52
26
16
48
36
60
66
68
62
14
74
76
70
64
72
12
56
54
28
32
78
80
82
30
30
1. Harold F. Krings, “Automatic Basketball Return Apparatus,” Patent 5681230, Oct 28, 1997.

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
91
3
The model can include a representation of the physical aspects of the product or sys-
tem (i.e., a sketch or geometric model), constraints on the design detail to be modeled, 
physical laws that govern its behavior, and mathematical equations that describe its 
behavior. (See Sec. 7.4 for more information on developing models.)
The practice of building a model to describe the behavior of a system to be de-
signed is shown here. For the Shot-Buddy to work effectively, it must be capable of 
enduring certain forces that will be applied to it when in use.
E X A M P L E  3 . 5  Estimating Forces in Use
Determine the variables needed to estimate the maximum force a basketball shot will 
have as it hits any kind of ball return device. To estimate the forces a ball return system 
must withstand, the JSR Design must determine the speed and direction with which a 
basketball could hit it. Figure 3.8 is the team’s diagram representing the motion of a bas-
ketball through the air, when released from the three-point shot line (6.02 meters from 
the basket), which is likely to be the shot that will have the maximum force. JSR Design 
assumes a shooter’s height is the average of an eighth-grade male and that the ball is 
thrown at head height. The model neglects drag effects of the air on the ball. The design 
FIGURE 3.7
A different basketball return device fi gure from Patent 5681230.
14
24a
38
18
28
20
32
16
34
46
36
18
44
108
40
42
22
26
30
12
24b
10
24c
22
44

92 
engineering design 
3
team used the known initial and fi nal conditions of the ball to create a set of simultaneous 
equations and solved them numerically to determine the velocity vector components at 
the start and fi nish of the shot and the highest point of the ball’s trajectory and its distance 
from the shooter to the basket. The calculations were done for a variety of different ball 
release angles. JSR Design’s estimate for initial velocity towards the basket (vx ) at a 45º 
release angle is 6.5 m/s, with a fi nal velocity when hitting a point just below the basket 
at 8.6 m/s. At this point, JSR Design estimates the contact time of the basketball and the 
ball return system to be 0.1 second (t) and uses the relationship for momentum (p  mv) 
to estimate a force. According to JSR Design, the estimated force is 55 N and occurs at a 
release angle of 30º. (Note that if JSR Design members had found the technical literature 
published by Tran and Silverberg1 they would have had a reference for estimates of forces 
and other variables and would not have needed to do so much analysis.) 
To verify their modeling, JSR Design can review the technical literature to fi nd a 
shooting model (see Fig. 3.9) developed by researchers Tran and Silverberg,1 for their 
study of basketball free-throws. Tran and Silverberg don’t show a height variable as 
they use 6 feet 6 inches as the average. They also report that a typical free-throw shot 
is released at about 6 inches above the head of the shooter. The formal model and 
JSR Design’s model include a velocity vector with a release angle, and both sets of 
FIGURE 3.9 
Model of free throw shot by Tran and Silverberg.
(x y z)
v
x
z
0
y
α
β
θ
ω
FIGURE 3.8
Model of shooter developed by JSR Design Team.
mg
3 Point Line
Viy
Vi
Vix
y
1.69 m
6.02 meters
2.59 meters
Pfinal
x
0
q
1. C. M. Tran and L. M. Silverberg (2008), “Optimal release conditions for the free throw in men’s bas-
ketball,” Journal of Sports Sciences, 26:11, 1147–1155.

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
93
3
researchers recognize that the angle will change. The formal model includes the back-
spin on the ball () and two additional angles. Angle  is the side angle of the velocity 
vector and  indicates the angle the sagittal plane of the shooter’s body makes with 
the normal line from the backboard. These angles are relevant when the shooter is not 
facing straight at the backboard during a shot.
The technical paper’s model includes a lot of detail that is not necessary during 
conceptual design. For example, professionals always put a backspin on the basketball 
to increase the chances of the ball rebounding downward towards the basket if it hits 
the backboard. Research literature cited in the previous section places the best back-
spin in the range of 3 to 4 Hz. This is a detail that is safely omitted in the JSR model 
used to determine a force level for the ball return device to withstand. 
Free Body Diagrams
Free body diagrams are tools to explore the physical nature (existence in form) 
and operation of the product as it is used. Engineers are taught to create a model to 
describe the forces and moments that act on physical objects in a defi ned environ-
ment. This type of model is called a free body diagram.1 The object being modeled 
is sketched with all forces acting upon it. The modeled object must be at rest, so all 
forces and moments must be balanced. Any unbalanced energy forces and moments 
result in moving the object in direction of the resultant force.
A free body diagram consists of a declared coordinate system indicated by a set of x-, 
y-, and z-axes; a sketch of an object oriented in the defi ned space; labeled arrows that indi-
cate all forces acting on the object oriented appropriately in the coordinate space (e.g., the 
object’s weight will normally be indicated by an arrow labeled “mg” to represent the force 
due to gravity, where “m” is the object’s mass and “g” is the acceleration due to gravity); 
and rotational forces (torques), indicated by labeled arcs, acting to rotate the object about 
the declared x-, y-, and z-directions. This model of an object is called “free” because it is 
represented alone in the sketch without any other object or person acting on it. They are 
replaced by the equivalent forces. In a correct free body diagram the set of force equations 
will sum all forces to zero, and the set of moment equations will sum all moments to zero.2
The free body diagram is a model that can be used to determine the forces that 
will be acting on a product during its operation. Free body diagrams can also be cre-
ated for components within a product to understand and estimate the forces acting 
upon them as a device operates. 
E X A M P L E  3 . 6  Free Body Diagram of Basketball Goal
The ball return has not been designed yet, but JSR Design needs to understand how the shots 
on the goal will transmit forces. The simplest way to model this is with a free body diagram. 
Figure 3.10 is a free body diagram used to estimate the forces on the basketball rim when hit 
by a shot on the front of the rim. The basketball rim is treated as a simple beam fi xed at one 
end. It will experience forces and a moment at the point it connects with the post.  
1. An excellent set of notes on constructing free body diagrams, “Some Notes on Free-Body Diagrams” 
by Professor William Hallett, Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, University of Ottawa, can be found at 
www.mhhe.com/dieter.
2. Ibid.

94 
engineering design 
3
3.5
ESTABLISHING THE ENGINEERING CHARACTERISTICS
Establishing the engineering characteristics is a critical step toward writing the 
product design specifi cation (Sec. 3.7). The process of identifying the needs that 
a product must fi ll is a complicated undertaking. Earlier sections of this chapter 
focused on gathering and understanding the total picture of what the customer 
wants from a product. A major challenge of this step is to hear and record the full-
ness of customer ideas without applying assumptions. For example, if a customer 
is talking about carry-on luggage they may say, “I want it to be easy to carry.” An 
engineer might interpret that phrase to mean “make it lightweight,” and set weight 
as a design parameter that should be minimized. However, the customer may 
really want a carry-on case that is easy to fi t into the overhead luggage compart-
ment of a plane. The carrying task is already easy due to the design innovation of 
wheeled luggage. 
 Just knowing what a customer or end user wants from a product is not suffi cient 
for generating designs. Recall that the design process only proceeds into concept 
generation once the product is so well-described that it meets with the approval of 
FIGURE 3.10
Free body diagram for Example 3.6.
45° 9.7 in
Ball hits at point B.
θ = 45° 
FB
x
x
y
0
0 = Fxo – FB sin θ
0 = Fyo – FB cos θ
0 = Mo + FB sin θ
Free body diagram of hoop is idealized
as beam fixed at point 0.
A
C
B
18 in
Diameter

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
95
3
groups of technical and business discipline specialists and managers. This description 
is comprised of solution-neutral specifi cations, meaning that the specifi cation  at this 
time should not be so complete as to suggest a single concept or class of concepts. 
 This description is a set of engineering characteristics that are defi ned as follows: 
 
●  Design Parameters.  Parameters are a set of physical properties whose values deter-
mine the form and behavior of a design. Parameters include the features of a design 
that can be set by designers  and  the values used to describe the performance of a 
design. Note: It must be clear that designers make choices in an attempt to  achieve 
a particular product performance level, but they cannot  guarantee  they will suc-
ceed until embodiment design activities are fi nalized. 
 
●  Design Variable . A design variable is a parameter over which the design team has a 
choice. For example, the gear ratio for the RPM reduction from the rotating spindle 
of an electric motor can be a variable. 
 
●  Constraints . A design parameter whose value has been fi xed becomes a constraint 
during the design process. Constraints are limits on design freedom. They can take 
the form of a selection from a particular color scheme, or the use of a standard 
fastener, or a specifi c size limit determined by factors beyond the control of both 
the design team and the customers. 1  Constraints may be limits on the maximum or 
minimum value of a design variable or a performance parameter. Constraints can 
take the form of a range of values.  
 The product description that a design team must present for approval before getting au-
thorization to continue the PDP process is a set of solution-neutral specifi cations made 
up of engineering characteristics. These will include parameters that have been set prior 
to the design process, design variables, and their constraints. These are the framework 
for the fi nal set of product design specifi cations, but they are not the fi nal specifi cations. 
 Customers cannot describe the product they want in engineering characteristics 
because they lack the knowledge base and expertise. Engineering and design profes-
sionals are able to describe products in solution-neutral form because they can imag-
ine the physical parts and components that create specifi c behaviors. Engineers can 
use a common product development activity called benchmarking to expand and re-
fresh their understanding of products of similar type to what they must design. 
 3.5.1 General and Competitive Performance Benchmarking 
 Benchmarking is a process for measuring a company’s operations against the best 
practices of companies both inside and outside of their industry. 2  It takes its name 
  1 . A good example of this kind of constraint is the size limitation on luggage that may be carried onto a 
commercial airplane. 
 2 .  R. C .  Camp ,  Benchmarking,   2d ed.,  Quality Press, American Society for Quality, Milwaukee ,  1995 ; 
 M. J .  Spendolini ,  The Benchmarking Book,  Amacom, New York ,  1992 ;  M .  Zairi ,  Effective Benchmark-
ing: Learning from the Best,  Chapman & Hall, New York ,  1996 (many case studies). 

96 
engineering design 
3
from the surveyor’s benchmark or reference point from which elevations are mea-
sured. Benchmarking can be applied to all aspects of a business. It is a way to learn 
from other businesses through an exchange of information.  
 Benchmarking operates most effectively on a quid pro quo basis—as an exchange 
of information between companies that are not direct competitors but can learn from 
each other’s business operations. Other sources for discovering best practices include 
business partners (e.g., a major supplier to your company), businesses in the same sup-
ply chain (e.g., automobile manufacturing suppliers), companies in collaborative and 
cooperative groups, or industry consultants. Sometimes trade or professional associa-
tions can facilitate benchmarking exchanges. More often, it requires good contacts 
and offering information from your own company that may seem useful to the compa-
nies you benchmark. 
 A company can look for benchmarks in many different places, including within 
its own organizational structure. Identifying intra-company best practices (or gaps in 
performance of similar business units) is one of the most effi cient ways to improve 
overall company performance through benchmarking. 
 Even in enlightened organizations, resistance to new ideas may develop. Bench-
marking is usually introduced by a manager who has studied it after learning about 
success experienced by other companies using the process. Since not all personnel 
involved in the process have the same education or comfort level with benchmarking, 
an implementation team can encounter resistance. The more common sources of resis-
tance to benchmarking are as follows: 
 
●  Fear of being perceived as copiers.  
 
●  Fear of yielding competitive advantages if information is traded or shared. 
 
●  Arrogance. A company may feel that there is nothing useful to be learned by look-
ing outside of the organization, or it may feel that it is the benchmark. 
 
●  Impatience. Companies that engage in an improvement program often want to be-
gin making changes immediately. Benchmarking provides the fi rst step in a pro-
gram of change—an assessment of a company’s relative position at the current 
point in time. 
 To overcome barriers to benchmarking, project leaders must clearly communicate 
to all concerned the project’s purpose, scope, procedure, and expected benefi ts.  All 
benchmarking exercises begin with the same two steps, regardless of the focus of the 
benchmarking effort. 
 
●  Select the product, process, or functional area of the company that is to be bench-
marked. That will infl uence the selection of key performance  metrics  that will be 
measured and used for comparison. From a business viewpoint, metrics might 
be fraction of sales to repeat customers, percent of returned product, or return on 
investment. 
 
●  Identify the  best-in-class companies  for each process to be benchmarked. A best-
in-class company is one that performs the process at the lowest cost with the high-
est degree of customer satisfaction, or has the largest market share. 
 Finally, it is important to realize that benchmarking is not a one-time effort. Com-
petitors will also be working hard to improve their operations. Benchmarking should 

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
97
3
1. B. B. Anderson and P. G. Peterson, The Benchmarking Handbook: Step-by-Step Instructions, 
Chapman & Hall, New York, 1996.
2. C. C. Wilson, M. E. Kennedy, and C. J. Trammell, Superior Product Development, Managing the 
Process for Innovative Products, Blackwell Business, Cambridge, MA, 1996.
be viewed as the fi rst step in a process of continuous improvement if an organization 
intends to maintain operational advantages. 
 Competitive performance benchmarking involves testing a company’s product 
against the best-in-class that can be found in the current marketplace. It is an im-
portant step for making comparisons in the design and manufacturing of products. 
Benchmarking is used to develop performance data needed to set functional expecta-
tions for new products and to classify competition in the marketplace. 
 The design engineer’s competitive-performance benchmarking procedure is sum-
marized in the following eight steps:  1, 2 
1.  Determine features, functions, and any other factors that are the most important to 
end user satisfaction. 
2.  Determine features and functions that are important to the technical success of the 
product. 
3.  Determine the functions that markedly increase the costs of the product. 
4.  Determine the features and functions that differentiate the product from its 
competitors.  
5.  Determine which functions have the greatest potential for improvement. 
6.  Establish metrics by which the most important functions or features can be quanti-
fi ed and evaluated. 
7.  Evaluate the product and its competing products using performance testing. 
8.  Generate a benchmarking report summarizing all information learned about the 
product, data collected, and conclusions about competitors.  
 3.5.2 Determining Engineering Characteristics 
 There is a need to translate the customer requirements into language that expresses 
the parameters of interest in the language of engineering characteristics. Defi ning 
any conceptual design requires that the design team or its approving authority set the 
level of detail that is necessary to uniquely defi ne every design alternative. This is 
the set of engineering characteristics (EC) that will include the parameters, design 
variables, and constraints the design team has begun to collect through research, in-
cluding benchmarking and reverse engineering activities. The team may have some 
idea of what the most important engineering characteristics are, but this cannot be 
determined until the next activity is completed, and that is creating the House of 
Quality.  
E X A M P L E  3 .7  Shot-Buddy Engineering Characteristics
The JSR Design team has been researching ball return devices that exist in the market 
place and comparing them to their customer requirements to develop a set of engineering 

98 
engineering design 
3
characteristics that cover the key parameters of the Shot-Buddy as it is imagined. JSR 
Design had to make certain highlevel design decisions prior to the making a list of pos-
sible design characteristics. To make the ball return practical, it is necessary to designate 
lanes for returning the ball (as shown in Fig. 3.11). The return lane is the one in which the 
shooter is standing at the time the ball return is actuated. Designs can vary in the number 
of lanes created.
It is not necessary to have a design defi ned in order to create a set of engineering 
characteristics. Team members must understand the problem well enough to create a list 
of parameters that describe the behavior of the system to be created. The design team 
will revise their list of ECs throughout the design process. The list presented below is the 
product of several iterations by the JSR Design Team.
The set of parameters is as follows:
1. Catch area—the volume around the basket that indicates the zone in which any 
basketball thrown will be returned to the shooter
2. Probability of jamming—the confi guration (mouth size, length, number of 
turns) of the ball return guide will determine the likelihood of a basketball get-
ting stuck
3. Accuracy of ball return—% of time the ball returns to the lane of the shooter
4. Average time of ball return—length of time from shot passing the height of the 
basket to when it is returned to the shooter
5. Sensing position of shooter—a key functionality of the Shot-Buddy is to determine 
where the shooter is on the court in order to accurately aim the ball’s return
6. Lane change time—time it takes the ball return aiming device to rotate through a lane
7. Lane span—degrees in radians that the lane traces out in rotation centered on the 
basket
8. Energy or torque to rotate ball return subsystem—the Shot-Buddy must include 
a moving system to aim the ball to the lane of the shooter
9. Weight
10. Time to install system—length of time it takes for a homeowner to assemble and 
mount the system and get it working
FIGURE 3.11
Ball return lanes for Shot-Buddy (six lane design shown).
Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, 
“JSR Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
99
3
11. Material rigidity—any part of the system that is vulnerable to impact by the 
basketball must be able to withstand a defl ection without displaying permanent 
deformation
12. Material toughness at attachment areas—The Shot-Buddy will be attached to 
some part of the existing basketball hoop installation or supporting structure and 
all parts of the attachment must be able to withstand a hard hit imparted by a 
basketball
13. Weather resistance—the Shot-Buddy is designed to be installed on outdoor basket-
ball hoops, meaning it must withstand the elements for a period of fi ve years
The ECs listed here are mix of physical and performance characteristics. Some ECs like 
number 5, sensing the position of the shooter, describe a key functionality of the system. It 
is likely that many different methods of sensing can be proposed for the Shot-Buddy; each 
would describe a different design.
The list of engineering characteristics (ECs)—developed in Ex. 3.7 represents as-
pects of the Shot-Buddy’s performance or physical characteristics that are variables to 
be determined by the design team. Each EC will contribute to determining the overall 
performance of the Shot-Buddy, but some ECs will be more critical to satisfying the 
customer requirements than others. The QFD method introduced in Sec. 3.6 will aid 
design teams in determining the most critical ECs.
 3.6
QUALITY FUNCTION DEPLOYMENT 
 Quality function deployment (QFD) is a planning and team problem-solving tool 
that has been adopted by a wide variety of companies as the tool of choice for fo-
cusing a design team’s attention on satisfying customer needs throughout the prod-
uct development process. The term  deployment  in QFD refers to the fact that this 
method determines the important set of requirements for each phase of PDP plan-
ning and uses them to identify the set of technical characteristics of each phase that 
most contribute to satisfying the requirements. QFD is a largely graphical method 
that aids a design team in systematically identifying all of the elements that go into 
the product development process and creating relationship matrices between key 
parameters at each step of the process. Gathering the information required for the 
QFD process forces the design team to answer questions that might be glossed over 
in a less rigorous methodology and to learn what it does not know about the prob-
lem. Because it is a group decision-making activity, it creates a high level of buy-in 
and group understanding of the problem. QFD, like brainstorming, is a tool for mul-
tiple stages of the design process. In fact, it is a complete process that provides input 
to guide the design team. 
 The complete QFD process is diagrammed in Fig. 3.12. 1  Three aspects of the 
QFD process are depicted here. It is clear why the phases of QFD, especially the 
1. S. Pugh, Total Design, Chap. 3, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1990.

100 
engineering design 
3
fi rst, product planning, are called houses. Second, the QFD process is made up of 
four phases that proceed in sequence and are connected as a chain with the output 
from each phase becoming the input to the next. The product planning phase of QFD, 
called the  House of Quality , feeds results into the design of individual parts, giving in-
puts into the process planning design stage, which become inputs into the production 
planning phase of QFD. For example, the important engineering characteristics deter-
mined by the House of Quality become the input for the part design house. Third, the 
QFD process is created to transform or map input requirements to each house into the 
characteristics output from the house. Since QFD is a linked, sequential, and transfor-
mational process, the fi rst set of inputs strongly infl uences all subsequent transforma-
tions. Thus, the QFD process is known as a methodology for infusing  the voice of the 
customer into every aspect of the design process.  
 The implementation of the QFD method in U.S. companies is often reduced to 
the use of only its fi rst house, the House of Quality. The House of Quality develops 
the relationships between what the customer wants from a product and which of the 
product’s features and overall performance parameters are most critical to fulfi lling 
those wants. The House of Quality translates  customer requirements 1  into generally 
quantifi able design variables, called  engineering characteristics . This mapping of 
customer wants to engineering characteristics informs the remainder of the design 
1. It is usual to refer to the set of desirable characteristics of a product as customer requirements even 
though the more grammatically correct term is customers’ requirements.
 FIGURE 3.12 
 Diagram showing the four houses of the complete QFD process. 
QFD’s Product
Planning house is called
the “House of Quality” 
Customer
Requirement 
Engineering
Characteristics
Product
Planning
Engineering
Characteristics
Part
Characteristics
Part
Deployment
Part
Characteristics
Manufacturing
Process
Requirements 
Process
Planning
Manufacturing
Process Requirements
Production
Requirements
Production
Planning

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
101
3
 The Development of QFD in Brief 
 QFD was developed in Japan in the early 1970s, with its fi rst large-scale applica-
tion in the Kobe Shipyard of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. It was rapidly adopted 
by the Japanese automobile industry. By the mid-1980s many U.S. auto, defense, 
and electronics companies were using QFD. A recent survey of 150 U.S. compa-
nies showed that 71 percent of these have adopted QFD since 1990. These com-
panies reported that 83 percent believed that using QFD had increased customer 
satisfaction with their products, and 76 percent felt it facilitated rational design 
decisions. It is important to remember these statistics because using QFD requires 
a considerable commitment of time and effort. Most users of QFD report that the 
time spent in QFD saves time later in design, especially in minimizing changes 
caused by poorly defi ning the original design problem. 
process. When the HOQ is constructed in its most comprehensive confi guration, the 
process will identify a set of essential features and product performance measures that 
will be the target values to be achieved by the design team. 
 The House of Quality can also be used to determine which engineering character-
istics should be treated as constraints for the design process and which should become 
decision criteria for selecting the best design concept. This function of the HOQ is 
explained in Sec. 3.6.3. Therefore, creating QFD’s House of Quality is a natural pre-
cursor to establishing the product design specifi cation (see Sec. 3.7). 
 3.6.1 The House of Quality Confi gurations 
 Engineers today can fi nd many different versions of QFD’s House of Quality. As 
with many TQM methods, there are hundreds of consultants specializing in training 
people in the use of QFD. A quick Internet search will identify scores of websites 
that describe QFD in general and the House of Quality in particular. Some use the 
same texts on QFD that we cite in this section. Others develop and copyright their 
own materials. These sites include consulting fi rms, private consultants, academics, 
professional societies, and even students who have developed HOQ software pack-
ages and templates. These applications range from simple Excel spreadsheet mac-
ros to sophisticated, multi-versioned families of software. 1  Naturally, each creator of 
HOQ software uses a slightly different confi guration of the HOQ diagram and slightly 
different terminology. The HOQ confi guration used in this text is a compilation of a 
variety of different HOQ terminologies that is presented in a format for the product 
development team. It is important to understand the basics of the HOQ so that you 
1. Three packages are QFD/Capture, International Techne Group, 5303 DuPont Circle, Milford, OH, 
45150; QFD Scope, Integrated Quality Dynamics; and QFD Designer from American Supplier Institute.

102 
engineering design 
3
can easily recognize how different versions of HOQ software are oriented. The main 
purpose of the HOQ will remain the same. 
 The HOQ takes information developed by the design team and guides the team 
into translating it into a format that is more useful for new product generation. This 
text uses an eight-room version of the House of Quality as shown in Fig. 3.13. As in 
all HOQ layouts, the relationship matrix (Room 4 in Fig. 3.13) is central to the goal 
of relating the CRs to the ECs. The CRs are processed through the HOQ in such a 
 FIGURE 3.13 
 The House of Quality translates the voice of the customer, input as CRs in Room 1, into target 
values for ECs in Room 8. 
IMPORTANCE RATING
IMPROVEMENT DIRECTION 
UNITS for ECs 
CORRELATION
MATRIX
Room 3
ENGINEERING
CHARACTERISTICS
(ECs)
“Hows”
Room 2
RELATIONSHIP MATRIX
“Whats” related to 
“Hows”
Room 4
IMPORTANCE RANKING
Room 5
TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT
Room 7
TARGET VALUES
Room 8
CUSTOMER
REQUIREMENTS
(CRs)
“Whats”
Room 1
CUSTOMER
ASSESSMENT
of
COMPETING
PRODUCTS
Rating competitors
on “Whats”
Room 6
CR to EC
Relationship
Strength Codes for
Room 4
Blank – None
Δ
or 9 – Strong
or 3 – Medium
or 1 – Weak
House of Quality
Most Complete
Configuration

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
103
3
way that their infl uence is embedded throughout the design process. The Critical to 
Quality ECs are determined by the simple calculations done in Room 5. Additional 
data gathered through examination of competitor products, benchmarking, and cus-
tomer survey results are recorded in Rooms 6 and 7, the assessments of competing 
products.  
 The visual nature of the House of Quality should be apparent. Notice that all the 
rooms of the HOQ that are arranged horizontally pertain to customer requirements 
(CRs). Information compiled from identifying the needs of the customer and end user 
is inserted in Room 1 in the form of customer requirements and their importance rat-
ings. Clearly, the initial work to obtain customer preferences, or “Whats,” is driving 
the HOQ analysis. Similarly, the HOQ rooms aligned vertically are organized accord-
ing to engineering characteristics (ECs), the “Hows.” The nature of the ECs and how 
they are arrived at were described in Sec. 3.5.2. The ECs that you have already identi-
fi ed as constraints can be included in Room 2. They can also be omitted if you do not 
think that they are major aspects of what the customer will perceive as quality. An 
example of a constraint like this is 110V AC current for a household appliance. 
 The end result of the HOQ is the set of target values for ECs that fl ow through 
the HOQ and exit at the bottom of the house in Room 8. This set of target values 
guides the selection and evaluation of potential design concepts. Note that the overall 
purpose of the HOQ process is broader than establishing target values. Creating the 
HOQ requires that the design team collects, relates, and considers many aspects of the 
product, competitors, customers, and more. Thus, by creating the HOQ the team has 
developed a strong understanding of the issues of the design. 
 You can see that the House of Quality summarizes a great deal of information 
in a single diagram. The determination of the “Whats” in Room 1 drives the HOQ 
 analysis. The results of the HOQ, target values for “Hows” in Room 8, drives the 
design team forward into the concept evaluation and selection processes (topics ad-
dressed in Chap. 7). Thus, the HOQ will become one of the most important reference 
documents created during the design process. Like most design documents, the HOQ 
should be updated as more information is developed about the design. 
 3.6.2 Steps for Building a House of Quality 
 Not all design projects will call for the construction of a House of Quality in its full 
confi guration (Rooms 1 through 8) as shown in Fig. 3.13. 
 The Streamlined House of Quality 
 The basic translation of CRs into ECs can be accomplished with an HOQ consist-
ing of Rooms 1, 2, 4, and 5. This streamlined confi guration of the House of Quality 
is shown in Fig. 3.14. Additional detail is given to the three parts of Room 5, the Im-
portance Ranking of ECs. This section describes the construction of the streamlined 
HOQ in a step-by-step process, followed by a sample HOQ built for the Shot-Buddy 
design project introduced in Example 3.1.  
 Room 1:  Customer requirements  are listed by rows in Room 1. The CRs and 
their importance ratings are gathered by the team as discussed in Sec. 3.3. It is 

104 
engineering design 
3
common to group these requirements into related categories as identifi ed by an 
affi nity diagram. Also included in this room is a column with an importance 
rating for each CR. The ratings range from 1 to 5. These inputs to the HOQ are 
the set of CRs that  includes but is not limited to the CTQ CRs . The CTQ CRs 
will be those with importance ratings of 4 and 5. 
 Room 2:  Engineering characteristics  are listed by columns in Room 2. ECs 
are product performance measures and features that have been identifi ed as 
the means to satisfy the CRs. Sec. 3.5.2 discusses how the ECs are identi-
fi ed. One basic way is to look at a particular CR and answer the question, 
“What can I control that allows me to meet my customer’s needs?” Typical 
ECs include weight, force, velocity, power consumption, and key part reli-
ability. ECs are usually measurable values (unlike the CRs) and their units 
are placed near the top of Room 2. Symbols indicating the preferred im-
provement direction of each EC are placed at the top of Room 2. Thus a ↑ 
symbol indicates that a higher value of this EC is better, and a ↓ symbol indi-
cates that a lower value is better. It is also possible that an EC will not have 
an improvement direction.   
 FIGURE 3.14 
 The Minimal HOQ Template includes Rooms 1, 2, 4, and 5. 
IMPORTANCE RATING
IMPROVEMENT DIRECTION
UNITS for ECs 
ABSOLUTE IMPORTANCE (5a)
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE (5b)
RANK ORDER of ECs (5c)
ENGINEERING
CHARACTERISTICS
(ECs)
“Hows”
Room 2
RELATIONSHIP MATRIX
Room 4
CUSTOMER
REQUIREMENTS
(CRs)
“Whats”
Room 1
CR      EC
Relationship
Strength Codes
Blank – None
Δ
or 9 – Strong
or 3 – Medium
or 1 – Weak
House of Quality
Most Streamlined
Configuration
Room 5
Parts 5a, 5b, 5c
IMPORTANCE
RANKING of ECs
Importance Rating
of CRs: 
1 through 5 where
1 – Least Important
5 – Most Important

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
105
3
 Room 4: The  Relationship matrix  is at the center of an HOQ. It is created by 
the intersection of the rows of CRs with the columns of ECs. Each cell in the 
matrix is marked with a symbol that indicates the strength of the causal asso-
ciation between the EC of its column and the CR of its row. The coding scheme 
for each cell is given as a set of symbols  1  that represent an exponential range 
of numbers (e.g., 9, 3, 1, and 0). To complete the Relationship Matrix system-
atically, take each EC in turn, and move down the column cells row by row, 
asking whether the EC will contribute to fulfi lling the CR in the cell’s row sig-
nifi cantly (9), moderately (3), or slightly (1). The cell is left blank if the EC has 
no impact on the CR.  
 Room 5:  Importance Ranking of ECs.  The main contribution of the HOQ is to 
determine which ECs are of critical importance to satisfying the CRs listed in 
Room 1. Those ECs with the highest rating are given special consideration, for 
these are the ones that have the greatest effect upon customer satisfaction.  
 
● Absolute importance  (Room 5a) of each EC is calculated in two steps. First 
multiply the numerical value in each of the cells of the Relationship Matrix 
by the associated CR’s importance rating. Then, sum the results for each col-
umn, placing the total in Room 5a. These totals show the absolute importance 
of each engineering characteristic in meeting the customer requirements. 
 
● Relative importance  (Room 5b) is the absolute importance of each EC, nor-
malized on a scale from 1 to 0 and expressed as a percentage of 100. To ar-
rive at this, total the values of absolute importance. Then, take each value of 
absolute importance, divide it by the total, and multiply by 100. 
 
● Rank order of ECs (Room 5c) is a row that ranks the ECs’ Relative Impor-
tance from 1 (highest % in Room 5b) to  n,  where  n  is the number of ECs in 
the HOQ. This ranking allows viewers of the HOQ to quickly focus on ECs 
in order from most to least relevant to satisfying the customer requirements. 
 The HOQ’s Relationship Matrix (Room 4) must be reviewed to determine the sets 
of ECs and CRs before accepting the EC Importance rankings of Room 5. The follow-
ing are interpretations of patterns  2 that can appear in Room 4: 
 
●  An empty row signals that no ECs exist to meet the CR. 
 
●  An empty EC column signals that the characteristic is not pertinent to customers. 
 
●  A row without a “strong relationship” to any of the ECs highlights a CR that will be 
diffi cult to achieve. 
 
●  An EC column with too many relationships signals that it is really a cost, reliability, 
or safety item that must be always considered, regardless of its ranking in the HOQ. 
This EC could be considered a constraint. 
1. In the fi rst HOQ applications in Japan, the teams liked to use the relationship coding symbols • for 
Strong,  for Medium, and Δ for Weak. These were taken from the racing form symbols for win, place, 
and show.
2. Adapted from S. Nakui, “Comprehensive QFD,” Transactions of the Third Symposium on QFD, 
GOAL/QPC, June 1991.

106 
engineering design 
3
 
● Two EC columns with nearly the same relationships may indicate that the ECs are 
similar and need to be combined.
 
●  An HOQ displaying a diagonal matrix (1:1 correspondence of CRs to ECs) signals 
that the ECs may not yet be expressed in the proper terms (rarely is a quality re-
quirement the result of a single technical characteristic). 
 If one or more of the patterns is present in Room 4, the CRs and ECs involved should 
be reviewed and altered if appropriate. 
 Construction of this HOQ requires inputs from the design team in the form 
of CRs and ECs. The processing of the HOQ inputs enables the design team to 
convert the set of CRs into a set of ECs and to determine which ECs are the most 
important to the design of a successful product. The output of this HOQ is found in 
Room 5. This information allows a design team to allocate design resources to the 
product performance aspects or features (ECs) that are most critical to the success 
of the product. These can be called critical to quality engineering characteristics 
or CTQ ECs.  
E X A M P L E  3 . 8  Streamlined House of Quality
A streamlined House of Quality is constructed (Fig. 3.15) for the Shot-Buddy in ac-
cordance with the instructions for Room 4. The CRs listed in Room 1 are from the list 
developed in Example 3.3. The Importance Weight factors are determined by the JSR 
Design team through their research. Room 2, Engineering Characteristics, names the 
ECs that were developed by completing the activities described in Example 3.7. The 
cells of the Relationship Matrix in Room 4 hold the rating that describes how much 
the execution of the EC in the column’s heading contributes to satisfying the CR of 
that row.
The HOQ in Fig. 3.15 shows that the most important engineering characteristics 
to the design of the Shot-Buddy are the catch area, low jamming probability, weather 
resistance and sensing the position of the shooter. These are the most important basic 
parameters of the Shot-Buddy and are defi ned as CTQ ECs. It may seem odd that the 
weather resistance of the system is one of the CTQ ECs of the Shot-Buddy. Further 
consideration of the CRs indicates how important it is to make a ball return system that 
works for basketball hoops that are usually installed outside the home and remain in 
place for several years. The HOQ analysis shows that the weather resistance of the sys-
tem is of critical importance and one EC that JSR Design might have overlooked. This 
illustrates the value of the HOQ to draw attention to engineering characteristics of real 
value to the customer.
The least important ECs are lane change time, weight, energy or torque to rotate, 
accuracy of ball return, and average time to return ball. It is interesting to note that most 
of these characteristics concern the functions of returning the ball to the proper lane, 
so one would think that they would be of major importance. The team may decide that 
two or more ECs should be combined into a more meaningful performance measure. For 
example, if we combined “accuracy of ball return” with the “average time to return the 
ball” we would create an EC called “effectiveness of ball return” with a relative weight of 
11.6 percent, raising it into the top three ECs. This is a change that the team could make 
after a critical review of the HOQ.
The results of the HOQ are dependent on the members of the design team who 
are following the process. Another group working on the same design task may have 

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
107
3
different outcomes. However, as the knowledge of the design teams and their experi-
ence become more similar their HOQ’s will too.
The Correlation Matrix or Roof of the House of Quality
A correlation matrix (Room 3) can be built for the House of Quality for the Shot-
Buddy design example. The correlation matrix is shown in Fig. 3.16. The correla-
tion matrix, Room 3, records possible interactions between ECs for future trade-off 
decisions.
Room 3: The Correlation matrix shows the degree of dependence among the en-
gineering characteristics in the roof of the HOQ. It is best to recognize these 
correlated relationships early so that appropriate trade-offs can be made during 
embodiment design. The correlation matrix in Fig. 3.16 shows that there are 
four strong positive correlations (indicated by “”) among EC pairs. One 
is the correlation between the catch area and the average time to return a ball. 
FIGURE 3.15
HOQ example of streamlined confi guration for the Shot-Buddy.
Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, “JSR 
Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.
Engineering Characteristics  
Improvement
Direction
Units m2 
% 
m 
sec
n/a
sec
rad
N 
kg
min
MPa MPa√m 
n/a
Customer
Requirements 
Importance
Weight Factor 
Catch Area
Jamming
Probability 
Accuracy of Ball
Return 
Average Time to
Return Ball 
Sensing Position
of Shooter
Lane Change
Time 
Lane Span 
Energy or Torque
to Rotate 
Weight
Time to Install
System 
Material Rigidity 
Material
Toughness at
Attachment Areas 
Weather
Resistance 
Weatherproof
4
1
3
9
Accurate Ball
Return
4 
3 
9 
9 
9 
9 
3 
Tool-less
Installation
2 
3 
3 
9 
1 
Five-Year Lifetime
4
1
3
9
9
Quick Return
3
9
1
9
9
3
3
9
Store in Garage
3
9
3
Compatible with
All Hoop
Installations
4 
1 
9 
Does Not Jam
5
3
9
3
3
Catch Most Shots
5
9
Non-Obtrusive
2
9
Raw Score (698) 131
108
39
42
63
9 
45
27
15 
54
45 
48
72
Relative Weight % 18.8 15.5
5.6
6.0
9.0
1.3
6.4
3.9 2.1 7.7
6.4
6.9
10.3
Rank Order
1 
2 
9 
8 
4 
13
6 
11
12
10
6 
5 
3 

108 
engineering design 
3
FIGURE 3.16
Shot-Buddy Design House of Quality Rooms 2 and 3.
Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, “JSR 
Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.
Improvement
Direction ↑
↓
↑
↓
n/a ↓
Units m2
% 
m 
sec
n/a
sec
rad
N 
kg
min MPa MPa
m
n/a
Engineering
Characteristics
Catch Area
Jamming Probability
Accuracy of Return
Average Time to
Return 
Senses Position of
Shooter 
Lane Change Time
Lane Span
Energy or Torque to
Rotate  
Weight
Time to Install
System  
Material Rigidity 
Material Toughness
near Hoop  
Weather Resistance
Correlation Matrix
Legend
++ Strong Positive
 
   + Positive
 
      None 
    – Negative
 
  ––  Strong Negative 
+
+
+
+
+
+
++
++
++
+
–
++
––
This is logical because as the catch area expands the distance that a trapped 
basketball might travel from a missed shot back to the shooter increases. This 
signals the design team to remember that if they increase the overall catch area 
they must be wary of the increase in the average time to return the basketball. 
Another correlation in shown is the negative correlation (indicated by “	”) 
between the lane span and the accuracy of ball return. Clearly, as the span of 
the lanes (arc width in radians) increases the less likely it is that the ball return 
will be absolutely aligned with the shooter when the ball is released. Other cor-
relations are indicated in the matrix.
Determining the strength of the correlations between ECs requires knowledge of the 
use of the product being designed and engineering experience. It is not necessary to 
have exact correlation data at this point. The rating serves as a visual reminder for the 
design team for use in future phases of the design process, like embodiment design 
(Chap. 8).
  Assessment of Competitors’ Products in House of Quality 
 The data available from the HOQ can be augmented by adding the results of any 
benchmarking activities conducted for the product. The results are shown in two dif-
ferent places. 
Room 6:  Competitive assessment  is a table that displays how the top competitive prod-
ucts rank with respect to the customer requirements listed across the HOQ in Room 2. 
This information comes from direct customer surveys, industry consultants, and 

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
109
3
marketing departments. In Fig. 3.17 it appears that all competitors meet the re-
quirement of not jamming. This means the Shot-Buddy cannot jam and still be 
competitive. The Shot-Buddy will be able to improve on “Accurate Ball Return” 
with its ability to return the ball to the shooter’s position, even when the shooter 
moves. Note: it is not unusual to have sparse data on some of the competitors and 
very detailed data on another. Certain competitors are targets for new products 
and, therefore, are studied more closely than others. 
 Room 7 (refer to the complete HOQ back in Fig. 3.13) in the lower levels of the 
House of Quality provides another area for the comparison to competing products. 
Room 7,  Technical Assessment , is located under the Relationship Matrix. Technical 
Assessment data can be located above or below the Importance Ranking sections of 
Room 5. (Recall that there are many different confi gurations of the House of Quality.) 
 Room 7:  Technical assessment,  indicates how your competing products score 
on achieving the suggested levels of each of the engineering characteristics 
listed in the column headings atop the Relationship Matrix. Generally a scale 
of 1 to 5 (best) is used. Often this information is obtained by getting exam-
ples of the competitor’s product and testing them. Note that the data in this 
FIGURE 3.17
HOQ example of streamlined confi guration for the Shot-Buddy.
1“Ballback® Pro Basketball Return System,” Sports Authority, http://www.sportsauthority.com/product/index.
jsp?productId=2923, accessed October 27, 2010.
2“The Boomerang,” www.boomerangbasketball.net/boomerang.html¸ accessed October 27, 2010.
3“Rolbak Net,” http://www.basketballgoalstore.com/goalrilla-accessories/rolbak-net.aspx, accessed October 27, 2010.
Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, “JSR 
Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.
Competitor Rankings
1—Poor, 3—OK, 5—Excellent
Ballback®
Pro1
The
Boomerang2
Rolbak
Net3
CR
ROOM 6:
CUSTOMER ASSESSMENT
OF COMPETING PRODUCTS
Weatherproof
Accurate Ball Return
Tool-less Installation
Five-Year Lifetime
Quick Return
Store in Garage
Compatible with all Baskets
Does Not Jam
Catch Most Shots
Non-Obtrusive
CUSTOMER
REQUIREMENTS
ENGINEERING
CHARACTERISTICS
ROOM 4
RELATIONSHIP
MATRIX
3
3
1
1
1
1
5
2
2
3
1
1
4
3
5
5
1
1
5
2
2
4
5
5
3
2
4
5
1
1

110 
engineering design 
3
room compares each of the product performance characteristics with those of 
the closest competitors. This is different from the competitive assessment in 
Room 6, where we compared the closest competitors on how well they perform 
with respect to each of the customer requirements. 
 Room 7 may also include a  technical diffi culty  rating that   indicates the ease with 
which each of the engineering characteristics can be achieved. Basically, this comes 
down to an estimate by the design team of the probability of doing well in attaining 
desired values for each EC. Again, a 1 is a low probability and a 5 represents a high 
probability of success. 
 Setting Target Values for Engineering Characteristics 
 Room 8: Setting target values is the fi nal step in constructing the HOQ. By know-
ing which are the most important ECs (Room 5), understanding the technical 
competition (Room 6), and having a feel for the technical diffi culty (Room 7), 
the team is in a good position to set the targets for each engineering character-
istic. Setting targets at the beginning of the design process provides a way for 
the design team to gauge the progress they are making toward satisfying the 
customer’s requirements as the design proceeds. 
 3.6.3 Interpreting Results of HOQ 
 The design team has collected a great deal of information about the design and pro-
cessed it into the completed House of Quality. The creation of the HOQ required con-
sideration of the connections between what the customers expect of the product, CRs, 
and the parameters that are set by the design team. The set of parameters make up the 
solution-neutral specifi cations for the product and were defi ned in Sec. 3.4. Some of 
the parameters of the design of the product are  already defi ned . They may be defi ned 
as the result of a decision by the approving authority that initiated the design process, 
they may be defi ned by the physics applied to the product while it is in use, or they 
may be defi ned by regulations set up by a standards organization or other regulatory 
bodies. The design variables that are already defi ned as constraints or that have al-
ready been given values do not need to appear in the HOQ. 
 The highest-ranking ECs from the HOQ are either constraints or design variables 
whose values can be used as decision-making criteria for evaluating candidate designs 
(see Chap. 7). If a high-ranking EC has only a few possible candidate values then it may 
be appropriate to treat that EC as a constraint. There are certain design parameters that 
can only take a few discrete values. If so, the design team should review the possible 
values of the EC, determine which is best at meeting correlated EC targets of the design, 
and then use only the selected value of the EC in generating conceptual designs. 
 If a high-ranking EC is a design variable that can take many values, like weight, 
or power output, it is good to use that EC as a metric by which you compare con-
ceptual designs. Thus, your highest-ranking ECs may become your design selection 
criteria. The results from the HOQ act as a guide to assist the team in determining the 
selection criterion for evaluating designs. 

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
111
3
 The lowest-ranking ECs of the HOQ are not as critical to the success of the de-
sign. These ECs allow freedom during the design process because their values can be 
set according to priorities of the designer or approving authority. Values for the low-
ranking ECs can be determined by whatever means is most conducive to achieving a 
good design outcome. They can be set in such a way as to reduce cost or to preserve 
some other objective of the design team. As long as low-ranking ECs are independent 
of the CTQ ECs, they can be set expeditiously and not require a great deal of design 
team effort. Once EC values are set, they are documented in the PDS. 
 3.7
PRODUCT DESIGN SPECIFICATION 
 The goal of design process planning is to identify, search, and assemble enough infor-
mation to decide whether the product development venture is a good investment for 
the company, and to decide what time to market and level of resources are required. 
The resulting documentation is typically called a  new product marketing report.  This 
report can range in size and scope from a one-page memorandum describing a simple 
product change to a business plan of several hundred pages. The marketing report 
includes details on such things as the business objectives, a product description and 
available technology base, the competition, expected volume of sales, marketing strat-
egy, capital requirements, development cost and time, expected profi t over time, and 
return to the shareholders. 
 In the product development process, the results of the design planning process 
that governs the engineering design tasks are compiled in the form of a set of product 
design specifi cations (PDS). The PDS is the basic control and reference document for 
the design and manufacture of the product. The PDS is a document that contains all 
of the facts related to the outcome of the product development. It should avoid forcing 
the design direction toward a particular concept and predicting the outcome, but it 
should also contain the realistic constraints.
Creating the PDS fi nalizes the process of establishing the customer needs and 
wants, prioritizing them, and beginning to cast them into a technical framework so 
that design concepts can be established. The process of group thinking and prioritiz-
ing that developed the HOQ provides excellent input for writing the PDS. However, it 
must be understood that the PDS will change as the design process proceeds. Never-
theless, at the end of the process the PDS will describe in writing the product that is 
intended to be manufactured and marketed. 
 Table 3.3 is a typical listing of elements that are included in a product design 
specifi cation. The elements are grouped by categories, and some categories include 
questions that should be answered by the design team and replaced with their deci-
sions. Not every product will require consideration of every item in this list, but many 
will. The list demonstrates the complexity of product design. The Shot-Buddy design 
example used throughout this chapter is again the example in the PDS of Table 3.4.  
 At the beginning of the concept generation process, the PDS should be as complete 
as possible about what the design should do. However, it should say as little as pos-
sible about  how the requirements are to be met.  Whenever possible the specifi cations 

112 
engineering design 
3
 TABLE 3.3 
Template for Product Design Specifi cation
Product Design Specifi cation
 Product Identifi cation 
●  Product name (# of models or different 
versions, related in-house product families)
●  Basic functions of the product
●  Special features of the product
●  Key performance targets (power output, 
effi ciency, accuracy)
●  Service environment (use conditions, stor-
age, transportation, use and predictable 
misuse)
●  User training required
 Market Identifi cation 
●  Description of target market and its size
●  Anticipated market demand (units per year)
●  Competing products
●  Branding strategy (trademark, logo, brand name)
 What is the need for a new (or redesigned) product?  
 How much competition exists for the new product? 
What are the relationships to existing products? 
Key Project Deadlines
●  Time to complete project
●  Fixed project deadlines (e.g., review dates) 
 Physical Description 
What is known (or has already been decided) about the physical requirements for the new 
product?
●  Design variable values that are known or fi xed prior to the conceptual design process (e.g., external 
dimensions)
●  Constraints that determine known boundaries on some design variables (e.g., upper limit on accept-
able weight)
 Financial Requirements 
 What are the assumptions of the fi rm about the economics of the product and its development? 
 What are the corporate criteria on profi tability? 
●  Pricing policy over life cycle (target manufacturing cost, price, estimated retail price, discounts)
●  Warranty policy
●  Expected fi nancial performance or rate of return on investment
●  Level of capital investment required
 Life Cycle Targets 
 What targets should be set for the performance of the product over time? (This will relate to the 
product’s competition.) 
 What are the most up-to-date recycling policies of the corporation and how can this product’s design 
refl ect those policies? 
●  Useful life and shelf life
●  Cost of installation and operation (energy costs, crew size, etc.)
●  Maintenance schedule and location (user-performed or service centered)
●  Reliability (mean time to failure): Identify critical parts and special reliability targets for them
●  End-of-life strategy (% and type of recyclable components, remanufacture of the product, company 
take back, upgrade policy)

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
113
3
should be expressed in quantitative terms and include all known ranges (or limits) 
within which acceptable performance lies. For example: The power output of the en-
gine should be 5 hp, plus or minus 0.25 hp. Remember that the PDS is a dynamic 
document. While it is important to make it as complete as possible at the outset of 
design, do not hesitate to change it as you learn more as the design evolves. The PDS 
is a document that should always be up to date and refl ect the current design.   
3.8
  SUMMARY 
 Problem defi nition in the engineering design process takes the form of identifying the 
needs of the customer that a product will satisfy. If the needs are not properly defi ned, 
then the design effort may be futile. This is especially true in product design, where 
considerable time and effort is invested in listening to and analyzing the “voice of the 
customer.” 
 Collecting customer opinions on what they need from a product is done in many 
ways. For example, a marketing department research plan can include interviewing 
 existing and target customers, implementing customer surveys, and analyzing war-
ranty data on existing products. The design team recognizes that there are many 
classes of customer needs, and research data must be studied intently to determine 
which needs will motivate customers to select a new product. Some customer needs 
are identifi ed as critical to quality and take on added priority for the design team. 
 Design teams describe products in terms of engineering characteristics: param-
eters, design variables, and constraints that communicate how the customer needs will 
be satisfi ed. More than one engineering characteristic will contribute to satisfying 
a single customer need. Engineering characteristics are discovered through bench-
marking competing products, performing reverse engineering on similar products, 
 TABLE 3.3 (continued)
Product Design Specifi cation
 Social, Political, and Legal Requirements 
 Are there government agencies, societies, or regulation boards that control the markets in which this 
product is to be launched?
 Are there opportunities to patent the product or some of its subsystems? 
●  Safety and environmental regulations. Applicable government regulations for all intended markets.
●  Standards. Pertinent product standards that may be applicable ( Underwriters Laboratories, OSHA).
●  Safety and product liability. Predictable unintended uses for the product, safety label guidelines, 
applicable company safety standards.
●  Intellectual property. Patents related to product. Licensing strategy for critical pieces of technology.
 Manufacturing Specifi cations 
 Which parts or systems will be manufactured in-house? 
●  Manufacturing requirements. Processes and capacity necessary to manufacture fi nal product.
●  Suppliers. Identify key suppliers and procurement strategy for purchased parts.

114 
engineering design 
3
 TABLE 3.4 
PDS for Shot-Buddy Device after the Problem Description 
and Need Identifi cation Steps Are Complete
Product Design Specifi cation: Shot-Buddy
Product Identifi cation
●  Basketball return that automatically directs 
ball to the shooter enabling effective practice 
shooting
●  Fits all structure-mounted and free-standing, 
standard-size hoops
●  User installation
Special Features
●  Shooter wears sensor that enables return 
targeting
● Targeting works up to 3-point arc
Key Performance Targets
●  Returns all made shots and missed shots falling 
within 8-inches of the hoop
●  Returns basketball accurately and quickly to the 
user at any location on the court
● Powered by rechargeable batteries
User Training Required: NONE
Service Environment:
● Outdoor: 	20 to 120ºF
● Indoor: 50 to 80ºF
● Up to 100% humidity
Key Project Deadlines
● Six month to fi nalize design
● Target advertising for holiday season
Physical Description:
● External Dimensions:
❍  Catch area approximately 6 feet by 4 feet
❍  Control housing approximately 2 feet wide, 
2 feet long, and 10 inches tall
❍  Return device approximately 2 feet by 2 feet
● Material: To be determined (TBD)
● Weight Targets:
❍ Ball catching device 
15 pounds
❍ Base component 
15 pounds
Manufacturing Specifi cations
●  All framing and support components will be 
manufactured in house. Others will be COTS
● Suppliers: TBD
Market Identifi cation
●  The target market for this product will be 
Middle School and High School age users
●  Initial Launch: Baltimore—DC metro area
●  Initial production run 2500 units
●  Year 2–3: based on market acceptance 
expand to nationwide market in 4th year
● Competing products:
❍  Current products can only return a 
basketball to a very limited range of the 
court
❍  No products involve the sensor 
technology
● Brand Name: Shot-Buddy
Financial Requirements:
● Pricing policy over life cycle:
❍ Target manufacturing cost: $250
❍ Estimated Retail Price: $500
●  Warranty Policy: 1 year complete warranty
●  Expected fi nancial performance or rate of 
return on investment: TBD
● Level of capital investment required: TBD
Life Cycle Targets:
● Useful life 5 years and beyond
●  Maintenance schedule: No maintenance 
required if sensors and control equipment 
are stored properly
● Reliability (mean time to failure): 5 years
●  End of life strategy: Shot-Buddy will be 
recyclable with batteries requiring special 
handling
Social Political, and Legal Requirements
●  Safety and environmental regulations will 
be followed
●  Standards: Research federal regulations on 
sports equipment
●  Safety and product liability: The only safety 
aspect of the Shot-Buddy is the installation 
process where a ladder might be involved to 
hang the device from the rim/backboard
●  Intellectual property: Will investigate patent 
potential

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
115
3
and technical research. The TQM tool called Quality Function Deployment (QFD) 
is a well-defi ned process that will lead a design team in translating the important 
customer needs into critical-to-quality engineering characteristics. This enables the 
product development team to focus design effort on the right aspects of the product. 
 The House of Quality (HOQ) is the fi rst step in QFD and is the most used in the 
product development process. The HOQ has a number of different confi gurations. 
There is a minimum number of “rooms” of the HOQ that must be completed to gain 
the benefi ts of the method. The HOQ will provide relative weight information for the 
engineering characteristics. Using this data the design team can determine which ECs 
are critical to quality (CTQ) and which should be set as constraints for concept gen-
eration. Other rooms of the HOQ can be used to identify EC correlations (Room 3) 
and assess competing products (Room 6). 
 The product design process results in a document called the Product Design Speci-
fi cation (PDS). The PDS is a living document that will be refi ned at each step of the PDP. 
The PDS is the single most important document in the design process as it describes the 
product and the market it is intended to satisfy.   
 NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS 
 Affi nity diagram  
 Benchmarking 
 Constraint  
 Customer requirement  
 Design parameter  
 Design variable  
 Engineering characteristics 
 Ethnographic study  
 Focus group  
 House of quality (HOQ) 
 Kano diagram  
 Pareto chart 
 Quality function deployment 
 Reverse engineering 
 Survey instrument  
 TQM 
 Value 
 Voice of the customer 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Customer Needs and Product Alignment 
Mariampolski, H.: Ethnography for Marketers: A Guide to Consumer Immersion, Sage Pub-
lications, 2005.
 Meyer ,  M. H ., and  A. P .  Lehnerd :  The Power of Product Platforms,    The Free Press, New York , 
 1997 . 
 Smith ,  P. G ., and  D. G .  Reinertsen :  Developing Products in Half the Time: New Rules, New 
Tools, 2d ed.,  Wiley, New York ,  1996 . 
 Ulrich ,  K. T ., and  S. D .  Eppinger :  Product Design and Development,   4th ed.,  McGraw-Hill, 
New York ,  2007 , Chap. 4. 
 Urban ,  G. L ., and  J. R .  Hauser :  Design and Marketing of New Products,   2nd ed.,  Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ ,  1993 . 
Quality Function Deployment 
 Bickell ,  B. A ., and  K. D .  Bickell :  The Road Map to Repeatable Success: Using QFD to Imple-
ment Change,  CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL ,  1995 . 

116 
engineering design 
3
 Clausing ,  D .:  Total Quality Development,  ASME Press, New York ,  1995 . 
 Cohen ,  L .:  Quality Function Deployment,  Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA ,  1995 . 
 Day ,  R. G .:  Quality Function Deployment,  ASQC Quality Press, Milwaukee, WI ,  1993 . 
 Guinta ,  L. R ., and  N. C .  Praizler :  The QFD Book,  Amacom, New York ,  1993 . 
 King ,  B .:  Better Designs in Half the Time, 3d ed.,  GOAL/QPC, Methuen, MA ,  1989 . 
Customer Requirements and PDS 
 Pugh  S .:  Total Design,  Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA ,  1990 . 
 Ullman ,  D. G .:  The Mechanical Design Process, 4th ed.,  McGraw-Hill, New York, 2009 . 
 PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES 
 3.1  Select 10 products from a department store’s online catalog for a supplier of household 
items (not clothing) and decide which needs in Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs they 
satisfy. Then, identify the particular product features that make the products attractive 
to you. Divide your customer needs into the four categories described by Kano. 
 3.2  The transistor, followed by the microprocessor, is one of the most far-reaching products 
ever developed. Make a list of the major products and services that have been impacted 
by these inventions. 
 3.3  Take 10 minutes and individually write down small things in your life, or aspects of 
products that you use, that bother you. You can just name the product, or better yet, give 
an attribute of the product that “bugs you.” Be as specifi c as you can. You are really 
creating a needs list. Combine this with other lists prepared by members of your design 
team. Perhaps you have created an idea for an invention. 
 3.4  Write a survey to determine the customers’ wants for a microwave oven. 
 3.5  List a complete set of customer needs for cross-country skis to allow skiing on dirt or 
grass. Divide the list of customer needs into “must haves” and “wants.” 
 3.6  Suppose you are the inventor of a new device called the helicopter. By describing the 
functional characteristics of the machine, list some of the societal needs that it is ex-
pected to satisfy. Which of these have come to fruition, and which have not? 
 3.7  Assume that a focus group of college students was convened to show them an innovative 
thumb drive memory unit and to ask what characteristics they wanted it to have. The 
comments were as follows: 
 
●  It needs to have enough memory to meet student needs. 
 
●  It should interface with any computer a student would encounter. 
 
●  It must have a reliability of near 100%. 
 
●  It should have some way to signal that it is working. 
 
 Translate these customer requirements into engineering characteristics of the product. 

 
chapter 3: Problem Definition and Need Identification 
117
3
 3.8  Complete the streamlined confi guration of the House of Quality (i.e., Rooms 1, 2, 4, 
and 5) for a heating and air-conditioning design project. The customer requirements are 
lower operating costs; improved cash fl ow; managed energy use; increased occupant 
comfort; and easy to maintain. The engineering characteristics are an energy effi ciency 
ratio of 10; zonal controls; programmable energy management system; payback 1 year; 
and 2-hour spare parts delivery. 
 3.9  A product design team is designing an improved fl ip-lid trash can such as that which 
would be found in a family kitchen. The problem statement is as follows: 
 Design a user-friendly, durable, fl ip-lid trash can that opens and closes reliably. The 
trash can must be lightweight yet tip-resistant. It must combat odor, fi t standard 
kitchen trash bags, and be safe for all users in a family environment.     
 
 With this information, and a little research and imagination where needed, construct a 
House of Quality (HOQ) for this design project. 
3.10  Write a product design specifi cation for the fl ip-lid trash can described in Prob. 3.9. 

4
118
 4 
 TEAM BEHAVIOR AND TOOLS 
 4.1 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Engineering design is really a “team sport.” Certainly in the context of being an engi-
neering student, there is so much to learn for your design project and so little time to do 
everything required for a successful design that being a member of a smoothly func-
tioning team is clearly a major benefi t. Also, as discussed in the next paragraph, the 
ability to work effectively in teams is highly prized in the business world. A team pro-
vides two major benefi ts: (1) a diversity of teammates with different educations and life 
experiences results in a knowledge base that is broader and often more creative than a 
single individual, and (2) by team members taking on different tasks and responsibili-
ties, the work gets fi nished more quickly. Therefore, this chapter has three objectives: 
 
●  To provide time-tested tips and advice for becoming an effective team member. 
 
●  To introduce you to a set of problem-solving tools that you will fi nd useful in carry-
ing out your design project, as well as being useful in your everyday life. 
 
●  To emphasize the importance of project planning to success in design, and to pro-
vide you with some ideas of how to increase your skill in this activity. 
 A recent column in  The Wall Street Journal  was titled “Engineering Is Reengi-
neered into a Team Sport.” The article went on to say, “These fi rms want people who 
are comfortable operating in teams and communicating with earthlings who know 
nothing about circuit-board design or quantum mechanics.” This is to emphasize that 
when industry leaders are asked what they would like to see changed in engineering 
curricula they invariably respond, “Teach your students to work effectively in teams.” 
A more near-term reason for devoting this chapter to team behavior is that the engi-
neering design courses for which this text is intended are mostly focused around team-
based projects. All too often we instructors thrust you students into a team situation 
without providing proper understanding of what it takes to achieve a smoothly func-
tioning team. Most often things work out just fi ne, but at a cost of extra hours of trial 
118

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
119
4
and error to fi nd the best way to function as a team. Indeed, the greatest complaint that 
students have about project design courses is “it takes too much time.” This chapter is 
designed to give you an understanding of the team-building process and to introduce 
you to some tools that people have found helpful in getting results through teams. 
 A team is a small number of people with complementary skills who are commit-
ted to a common purpose, performance goals, and approach for which they hold them-
selves mutually accountable. 1  There are two general types of teams: teams that do real 
work, like design teams, and teams that make recommendations. Both are important, 
but we focus here on the former. Most people have worked in groups, but a working 
group is not necessarily a team. A team is a high order of group activity. Many groups 
do not reach this level, but it is a goal truly worth achieving.   
 4.2 
 WHAT IT MEANS TO BE AN EFFECTIVE TEAM MEMBER 
 There is a set of attitudes and work habits that you need to adopt to be a good team 
member. First and foremost, you need  to take responsibility for the success of the 
team.  Without this commitment, the team is weakened by your presence. Without this 
commitment, you shouldn’t be on the team. 
 Next, you need to  be a person who delivers on commitments . This means that you 
consider membership on the team as something worthwhile and that you are willing 
to rearrange your job and personal responsibilities to satisfy the needs of the team. On 
occasions when you cannot complete an assignment, always notify the team leader as 
soon as possible so other arrangements can be made. 
 Much of the team activity takes place in meetings where members share their 
ideas. Learn  to be a contributor to discussions . Some of the ways that you can 
contribute are by asking for explanations to opinions, guiding the discussion back on 
track, and pulling together and summarizing ideas. 
 Listening is an art that not all of us have learned to practice. Learn to  give 
your full attention to whomever is speaking and demonstrate this by asking helpful 
 questions . To help focus on the speaker, take notes and never do distracting things like 
reading unrelated material, using your mobile phone, walking around, or interrupting 
the speaker. 
 Develop techniques for getting your message across to the team . This means 
thinking things through briefl y in your own mind before you speak. Always speak in a 
loud, clear voice. Have a positive message, and avoid “put-downs” and sarcasm. Keep 
focused on the point you are making. Avoid rambling discussion. 
 Learn to give and receive useful feedback . The point of a team meeting is to ben-
efi t from the collective knowledge and experience of the team to achieve an agreed-
upon goal. Feedback is of two types. One is a natural part of the team discussion. The 
other involves corrective action for improper behavior by a member of the team that is 
best done after the meeting. 
 1 .  J. R .  Katzenbach and  D. K .  Smith ,  The Wisdom of Teams,  HarperCollins, New York ,  1994. 

120 
engineering design 
4
 The following are characteristics of an effective team: 
 
●  Team goals are as important as individual goals. 
 
●  The team understands the goals and is committed to achieving them. 
 
●  Trust replaces fear, and people feel comfortable taking risks. 
 
●  Respect, collaboration, and open-mindedness are prevalent. 
 
●  Team members communicate readily; diversity of opinions is encouraged. 
 
●  Decisions are made by consensus and have the acceptance and support of the mem-
bers of the team. 
 We hope you will want to learn how to become an effective team member. Much 
of this chapter is devoted to helping you do that. Being a good team member is not a 
demeaning thing at all. Rather, it is a high form of group leadership. Being recognized 
as an effective team member is a highly marketable skill. Corporate recruiters say that 
the traits they are looking for in new engineers are communication skills, team skills, 
and problem-solving ability. 
 4.3 
 TEAM LEADERSHIP ROLES 
 We have just discussed the behavior that is expected of a good team member. Within a 
team, members assume different roles in addition to being active team members. The 
discussion that follows is oriented toward how teamwork is practiced in business and in-
dustry. However, student design teams differ in several important respects from a team 
in the business world: (1) the team members are all close to the same age and level of 
formal education, (2) they are peers and no one has authority over the other team mem-
bers, and as a result, (3) they often prefer to work without a designated leader in a shared 
leadership environment. 
 An important role that is external to the team but vital to its performance is the 
 team sponsor . The team sponsor is the manager who has the need for the output of the 
team. He or she selects the team leader, negotiates the participation of team members, 
provides any special resources needed by the team, and formally commissions the 
team. 
 The  team leader  convenes and chairs the team meetings using effective meeting 
management practices (see Sec. 4.5). He or she guides and manages the day-to-day ac-
tivity of the team by tracking the team’s accomplishment toward stated goals, helping 
team members to develop their skills, communicating with the sponsor about prog-
ress, trying to remove barriers toward progress, and helping to resolve confl ict within 
the team. In general, there are three styles of team leadership: the traditional or auto-
cratic leader, the passive leader, and the facilitative leader. Table 4.1 lists some major 
characteristics of these types of leaders. Clearly, the facilitative leader is the modern 
type of leader who we want to have leading teams.  
 Many teams in industry include a  facilitator , a person trained in group dynam-
ics who assists the leader and the team in achieving its objectives by coaching them 
in team skills and problem-solving tools, and assisting in data-collection activities. 
While the facilitator functions as a team member in most respects, she or he must 

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
121
4
remain neutral in team discussions and stand ready to provide interventions to attain 
high team productivity and improved participation by team members or, in extreme 
situations, to resolve team disputes. A key role of the facilitator is to keep the group 
focused on its task. When a facilitator is not available the team leader must take on 
these responsibilities. 
 Suggestions on organization of student design teams and the duties that need  to 
be shared by the team members can be found in the document Team Organization and 
Duties at www.mhhe.com/dieter. 
 4.4 
 TEAM DYNAMICS 
 Students of team behavior have observed that most teams go through fi ve stages of 
team development. 1  
1.   Orientation ( forming):  The members are new to the team. They are probably both 
anxious and excited, yet unclear about what is expected of them and the task they 
are to accomplish. This is a period of tentative interactions and polite discourse, 
as the team members undergo orientation and acquire and exchange information. 
2.   Dissatisfaction (storming):  Now the challenges of forming a cohesive team be-
come real. Differences in personalities, working and learning styles, cultural back-
grounds, and available resources (time to meet, access to and agreement on the 
meeting place, access to transportation, etc.) begin to make themselves known. 
Disagreement, even confl ict, may break out in meetings. Meetings may be charac-
terized by criticism, interruptions, poor attendance, or even hostility. 
3.   Resolution (norming):  The dissatisfaction abates when team members establish 
group norms, either spoken or unspoken, to guide the process, resolve confl icts, 
 TABLE 4.1 
Characteristics of Three Leadership Types
Traditional Leader
Passive Leader
Facilitative Leader
Directive and controlling
Hands off
Creates open environment
No questions—just do it
Too much freedom
Encourages suggestions
Retains all decision-making 
authority
Lack of guidance and direction
Provides guidance
Nontrusting
Extreme empowerment
Embraces creativity
Ignores input
Uninvolved
Considers all ideas
Autocratic
A fi gurehead
Maintains focus; weighs 
goals vs. criteria
 1.  R. B .  Lacoursiere ,  The Life Cycle of Groups,  Human Service Press, New York ,  1980 ;  B .  Tuckman , 
 “Developmental Sequence in Small Groups,” Psychological Bulletin , no. 63,  pp. 384–99 ,  1965 . 

122 
engineering design 
4
  1 . Consensus means general agreement or accord. Consensus does not require 100 percent agreement of 
the group. Neither is 51 percent agreement a consensus. 
and focus on common goals. The norms are given by rules of procedure and the 
establishment of comfortable roles and relationships among team members. The 
arrival of the resolution stage is characterized by greater consensus seeking, 1 and 
stronger commitment to help and support each other. 
4.   Production (performing): This is the stage of team development we have worked 
for. The team is working cooperatively with few disruptions. People are excited 
and have pride in their accomplishments, and team activities are fun. There is high 
orientation toward the task, and demonstrable performance and productivity. 
5.   Termination (adjourning): When the task is completed, the team prepares to dis-
band. This is the time for joint refl ection on how well the team accomplished its 
task, and refl ection on the functioning of the team. In addition to a report to the 
team sponsor on results and recommendations of the team, another report on team 
history and dynamics may be written to capture the “lessons learned” to benefi t 
future team leaders. 
 It is important for teams to realize that the dissatisfaction stage is perfectly nor-
mal and that they can look forward to its passing. Many teams experience only a brief 
stage 2 and pass through without any serious consequences. However, if there are seri-
ous problems with the behavior of team members, they should be addressed quickly.  
 One way or another, a team must address the following set of team challenges: 
 
●  Safety : Are the members of the team safe from destructive personal attacks? Can 
team members freely speak and act without feeling threatened? 
 
●  Inclusion : Team members need to be allowed equal opportunities to participate. 
Rank is not important inside the team. Make special efforts to include new, quiet 
members in the discussion. 
 
●  Appropriate level of interdependence : Is there an appropriate balance between the 
individuals’ needs and the team needs? Is there a proper balance between indi-
vidual self-esteem and team allegiance? 
 
●  Cohesiveness : Is there appropriate bonding between members of the team? 
 
●  Trust : Do team members trust each other and the leader? 
 
●  Confl ict resolution : Does the team have a way to resolve confl ict? 
 
●  Infl uence : Do team members or the team as a whole have infl uence over members? 
If not, there is no way to reward, punish, or work effectively. 
 
●  Accomplishment : Can the team perform tasks and achieve goals? If not, frustration 
will build up and lead to confl ict.  
 It is important for the team to establish some guidelines for working together. 
Team guidelines will serve to ameliorate the dissatisfaction stage and are a necessary 
condition for the resolution stage. The team should begin to develop these guidelines 
early in the orientation stage. Team guidelines are often given in a Team Charter, 
which the team develops and then agrees to with their signatures. An example is given 
on the text website www.mhhe.com/dieter under Chapter 4. 

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
123
4
 People play various roles during a group activity like a team meeting. It should be 
helpful in your role as team leader or team member to recognize some of the behav-
ior listed briefl y in Table 4.2. It is the task of the team leader and facilitator to try to 
change the hindering behavior and to encourage team members in their various help-
ing roles.   
 4.5 
 EFFECTIVE TEAM MEETINGS 
 Much of the work of teams is accomplished in team meetings. It is in these meetings 
that the collective talent of the team members is brought to bear on the problem, and 
in the process, all members of the team “buy in” to the problem and together develop 
a solution. Students who complain about design projects taking too much time often 
are really expressing their inability to organize their meetings and manage their time 
effectively. 
 At the outset it is important to understand that an effective meeting requires plan-
ning. This is the responsibility of the person who will lead the meeting. Meetings 
should begin on time and last for about 90 minutes, the optimum time to retain all 
members’ concentration. A meeting should have a written agenda, with the name 
of the designated person to present each topic and an allotted time for discussion of 
the topic. If the time allocated to a topic proves to be insuffi cient, it can be extended 
by the consent of the group, or the topic may be given to a small task group to study 
further and report back at the next meeting of the team. In setting the agenda, items of 
greatest urgency should be placed fi rst on the agenda. 
 The team leader directs but does not control discussion. As each item comes up for 
discussion on the agenda, the person responsible for that item makes a clear statement 
of the issue or problem. Discussion begins only when it is clear that every participant 
 TABLE 4.2 
Different Behavioral Roles Found in Groups
Helping Roles
Hindering Roles
Task Roles
Maintenance Roles
Initiating: proposing tasks; 
defi ning problem
Encouraging 
Dominating: asserting authority 
or superiority
Information or opinion seeking
Harmonizing: attempting to 
reconcile disagreement
Withdrawing: not talking or 
contributing
Information or opinion giving
Expressing group feeling
Avoiding: changing the topic; 
frequently absent
Clarifying
Gate keeping: helping to keep 
communication channels open
Degrading: putting down others’ 
ideas; joking in barbed way
Summarizing
Consensus testing
Compromising
Standard setting and testing: 
checking whether group is 
satisfi ed with procedures
Uncooperative: Side conversa-
tions: whispering and 
private conversations 
across the table

124 
engineering design 
4
understands what is intended to be accomplished regarding that item. One reason for 
keeping teams small is that every member has an opportunity to contribute to the dis-
cussion. Often it is useful to go around the table in a round-robin fashion, asking each 
person for ideas or solutions, while listing them on a fl ip chart or blackboard. No criti-
cism or evaluation should be given here, only questions for clarifi cation. Then the ideas 
are discussed by the group, and a decision is reached. It is important that this be a group 
process and that an idea become disassociated from the individual who fi rst proposed it. 
 Decisions made by the team should be consensus decisions. When there is a 
consensus, people don’t just go along with the decision, they invest in it. Arriving at 
consensus requires that all participants feel that they have had their full say. Try to 
help team members to avoid the natural tendency to see new ideas in a negative light. 
However, if there is a sincere and persuasive negative objector, try to understand their 
real objections. Often they have important substance, but they are not expressed in a 
way that they can be easily understood. It is the responsibility of the leader to keep 
summing up for the group the areas of agreement. As discussion advances, the area 
of agreement should widen. Eventually you come to a point where problems and dis-
agreement seem to melt away, and people begin to realize that they are approaching a 
decision that is acceptable to all. 
 4.5.1 Helpful Rules for Meeting Success 
1.  Pick a regular meeting location and try not to change it. 
2.  Pick a meeting location that: (a) is agreeable, accessible to all, and conducive 
to work, (b) has breathing room when there is full attendance, (c) has a pad and 
easel in the room, (d) isn’t too hot, too cold, or too close to noisy distractions. 
3.  Regular meeting times are not as important as confi rming the time of meet-
ings. Once a meeting time has been selected, confi rm it immediately by e-mail. 
Remain fl exible on selecting meeting length and frequency. Shape the time that 
the team spends together around the needs of the work to be accomplished. This 
being said, it is important for every student design team to have a two-hour block 
of time when they can meet weekly without interference from class or work 
schedules.   
4.  Send an e-mail reminder to team members just before the fi rst of several meetings.   
5.  If you send materials out in advance of a meeting, bring extra copies just in case 
people forget to bring theirs, or they did not arrive.  
6.  Start on time, or no later than 5 to 7 minutes from the stated starting time. 
7.  Pass out an agenda at the beginning of the meeting and get the team’s concur-
rence with the agenda. Start every meeting with “what are we trying to accom-
plish today?” 
8.  Rotate the responsibility for writing summaries of each meeting. The summa-
ries should document: (a) when did the team meet and who attended, (b) what 
were the issues discussed (in outline form), (c) decisions, agreements, or apparent 
consensus on issues, (d) next meeting date and time, (e) action items, with assign-
ment to team members for completion by the next meeting. In general, meeting 
summaries should not exceed one page, unless you are attaching results from 

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
125
4
group brainstorming, lists of issues, ideas, and so on. Meeting summaries should 
be distributed by the assigned recorder within 48 hours of the meeting. 
9.  Notice members who come late, leave early, or miss meetings. Ask if the meeting 
time is inconvenient or if competing demands are keeping them from meetings. 
10.  Observe team members who are not speaking. Near the end of the discussion, ask 
them directly for their opinion on an issue. Consult them after the meeting to be 
sure that they are comfortable with the team and discussion. 
11.  Occasionally use meeting evaluations (perhaps every second or third meeting) to 
gather anonymous feedback on how the group is working together. Meeting eval-
uations should be turned in to the facilitator, who should summarize the results, 
distribute a copy of those results to everyone, and lead a brief discussion at the 
next meeting on reactions to the meeting evaluations and any proposed changes 
in the meeting format.   
12.  Do not bring guests or staff support or add team members without seeking the 
permission of the team. 
13.  Avoid canceling meetings. If the team leader cannot attend, an interim discussion 
leader should be designated. 
14.  End every meeting with an “action check”: (a) What did we accomplish/agree upon 
today? (b) What will we do at the next meeting? (c) What is everyone’s “home -
work,” if any, before the next meeting? 
15.  Follow up with any person who does not attend, especially people who did not 
give advance notice. Call to update them about the meeting and send them any 
materials that were passed out at the meeting. Be sure they understand what will 
take place at the next meeting.   
 For smooth team operation, it is important to:   
 
●  Create a team roster. Ask team members to verify mailing addresses, e-mail ad-
dresses, names, and phone numbers or a team website. Include information about 
the team sponsor. Use e-mail addresses to set up a distribution list for your team. 
 
●  Organize important material in team binders or a team website. Include the team ros-
ter, team charter, essential background information, data, critical articles, and so on.  
   A well-functioning team achieves its objectives quickly and effi ciently in an en-
vironment that induces energy and enthusiasm. However, it would be naive to think 
that everything will always go well with teams. Suggestions for dealing with people 
problems in teams can be found in the text website www.mhhe.com/dieter.    
 4.6 
 PROBLEM-SOLVING TOOLS 
 In this section we present some problem-solving tools that are useful in any problem 
situation, whether as part of your design project or in any other business situation—as 
in trying to identify new sources of income for the student ASME chapter. These tools 
are especially well suited for problem solving by teams. They have a strong element of 
common sense and do not require sophisticated mathematics, so they can be learned 

126 
engineering design 
4
and practiced by any group of educated people. They are easy to learn, but a bit tricky 
to learn to use with real expertise. These tools have been codifi ed within the discipline 
called  total quality management. 1 
 Many strategies for problem solving have been proposed. The one that we have 
used and found effective is a simple three-phase process. 2 
 
●  Problem defi nition 
 
●  Cause fi nding 
 
●  Solution fi nding and implementation 
 Table 4.3 lists the tools that are most applicable in each phase of the problem-
solving process. Most are described below in examples that illustrate their use. A few 
are found in other sections of this text.  
 We view problem defi nition as the critical phase in any problem situation. A prob-
lem can be defi ned as the difference between a current state and a more desirable 
state. Often the problem is posed by management or the team sponsor, but until the 
team redefi nes it for itself, the problem has not been defi ned. The problem should be 
based on data, which may reside in the reports of previous studies, or in surveys or 
tests that the team undertakes to defi ne the problem. In working toward an acceptable 
problem defi nition, the team uses  brainstorming and the  affi nity diagram . 
 The objective of the cause-fi nding stage is to identify all of the possible causes of 
the problem and to narrow them down to the most probable  root causes . This phase 
 TABLE 4.3 
Problem-Solving Tools
Problem Defi nition
Cause Finding
Solution Finding and 
Implementation
Brainstorming (see 
Sec. 6.3.1)
Affi nity diagram
Pareto chart
 Gathering data 
 Interviews (see Sec. 3.2.2)
  Focus groups (see Sec. 3.2.2)
 Surveys (see Sec. 3.2.2)
 Analyzing data 
 Checksheet
 Histogram
 Flowchart
 Pareto chart
 Search for root causes 
 Cause-and-effect diagram
 Why-why diagram
 Interrelationship digraph
 Solution fi nding 
  Brainstorming (see Sec. 6.3.1)
  How-how diagram
  Concept selection (see Chap. 7)
 Implementation 
 Force fi eld analysis
 Written implementation plan
 1 .  J. W .  Wesner ,  J. M .  Hiatt , and  D. C .  Trimble ,  Winning with Quality: Applying Quality Principles in 
Product Development,  Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA ,  1995 ;  C. C .  Pegels ,  Total Quality Management, 
 Boyd & Fraser, Danvers, MA,  1995 ;  W. J .  Kolarik ,  Creating Quality,  McGraw-Hill, New York ,  1995 ; 
 S .  Shiba ,  A .  Graham , and  D .  Walden ,  A New American TQM,  Productivity Press, Portland, OR,  1993 . 
 2 .  Ralph  Barra ,  Tips and Techniques for Team Effectiveness,    Barra International, PO Box 325, New 
Oxford, PA . 

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
127
4
starts with the gathering of data and analyzing the data with simple statistical tools. 
The fi rst step in data analysis is the creation of a  checksheet  in which data is recorded 
by classifi cations. Numeric data may lend itself to the construction of a histogram, 
while a  Pareto chart  or simple bar chart may suffi ce for other situations. Run charts 
may show correlation with time, and scatter diagrams show correlation with critical 
parameters. Once the problem is understood with data, the  cause-and-effect diagram 
and the  why-why diagram  are effective tools for identifying possible causes of the 
problem. The  interrelationship digraph is a useful tool to help identify root causes.  
 With the root causes identifi ed, the objective of the solution-fi nding phase is to 
generate as many ideas as possible as to how to eliminate the root causes. Brainstorm-
ing clearly plays a role, but this is organized with a  how-how diagram . A concept 
selection method such as the Pugh chart (Sec. 7.5) is used to select among the various 
solutions that evolve. With the best solutions identifi ed, the pros and cons of a strategy 
for implementing them is identifi ed with the help of  force fi eld analysis . Finally, the 
specifi c steps required to implement the solution are identifi ed and written into an 
 implementation plan . Then, as a last step, the implementation plan is presented to the 
team sponsor. 
 We have outlined briefl y a problem-solving strategy that utilizes a number of tools 
that are often associated with total quality management (TQM). 1  They are useful for 
fi nding solutions to problems of a technical, business, organization, or personal nature. 
We present these problem-solving tools in the order that they would usually be used 
for a problem that might be found in an organizational setting. Then, in Example 4.1, 
we use them again to solve a technical problem. 
  Step 1. Problem Defi nition
Problem Statement .  A group of engineering honors students 2 was concerned 
that more engineering seniors were not availing themselves of the opportunity to do a 
senior research project. All engineering departments listed this as a course option, but 
only about 5 percent of the students chose this option. To properly defi ne the problem, 
the team brainstormed about the question, “Why do so few senior engineering stu-
dents choose to do a research project?” 
 Brainstorming .  Brainstorming is a group technique for generating ideas in a 
nonthreatening atmosphere. It is a group activity in which the collective creativity 
of the group is tapped and enhanced. The objective of brainstorming is to generate 
the  greatest number of alternative ideas  from the uninhibited responses of the group. 
Brainstorming is most effective when it is applied to specifi c rather than general prob-
lems. It is frequently used in the problem defi nition phase and solution-fi nding phase 
of problem solving. 
 1 .  M .  Brassard and  D .  Ritter ,  The Memory Jogger ™  II, A Pocket Guide of Tools for Continuous Im-
provement,  GOAL/QCP, Methuen, MA ,  1994 ;  N. R .  Tague ,  The Quality Toolbox,  ASQC Quality Press, 
Milwaukee, WI ,  1995 . 
  2 . The team of students making this study was Brian Gearing, Judy Goldman, Gebran Krikor, and Charnchai 
Pluempitiwiriyawej. The results of the team’s study have been modifi ed appreciably by the authors. 

128 
engineering design 
4
 There are four fundamental brainstorming principles. 
1.   Criticism is not allowed . Any attempt to analyze, reject, or evaluate ideas is 
postponed until after the brainstorming session. The idea is to create a sup-
portive environment for free-fl owing ideas. 
2.  Ideas brought forth should be picked up and built upon by the other members 
of the team. Individuals should focus only on the positive aspects of ideas pre-
sented by others. The group should attempt to create chains of mutual associa-
tions that result in a fi nal idea that no one has generated alone. All output of a 
brainstorming session is to be considered a group result. 
3.  Participants should divulge all ideas entering their minds without any con-
straint. All members of the group should agree at the outset that a seemingly 
wild and unrealistic idea may contain an essential element of the ultimate 
solution. 
4.  A key objective is to provide as many ideas as possible within a relatively 
short time. It is not unusual for a group to generate 20 to 30 ideas in a half 
hour of brainstorming. Obviously, to achieve that output the ideas are de-
scribed only roughly and without details. 
 It is helpful for a brainstorming session to have a facilitator to control the fl ow of 
ideas and to record the ideas. Start with a clear, specifi c written statement of the prob-
lem. Allow a few minutes for members to collect their thoughts, and then begin. Go 
around the group, in turn, asking for ideas. Anyone may pass, but all should be encour-
aged to contribute. Build on (piggyback on) the ideas of others. Encourage creative, 
wild, or seemingly silly notions. There is no questioning, discussion, or criticism of 
ideas. Generally the ideas build slowly, reach a point where they fl ow faster than they 
can be written down, and then fall off. When the group has exhausted all ideas, stop. A 
good format for brainstorming is to write ideas on large sticky notes and place them on 
the wall where the entire team can view them and hopefully will build upon them. This 
procedure also facilitates performing the next step in problem defi nition, the affi nity 
diagram. A variety of brainstorming in which ideas are written down without pub-
lic disclosure is called brainwriting or 6-3-5 brainstorming (www.ifm.eng.cam.ac.uk/
dng/tools/project/brainwrite.html). 
 When the student team brainstormed, they obtained the following results. 
 Problem:  Why do so few engineering seniors do a research project? 
 Students are too busy. 
 Professors do not talk up research opportunity. 
 Students are thinking about getting a job. 
 Students are thinking about getting married. 
 They are interviewing for jobs. 
 They don’t know how to select a research topic. 
 I’m not interested in research. I want to work in manufacturing. 
 I don’t know what research the professors are interested in. 
 The department does not encourage students to do research. 
 I am not sure what research entails. 

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
129
4
 It is hard to make contact with professors. 
 I have to work part-time. 
 Pay me and I’ll do research. 
 I think research is boring. 
 Lab space is hard to fi nd. 
 Faculty just use undergraduates as a pair of hands. 
 I don’t know any students doing research. 
 I haven’t seen any notices about research opportunities. 
 Will working in research help me get into grad school? 
 I would do it if it was required. 
 Affi nity Diagram .  The affi nity diagram identifi es the inherent similarity between 
items. It is used to organize ideas, facts, and opinions into natural groupings. If you 
have used sticky memo notes, a good way to start building the affi nity diagram is to 
put all of the brainstorming responses on the wall in no particular order. Each idea is 
“scrubbed,” that is each person explains what they wrote on each note so that each team 
member understands it the same way. This often identifi es more than one note with the 
same thought, or reveals cards that have more than one idea on them. If this happens, 
 additional notes are made up. Then the notes or cards are sorted into columns of loosely 
related groupings. As the nature of a grouping becomes clear, place a header card at the 
top of each column to denote its content. Also, add a column header “Other” to catch the 
outliers. If an idea keeps being moved between two groups because of disagreement as 
to where it belongs, make a duplicate and put the same idea in both groups.  
 Unlike brainstorming, building the affi nity diagram is a time for plenty of dis-
cussion so that everyone understands what is being proposed. Team members may 
be called upon to defend their idea or where it has been placed in the diagram. The 
creation of affi nity groups serves several purposes. First, it breaks a problem down 
into its major issues; subdivision of a problem is an important step toward solution. 
Second, the act of the team assembling the affi nity diagram stimulates a clear under-
standing of the ideas that were put forth hurriedly in the brainstorming session, and 
often leads to new ideas through clarifi cation or combination. It also provides an op-
portunity to abandon obviously poor or frivolous ideas.  
 The team arranged their brainstorming ideas into the following    affi nity diagram . 
Note that in the discussion a few of the ideas were judged to be not worthy of further 
consideration, but rather than drop them from the list, they have been placed in brack-
ets to indicate they have been removed from active consideration. In this way, none of 
the ideas proposed in brainstorming have been lost. 
 Time constraints 
 Students are too busy. 
 Students are interviewing for jobs. 
 I have to work part-time.  
 Faculty issues 
 Professors don’t talk up research opportunities. 
 The department does not encourage students to do research. 

130 
engineering design 
4
 It is hard to make contact with professors. 
 Faculty just use undergraduates as a pair of hands. 
 Lack of interest 
 Students are thinking about getting a job. 
 [They are thinking about getting married.] 
 I’m not interested in research. I want to work in manufacturing. 
 [Pay me and I’ll do research.] 
 I think research is boring. 
 I would do it if it was required. (2) 
 Lack of information 
 They don’t know how to select a research topic. 
 I don’t know what research the professors are interested in. 
 I’m not sure what research entails. 
 I don’t know any students doing research. 
 I haven’t seen any notices about research opportunities. 
 Will working in research help me get into graduate school?  
 Other 
 Lab space is hard to fi nd. 
 To focus more clearly on the problem defi nition, the team took the results of their 
brainstorming, as represented by the affi nity diagram, and narrowed the problem down 
to the seven issues (A through G) shown in the following table. Note that four main sub-
headings from the affi nity diagram are represented in this list, along with three issues 
from within the subheadings that the team thought were worthy of further consideration. 
Issues
Brian
Judy
Gebran
Charn
Total
   A.  Lack of readily available information about 
research topics
3
3
4
4
14
   B.  Lack of understanding of what it means to do 
research
2
5
1
8
   C.  Time constraints
5
5
   D.  Lack of a strong tradition for undergraduate 
research
0
   E.  Lack of a mandatory research course
2
2
    F.  Lack of student interest
3
3
   G.  Lack of incentives
3
2
1
2
8
 The team then practiced  list reduction  using a method called  multivoting . Each team 
member received 10 votes that they could distribute any way they wished among the 
seven issues. Note that Gebran felt strongly that time constraint was the main issue 
and placed half of his votes on this topic. The other team members distributed their 
votes more widely. From this multivoting three issues stood out—A, B, and G. 
 A second round of list reduction was conducted by simple  ranking . Each team 
member was asked to pick which of the three issues they favored (3), which was lowest 

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
131
4
in importance (1), and which was intermediate in importance (2). The results were as 
follows: 
Ideas
Brian
Judy
Gebran
Charn
Total
   A.  Lack of readily available information about 
research topics
2
1
1
2
6
   B.  Lack of understanding of what it means to 
do research
3
3
3
3
12
   C.  Lack of incentives
1
2
2
1
6
 As a result of a second round of ranking, the team of four students formed the tenta-
tive impression that a lack of understanding on the part of undergraduates about what 
it means to do research is the strongest contributor to the low participation by students 
in research projects. This is at variance with their earlier ranking. However, the two 
issues, lack of understanding of what it means to do research and lack of information 
about possible research topics are really part of a large topic of lack of information 
concerning research. Therefore, the problem statement was formulated as follows:    
 Revised Problem Statement  
The lack of information among undergraduate engineering students about what 
it means to do research, including the lack of information on specifi c research op-
portunities with faculty, is responsible for the low participation of students in elective 
research courses. 
 However, the team realized that they were but four students, whose ideas might 
be different from a wider group of engineering students. They realized that a larger 
database was needed as they went into the cause-fi nding stage of problem solving. 
 Step 2. Cause Finding 
 Survey .  One hundred surveys were distributed to senior engineering students. 
The questions were based on the A to G issues listed previously, with issue D omit-
ted. The students were asked to rank the importance of each issue on a 1–7 Likert 
scale, and they were asked whether they were interested doing a research project. Of 
the 75 surveys received from undergraduate students, a surprising 93 percent said 
they were interested in doing a research project, while 79 percent felt there was a 
lack of undergraduate involvement in research. A very similar survey was given to 
faculty. 
Pareto Chart.  The results of the survey are best displayed by a  Pareto chart . This 
is a bar chart used to prioritize causes or issues, in which the cause with the highest 
frequency of occurrence is placed at the left, followed by the cause with the next fre-
quency of occurrence, and so on. It is based on the Pareto principle, which states that 
a few causes account for most of the problem, while many other causes are relatively 
unimportant. This is often stated as the 80/20 rule, that roughly 80 percent of the prob-
lem is caused by only 20 percent of the causes, or 80 percent of the sales come from 

132 
engineering design 
4
20 percent of the customers, or 80 percent of the tax income comes from 20 percent 
of the taxpayers, etc. A Pareto chart is a way of analyzing the data that identifi es the 
 vital few in contrast to the trivial many. 
 The Pareto chart for the student ranking of the causes why they do not do re-
search is shown in Fig. 4.1. Lack of understanding of what it means to do research 
has moved to second place, to be replaced in fi rst place by “lack of information about 
research topics.” However, if one thinks about these results one would conclude that 
“no mandatory research course” is really a subset of “lack of understanding about re-
search,” so that this remains the number one cause of the problem. It is interesting that 
the Pareto chart for the faculty surveys showed lack of facilities and funding, and lack 
of incentives, in the one/two position. Otherwise the order of causes of the problem 
was about the same. Referring again to Fig. 4.1, note that this contains another piece 
of information in addition to relative importance. Plotted along the right axis is the 
cumulative percent of responses. We note that the fi rst fi ve categories (fi rst four when 
the above correction is made) contain 80 percent of the responses.  
 Cause-and-Effect Diagram.  The cause-and-effect diagram, also called the fi sh-
bone diagram (after its appearance), or the Ishikawa diagram (after its originator), is a 
powerful graphical way of identifying the factors that cause a problem. It is used after 
the team has collected data about possible causes of the problem. It is often used in 
conjunction with brainstorming to collect and organize all possible causes and con-
verge on the most probable root causes of the problem. 
 FIGURE 4.1 
 Pareto chart for average rating of reasons why undergraduate students do not do research 
projects. Based on responses from 75 students. 
Avg. Rating 1–7 scale
Percent
Pareto Chart
0
25
50
75
100
Other
8
6
4
2
0
Lack of interest
No mandatory research course
Lack of incentive
Lack of time
Understanding about research
Info about research topics
18
35
50
65
78
91
100

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
133
4
 Constructing a cause-and-effect diagram starts with writing a clear statement 
of the problem (effect) and placing it in a box to the right of the diagram. Then the 
backbone of the “fi sh” is drawn horizontally out from this box. The main categories 
of causes, “ribs of the fi sh,” are drawn at an angle to the backbone, and labeled at 
the ends. Usually these end labels are categories specifi c to the problem that come 
mainly from the headers of the affi nity diagram. Sometimes more generic categories 
such as methods, machines (equipment), materials, and people for a problem dealing 
with a production process, and policies, procedures, plant (equipment and space), 
and people for a service-related or organizational problem. Ask the team, “What 
causes this?” and record the cause, not the symptom, along one of the ribs. Dig 
deeper, and ask what causes the cause you just recorded, so the branches develop 
subbranches and the whole chart begins to look like the bones of a fi sh. A good fi sh-
bone diagram should go down three levels. In recording ideas from the brainstorm-
ing session, be succinct but use problem-oriented statements to convey the sense 
of the problem. As the diagram builds up, look for possible root causes. One way 
to identify root causes is to look for causes that appear frequently within or across 
main categories.  
 Figure 4.2 shows the cause-and-effect diagram generated by the students to un-
derstand the causes for the low student involvement in research. We note that time 
pressures caused by heavy course loads and necessity to work part-time are one possi-
ble root cause, while others center around the lack of understanding of students about 
what it means to do research and the lack of appreciation by faculty of student interest 
in doing research.  
 FIGURE 4.2 
 Cause-and-effect diagram for lack of undergraduate student involvement in research. 
Note: Most third level causes are omitted in this diagram for clarity. 
Lack of time
Lack of incentives
Heavy course load
Need to work
Big social life
Depts. not organized
to get out information
Faculty does not
understand student interest
Many students not interested
Lack of info.
on research topics
Don't know about
student interest
Little faculty push
No course in how to do research
Few students
doing research
Little understanding
about research
Lack of mandatory research
Lack of
undergraduate
involvement
in research
Fun
Many students
work part-time
Lack of lab
space/funding
Don't understand
benefits

134 
engineering design 
4
 Why-Why Diagram.  To delve deeper into root causes, we turn to the why-why 
diagram. The why-why diagram can be used as an alternative to the cause-and effect 
diagram, but more commonly it is used to dig deeper about one of the more likely root 
causes. This is a tree diagram, which starts with the problem and asks, “Why does 
this problem exist?” in order to develop a tree with a few main branches and several 
smaller branches. The team continues to grow the tree by repeatedly asking “why” 
until patterns begin to show up. Root causes are identifi ed by causes that begin to 
repeat themselves on several branches of the why-why tree. The why-why diagram 
should extend to four levels, counting the problem statement as the fi rst level. 
 The Pareto chart, when reinterpreted, shows that student lack of understanding 
about research was the most important cause of low student participation in research. 
The cause-and-effect diagram also shows this as a possible root cause. To dig deeper 
we construct the why-why diagram shown in Fig. 4.3. This begins with the clear state-
ment of the problem. The lack of understanding about research on the part of the 
undergraduates is two-sided: the faculty doesn’t communicate with the students about 
opportunities, and the students don’t show initiative to fi nd out about it. The team, in 
asking why, came up with three substantial reasons. Again, they asked why, about 
each of these three causes, and asking why yet a third time builds up a tree of causes. 
 FIGURE 4.3 
 Why-why diagram for lack of student understanding about research. 
Lack of
understanding
about research
Lack of active learning 
in classroom
Information explosion
Faculty don't
communicate
to students about
research
No courses
for students
on research
Lack of incentives
for faculty to
involve students
Strong emphasis on
research with
grad students
Crowded syllabus
leaves little time
for faculty to
discuss research
Grad students available to do
research for several years
Grad students important to
turning out research
Engr. curriculum 133 credits
Information explosion
Faculty does not
perceive a need
Crowded curriculum
Students overloaded
Students do not ask for
such a course
Little institutional support
Faculty not actively
seeking funds
Does not count much
toward teaching load
Lack of funds

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
135
4
At this stage we begin to see patterns of causes appearing in different branches of the 
tree—a sign that these are possible root causes. These are: 
 
● Students and curriculum are overloaded. 
 
● The information explosion is a major cause of the above. 
 
● The faculty doesn’t perceive a need to provide information about research. 
 
● The faculty perceive a low student interest in doing research. 
 
● A lack of resources, funding, and space limits faculty involvement in under-
graduate research. 
 Narrowing down this set of causes to fi nd the root cause is the job of the next tool.  
 Interrelationship Digraph .  This is a tool that explores the cause-and-effect re-
lationships among issues and identifi es the root causes. Start with a clear statement 
of the problem. The causes that you examine with the IR digraph will be suggested 
by common issues appearing in the fi shbone or why-why diagram, or that are clearly 
defi ned by the team as being important. Generally try to limit the possible root causes 
to six. The  possible root causes are laid out in a large circular pattern (Fig. 4.4). The 
cause and infl uence relationships are  identifi ed by the team between each cause or 
factor in turn. Starting with A we ask whether a causal relationship exists between 
A and B, and if so, whether the direction is stronger from A to B or B to A. If the 
causal relationship is stronger from B to A, then we draw an arrow in that direction. 
Next we explore the relationship between A and C, A and D, etc., in turn, until causal 
relationships have been explored between all of the factors. Note that there will not be 
a causal relationship between all factors. For each cause or factor, the number of ar-
rows going in and coming out should be recorded. A high number of outgoing arrows 
indicates the cause or factor is a root cause or driver. A factor with a high number 
of incoming arrows indicates that it is a key indicator and should be monitored as a 
measure of improvement. To aid in making good decisions about relationships, write 
a defi ning sentence or statement about each possible root cause. Usually short one- or 
two-word statements are not specifi c enough and lead to fuzzy decisions as to whether 
a relationship exists between a pair of causes. 
 FIGURE 4.4 
 Interrelationship digraph to identify root causes from why-why diagram (Fig. 4.3). 
A
B
A - Student/curriculum overload
B - Information explosion
C - Faculty don’t perceive
        a need for information
D - Faculty perceive low student
        interest in research
E - Lack of funding/space for
        undergraduate research
In
1
0
2
1
1
C
D
E
Out
2
1
0
2
0

136 
engineering design 
4
 In Fig. 4.4, the root causes are the overloaded students and curriculum, and the 
fact that the faculty perceive that there is a low undergraduate student interest in doing 
research. The key input is that the faculty do not perceive a need to supply information 
on research to the undergraduates. Solutions to the problem should then focus on ways 
of reducing student overload and developing a better understanding of the student in-
terest in doing research. It was decided that reducing student overload had to precede 
any efforts to change faculty minds that students are not interested in doing research.  
 Step 3. Solution Planning and Implementation 
 While this is the third of three phases in the problem-solving process, it does not 
consume one-third of the time in the problem-solving process. This is because, having 
identifi ed the true problem and the root causes, we now are most of the way home to 
a solution. The objective of solution fi nding is to generate as many ideas as possible 
on “how” to eliminate the root causes and to converge on the best solution. To do this 
we fi rst employ brainstorming and then use multivoting or other evaluation methods 
to arrive at the best solution. The concept-selection method and other evaluation meth-
ods are discussed in Chap. 7. 
 How-How Diagram .  A useful technique for suggesting solutions is the how-how 
diagram. Like the why-why diagram, the how-how diagram is a tree diagram, but it 
starts with a proposed solution and asks the question, “How do we do that?” The how-
how diagram is best used after brainstorming has generated a set of solutions and an 
evaluation method has narrowed them to a small set. 
 A how-how diagram is constructed for the question, “How can we reduce the over-
load on students?” Brainstorming and multivoting had shown the main issues to be: 
 
● Curriculum reform 
 
● Student time management 
 
● Student and faculty fi nancial issues 
 Specifi c solutions that would lead to improvements in each of these areas are recorded 
in Fig. 4.5. Study of the fi rst level of solutions—curriculum reform, helping students 
improve time management skills, and fi nancial issues—showed that the only broad 
solution that would reduce student overload was curriculum reform.  
 Force Field Analysis .  Force fi eld analysis is a technique that identifi es those 
forces that both help (drive) and hinder (restrain) the implementation of the solution 
of a problem. In effect, it is a chart of the pros and cons of a solution, and as such, it 
helps in developing strategies for implementation of the solution. This forces team 
members to think together about all the aspects of making the desired change a per-
manent change, and it encourages honest refl ection on the root causes of the problem 
and its solution. Fortunately, the force fi eld analysis, Fig. 4.6, showed that the college 
and higher education environments were favorable toward changing the curriculum. 
 The fi rst step in constructing the force fi eld diagram (Fig. 4.6) is to draw a large T. 
At the top of the T, write a description of the problem that is being addressed. To the 
far right of the T, write a description of the ideal solution that we would like to achieve. 
Participants then list forces (internal and external) that are driving the organization 

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
137
4
 FIGURE 4.5 
 How-how diagram for problem of reducing student overload, so more students will be able to 
engage in research projects. 
Reduce
student
overload
More students supported on sponsored research
Time management
Financial issues
Curriculum reform
Find ways to supplement scholarships
Seek NSF funding for student research
Seek corporate funding for projects
Better adjust workload per semester
Make time mgt. software available
Teach time mgt. in ENES 100
Offer a research seminar by grad students
Offer a “research” course
More active learning
Reduce credits for BS degree
 FIGURE 4.6 
 Force fi eld diagram for implementing solutions to reducing student overload. 
National movement of reform
among engineering schools
Competitive student recruiting
Engr. accred. agency
State Board of Higher Ed.
Dean and dept. chairs
Enlightened faculty
Resistance to change
A prolonged administrative
process
Some industry employers
Entrenched faculty
Driving Forces
Restraining Forces
Reduce student overload
to permit greater
research involvement
Produce
curriculum
reform

138 
engineering design 
4
toward the solution on the left side of the vertical line. The forces that are restraining 
movement toward the ideal solution are listed on the right side of the vertical line. 
Often it is important to prioritize the driving forces that should be strengthened to 
achieve the most movement toward the ideal solution state. Also, identify the restrain-
ing forces that would allow the most movement toward the goal if they were removed. 
This last step is important, because change is more often achieved by removing barri-
ers than by simply pushing the positive factors for change. 
 Figure 4.6 shows that the key to achieving the needed curriculum reform is to 
bring aboard some recalcitrant faculty, with help from the dean and departmental 
chairs. The change process should be expected to be administratively protracted, but 
doable. 
 Implementation Plan.  The problem-solving process should end with the de-
velopment of specifi c actions to implement the solution. In doing this, think hard 
about maximizing the driving forces and minimizing the restraining forces shown in 
Fig. 4.6. The implementation plan takes the specifi c actions listed on the how-how dia-
gram and lists the specifi c steps, in the order that must be taken. It also assigns respon-
sibility to each task and gives a required completion date. The implementation plan 
also gives an estimate of the resources (money, people, facilities, material) required to 
carry out the solution. In addition, it prescribes what level of review and frequency of 
review of the solution implementation will be followed. A fi nal, but a very important 
part of the plan, is to list the metrics that will measure a successful completion of 
the plan. 
 The implementation plan for reducing the overload on the students by introducing 
a new curriculum is shown in Fig. 4.7. A Curriculum Action Team was established by 
the dean, with representation from both faculty and undergraduate students. The team 
leader was a distinguished faculty member who was recognized widely throughout the 
College for both his research and educational contributions. Several activities were 
created to involve the entire faculty: a day of learning about active learning methods 
and seminar speakers from other universities that had recently made major curricu-
lum changes. A seminar course was developed by graduate students to acquaint un-
dergraduate students with the research process and opportunities for research. Careful 
attention was given to due process so that all constituencies were involved. One such 
group was the Industry Advisory Councils of each department and the College. 
 Epilogue.  This was not just an isolated student exercise. Over the next three 
years the number of credits for a BS degree was reduced from 133 to 122 credits in 
all engineering programs. Most of them adopted active learning modes of instruction. 
A major corporate grant was received to support undergraduate student projects, and 
many faculty included undergraduates in their research proposals. The level of student 
participation in research projects doubled. 
 It is important to understand how a structured problem-solving process led to an 
understanding of the problem and its solution that was much different from that origi-
nally perceived. Both the team brainstorming and student surveys viewed the cause 
of the problem as lack of information about the process of doing research and about 
actual areas in which research could be conducted. Yet the root cause analysis pointed 

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
139
4
 FIGURE 4.7 
 Implementation plan for creating curriculum reform. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
Date:8/10/00
PROBLEM STATEMENT:  Increase the undergraduate student participation in research.
PROPOSED SOLUTION: Create an action team of faculty and students within the college to produce major
curriculum reform, to include reduction of credits for the BS degree from 133 to 123 credits, more teaching by
active learning, and more opportunity for undergraduate students to do research.
 
SPECIFIC STEPS:
Completion
date
Responsibility
9/30/00
10/30/00
11/15/00
11/26/00
11/30/00
1/15/01
1/30/01
5/15/01
5/15/01
6/2/01
9/15/01
10/15/01
11/15/01
2/20/02
9/1/02
Dean
Dean
Team
Dean/Team
Team
Team
Dept. Chairs
Team
Team
Dean/Team
Curric. Com.
Dept. Chairs
Dean
Dean/Chairs
RESOURCES REQUIRED
Budget: $15,000. Speakers for Day of Learning
People: None additional; redirection of priorities is needed.
Facilities: Reserve Dean’s Conference Room, each month, 1st and 3rd Wed, 3-5 pm.
Materials: Covered in budget above.
REVIEWS REQUIRED
Monthly meeting between team leader and Dean.
MEASURES OF SUCCESSFUL PROJECT ACHIEVEMENT
Reduction in credits for BS degree from 133 to 123 credits.
Increase in number of undergraduates doing research project from 8% to 20%.
Increase in number of engineering students graduating in 4 years.
Increase in number of undergraduates going to graduate school.
.
1. Create curriculum reform action team
2. Discuss issues with Faculty Council/Dept. Chairs
3. Hold discussion with dept. faculty
4. Discuss with College Industrial Advisory Council
5. Discuss with Student Council
6. Day of learning about active learning
7. Dept. curriculum committees begin work
8. Teach “research course” as honors seminar
9. Organize “research seminar ,” taught by grad students
10. Preliminary reports by  dept. curriculum committees
11. Fine-tuning of curriculum changes
12. Faculty votes on curriculum
13. Submittal of curriculum to Univ. Senate
14. Vote on curriculum by Univ. Senate 
15. Implementation of new curriculum
to the underlying cause being the crowded curriculum with students too overloaded 
to think about becoming involved in a research project. The ultimate solution was 
a completely new curriculum that reduced the number of total credits and required 
courses, introduced more opportunities for elective courses, and emphasized active 
learning by providing “studio hours” for most required courses. 
 4.6.1 Applying the Problem-Solving Tools in Design 
 The problem-solving tools described previously are very useful in design, but they 
are applied in a somewhat different way. Customer interviews and surveys are im-
portant in both business and design environments. In engineering design the prob-
lem defi nition step is often much more tightly prescribed and less open-ended, but 

140 
engineering design 
4
achieving full understanding of the problem requires using some specifi c tools like 
Quality Function Deployment (QFD), as described in Chap. 3. In design the full suite 
of problem-solving tools are rarely used from problem defi nition to problem solution. 
Brainstorming is used extensively in developing design concepts (Chap. 6), but the af-
fi nity diagram could be used to more advantage than it normally is. The cause-fi nding 
tools are becoming more frequently used to improve the quality of products by seek-
ing out the root causes of defects (Chap. 14). This is shown in Example 4.1. 
 E X A M P L E 4 .1 
 Early prototype testing of a new game box with a selected group of energetic 10-year-olds 
revealed that in 20 out of 100 units the indicator light failed to function after three weeks 
of active use.  
 Problem  Defi nition:   The indicator light on the SKX-7 game box does not have the 
required durability to perform its function. 
 The nature of the failures could be characterized as either a poorly made solder joint, 
a break in the wiring to the bulb, a loose socket, or excessive current passing through the 
fi lament. These results are displayed in Fig. 4.8 as a Pareto chart.  
 Cause Finding 
 The Pareto chart points to faulty solder joints as the chief cause of failure. There is 
a high degree of confi dence that the issue of excessive current will be readily fi xed when 
the electronic circuits are redesigned. This is scheduled for next week. 
 The indicator light is but one of many components included on a printed circuit board 
(PCB), also called a card, that is the heart of the game box. If the simple light circuit is fail-
ing then there is concern that more critical circuits may fail with time due to solder defects. 
This calls for a detailed root cause investigation of the process by which the PCBs are made. 
 A printed circuit board (PCB) is a reinforced plastic board laminated with copper. 
Electronic components such as integrated circuit (IC) chips, resistors, and capacitors are 
placed at specifi ed positions on the board and connected with a pathway of copper. The 
 FIGURE 4.8 
 Pareto chart for the general issues with the failure of the indicator light to function. 
FREQUENCY OF
OCCURRENCE
WIRE BROKEN
LOOSE SOCKET
EXCESSIVE CURRENT
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
SOLDER JOINT FLAW

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
141
4
circuit path is produced by silk screen printing a layer of acid-resistant ink where the 
wires are to go, and then acid etching away the rest of the copper layer. The components 
are connected to the copper circuit by soldering. 
 Soldering is a process by which two metals are joined using a low-melting-point 
alloy. Traditionally lead-tin alloys have been used for soldering copper wires, but because 
lead is toxic it is being replaced by tin-silver and tin-bismuth alloys. Solder is applied as a 
paste consisting of particles of metallic solder held together in a plastic binder. The solder 
paste also contains fl uxing and wetting agents. The fl ux acts to remove any oxide or grease 
on the metal surfaces to be joined and the wetting agent lowers the surface tension so the 
molten solder spreads out over the surface to be joined. The solder paste is applied to the 
desired locations on the PCB by forcing it through a screen with a squeegee action. To 
control the height of the solder pad or ball, the distance between the screen and the PCB 
surface (standoff) must be accurately controlled. 
 Flowchart.  A fl owchart is a map of all of the steps involved in a process or a par-
ticular segment of a process. Flowcharting is an important tool to use in the early steps 
of cause fi nding because the chart quickly allows the team to understand all of the steps 
that can infl uence the causes of the problem. A fl owchart for the refl ow soldering process 
is shown in Fig. 4.9.  
 The symbols in the fl owchart have particular meaning. The input and output to the 
process are placed inside the ovals. A rectangle is used to show a task or activity performed 
in the process. Decision points are shown by diamonds. Typically these are points where a 
yes or no decision must be made. The direction of fl ow in the process is shown with arrows. 
 The fl owchart shows that after the solder and components have been placed the PCB 
is put in an oven and carefully heated. The fi rst step is to drive off any solvents and to 
 FIGURE 4.9 
 A simplifi ed fl owchart for the refl ow soldering process. 
PLACE BOARD IN
REFLOW OVEN
PREHEAT 100 C
ACTIVATE FLEX
RAISE TEMP TO
MELT SOLDER
TO REWORK
STATION
NO
YES
SHIP BOARD
DOES
BOARD PASS
INSPECTION?
CLEAN
BOARD
COOL, OVEN TO
SOLIDIFY SOLDER
ARE
COMPONENTS
PLACED
CORRECTLY?
YES
NO
SCREEN PRINT
SOLDER PASTE
PLACE
COMPONENTS
ON BOARD
INPUT
CIRCUIT BOARD

142 
engineering design 
4
activate the fl uxing reaction. Then the temperature is increased to just above the melting 
point of the solder where it melts and wets the leads of the components. Finally the assem-
bly is cooled slowly to room temperature to prevent generating stresses due to differential 
thermal contraction of the components. The last step is to carefully clean the PCB of any 
fl ux residue, and the board is inspected visually for defects. 
 Cause-and-Effect Diagram: 
 The cause-and-effect diagram provides a visual way to organize and display the pos-
sible causes for bad solder joints, Fig. 4.10. Five generic causes for bad solder joints are 
shown in the rectangles, and more detailed reasons for these causes of defective joints 
are given by the lines feeding into these major “bones.” We now look at this level of the 
diagram to identify possible root causes. Not providing enough solder paste to the joint is 
a broad generic cause that involves such possible root causes as using the wrong grade of 
paste or old paste that is approaching the end of its shelf life. Other issues have to do with 
the design or application of the screen (stencil) through which the paste gets on the PCB. 
Failure of the solder to adequately wet the leads of the component (dewetting) is a failure 
of the fl ux and wetting agent to perform their function, which ties in again with using the 
wrong solder paste. Tombstoning is a defect in PCB manufacture where instead of a com-
ponent lying fl at on the board it moves upright when going through the soldering process. 
As shown in Fig. 4.10, this is caused by lack of uniformity of temperature or stress or is-
sues with the alignment of the stencil. Tombstoning is apparent on fi nal inspection of the 
PCB. Since it was not observed, it was not considered further as a possible root cause. A 
cold joint occurs when the solder does not make good contact with the component lead 
or the solder pad on the PCB. This can occur when movement occurs before the solder 
 FIGURE 4.10 
 Cause-and-effect diagram for the production of fl awed solder joints. 
DEWETTING
STANDOFF
TOO HIGH
INSUFFICIENT
SOLDER PASTE
PAD TOO SMALL
POOR DESIGN
WRONG SOLDER
BALL SIZE
POOR BINDER
SELECTION
POOR STENCIL
DESIGN
PASTE TOO
VISCOUS
WRONG HOLE SIZE
POOR STENCIL
ALIGNMENT
BAD SOLDER
JOINT
POOR
STENCIL
CLEANING
POOR DESIGN
OF COMPONENT
INSUFFICIENT
FLUX
LEADS POORLY
FORMED
CORRODED PAD
POOR BOARD
PRECLEANING
POOR BOARD
CLEANING
RESIDUAL STRESS
IN LEADS
COOLING TOO SLOW
UNEVEN HEATING
SIDE TO SIDE
NON-UNIFORM
PASTE
VIBRATION WHILE
SOLIDIFYING
COLD JOINT
TOMBSTONING
POOR STENCIL
ALIGNMENT
POOR STENCIL
CLEANING
POOR PASTE
DISTRIBUTION

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
143
4
is completely cooled or when vibration occurs. Improper maintenance of the soldering 
machine can cause vibrations.  
 Interrelationship Digraph.   The interrelationship digraph, Fig. 4.11, is helpful in 
reducing the number of possible root causes. By examining Fig. 4.10, the following list 
of possible root causes was developed. In developing this list, be as explicit as you can in 
writing each possible cause, so that there is no misunderstanding among team members 
as to what is intended.  
 FIGURE 4.11 
 Interrelationship digraph used to reduce the possible root causes to a single root cause. 
A
F
E
D
B
C
Possible Root Causes
Arrows In
Arrows Out
A  Poor design of component leads, or errors in fabri-
cation of leads
0
0
B  Improper board cleaning
2
0
C  Solder paste used beyond its shelf life
1
2
D  Incorrect selection of paste (solder/binder/fl ux 
mixture)
0
3
Root cause
E  Poor operation or maintenance of refl ow soldering 
machine
1
0
F  Design or maintenance of stencil
2
0
 As described earlier, each combination of possible causes is examined to asking the ques-
tion, “Is there a relationship between the two causes, and if so, which cause is the driver of the 
problem?” In this way, Fig. 4.11 was completed. The root cause is the possible cause with the 
greatest number of arrows directed out from it, that is, it is driving the greatest number of other 
causes. The root cause was found to be incorrect selection of the solder paste. This is not a 
surprising result given that new technology with nonleaded solder was being used.  
 Solution Finding and Implementation 
 Finding a solution in this case does not depend on brainstorming so much as on care-
ful engineering application of well-known practices. The how-how diagram is useful in 
organizing the information needed to achieve a good solution. 
 How-How Diagram .  The how-how diagram is a tree diagram that starts with the 
problem requiring a solution. The how-how diagram is fi lled out by repeatedly asking the 

144 
engineering design 
4
question, “How can we achieve this?” Figure 4.12 shows the how-how diagram. It serves 
as a visual checklist for proper selection of solder paste for a given application. 
 The two remaining tools in the problem-solving suite of tools, force fi eld analysis and 
implementation planning, could be developed in the way described earlier in this section. 
In a design or manufacturing environment, often the process stops with fi nding a good 
workable solution. The busy engineer is off to solve another problem.  
 4.7 
 TIME MANAGEMENT 
 Time is an invaluable and irreplaceable commodity. You will never recover the hour 
you squandered last Tuesday. All surveys of young engineers making an adjustment 
to the world of work point to personal time management as an area that requires in-
creased attention. The chief difference between time management in college and as 
a practicing engineer is that time management in the world of work is less repetitive 
and predictable than when you are in college. For instance, you are not always doing 
the same thing at the same time of the day as you do when you are taking classes as a 
college student. If you have not done so, you need to develop a personal time manage-
ment system that is compatible with the more erratic time dimension of professional 
practice. Remember, effectiveness is doing the right things, but effi ciency is doing 
those things the right way, in the shortest possible time. 
 An effective time management system is vital to help you focus on your long-term 
and short-term goals. It helps you distinguish urgent tasks from important tasks. It is 
 FIGURE 4.12 
 The development of the solution steps with the how-how diagram. 
DETERMINE
EXPECTED RATE
OF USAGE
MEET SLUMP
RESISTANCE
CRITERION
PROVIDE
REQUIRED
PRINTING SPEED
USE
MANUFACTURER’S
DATA SHEETS
AVOID
INCORRECT
SELECTION OF
SOLDER PASTE
CHECK ON
NECESSARY
SHELF LIFE
KEEP
VISCOSITY
WITHIN LIMITS
ENSURE FLUX
ACTIVATION
AND MELT
RANGE ARE
COMPATIBLE
MATCH FLUX
WITH CLEANING
EQUIPMENT

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
145
4
the only means of gaining free time for yourself. Each of you will have to work out a 
time management system for yourself. The following are some time-tested points to 
achieve it: 1 
 Find a place for everything. This means you should have a place for the tools of 
your profession (books, reports, data fi les, research papers, software manuals, 
etc.). It means that you need to develop a fi ling system and to have the persever-
ance to use it. It does not mean that you need to keep every piece of paper that 
passes through your hands. 
 Schedule your work. You do not need to have an elaborate computerized schedul-
ing system, but you need a scheduling system. Professor David Goldberg sug-
gests you need three things: (1) a monthly calendar to keep track of day-to-day 
and future appointments and commitments; (2) a diary to keep track of who 
you talked with and what you did (this can often be combined with a lab note-
book), and (3) a to-do list. His system for this is as simple as an 8½  11-inch 
lined pad of paper. All tasks are rated as either To-Do (needed in the next two 
weeks) or Pending (those tasks two weeks out or “would be nice to do”). 
 It works like this: Every morning create a list of activities for the day. It 
may contain meetings or classes you must attend, e-mails you need to send, and 
people you need to talk with. When you complete a task, celebrate silently and 
cross it off the list. The next morning review the previous day and make a new 
list of the current day’s activities. At the beginning of each week, make a new 
sheet updating the to-do and pending lists. 
 Stay current with the little stuff. Learn to quickly decide between the big items 
and the small stuff. Be cognizant of the 80/20 rule that 80 percent of your posi-
tive results will come from the vital 20 percent of your activities, the urgent and 
important. Big items, such as reports or design reviews, go on the pending list 
and time is set aside to give these major tasks the thoughtful preparation they 
require. With the small stuff that is too important to throw away or ignore but 
is not really major, learn to deal with it as soon as it gets to you. If you don’t let 
the small stuff pile up, it allows you to keep a clearer calendar for when the big, 
important jobs need your undivided attention.  
 Learn to say no. This takes some experience to accomplish, especially for the 
new employee who does not want to get a reputation of being uncooperative. 
However, there is no reason you should volunteer for every guided tour or char-
ity drive, spend time with every salesperson who cold calls on you, or interview 
every potential hire unless they are in your area of specialization. And—be 
ruthless with junk mail. 
 Find the sweet spot and use it. Identify your best time of day, in terms of energy 
level and creative activity, and try to schedule your most challenging tasks for 
that time period. Conversely, group more routine tasks like returning phone 
calls or writing simple memos into periods of common activity for more effi -
cient performance. Occasionally make appointments with yourself to refl ect on 
your work habits and think creatively about your future. 
 1 . Adapted from  D. E .  Goldberg ,  Life Skills and Leadership for Engineers,  McGraw-Hill, New York ,  1995 . 

146 
engineering design 
4
 4.8 
 PLANNING AND SCHEDULING 
 It is an old business axiom that time is money. Therefore, planning future events and 
scheduling them so they are accomplished with a minimum of delay is an impor-
tant part of the engineering design process. For large construction and manufactur-
ing projects, detailed planning and scheduling is a must. Computer-based methods 
for handling the large volume of information that accompanies such projects have 
become commonplace. However, engineering design projects of all magnitudes can 
benefi t greatly from the simple planning and scheduling techniques discussed in this 
chapter. 
 One of the most common criticisms leveled at young graduate engineers is that 
they overemphasize the technical perfection of the design and show too little concern 
for completing the design on time and below the estimated cost. Therefore, the plan-
ning and scheduling tools presented in this chapter are decidedly worth your attention. 
 In the context of engineering design,  planning  consists of identifying the key ac-
tivities in a project and ordering them in the sequence in which they should be per-
formed.  Scheduling consists of putting the plan into the time frame of the calendar. 
The major decisions that are made over the life cycle of a project fall into four areas: 
performance, time, cost, and risk. 
 
●  Performance : The design must possess an acceptable level of operational capability 
or the resources expended on it will be wasted. The design process must generate sat-
isfactory specifi cations to test the performance of prototypes and production units. 
 
●  Time : In the early phases of a project the emphasis is on accurately estimating the 
length of time required to accomplish the various tasks and scheduling to ensure 
that suffi cient time is available to complete those tasks. In the production phase the 
time parameter becomes focused on setting and meeting production rates, and in 
the operational phase it focuses on reliability, maintenance, and resupply. 
 
●  Cost : The importance of cost in determining what is feasible in an engineering 
design has been emphasized in earlier chapters. Keeping costs and resources within 
approved limits is one of the chief functions of the project manager.   
 
●  Risk : Risks are inherent in anything new. Acceptable levels of risk must be estab-
lished for the parameters of performance, time, and cost, and they must be moni-
tored throughout the project. The subject of risk is considered in Chap. 14. 
 4.8.1 Work Breakdown Structure 
 A  work breakdown structure  (WBS) is a tool used to divide a project into manageable 
segments to ensure that the complete scope of work is understood. The WBS lists the 
tasks that need to be done. Preferably, these are expressed as  outcomes (deliverables) 
instead of planned  actions . Outcomes are used instead of actions because they are 
easier to predict accurately at the beginning of a project. Also, specifying outcomes 
rather than actions leaves room for ingenuity in delivering results. Table 4.4 shows the 
WBS for a project to develop a small home appliance.  

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
147
4
 This work breakdown structure has been developed at three levels: (1) the over-
all project objective, (2) the design project phases, and (3) the expected outcomes in 
each design phase. For large, complicated projects the work breakdown may be taken 
to one or two more levels of detail. When taken to this extreme level of detail the 
document, called a  scope of work,  will be a thick report with a narrative paragraph 
 TABLE 4.4 
Work Breakdown Structure for the Development of a Small Appliance
1.0 Development Process for Appliance
Time (Person Weeks)
 1.1 Product specifi cation 
 1.1.1 Identify customer needs (market surveys, QFD)
4
 1.1.2 Conduct benchmarking
2
 1.1.3 Establish and approve product design specifi cations (PDS)
2
 1.2 Concept generation 
 1.2.1 Develop alternative concepts
8
 1.2.2 Select most suitable concept
2
 1.3 Embodiment design 
 1.3.1 Determine product architecture
2
 1.3.2 Complete part confi gurations
5
 1.3.3 Select materials. Analyze for design for manufacture & assembly
2
 1.3.4 Design for robustness for CTQ requirements
4
 1.3.5 Analyze for reliability and failure with FMEA and root cause analysis
2
 1.4 Detail design 
 1.4.1 Integration check of subsystems; tolerance analysis
4
 1.4.2 Finish detail drawings and bill of materials
6
 1.4.3 Prototype test results
8
 1.4.4 Correct product defi ciencies
4
 1.5 Production 
 1.5.1 Design production system
15
 1.5.2 Design tooling
20
 1.5.3 Procure tooling
18
 1.5.4 Make fi nal adjustments to tooling
6
 1.5.5 Make pilot manufacturing run
2
 1.5.6 Complete distribution strategy
8
 1.5.7 Ramp-up to full production
16
 1.5.8 Ongoing product production
20
 1.6 Life cycle tracking 
Ongoing
 TOTAL TIME (if done sequentially) 
160

148 
engineering design 
4
describing the work to be done. Note that the estimated time for achieving each out-
come is given in terms of person weeks. Two persons working for an elapsed time of 
two weeks equals four person weeks. 
 4.8.2 Gantt Chart 
 The simplest and most widely used scheduling tool is the  Gantt chart,  Fig. 4.13. 
The tasks needed to complete the project are listed sequentially in the vertical axis 
and the estimated time to accomplish the task are shown along the horizontal axis. 
The time estimates are made by the development team using their collective experi-
ence. In some areas like construction and manufacturing there are databases that can 
be accessed through handbooks or scheduling and cost estimation software.  
 The horizontal bars represent the estimated time to complete the task and pro-
duce the required deliverable. The left end of the bar represents the time when the 
task is scheduled to start; the right end of the bar represents the expected date of 
completion. The vertical dashed line at the beginning of week 20 indicates the cur-
rent date. Tasks that have been completed are shown in black. Those yet to be com-
pleted are in gray. The black cell for task 1.3.2 indicates that the team is ahead of 
schedule and already working on designing part confi gurations. Most of the schedule 
is sequential, showing that there is not much use of concurrent engineering principles 
in this design team. However, the tasks of selecting materials and performing design 
for manufacturing activities are started before task 1.3.2 is scheduled for completion. 
The symbol ▲ indicates  milestone  events . These are design reviews, scheduled to 
take place when the product design specifi cation (PDS) and conceptual design are 
fi nished. 
 A defi ciency of the Gantt chart is that succeeding tasks are not readily related to 
preceding tasks. For example, it is not apparent what effects a delay in a preceding 
task will have on the succeeding tasks and the overall project completion date. 
 FIGURE 4.13 
 Gantt chart for the fi rst three phases of the work breakdown structure in Table 4.4. 
1.1.1
1.1
TASKS
Time in 2-Week Increments
1.2
1.3
1.1.2
1.1.3
1.2.1
1.2.2
1.3.1
1.3.2
1.3.3
1.3.4
1.3.5

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
149
4
 E X A M P L E 4 . 2 
 The  project objective  of a development team is to install a prototype of a new design of 
heat transfer tubes in an existing shell and determine the performance of the new tube 
bundle design. The Gantt chart is shown in Fig. 4.14. Note that the process proceeds along 
two paths: (1) remove the internals from the shell and install the new tubes, and (2) install 
the wiring and instrumentation.  
 The dependence of one task on another can be shown by a network logic diagram 
like Fig. 4.15. This diagram clearly shows the precedence relationships, but it loses the 
strong correspondence with time that the Gantt chart displays.  
 The longest path through the project from start to end of testing can be found from 
inspection. This is called the  network critical path . From Fig. 4.15 it is the 20 weeks re-
quired to traverse the path  a-b-c-d-e-f-g . The critical path is shown on the modifi ed Gantt 
chart, at the bottom, Fig. 4.16. On this fi gure the parts of the schedule that have slack 
time are shown dashed.  Slack is the amount of time by which an activity can exceed its 
estimated duration before failure to complete the activity becomes critical. For example, 
for the activities of installing heaters, there is a seven-week slack before the activities must 
be completed to proceed with the leak testing. Thus, the identifi cation of the longest path 
focuses attention on the activities that must be given special management attention, for any 
delay in those activities would critically lengthen the project. Conversely, identifi cation of 
activities with slack indicates the activities in which some natural slippage can occur with-
out serious consequences. This, of course, is not license to ignore the activities with slack. 
 FIGURE 4.14 
 Gantt chart for prototype testing a heat exchanger. 
Remove
internals
Activity
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Week number
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Construct
supports
Install
new tubes
Leak test
Insulate
Test at
temperature
Install
external wiring
Install
internal wiring
Install
heaters
Install
thermocouples
Calibrate T/C

150 
engineering design 
4
 4.8.3 Critical Path Method 
 The critical path method (CPM) is a graphical network diagram that focuses on iden-
tifying the potential bottlenecks in a project schedule. While it was relatively easy 
to identify the critical path in a simple network like Fig. 4.15, most construction or 
product development projects are very complex and require a systematic method 
 FIGURE 4.15 
 Network logic diagram for heat exchanger prototyping tests. 
4
3
3
5
Install external wiring
Check and calibrate T/C
Install
internal wiring
Install
thermocouples
3 wks.
Start
Remove
internals
Construct
supports 4 wks.
Leak test
Install
new tubes
6 wks.
3
2
2
Insulate
Finish
Test at
temperature
3
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
Install
heaters
 FIGURE 4.16 
 Modifi ed Gantt chart for heat exchanger prototype tests. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
Week number
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Insulate
Test at
temperature
Install 
external wiring
Install 
internal wiring
Install 
heaters
Remove
internals
Construct
supports
Install
new tubes
Leak
test
Calibrate
T/C
Install T/C

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
151
4
of analysis like CPM. The basic tool of CPM is an arrow network diagram similar to 
Fig. 4.15. The chief defi nitions and rules for constructing this diagram are: 
 
●  An  activity  is a time-consuming effort that is required to perform part of a project. 
An activity is shown on an arrow diagram by a directed line segment with an ar-
rowhead pointing in the direction of progress in completion of the project. 
 
●  An  event is the end of one activity and the beginning of another. An event is a point 
of accomplishment and/or decision. However, an event is assumed to consume no 
time. A circle is used to designate an event. Every activity in a CPM diagram is 
separated by two events. 
 There are several logic restrictions to constructing the network diagram. 
1.  An activity cannot be started until its tail event is reached. Thus, if A
B 
activity B cannot begin until activity A has been completed. Similarly, if 
C
D
E activities D and E cannot begin until activity C has been completed. 
2.  An event cannot be reached until all activities leading to it are complete. If 
F
H
G
 activities F and G must precede H. 
3.  Sometimes an event is dependent on another even preceding it, even though the 
two events are not linked together by an activity. In CPM we record that situation 
by introducing a dummy activity, denoted 
 . A  dummy activity  requires zero 
time and has zero cost. Consider two examples:  
A
C
B
D
Activities A and B must both be completed 
before Activity D, but Activity C depends 
only on A and is independent of Activity B.
D
B
A
C
E
F
4
3
2
1
0
5
Activities A must precede both B and C. 
B must precede D and E.
C must precede E. 
D and E must precede F.
 To develop a methodology for fi nding the longest path or paths through the net-
work (the critical path) requires defi ning some additional parameters. 
 
●  Duration  (D): The  duration of an activity  is the estimated time to complete the 
activity. 
 
●  Earliest start (ES): The earliest start of an activity is the earliest time when the activity 
can start. To fi nd ES trace a path from the start event of the network to the tail of the 
selected activity. If multiple paths are possible, use the one with the longest duration.  
 
●  Latest start (LS): The latest time an activity can be initiated without delaying the 
minimum completion time for the project. To fi nd LS take a backward pass (from 
head to tail of each activity) from the last event of the project to the tail of the activ-
ity in question. If multiple paths are possible use the path with the largest duration. 

152 
engineering design 
4
 
●  Earliest fi nish time (EF): EF  ES  D, where D is the duration of each activity.  
 
●  Latest fi nish time (LF): LF  LS  D 
 
●  Total fl oat  (TF): The slack between the earliest and latest start times. TF  LS  ES. 
An activity on the critical path has zero total fl oat. 
 E X A M P L E 4 . 3 
 The network diagram in Fig. 4.15 has been redrawn as a CPM network in Fig. 4.17. The 
activities are labeled with capital letters, and their duration is given below each line in 
weeks. To facilitate solution with computer methods, the events that occur at the nodes 
have been numbered serially. The node number at the tail of each activity must be less 
than that at the head. The ES times are determined by starting at the fi rst node and mak-
ing a forward pass through the network while adding each activity duration in turn to the 
ES of the preceding activity. The details are shown in Table 4.5. 
 The LS times are calculated by a reverse procedure. Starting with the last event, a 
backward pass is made through the network while subtracting the activity duration from 
the LS at each event. The calculations are given in Table 4.6. Note that for calculating LS, 
each activity starting from a common event can have a different late start time, whereas 
all activities starting from the same event had the same early start time.   
 FIGURE 4.17 
 CPM network based on Example 4.3, prototype testing of new heat exchanger design. 
B
A
D
C
E
G
F
H
J
I
8
7
6
3
2
1
5
3
2
K
2
3
6
3
4
3
4
3
5
4
 TABLE 4.5 
Calculation of Early Start Times Based on Fig. 4.17
Event
Activity
ES
Comment
1
A, B
0
Conventional to use ES  0 for the initial event
2
C, D, F
3
ES 2  ES 1   D  0  3  3
3
E, G
7
ES 3  ES 2   D  7
4
I
12
At a merge like 4 the largest ES  D of the merging activities is used
5
H
13
ES 5  ES 3   6  13
6
J
16
ES 6  ES 5   3  16
7
K
18
8
—
20

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
153
4
 A summary of the results is given in Table 4.7. The total fl oat (TF) was determined 
from the difference between LS and ES. The total fl oat for an activity indicates how much 
the activity can be delayed while still allowing the complete project to be fi nished on 
time. When TF  0 it means that the activity is on the critical path. From Table 4.7 the 
critical path consists of activities A-D-G-H-J-K.  
 In CPM the estimate of the duration of each activity is based on the most likely 
estimate of time to complete the activity. All time durations should be expressed in 
the same units, whether they be hours, days, or weeks. The sources of time estimates 
are records of similar projects, calculations involving personnel and equipment needs, 
legal restrictions, and technical considerations.  
 PERT (program evaluation and review technique) is a popular scheduling method 
that uses the same ideas as CPM. However, instead of using the most likely estimate 
of time duration, it uses a probabilistic estimate of the time for completion of an activ-
ity. Details about PERT will be found in the Bibliography to this chapter. 
 TABLE 4.6 
Calculation of Late Start Times Based on Fig. 4.17
Event
Activity
LS
Event
Activity
LS
8
—
20
5–2
F
10
8–7
K
18
4–3
E
8
7–6
J
16
4–2
C
10
6–5
H
13
4–1
B
9
6–4
I
13
3–2
D
3
5–3
G
7
2–1
A
0
 TABLE 4.7 
Summary of Scheduling Parameters for Prototype Testing Project
Activity
Description
D, weeks
ES
LS
TF
A
Remove internals
3
0
0
0
B
Install external wiring
4
0
9
9
C
Install internal wiring
3
3
10
7
D
Construct supports
4
3
3
0
E
Install thermocouples
5
7
8
1
F
Install heaters
3
3
10
7
G
Install new tubes
6
7
7
0
H
Leak test
3
13
13
0
I
Check thermocouples
3
12
13
1
J
Insulate
2
16
16
0
K
Test prototype at temperature
2
18
18
0

154 
engineering design 
4
4.9
 SUMMARY 
 This chapter considered methods for making you a more productive engineer. Some 
of the ideas, time management and scheduling, are aimed at the individual, but most 
of this chapter deals with helping you work more effectively in teams. Most of what is 
covered here falls into two categories: attitudes and techniques. 
 Under attitudes we stress: 
 
●  The importance of delivering on your commitments and of being on time 
 
●  The importance of preparation—for a meeting, for benchmarking tests, and so on 
 
●  The importance of giving and learning from feedback 
 
●  The importance of using a structured problem-solving methodology 
 
●  The importance of managing your time 
 With regard to techniques, we have presented information on the following: 
 Team processes: 
 
●  Team guidelines (rules of the road for teams) 
 
●  Rules for successful meetings 
 Problem-solving tools (TQM): 
 
●  Brainstorming 
 
●  Affi nity diagram 
 
●  Multivoting 
 
●  Pareto chart 
 
●  Cause-and-effect diagram 
 
●  Why-why diagram 
 
●  Interrelationship digraph 
 
●  How-how diagram 
 
●  Force fi eld analysis 
 
●  Implementation plan 
 Scheduling tools: 
 
●  Gantt chart 
 
●  Critical path method (CPM) 
 Further information on these tools can be found in the references listed in the Bibliogra-
phy. Also given there are names of software packages for applying some of these tools.   
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
 Consensus 
 Critical path method (CPM) 
Facilitator
Float (in CPM)
 Flowchart 
 Force fi eld analysis  
 Gantt chart 
 How-how diagram 
 Interrelationship digraph 
Milestone event
Multivoting 
 Network logic diagram 
 PERT 
 Total quality 
management (TQM) 
 Work breakdown 
structure 

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
155
4
   BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Team Methods 
 Cleland ,  D. I .: Strategic Management of Teams,  Wiley, New York ,  1996 . 
 Harrington-Mackin ,  D .:  The Team Building Tool Kit,  American Management Association, 
New York ,  1994 . 
 Katzenbach ,  J. R ., and  D. K .  Smith :  The Wisdom of Teams,  HarperBusiness, New York ,  1993 . 
 Scholtes ,  P. R ., et al.:  The Team Handbook, 3d ed.,  Joiner Associates, Madison, WI ,  2003. 
 West ,  M. A .:  Effective Teamwork: Practical Lessons from Organizational Research, 2d ed., 
 BPS Blackwell, Malden, MA  2004. 
 Problem-Solving Tools 
 Barra ,  R .:  Tips and Techniques for Team Effectiveness,    Barra International, New Oxford, PA ,  1987 . 
 Brassard ,  M ., and  D .  Ritter :  The Memory Jogger ™ II, GOAL/QPC ,  Methuen, MA ,  1994 . 
 Folger ,  H. S ., and  S. E .  LeBlanc :  Strategies for Creative Problem Solving,  Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ ,  1995 . 
 Tague ,  N. R .:  The Quality Toolbox,  ASQC Quality Press, Milwaukee, WI ,  1995 . 
 Planning and Scheduling 
 Gido, J. and J. D. Clements, Successful Project Management, Southwestern, Mason, OH, 2009.
Mantel, S. J. and J. R. Meredeth, S. M. Shafer, M. M. Sutton, Project Management in Practice, 
John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2008.
 Rosenau ,  M. D . and  G. D .  Githens :  Successful Project Management,   4th ed.,  Wiley, New York ,  1998 . 
 Shtub ,  A .,  J. F .  Bard , and  S .  Globerson :  Project Management: Process, Methodologies, and 
Economics, 2d ed.,  Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ ,  2005 . 
 Scheduling Software 
 Microsoft Project 2010 is the most widely used midrange scheduling software for making 
Gantt charts and determining the critical path. It is also capable of assigning resources 
to tasks and managing budgets. The software is compatible with Microsoft Offi ce tools. 
 Oracle Primavera Project Portfolio Management offers a suite of planning and sched-
uling software tools that can be used on very large construction and development proj-
ects, e.g., 100,000 activities. Depending on the choice of software it can be used to 
defi ne project scope, schedule, and cost. The software can be integrated with a corpo-
rate enterprise resource planning (ERP) system. 
 PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES 
 4.1  For your fi rst meeting as a team, do some team-building activities to help you get acquainted.   
 (a) Ask a series of questions, with each person giving an answer in turn. Start with the 
fi rst question and go completely around the team, then the next, etc. Typical questions 
might be: (1) What is your name? (2) What is your major and class? (3) Where did you 
grow up or go to school? (4) What do you like best about school? (5) What do you like 
least about school? (6) What is your hobby? (7) What special skills do you feel you 

156 
engineering design 
4
bring to the team? (8) What do you want to get out of the course? (9) What do you want 
to do upon graduation? 
 (b) Do a brainstorming exercise to come up with a team name and a team logo. 
 4.2  Brainstorm about uses for old newspapers. 
 4.3  Teams often fi nd it helpful to create a team charter between the team sponsor and the 
team. What topics should be covered in the team charter? 
 4.4  To learn to use the TQM tools described in Sec. 4.7, spend about four hours total of 
team time to arrive at a solution for some problem that is familiar to the students and 
that they feel needs improvement. Look at some aspect of an administrative process 
in the department or campus. Be alert to how you can use the TQM tools in your design 
project. 
 4.5  The  nominal group technique  is a variation on using brainstorming and the affi nity 
diagram as a way to generate and organize ideas for the defi nition of a problem. Do re-
search about NGT, and use it as an alternative to the methods discussed in this chapter. 
 4.6  There are certain short statements (killer phrases) that unthinking persons often say 
during brainstorming sessions that destroy the free fl ow of ideas. The team should make 
a list of 10 or 12 killer phrases as a reminder of what not to do when brainstorming. 
 4.7  After about two weeks of team meetings, invite a disinterested and knowledgeable per-
son to attend a team meeting as an observer. Ask this person to give a critique of what 
he or she found. Then invite this person back in two weeks to see if you have improved 
your meeting performance. 
 4.8  Develop a rating system for the effectiveness of team meetings. 
 4.9  Keep a record of how you spend your time over the next week. Break it down by 
30-minute intervals. What does this tell you about your time management skills? 
4.10  The following restrictions exist in a scheduling network. Determine whether the 
network is correct, and if it is not, draw the correct network. 
 
(a) A precedes C
 
 
B precedes E
 
 
C precedes D and E 
1
3
2
A
B
C
D
E
 
(b) A precedes D and E
 
 
B precedes E and F
 
 
C precedes F 
 
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
D
E
F

 
chapter 4: Team Behavior and Tools 
157
4
4.11  The development of an electronic widget is expected to follow steps.
 
 Determine the arrow network diagram and determine the critical path by using the 
CPM technique.
Activity
Description
Time est., weeks
Preceded by
A
Defi ne customer needs
4
B
Evaluate competitor’s product
3
C
Defi ne the market
3
D
Prepare product specs
2
B
E
Produce sales forecast
2
B
F
Survey competitor’s marketing methods
1
B
G
Evaluate product vs. customer needs
3
A,D
H
Design and test the product
5
A,B,D
I
Plan marketing activity
4
C,F
J
Gather information on competitor’s pricing
2
B,E,G
K
Conduct advertising campaign
2
I
L
Send sales literature to distributors
4
E,G
M
Establish product pricing
3
H,J

5
 5 
 GATHERING INFORMATION  
 5.1 
 THE INFORMATION CHALLENGE 
 The need for information can be crucial at many steps in a design project. You will 
need to fi nd these bits of information quickly, and validate them as to their reliability. 
For example, you might need to fi nd suppliers and costs of fractional-horsepower mo-
tors with a certain torque and speed. At a lower level of detail, you would need to 
know the geometry of the mounting brackets for the motor selected for the design. 
At a totally different level, the design team might need to know whether the new 
trade name they created for a new product infringes on any existing trade names, 
and further, whether it will cause any cultural problems when pronounced in Spanish, 
Japanese, and Mandarin Chinese. Clearly, the information needed for an engineering 
design is more diverse and less readily available than that needed for conducting a 
research project, for which the published technical literature is the main source of in-
formation. We choose to emphasize the importance of the information-gathering step 
in design by placing this chapter early in this text (Fig. 5.1). 
 Figure 5.1 requires some explanation. The need for information permeates the 
entire engineering design or process design process. By placing the Gathering Infor-
mation step between the Problem Defi nition and Concept Generation steps, we are 
emphasizing the critical need for information to achieve a creative concept solution. 
Moreover, we think that the suggestions described in this chapter for fi nding informa-
tion, and suggestions for sources of information, will be equally useful in the embodi-
ment and detail design phases. You will fi nd that as you progress into these phases 
of design the information required becomes increasingly technical. Of course, there 
is information, mostly marketing information, that was needed to accomplish the 
problem defi nition.  
158

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
159
5
 5.1.1 Data, Information, and Knowledge 
 We are told that the future prosperity of the United States and other developed coun-
tries will depend on the ability of their  knowledge workers , such as engineers, sci-
entists, artists, and other innovators, to develop new products and services as the 
manufacturing of these things is sent offshore to less developed countries with lower 
wage rates  .1  Thus, it behooves us to learn something about this elusive thing called 
knowledge, and how it is different from just plain facts.  
 Data  is a set of discrete, objective facts about events. These data may be experi-
mental observations about the testing of a new product, or data on sales that are part of a 
marketing study.  Information  is data that has been treated in some way that it conveys a 
message. For example, the sales data may have been analyzed statistically so as to iden-
tify potential markets by customer income level, and the product test data may have been 
compared with competitive products. Information is meant to change the way the re-
ceiver of the message perceives something, i.e., to have an impact on his or her judgment 
and behavior. The word  inform  originally meant “to give shape to.” Information is meant 
to shape the person who gets it and to make some difference in his outlook or insight. 
 Data becomes information when its creator adds meaning. This can be done in 
the following ways. 2 
 
●  Contextualized: we know for what purpose the data was gathered. 
 
●  Categorized: we know the units of analysis or key components of the data. 
 1.  T. L .  Friedman ,  The World Is Flat ,  Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, New York ,  2005 . 
 2.  T. H .  Davenport and  L .  Prusak ,  Working Knowledge ,  Harvard Business School Press, Boston ,  1998 . 
FIGURE 5.1
Steps in the design process, showing early placement of the gathering information step.
Define
problem
Problem statement
Benchmarking
Product dissection
House of Quality
PDS
Gather
information
Conceptual design
Internet
Patents
Technical articles
Trade journals
Consultants
Concept
generation
Creativity methods
Brainstorming
Functional models
Decomposition
Systematic design
methods
Evaluation
of concepts
Design making
Selection criteria
Pugh chart
Decision matrix
AHP
Product
architecture
Arrangement of
physical elements
Modularity
Configuration
design
Preliminary
selection of
materials and
manufacturing
processes
Modeling
Sizing of parts
Parametric
design
Robust design
Set tolerances
DFM, DFA, DFE
Tolerances
Detail
design
Engineering
drawings
Finalize PDS
Embodiment design

160 
engineering design 
5
 
●  Calculated: the data have been analyzed mathematically or statistically. 
 
●  Corrected: errors have been removed from the data. 
 
●  Condensed: the data have been summarized in a more concise form. 
 Knowledge  is broader, deeper, and richer than data or information. Because of 
this it is harder to defi ne. It is a mix of experience, values, contextual information, 
and expert insight that provides a framework for evaluating and incorporating new 
experiences and information. Creation of knowledge is a human endeavor. Computers 
can help immensely with the storage and transformation of information, but to pro-
duce knowledge humans must do virtually all of the work. This transformation occurs 
through the following processes: 
 
●  Comparison: how does this situation compare to other situations we have known? 
 
●  Consequence: what implications does the information have for decisions and 
actions? 
 
●  Connections: how does this bit of knowledge relate to others? 
 
●  Conversation: what do other people think about this information? 
 Unlike data and information, knowledge contains judgment. It can be likened to a liv-
ing system, growing and changing as it interacts with the environment. An important 
element in developing knowledge is to be aware of what one doesn’t know. The more 
knowledgeable one becomes the more humble one should feel about what one knows. 
Much knowledge, especially design knowledge, is applied through “rules of thumb.” 
These are guides to action that have been developed through trial and error over long 
periods of observation and serve as shortcuts to the solution of new problems that are 
similar to problems previously solved by experienced workers. Rules of thumb occur 
frequently in areas where detailed knowledge is needed, as in decisions concerning 
design for manufacture (DFM). 
 Under this schema a component, a specifi cation, or a material data sheet is  data . 
A catalog containing the dimensions and performance data of bearings made by 
a certain manufacturer is  information . An article about how to calculate the fail-
ure life of bearings published in an engineering technical journal is  knowledge . 
The output of a design review session is information, but the output of a more in-
depth review of lessons learned upon completing a major design project is most 
likely knowledge. Since it is not easy to decide whether something is information 
or knowledge without having a deep understanding of the context in which it exists, 
in this text we shall generally call most things information unless it is quite clearly 
knowledge.  
 5.2 
TYPES OF DESIGN INFORMATION 
 The information needed to do engineering design is of many types and occurs in many 
forms other than the written word. Some examples are CAD fi les, computer data fi les, 
models, and prototypes. Table 5.1 shows the broad spectrum of information needed in 
design.   

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
161
5
 5.3 
 SOURCES OF DESIGN INFORMATION 
 Just as design requires a variety of types of information, so there is a variety of sources 
in which to fi nd this information; see Table 5.2. 
 When college students today are asked to fi nd some information, invariably their 
fi rst inclination is to “Google” the topic. There is no question that the extreme growth 
 TABLE 5.1 
Types of Design Information
 Customer 
 Surveys and feedback
 Marketing data
 Related designs 
 Specs and drawings for previous versions of the product
 Similar designs of competitors (reverse engineering)
 Analysis methods 
 Technical reports
 Specialized computer programs, for example, fi nite element analysis
 Materials 
 Performance in past designs (failure analysis)
 Properties
 Manufacturing 
 Capability of processes
 Capacity analysis
 Manufacturing sources
 Assembly methods
 Cost 
 Cost history
 Current material and manufacturing costs
 Standard components 
 Availability and quality of vendors
 Size and technical data
 Technical standards 
 ISO
 ASTM
 Company specifi c
 Governmental regulations 
 Performance based
 Safety
 Life cycle issues 
 Maintenance/service feedback
 Reliability/quality data
 Warranty data

162 
engineering design 
5
of the World Wide Web through the  Internet  has been an exhilarating, liberating 
movement. It provides much entertainment and near-universal access in developed 
countries. Business has found many ways to use the Web to speed communication 
and increase productivity. However, it is important to realize that much of the in-
formation retrieved from the Internet is raw information in the sense that it has not 
been  reviewed for correctness by peers or an editor. Thus, articles retrieved from the 
Internet do not generally have the same credibility as articles published in a reputable 
 TABLE 5.2 
Sources of Information Pertinent to Engineering Design
 Libraries 
 Dictionaries and encyclopedias
 Engineering handbooks
 Texts and monographs
 Periodicals (technical journals and magazines, and newspapers)
 Internet 
 A massive depository of information. See Sec. 5.6 for more detail.
 Government 
 Technical reports
 Databases
 Search engines
 Laws and regulations
 Engineering professional societies and trade associations 
 Technical journals and news magazines
 Technical conference proceedings
 Codes and standards, in some cases
 Intellectual property 
 Patents, both national and international
 Copyrights
 Trademarks
 Personal activities 
 Buildup of knowledge through work experience and study
 Contacts with colleagues
 Personal network of professionals
 Contacts with suppliers and vendors
 Contacts with consultants
 Attendance at conferences, trade shows, exhibitions
 Visits to other companies
 Customers 
 Direct involvement
 Surveys
 Feedback from warranty payments and returned products

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
163
5
technical or business journal. Also, there is a tendency to think that everything on 
the Web is current material, but that may not be so. Much material gets posted and 
is never updated. Another problem is the volatility of Web pages. Web pages disap-
pear when their webmaster changes job or loses interest. With increasing use of ad-
vertisement on the Internet there is a growing concern about the objectivity of the 
information that is posted there. All of these are points that the intelligent reader must 
consider when enjoying and utilizing this fast-growing information resource. 
 Table 5.2 lists the complete range of sources of design information. In subsequent 
sections we will briefl y discuss each of these types and sources of information so that 
you can judge for yourself whether one of these is applicable to your problem. In most 
cases we will also give a few carefully chosen reference materials and websites.   
 In reviewing this list, you can divide the sources of information into (1) people 
who are paid to assist you, for example, the company librarian or consultant, (2) peo-
ple who have a fi nancial interest in helping you, for example, a potential supplier of 
equipment for your project, (3) people who help you out of professional responsibility 
or friendship, and (4) customers. 
 All suppliers of materials and equipment provide sales brochures, catalogs, and 
technical manuals, that describe the features and operation of their products. Usually 
this information can be obtained at no cost by checking the reader service card that 
is enclosed in most technical magazines. Much of this information is available on the 
Internet. Practicing engineers commonly build up a fi le of such information. Gener-
ally a supplier who has reason to expect a signifi cant order based on your design will 
most likely provide any technical information about the product that is needed for you 
to complete your design. 
 It is only natural to concentrate on searching the published technical literature 
for the information you need, but don’t overlook the resources available among your 
colleagues. The professional fi les or notebooks of engineers more experienced than 
you can be a gold mine of information if you take the trouble to communicate your 
problem in a proper way. Remember, however, that the fl ow of information should be  
two-way. Be willing to share what you know, and above all, return the information 
promptly to the person who lent it to you. 
 It is important to remember that information costs time and money. It is actually 
possible to acquire too much information in a particular area, far more than is needed 
to make an intelligent design decision. Also, as noted in Chap. 6, this could actually 
inhibit your ability in coming up with creative design concepts. However, do not un-
derestimate the importance of information gathering or the effort required in search-
ing for information. Many engineers feel that this isn’t real engineering, yet surveys of 
how design engineers use their time show that they spend up to 30 percent of their time 
searching for information. 1  There is a marked difference in the information profi les of 
engineers engaged in concept design and those involved in detail design. The former 
group use large volumes of information, rely heavily on their own personal collections, 
and search widely for information. The detail designers use much less information, 
 1.  A .  Lowe ,  C .  McMahon ,  T .  Shah , and  S .  Culley , “A Method for the Study of Information Use Profi les for 
Design Engineers,”  Proc. 1999 ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference. DETC99DTM-8753 

164 
engineering design 
5
rely heavily on company design guidelines and information sources, and apply this 
information most frequently in working with engineering drawings and CAD models.  
 5.4 
 LIBRARY SOURCES OF INFORMATION 
 In Sec. 5.3 we considered the broad spectrum of information sources and focused 
mostly on the information that can be obtained in a corporate design organization. 
In this section we shall deal with the type of information that can be obtained from 
libraries. The library is the most important resource for students and young engineers 
who wish to develop professional expertise quickly. 
 When you are looking for information in a library you will fi nd a hierarchy of in-
formation sources. Where you enter the hierarchy depends on your own state of knowl-
edge about the subject and the nature of the information you want to obtain. If you are 
a complete novice, it may be necessary to use a technical dictionary and read an ency-
clopedia article to get a good overview of the subject. If you are quite familiar with the 
subject, then you may simply want to use an index or abstract service to fi nd pertinent 
technical articles.  
 Starting with a limited information base, you should consult technical encyclope-
dias and the library’s electronic catalog to search out broad introductory texts. As you 
become expert in the subject, you should move to more detailed monographs and/or 
use abstracts and indexes to fi nd pertinent articles in the technical literature. Reading 
these articles will suggest other articles (cross references) that should be consulted. 
Another route to important design information is the patent literature (Sec. 5.9). 
 The task of translating your own search needs into the terminology that appears 
in the library catalog is often diffi cult. Library catalogs have been developed for more 
traditional scholarly and research activities than for the information needs of engi-
neering design. The kinds of questions raised in the context of engineering design, 
where graphical information and data on suppliers may be more valuable than schol-
arly knowledge, suggest that a quick search with an Internet browser such as Google 
may be a useful step early in your search. Also, pay close attention to the lists of  key-
words  found in all abstracts and many technical articles. These give you alternative 
places to search for information. 
 5.4.1 Dictionaries and Encyclopedias 
 At the outset of a project dealing with a new technical area, there may be a need to 
acquire a broad overview of the subject. You may fi nd that the technical terms are 
unfamiliar and that you need to consult a technical dictionary. Two good sources are: 
 Davis, J. R. (ed.):  ASM Materials Engineering Dictionary,  ASM International, 
Materials Park, OH, 1992. 
 Nayler, G. H. F.:  Dictionary of Mechanical Engineering,  4th ed., Butterworth-
Heinemann, Boston, 1996. 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
165
5
   Technical encyclopedias are written for the technically trained person who is just 
beginning to learn about a new subject. Thus, encyclopedias are a good place to start 
out if you are only slightly familiar with a subject because they give a broad overview 
rather quickly. In using an encyclopedia, spend some time checking the index for the 
entire set of volumes to discover subjects you would not have looked up by instinct. 
Some useful technical encyclopedias are: 
 McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Environmental Science and Engineering,  3d ed., 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1993. 
 McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Physics, 2d ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1993. 
 McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Engineering,  8th ed., 20 vols., 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1997. Also available on CD-ROM. 
 5.4.2 Handbooks 
 Undoubtedly, at some point in your engineering education a professor has admon-
ished you to reason out a problem from “fi rst principles” and not be a “handbook 
engineer.” That is sound advice, but it may put handbooks in a poor perspective that 
is undeserved. Handbooks are compendia of useful technical information and data. 
They are usually compiled by an expert in a fi eld who decides on the organization of 
the chapters and then assembles a group of experts to write the individual chapters. 
Many handbooks provide a description of theory and its application, while others con-
centrate more on detailed technical data. You will fi nd that an appropriately selected 
collection of handbooks will be a vital part of your professional library. 
 There are hundreds of scientifi c and engineering handbooks, far more than we can 
possibly list. A good way to fi nd out what is available in your library is to visit its refer-
ence section and spend time looking at the books on the shelf. To get a list of those hand-
books in your library, go to the electronic catalog and enter handbook of ___. When we 
did this we got the following small sampling of the many handbooks that were there: 
 
●  Handbook of engineering fundamentals 
 
●  Handbook of mechanical engineering 
 
●  Handbook of mechanical engineering calculations 
 
●  Handbook of engineering design 
 
●  Handbook of design, manufacturing, and automation 
 
●  Handbook of elasticity solutions 
 
●  Handbook of formulas for stress and strain1 
 
●  Handbook of bolts and bolted joints  
 
●  Handbook of fatigue tests 
 The point of this is that you can fi nd an engineering handbook on practically any 
topic, from fundamental engineering science to very specifi c engineering details and 
1. A very useful reference source is Roark’s Formulas for Stress and Strain, 7th ed., McGraw-Hill. This 
is available online at knovel.com.

166 
engineering design 
5
data. Many handbooks are becoming available online for a modest subscription fee. 
This greatly extends the search capability of the engineer’s laptop computer. Many en-
gineering libraries subscribe to knovel.com, an online reference service with a special 
emphasis on engineering design. Knovel provides online access to handbooks and 
specialized monographs along with information retrieval capabilities. 
 5.4.3 Textbooks and Monographs 
 New technical books are continually being published. Monographs are books with a 
narrower and more specialized content than the books you used as texts. A good way 
to keep up to date is to scan the books-in-print column of your professional society’s 
monthly magazine, or to belong to a technical book club.  
 5.4.4 Finding Periodicals 
 Periodicals are publications that are issued periodically, every month, every three 
months, or daily (as a newspaper). The main periodicals that you will be interested in 
are  technical journals , which describe the results of research in a particular fi eld, like 
engineering design or applied mechanics, and  trade magazines , which are less techni-
cal and more oriented to current practice in a particular industry.  
 Indexing and abstracting services  provide current information on periodical lit-
erature, and more importantly they also provide a way to retrieve articles published 
in the past. An indexing service cites the article by title, author, and bibliographic 
data. An abstracting service also provides a summary of the contents of the article. 
Although indexing and abstracting services primarily are concerned with articles 
from periodicals, many often include books and conference proceedings, and some 
list technical reports and patents. Until the digital age, abstracts and indexes were 
contained in thick books in the reference section. Now they can be accessed from 
your computer by tying into the  reference port  of your library. Table 5.3 lists the most 
common  abstract databases for engineering and science.  
 Conducting a search in the published literature is like putting together a complex 
puzzle. One has to select a starting place, but some starts are better than others. 
A good strategy 1  is to start with the most recent subject indexes and abstracts and try 
to fi nd a current review article or general technical paper. The references cited in it 
will be helpful in searching back along the “ancestor references” to fi nd the research 
that led to the current state of knowledge. However, this search path will miss many 
references that were overlooked or ignored by the original researchers. Therefore, the 
next step should involve  citation searching  to fi nd the “descendant references” using 
 Science Citation Index . Once you have a reference of interest, you can use Citation 
Index to fi nd all other references published in a given year that cited the key refer-
ence. Because the index is online, such searches can be done quickly and precisely. 
 1.  L. G .  Ackerson ,  Reference Quarterly (RQ), vol. 36,  pp. 248–60 ,  1996 . 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
167
5
These two search strategies will uncover as many references as possible about the 
topic. The next step is to identify the key documents. One way to do this is to identify 
the references with the greatest number of citations, or those that other experts in the 
fi eld cite as particularly important. You must remember that it takes 6 to 12 months 
for a reference to be included in an index or abstract service, so current research will 
not be picked up using this strategy. Current awareness can be achieved by searching 
 Current Contents  on a regular basis using keywords, subject headings, journal titles, 
and authors already identifi ed from your literature search. One must also be aware 
that much information needed in engineering design cannot be accessed through this 
strategy because it is never listed in scientifi c and technical abstract services. For this 
information, the Internet is an important resource (see Sec. 5.6).  
 5.4.5 Catalogs, Brochures, and Business Information 
 An important category of design information is catalogs, brochures, and manuals giv-
ing information on materials and components that can be purchased from outside sup-
pliers. Most engineers build up a collection of this trade literature, often using the 
reply cards in trade magazines as a way of obtaining new information. Visits to trade 
shows are an excellent way to become acquainted quickly with the products offered 
by many vendors. When faced with the problem of where to turn to fi nd informa-
tion about an unfamiliar new component or material, start with the  Thomas Register 
of American Manufacturers  (www.thomasnet.com). This is the most comprehensive 
resource for fi nding information on suppliers of industrial products and services in 
North America. 
 TABLE 5.3 
Common Databases for Electronic Access to Engineering Abstracts and Indexes
Name
Description
Academic Search Premier
Abstracts and indexing for over 7000 journals. Many full text.
Aerospace Database 
Indexes journals, conferences, reports by AIAA, IEEE, ASME.
Applied Science & Technology
Includes buyers guides, conf. proceedings. Most applied of group.
ASCE Database
All American Society of Civil Engineers documents.
Compendex
Electronic replacement for Engineering Index.
Engineered Materials
Covers polymers, ceramics, composites.
General Science Abstracts
Coverage of 265 leading journals in U.S. and UK.
INSPEC
Covers 4000 journals in physics, EE, computing and info. techn.
Mechanical Engineering
Covers 730 journals and magazines.
METADEX
Covers metallurgy and materials science.
Safety Science and Risk
Abstracts from 1579 periodicals.
Science Citation Index 
(Web of Science)
Covers 5700 journals in 164 science and technology disciplines.
Science Direct
Coverage of 1800 journals; full text for 800.

168 
engineering design 
5
 Most technical libraries also contain certain types of business or commercial 
information that is important in design. Information on the consumption or sales of 
commodities and manufactured goods by year and state is collected by the federal 
government and is available in the U.S. Department of Commerce Census of Manu-
facturers and the Bureau of the Census Statistical Abstract of the United States. This 
type of statistical information, important for marketing studies, is also sold by com-
mercial vendors. This data is arranged by industry according to the  North American 
Industry Classifi cation System  (NAICS) code. The NAICS is the replacement for the 
former  Standard Industrial Classifi cation  (SIC) code. Businesses that engage in the 
same type of commerce will have the same NAICS code regardless of size. There-
fore, the NAICS code is often needed when searching in government databases. See 
Sec. 5.6.3 for useful websites for fi nding business information. 
 5.5 
 GOVERNMENT SOURCES OF INFORMATION 
 The federal government either conducts or pays for about 35 percent of the research 
and development performed in this country. That generates an enormous amount of 
information, mostly in the form of technical reports. This R&D enterprise is concen-
trated in defense, space, environmental, medical, and energy-related areas. It is an 
important source of information, but all surveys indicate that it is not utilized nearly 
as much as it ought to be. 
 Government-sponsored reports are only one segment of what is known among in-
formation specialists as the  gray literature . Other components of the gray literature are 
trade literature, preprints, conference proceedings, and academic theses. This is called 
gray literature because it is known to exist but it is diffi cult to locate and retrieve. The 
organizations producing the reports control their distribution. Concerns over intellec-
tual property rights and competition result in corporate organizations being less willing 
to make reports generally available than governmental and academic organizations. 
 The Government Printing Offi ce (GPO) is the federal agency with the responsi-
bility for reproducing and distributing federal documents. Although it is not the sole 
source of government publications, it is a good place to start, particularly for docu-
ments dealing with federal regulations and economic statistics (www.gpoaccess.gov). 
Some GPO publications also can be purchased as e-books from Google. 
 Reports prepared under contract by industrial and university R&D organizations 
ordinarily are not available from the GPO. These reports may be obtained from the 
 National Technical Information Service  (NTIS), a branch of the Department of Com-
merce. NTIS, a self-supporting agency through the sale of information, is the nation’s 
central clearinghouse for U.S. and foreign technical reports, federal databases, and 
software. Searches can be made online at www.ntis.gov. 
 In searching for government sources of information, the GPO covers a broader 
spectrum of information, while NTIS will focus you on the technical report literature. 
However, even the vast collection at NTIS does not have all federally sponsored tech-
nical reports. The Offi ce of  Scientifi c and Technical Information, sponsored by DOE, 
provides access to reports from DOE, EPA, NIST, and other agencies at www.osti.gov.  

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
169
5
 While not government publications, academic theses to a large extent are depen-
dent for their existence on government support to the authors who did the research. 
The  Dissertation Abstracts  database gives abstracts to over 1.5 million doctoral dis-
sertations and masters’ theses awarded in the United States and Canada. Copies of the 
theses can also be purchased from this source. 
 5.6 
 INFORMATION FROM THE INTERNET 
 The fastest-growing communication medium is the Internet.1 Not only is this becom-
ing the preferred form of personal and business communication via e-mail, but it is 
rapidly becoming a major source for information retrieval and a channel of com-
merce. For a discussion of how the Internet developed and functions see www.isoc
.org/history/brief.shtml.  
 5.6.1 Searching with Google 
 There are over 150 search engines that search the World Wide Web, but the most 
commonly used general-purpose search engine by far is  Google (www.google.com). 
Like many search engines, it builds up its search index by using robot crawlers to 
traverse the Web and add the URLs to its index. Obviously, the search engine can 
only fi nd what has been indexed. However, since the indexing of pages is performed 
automatically, a tremendous number of Web pages are indexed. Also, because any 
page is added by the crawler without any human judgment, the number of documents 
returned for a query can be very large. Google ranks the order in which search results 
appear primarily by how many other sites link to each Web page. This is a kind of 
popularity vote based on the assumption that other pages would create a link to the 
best or most useful pages. 
 The issue with Google is not getting “hits” for your keywords; rather, it is limiting 
the responses to a manageable number. The following simple rules help achieve this: 
 
●  Suppose we want to fi nd responses on the topic  proportional control.  When en-
tered into the search box of Google this results in 11,800,000 responses. 
 
●  Obviously, some of these were achieved because Google found the word  propor-
tional  in some web pages,  control  in others, and  proportional control  in still oth-
ers. To search for the exact phrase  proportional control , place the phrase within 
quotation marks in the search fi eld, i.e,  “proportional control.”  This reduced the 
number of responses to 134,000. 
 
●  The search can be restricted further by excluding a term from the search. Sup-
pose we wanted to exclude from the search any references that pertain to tempera-
ture control. We could do this by typing a minus sign before the word temperature. 
1. An excellent tutorial for fi nding information on the Internet is http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/TeachingLib/
Guides/Internet/Find.

170 
engineering design 
5
Thus, we would type  “proportional control”temperature , and the responses 
are reduced to 76,300. 
 
●  There certainly is not a paucity of responses for the search in this example, but if 
there were, and we were trying to increase the responses, we could purposely tell 
the search engine to search for either term by using an OR search. We would enter 
 proportional OR  control , and the responses would rise to 1.05 billion. 
 These operations are performed more easily with the Advanced Search options 
found in Google. Advanced Search also allows you to restrict the search to only 
Web sites written in the English language, or any other language, and to pages for 
which the search term appeared in the title of the page. The latter restriction indi-
cates greater relevance. When the restrictions of English language and appearing in 
the title of the page were used in our example search, the number of responses was 
reduced to 363. If this was further restricted to pages updated within the past year, 
the number came down to 244 responses. You also can restrict the search to docu-
ments having a certain format, for example documents formatted in PDF, Word, or 
PowerPoint. 
 Google contains a large number of features not usually associated with a search 
engine. 1  Just above the search fi eld on the Google Home Page are the frequently used 
features Image, Video, Maps, News, and Gmail. The last feature in this lineup is 
 More .  
 One of the more useful categories under  More  is  Directory . This allows you to 
browse the Web by topic. Click on  Science → Technology →  Mechanical Engineer-
ing  to fi nd 17 categories listed, everything from academic mechanical engineering 
departments worldwide, to design, to tribology. A single click on an entry takes you 
to a website. Generally, these tend to be more general than the Web pages turned up 
by the regular Google search, but they often are good places to start a search because 
they may open up new ideas for keywords or topics. Many of the URLs listed in the 
next section were found in the Google Directory. 
 An important category under  More  is  Google Scholar . It serves the same pur-
pose as the online abstract services. The sources searched include peer-reviewed 
papers in journals, academic theses, books, and articles from professional societ-
ies, universities, and other scholarly organizations. The results are ordered by rel-
evance, which considers the author, the publication in which the article appeared, 
and how often the article has been cited in the published scholarly literature. When 
“proportional controller”−temperature was entered in Google Scholar it received 
1720 responses, much fewer than was found with the main search but presumably all 
of higher quality. 
 Other useful categories under  More  are  Patents  (access to the full text of over 
seven million U.S. patents),  Finance  (business information and news, including stock 
charts) and Product Search, a quick way to fi nd if your idea for a design project is 
original. 
 1. Google changes the features listed over the search fi eld from time to time as new features become 
available. If you do not fi nd one of the features discussed in this paragraph at that location, click on  More . 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
171
5
 Not many people realize that Google has a built-in calculator. It is also very adept 
at conversion of units. The following calculations and conversions were performed by 
typing the appropriate expression on the left of the equal sign in the search box. 
 
●  (2 ^ 4) + 25 = 41 
 
●  sqrt 125 = 11.1802291 
 
●  45 degrees in radians = 0.785398 
 
●  tan(0.785398) = 0.999967 Google does trig functions using radians, not degrees. 
 
●  50,000 psi in MPa = 344.73 megapascals 
   Another important feature of Google is its ability to translate from one language to 
another. You can fi nd the Translate tab under  More . Simply type or paste the text to 
be translated into the Translate Text box, select the original and translation languages, 
and click the translate button. References to articles that are not in English have a 
Translate tab built-in. 
 Yet another very useful function for Google is to get a quick defi nition of a word 
or term that you do not understand. Just type the word defi ne into the Search Space 
followed by the word or phrase you want defi ned. One or more defi nitions will pop 
up at the head of the search results. Try this with the words  reverse engineering and 
 harbinger . 
 Yahoo (www.yahoo.com) is much older than Google. It has evolved into more of 
a general-purpose directory that covers a very wide spectrum of information than a 
general-purpose search engine. It is particularly strong in the business and fi nance 
areas. Search engines are continually being introduced. One that has achieved a grow-
ing following is Bing from Microsoft. 
 5.6.2 Some Helpful URLs for Design 
 Listed in this section are some websites that have been found to be useful in providing 
technical information for design projects. This section deals chiefl y with references 
to mechanical engineering technical information. Similar information will be found 
in Chap. 11 for materials and in Chap. 12 for manufacturing processes. Section 5.6.3 
gives references of a more business-oriented nature that are useful in design. 
 Directories 
 Directories are collections of websites on specifi c topics, like mechanical engineer-
ing or manufacturing engineering. Using directories narrows down the huge number of 
hits you get when using a search engine. They direct you to more specifi c sites of infor-
mation. Also, the information specialists who build directories are more likely to screen 
the directory content for the quality of the information. Following are some directories 
to information in mechanical engineering. The reader should be able to use these URLs 
to fi nd similar directories in other areas of science, engineering, and technology.  
 WWW Virtual Library: Gives a comprehensive set of websites for most U.S. me-
chanical engineering departments and many commercial vendors. http://vlib
.org/Engineering 

172 
engineering design 
5
 Intute: Science, Engineering and Technology. A large catalog of Internet sources 
in the three broad areas. Focus is on UK sources. www.intute.ac.uk/sciences/
engineering/ 
 Yahoo Directory: http://dir.yahoo.com/Science/Engineering/Mechanical
_Engineering   
 Google Directory: http:directory.google.com/Top/Science/Technology/
Mechanical_Engineering/ 
 NEEDS: A digital library with links to online learning materials in engineering. 
www.needs.org/needs/ 
Wikipedia.com is the popular online encyclopedia. Articles are submitted by 
readers with little editorial review. Thus they can contain errors or biases. For 
technical topics this is a good place to get a quick overview of a new subject, 
but it should be read with caution for political or economic topics where preju-
dices often run high.
 Technical Information 
 Knovel (http://knovel.com) is a web-based engineering information service that is 
available through many engineering libraries. It offers direct access to thousands 
of engineering handbooks and design-oriented monographs that are search opti-
mized for engineering. Although it is a subscription service, there is free access 
to a limited number of handbooks and databases.  
 An online text on Design of Machine Elements, with a good discussion of de-
sign creativity, review of mechanics of materials, and design of components. 
Excellent problems with answers. http://www.mech.uwa.edu.au/DANotes   
 Browse back issues of  Mechanical Engineering  and  Machine Design magazines. 
http://www.memagazine.org/index.html; http://www.machinedesign.com 
 ESDU Engineering Data Service, http://www.esdu.com, began as a unit of the 
Royal Aeronautical Society in the UK, and now is part of IHS Inc, a large U.S. 
engineering information products company. On a subscription basis, it provides 
well-researched reports on design data and procedures for topics ranging from 
aerodynamics to fatigue to heat transfer to wind engineering. 
 How Stuff Works: Simple but very useful descriptions, with good illustrations 
and some animations, of how technical machines and systems work. http://
www.howstuffworks.com. For common engineering devices click on Science 
→ Engineering. 
 Working models of common mechanical mechanisms. www.brockeng.com/
mechanism. Simple but very graphic models of mechanical mechanisms. www.
fl ying-pig.co.uk/mechanisms. A world-famous collection of kinematic models. 
http://kmoddl.library.cornell.edu 
 eFunda, for Engineering Fundamentals, bills itself as the ultimate online refer-
ence for engineers. http://www.efunda.com. The main sections are materials, 
design data, unit conversions, mathematics, and engineering formulas. Most 
equations from engineering science courses are given with brief discussion, 
along with nitty-gritty design data like screw thread standards and geometric 
dimensioning and tolerancing. It is basically a free site, but some sections 
require a subscription fee for entry. 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
173
5
 Engineers Edge is similar to eFunda but with more emphasis on machine design 
calculations and details. Also, there is good coverage of design for manufacture 
for most metal and plastic manufacturing processes. www.engineersedge.com. 
For useful websites on materials properties go to Chap. 11; for manufacturing 
process go to Chap. 13.
 Access to Supplier Information 
 When searching for suppliers of materials or equipment with which to build pro-
totypes for your design project, it is important to contact your local purchasing agent. 
He or she may know of local vendors who can provide quick delivery at good prices. 
For more specialized items, you may need to shop on the Web. Three supply houses 
that have a national network of warehouses and good online catalogs are: 
 McMaster-Carr Supply Co. http://www.mcmaster.com 
 Grainger Industrial Supply. http://www.grainger.com 
 MSC Industrial Supply Co. http://www1.mscdirect.com 
 A good place to start a search of vendors is the website section of Google. Introduc-
ing a product or equipment name in the Search box will turn up several names of suppli-
ers, with direct links to their websites. For many years, the very large books of  Thomas 
Register of American  Manufacturers  was a standard fi xture in design rooms. This im-
portant source of information can now be found on the Web at http://www.thomasnet
.com. One of its features is PartSpec®, over one million predrawn mechanical and elec-
trical parts and their specifi cations that can be downloaded into your CAD system. 
Directories of suppliers can be found in eFunda, the website for Machine Design maga-
zine, www.industrylink.com, and www.engnetglobal.com. Be advised that the companies 
that will turn up in these directories are basically paid advertisers to these directories. 
    5.6.3 Business-Related URLs for Design and Product Development 
 We have made the point many times, and it will be repeated many times elsewhere 
in this text, that design is much more than an academic exercise. Engineering design  
does not have real meaning unless it is aimed at making a profi t, or at least reducing 
cost. Hence, we have assembled a group of references to the WWW that are pertinent 
to the business side of the product development process. These all are subscription 
services, so it is best to enter them through your university or company website. 
 General Websites 
 LexisNexis, http://web.lexis-nexis.com, is the world’s largest collection of news, 
public records, legal, and business information. The major divisions show the 
scope of its contents: News, Business, Legal Research, Medical, Reference.  
 General Business File ASAP provides references to general business articles dat-
ing from 1980 to the present. 
 Business Source Premier gives full text for 7800 academic and trade magazines 
in a spectrum of business fi elds. It also gives profi les of 10,000 of the world’s 
largest companies. 

174 
engineering design 
5
 Marketing 
 North American Industry Classifi cation System (NAICS) can be found at http://
www.census.gov/epcd/www/naics.html. Knowledge of the NAICS code often is use-
ful when working with the following marketing databases: 
 Hoovers is the place to go to get detailed background on companies. It provides 
key statistics on sales, profi ts, the top management, the product line, and the 
major competitors. 
 Standard and Poors Net Advantage provides fi nancial surveys by industry sector 
and projections for the near future. 
 IBIS World provides world market industry reports on 700 U.S. industries and 
over 8000 companies. 
 RDS Business & Industry is a broad-based business information database that 
focuses on market information about companies, industries, products, and mar-
kets. It covers all industries and is international in scope. It is a product of the 
Gale Group of the Thomson Corporation. 
Dialog (www.dialog.com) is a major online business and technical information 
system.
 Statistics 
 A large amount of U.S business, trade, and economic statistics is available from 
federal government agencies. Some of the most commonly used  sources are discussed 
below. For a guide to even more U.S. government departments and bureaus see http:// 
guides.ucf.edu/statusa. 
 Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce. http://www.bea.gov. 
This is the place to fi nd information on the overview of the U.S. economy and 
detailed data on such things as gross domestic product (GDP), personal income, 
corporate profi ts and fi xed assets, and the balance of trade. 
 Bureau of Census, Department of Commerce. http://census.gov/. This is the place 
to fi nd population fi gures and population projections by age, location, and other 
factors. 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor. http://bls.gov. This is the place 
to fi nd data on the consumer price index, producer price index, wage rates, pro-
ductivity factors, and demographics of the labor force.   
 Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. http://www.stls.frb.org. If you really are into 
economic data, this website contains a huge depository of historical economic 
data, as well as full text of many federal publications. 
 5.7 
 PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES AND TRADE ASSOCIATIONS 
 Professional societies are organized to advance a particular profession and to honor 
those in the profession for outstanding accomplishments. Engineering societies ad-
vance the profession chiefl y by disseminating knowledge through sponsoring annual 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
175
5
meetings, conferences and expositions, local chapter meetings, by publishing techni-
cal journals (archival journals), magazines, books, and handbooks, and sponsoring 
short courses for continuing education. Unlike some other professions, engineering 
societies rarely lobby for specifi c legislation that will benefi t their membership. Some 
engineering societies develop codes and standards; see Sec. 5.8. 
 The fi rst U.S. engineering professional society was the American Society of 
Civil Engineers (ASCE), followed by the American Society of Mining, Metallurgi-
cal and Petroleum Engineers (AIME), the American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
(ASME), the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), and the American 
Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE). These fi ve societies are called the Five 
Founder Societies, and were all established in the latter part of the 19 th  century and 
early 1900s. As technology advanced rapidly, new groups were formed, such as the 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Institute of Industrial Engineers, American 
Nuclear Society, and such specialty societies as the American Society of Heating, 
Refrigerating, and Air-conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), the International Society 
for Optical Engineering (SPIE), the Biomedical Engineering Society and the American 
Society for Engineering Education (ASEE). One count of engineering societies comes 
to 30,  1  while another totals 85. These references should serve as an entrée to the web-
sites of most engineering societies.  
 The lack of a central society focus for engineering, such as exists in medicine 
with the American Medical Association, has hampered the engineering profession 
in promoting the public image of engineering, and in representing the profession 
in discussions with the federal government. The American Association of Engi-
neering Societies (AAES) serves as the “umbrella organization” for engineering 
representation in Washington, although a number of the larger societies also have 
a Washington offi ce. The current membership in the AAES is 13 societies, includ-
ing the fi ve founder societies. The National Academy of Engineering (NAE) is the 
engineering counterpart to the National Academy of Science. It exists to honor dis-
tinguished engineers and to advise the government on technical issues that affect 
the nation. 
 Trade associations represent the interests of the companies engaged in a particu-
lar sector of industry. All trade associations collect industrywide business statistics 
and publish a directory of members. Most lobby on behalf of their members in such 
things as import controls and special tax regulations. Some, such as the American 
Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) and the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), 
sponsor research programs to advance their industries. A trade association like the 
National Association of Manufacturers is a multi-industry association with a heavy 
educational program aimed at Congress and the general public. Others like the Steel 
Tank Institute are much more focused and issue such things as  Standards for Inspec-
tion of Above  Ground Storage Tanks . Yahoo gives a good listing of trade associations 
of all kinds at Business→Trade Associations. 
 1. http://www.englib.cornell.edu/erg/soc.php 

176 
engineering design 
5
 5.8 
 CODES AND STANDARDS 
 The importance of codes and standards in design is discussed in Sec. 1.7 and Sec. 13.7. 
A  code  is a set of rules for performing some task, as in the local city building code or 
fi re code. A  standard  is less prescriptive and can be defi ned as a set of technical defi -
nitions and guidelines. It establishes a basis for comparison. Many standards describe 
a best way to perform some test so that the data obtained can be reliably compared 
with data obtained by other persons. A  specifi cation  describes how a system should 
work, and is usually is much more specifi c and detailed than a standard, but some-
times it is diffi cult to differentiate between documents that are called standards and 
those called specifi cations. 1  
 The United States is the only industrialized country in which the national stan-
dards body is not a part of or supported by the national government. The American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI) is the coordinating organization for the vol-
untary standards system of the United States (www.ansi.org). Codes and standards 
are developed by professional societies or trade associations with committees made 
up mostly of industry experts, with representation from university professors and 
the general public. The standards may then be published by the technical organiza-
tions themselves, but most are also submitted to ANSI. This body certifi es that the 
standards-making process was carried out properly and publishes the document also 
as an ANSI standard. ANSI may also initiate new standards-making projects, and it 
has the important responsibility of representing the United States on the International 
Standards Committees of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 
The standard development process in the United States does not involve substantial 
support from the federal government, but it does represent a substantial commitment 
of time from volunteer industry and academic representatives, and cost to their spon-
soring organizations for salary and travel expenses. Because the cost of publishing 
and administering the ANSI and other standards systems must be covered, the cost 
for purchasing standards is relatively high, and they are not generally available free on 
the World Wide Web. 
 The standards responsibility of the U.S. government is carried out by the  Na-
tional Institute for Standards and Technology  (NIST), a division of the Department 
of Commerce. The Standards Services Division (SSD) of NIST (http://www.nist.gov/
ts/ssd/index.cfm) is the focal point for standards in the federal government that coor-
dinates activities among federal agencies and with the private sector. Since standards 
can serve as substantial barriers to foreign trade, SSD maintains an active program 
of monitoring standards globally and supporting the work of the U.S. International 
Trade Administration. SSD also manages the national program by which testing labo-
ratories become nationally accredited. NIST, going back to its origins as the National 
Bureau of Standards, houses the U.S. copies of the international standards for weights 
and measures, such as the standard kilogram and meter, and maintains a program for 
 1.  S. M .  Spivak and  F. C .  Brenner ,  Standardization Essentials: Principles and Practice ,  Marcel Dekker, 
New York ,  2001 . 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
177
5
calibrating other laboratories’ instruments against these and other physical standards. 
The extensive laboratories of NIST are also used, when necessary, to conduct research 
to develop and improve standards. 
 ASTM International is the major organization that prepares standards in the fi eld 
of materials and product systems. It is the source of more than half of the existing 
ANSI standards. Most technical libraries will have a set of the Annual Book of ASTM 
Standards (http://astm.org). 
 The ASME prepares the well-known Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code that is in-
corporated into the laws of most states. The ASME Codes and Standards Division 
also publishes performance test codes for turbines, combustion engines, and other 
large mechanical equipment (http://asme.org/Codes/). For a long list of standard de-
veloping organizations go to http://engineers.ihs.com/products/standards and click on 
standards to fi nd the list. 
ANSI provides an educational website about standards (http://standardslearn.org). 
It lists many standards developing organizations (SDO), a broad tutorial about stan-
dards, and case studies showing where standards can be critical in design.
 The Department of Defense (DOD) is the most active federal agency in develop-
ing specifi cations and standards. DOD has developed a large number of standards, 
generally by the three services, Army, Navy, and Air Force. Defense contractors must 
be familiar with and work to these standards. In an effort to reduce costs through 
common standards, DOD has established a Defense Standardization Program (DSP) 
Offi ce (www.dsp.dla.mil). One aim is to lower costs through the use of standardized 
parts as a result of reduced inventories. The other major goal is to achieve improved 
readiness through shortened logistics chains and improved interoperability of joint 
forces. Other important federal agencies that write standards are: 
 
●  Department of Energy (DOE) 
 
●  Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 
 
●  Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) 
 The General Services Agency (GSA) is the federal government’s landlord charged 
with providing offi ce space and facilities of all kinds, and procuring common items of 
business like fl oor coverings, automobiles, and light bulbs. Thus it has issued over 700 
standards for common everyday items. A listing of these specifi cations can be found at 
http://apps.fss.gsa.gov/pub/fedspecs/. A quick scan of the index found standards for the 
abrasion resistance of cloth, the identifi cation of asbestos, and turbine engine lubricants. 
These standards are not downloadable and must be purchased. Links to all of these 
federal sources of standards can be found at http://www.uky.edu/Subject/standards.html. 
 Because of the growing importance of world trade, foreign standards are becom-
ing more important. Some helpful websites are: 
 
●  International Organization for Standardization (ISO); http://www.iso.org 
 
●  British Standards Institution (BSI); http://www.bsigroup.com 
 
●  DIN (Deutsches Institut fur Normung), the German standards organization. Copies 
of all DIN standards that have been translated into English can be purchased from 
ANSI at http://webstore.ansi.org 
 
●  Another website from which to purchase foreign standards is World Standards 
Services Network, http://www.wssn.net 

178 
engineering design 
5
 An important website to use to search for standards is the National Standards System 
Network http://www.nssn.org. NSSN was established by ANSI to search for standards 
in its database of over 250,000 references. For example, a search for standards deal-
ing with nuclear waste found 50 records, including standards written by ASTM, ISO, 
ASME, DIN and the American Nuclear Society (ANS). 
 5.9 
 PATENTS AND OTHER INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
 Creative and original ideas can be protected with patents, copyrights, and trademarks. 
These legal documents fall within the broad area of property law. Thus, they can be 
sold or leased just like other forms of property such as real estate and plant equip-
ment. There are several different kinds of intellectual property. A  patent,  granted by a 
government, gives its owner the right to prevent others from making, using, or selling 
the patented invention. We give major attention to patents and the patent literature in 
this section because of their importance in present-day technology. A  copyright gives 
its owner the exclusive right to publish and sell a written or artistic work. It there-
fore gives its owner the right to prevent the unauthorized copying by another of that 
work. A  trademark  is any name, word, symbol, or device that is used by a company 
to identify its goods or services and distinguish them from those made or sold by oth-
ers. The right to use trademarks is obtained by registration and extends indefi nitely 
so long as the trademark continues to be used. A  trade secret  is any formula, pattern, 
device, or compilation of information that is used in a business to create an opportu-
nity over competitors who do not have this information. Sometimes trade secrets are 
information that could be patented but for which the corporation chooses not to obtain 
a patent because it expects that defense against patent infringement will be diffi cult. 
Since a trade secret has no legal protection, it is essential to maintain the information 
in secret. 
 5.9.1 Intellectual Property 
 Intellectual property has received increasing attention in the high-tech world.  The 
Economist  states that as much as three-quarters of the value of publicly traded com-
panies in the United States comes from intangible assets, chiefl y intellectual property. 1 
The revenue from licensing technology-based intellectual property in the United 
States is estimated at $45 billion annually, and around $100 billion worldwide. At 
the same time, it has been estimated that only about 1 percent of patents earn sig-
nifi cant royalties, and only about 10 percent of all patents issued are actually used in 
products. The majority of patents are obtained for defensive purposes, to prevent the 
competition from using your idea in their product.  
 1. “A Market for Ideas,”  The Economist ,  Oct. 20,  2005 . 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
179
5
 The new emphasis on patents in the high-tech industries has been driven by sev-
eral broad industry trends. 
 
●  The technology in the information technology and telecommunication businesses 
has become so complex that there is a greater willingness to accept the innova-
tions of other companies. The industry has changed from vertically integrated fi rms 
dealing with every aspect of the product or service to a large number of specialist 
companies that focus on narrow sectors of the technology. These companies must 
protect their intellectual property before licensing it to other companies. 
 
●  Since the technology is moving so fast, there is a tendency for cutting-edge tech-
nology to quickly change to a commodity-type business. When this happens, profi t 
margins are reduced, and licensing of the technology is one way to improve the 
profi t situation. 
 
●  Customers are demanding common standards and interoperability between sys-
tems. This means that companies must work together, which often requires pooling 
of patents or cross-licensing agreements. 
 
●  For start-up companies, patents are important because they represent assets that 
can be sold in case the company is not successful and goes out of business. In the 
high-tech world, large companies often buy out small start-ups to get their intellec-
tual property, and their talented workforce. 
 It seems clear that a major force behind the great increase in patent development 
is that everyone seems to be doing it. IBM has around 40,000 patents, and that number 
is increasing by 3000 every year. Nokia, a company with a rather narrow product line, 
has over 12,000 patents worldwide. Hewlett-Packard, a company that refrained from 
intensive patenting of its technology in its early days because founder David Packard 
felt it would help the industry innovate, recently created an intellectual property team 
of 50 lawyers and engineers, and in three years increased its annual licensing revenue 
from $50 million to over $200 million. 
 How Intellectual Property Can Pay Off Big! 
 An excellent example of a company whose profi tability depends on intellectual 
property is Qualcomm. A pioneer in mobile telephones, Qualcomm early on devel-
oped a communication protocol called CDMA. Most other cell phone makers went 
a different way, but Qualcomm persisted, and now CDMA is generally accepted 
and forms the basis of third-generation wireless networks. 
 Initially Qualcomm made handsets, but it sold this business in 1999 to focus 
on developing CDMA and the semiconductor chips that make it possible. Today 
it spends 19 percent of sales on R&D and has over 1800 patents, with 2200 being 
processed through the patent system. Sixty percent of its profi ts come from royal-
ties on other companies’ cell phones that use CDMA. Qualcomm is not a “patent 
troll,” but it is a good example of how if you get the technology right and pursue its 
intellectual property you can make a very nice business. 

180 
engineering design 
5
 Some observers of the scene say that this reminds them of the mutually assured 
destruction scenario that existed during the Cold War. “You build up your patent port-
folio, I’ll build up mine.” The question is whether this proliferation of intellectual 
property is damping down innovation. It certainly means that it becomes more dif-
fi cult to build new products without accidentally infringing on a patent owned by an-
other company. The worst of this situation is exemplifi ed by the “patent trolls,” small 
companies of lawyers who write patents without much reduction to practice to back 
them up, or who buy patents for critical bits of a technology, and then shop for settle-
ments from companies who they claim are infringing on their patents. 
 5.9.2 The Patent System 
 Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution of the United States declares that Congress 
shall have the power to promote progress in science and the useful arts by securing for 
limited times to inventors the exclusive right to their discoveries. A patent granted by 
the U.S. government gives the patentee the right to prevent others from making, using, 
or selling the patented invention for a set period of time. Any patent application fi led 
since 1995 has a term of protection that begins on the date of the grant of the patent 
and ends on a date 20 years after the fi ling date of the application. The 20-year term 
from the date of fi ling brings the United States into harmony with most other coun-
tries in the world in this respect. The most common type of patent, the  utility patent , 
may be issued for a new and useful machine, process, article of manufacture, or com-
position of matter. In addition,  design patents are issued for new ornamental designs 
and  plant patents  are granted on new varieties of plants. Computer software, previ-
ously protected by copyright, became eligible for patenting in 1981. In 1998 a U.S. 
court allowed  business practices  to be patented. In addition, new uses for an invention 
in one of the above classes are patentable. 
 Laws of nature and physical phenomena cannot be patented. Neither can mathe-
matical equations and methods of solving them. In general, abstract ideas cannot be pat-
ented. A 2010 Supreme Court decision ruled that a business method for hedging energy 
purchases was too abstract to qualify for a patent. At the same time the court rejected a 
lower court’s reasoning that only machines and physical transformations could be pat-
ented. Some experts hailed the decision as a move to broaden the scope of patent eli-
gible inventions to be more aligned with the information age. Patents cannot be granted 
merely for changing the size or shape of a machine part, or for substituting a better 
material for an inferior one. Artistic, dramatic, literary, and musical works are protected 
by copyright, not by patents. Prior to 20 years ago, computer software was protected by 
copyrights. Today, this form of intellectual property is protected by patents. 
 There are three general criteria for awarding a patent: 
 
●  The invention must be new or novel. 
 
●  The invention must be useful. 
 
●  It must not be obvious to a person skilled in the art covered by the patent. 
 A key requirement is novelty. Thus, if you are not the fi rst person to propose the 
idea you cannot expect to obtain a patent. If the invention was made in another country, 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
181
5
but it was known or used in the United States before the date of the invention in the 
United States, it would not meet the test of novelty. Finally, if the invention was pub-
lished anywhere in the world before the date of invention but was not known to the 
inventor, it would violate the requirement of novelty. The requirement for usefulness is 
rather straightforward. For example, the discovery of a new chemical compound (com-
position of matter) which has no useful application is not eligible for a patent. The fi nal 
requirement, that the invention be unobvious, can be subject to considerable debate. 
A determination must be made as to whether the invention would have been the next 
logical step based on the state of the art at the time the discovery was made. If it was, 
then there is no patentable discovery. Note that if two people worked on the invention 
they both must be listed as inventors, even if the work of one person resulted in only 
a single claim in the patent. The names of fi nancial backers cannot be on the patent if 
they did not do any of the work. Since most inventors today work for a company, their 
patent by virtue of their employment contract will be assigned to their company. Hope-
fully the company will suitably reward its inventors for their creative work. 
 The requirement for novelty places a major restriction on disclosure prior to fi ling 
a patent application. In the United States the printed publication or public presentation 
at a conference of the description of the invention anywhere in the world more than one 
year before the fi ling of a patent application results in automatic rejection by the Pat-
ent Offi ce. It should be noted that to be grounds for rejection the publication must give 
a description detailed enough so that a person with ordinary skill in the subject area 
could understand and make the invention. Also, public use of the invention or its sale 
in the United States one year or more before patent application results in automatic re-
jection. The patent law also requires diligence in  reduction to practice . If development 
work is suspended for a signifi cant period of time, even though the invention may have 
been complete at that time, the invention may be considered to be abandoned. There-
fore, a patent application should be fi led as soon as it is practical to do so. 
 In the case of competition for awarding a patent for a particular invention, the patent 
is awarded to the inventor who can prove the earliest date of conception of the idea 
and can demonstrate reasonable diligence in reducing the idea to practice. 1 The date 
of invention can best be proved in a court of law if the invention has been recorded in 
a bound laboratory notebook with numbered pages and if the invention has been wit-
nessed by a person competent to understand the idea. For legal purposes, corrobora-
tion of an invention must be proved by people who can testify to what the inventor did 
and the date when it occurred. Therefore, having the invention disclosure notarized is 
of little value since a notary public usually is not in a position to understand a highly 
technical disclosure. Similarly, sending a registered letter to oneself is of little value. 
 1. A major difference between U.S. patent law and almost every other country’s laws is that in the United 
States a patent is awarded to the fi rst person to invent the subject matter, while in other countries the pat-
ent is awarded to the fi rst inventor to fi le a patent application. There is a bill in Congress at the time of 
this writing to change the U.S. patent law so that it conforms to the rest of the world. Another difference 
is that in any country but the United States public disclosure of the invention before fi ling the applica-
tions results in loss of patent rights on grounds of lack of novelty. The U.S. patent system provides for a 
fi ling of a Provisional Patent Application, which sets the fi ling date and gives the inventor one year to 
decide whether to fi le a regular and more expensive patent. 

182 
engineering design 
5
For details about how to apply, draw up, and pursue a patent application the reader is 
referred to the literature on this subject. 1  
 5.9.3 Technology Licensing 
 The right to exclusive use of technology that is granted by a patent may be transferred 
to another party through a licensing agreement. A license may be either an exclu-
sive license, in which it is agreed not to grant any further licenses, or a nonexclusive 
license. The licensing agreement may also contain details as to geographic scope, for 
example, one party gets rights in Europe, another gets rights in South America. Some-
times the license will involve less than the full scope of the technology. Frequently 
consulting services are provided by the licensor for an agreed-upon period. 
 Several forms of fi nancial payment are common. One form is a paid-up license, 
which involves a lump sum payment. Frequently the licensee will agree to pay 
the licensor a percentage of the sales of the products (typically 2 to 5 percent) that utilize 
the new technology, or a fee based on the extent of use of the licensed process. Before 
entering into an agreement to license technology, it is important to make sure that the 
arrangement is consistent with U.S. antitrust laws or that permission has been obtained 
from appropriate government agencies in the foreign country. Note that some defense-
related technology is subject to export control laws.  
 5.9.4 The Patent Literature 
 The U.S. patent system is the largest body of information about technology in the 
world. At present there are over 7 million U.S. patents, and the number is increasing 
by about 190,000 each year. Old patents can be very useful for tracing the develop-
ment of ideas in an engineering fi eld, while new patents describe what is happen-
ing at the frontiers of a fi eld. Patents can be a rich source of ideas. Since only about 
20 percent of the technology that is contained in U.S. patents can be found elsewhere 
in the  published literature, 2  the design engineer who ignores the patent literature is 
aware of only the tip of the iceberg of information. 
 The U.S. Patent and Trademark Offi ce (USPTO) has been highly computerized. 
Its offi cial website at www.uspto.gov contains a great deal of searchable information 
about specifi c patents and trademarks, information about patent laws and regulations, 
and news about patents. Typical reasons for making a patent search are:
1. You have been asked to comment on a patent used by a competitor.
2. You are looking for ideas to improve your design concept.
1. W. G. Konold, What Every Engineer Should Know about Patents, 2d ed., Marcel Dekker, New York, 
1989; M. A. Lechter (ed.), Successful Patents and Patenting for Engineers and Scientists, IEEE Press, 
New York, 1995; D. A. Burge, Patent and Trademark Tactics and Practice, 3d ed., John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, 1999; H. J. Knight, Patent Strategy, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2001; “A Guide to Filing a 
Non-Provisional (utility) Patent Application, U.S. Patent and Trademark Offi ce (available electronically).
2. P. J. Terrago, IEEE Trans. Prof. Comm., vol. PC-22, no. 2, pp. 101–4, 1974.

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
183
5
3. You have come up with a really cool design concept, and you want to determine if 
the idea is novel enough to warrant the expense of preparing a patent submission.
4. You want to continue to update yourself on a particular technology of interest.
Let us see how you could approach the fi rst task listed above. At www.uspto.gov, 
decide whether you wish to search for Patents or Trademarks and click on Search. 
Under Search Full Text patents, since you know the patent number, click on Patent 
Number Search. This gives the name of the patent holder, the date of issue, the 
owner of the patent, the fi ling date, an abstract, references to other pertinent patents, 
the claims, and the patent classes and subclasses that it is fi led under. A copy of the 
full patent, with drawings, can be obtained by clicking on Images at the top of the 
fi rst page. These full-page images are in tag image fi le format (TIF).1
The second task is a bit harder. Without knowing the patent number you will need 
to use the Quick Search feature. You enter keywords, as in searching the abstracts and 
indexes for technical literature, and get back lists of patent numbers and titles in de-
scending date of issue. By clicking Advanced Search, you can fi nd things like all the 
patents owned by a certain company or all patents issued in a certain person’s name. 
Be sure to read the Help page before using this search tool.
The third task is more complicated than the others. To gain confi dence that your 
idea is new, you will need to do a thorough search using the Patent Classifi cation Sys-
tem. U.S. patents have been organized into about 450 classes, and each class is subdi-
vided into many subclasses. All told, there are 150,000 classes/subclasses listed in The 
Manual of Classifi cation. This classifi cation system helps us to fi nd patents between 
closely related topics. The use of this classifi cation system is a fi rst step in making a 
serious patent search.2 If you have already found some pertinent patents, for example, 
by using Google ® Patent Search, these will suggest typical classes and subclasses 
for the subject. The Manual of Classifi cation can be found at http://www.uspto.gov/go/
classifi cation. The issue is that the Quick Search is not guaranteed to produce all rele-
vant patents because they are often fi led under categories that seem strange to the inven-
tor but perfectly logical to the patent examiner. Patent searching is more of an art than a 
science, even though information science has been brought to bear on the problem.
Once the classes and subclasses for appropriate patents have been obtained by 
clicking on Tools to Help Searching by Patent Classifi cation (under Links on the 
left at bottom), you can enter the class/subclass in the appropriate boxes. This will 
give a list of patents in the classifi cation.
To stay up-to-date on an area of technology with the patented literature, you can 
read the weekly issues of the Offi cial Gazette for Patents. An electronic version is 
available from the USPTO home page. Starting on page 2 of the USPO website, click 
on Patent Offi ce Gazette. You can browse by classifi cation, name of inventor or as-
signee, and state in which the inventor resides. The last 52 weeks of issues can be 
1. Another important source of patent information is worldwide.espacenet.com. This website for the 
European Patent Offi ce has over 59 million patents from 72 countries.
2. An excellent online tutorial on the use of the patent classifi cation system is available from the 
 McKinney Engineering Library, University of Texas, Austin. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/engin/patent-
tutorial/index.htm.

184 
engineering design 
5
read online. After that they are available in the Annual Index of Patents, available on 
DVD-ROM, or in the printed index available in many libraries. The Patent Offi ce has 
established a nationwide system of Patent Depository Libraries where patents can be 
examined and copied. Many of these are at university libraries.
Many people experience diffi culty printing the fi gures from patents viewed on the 
USPTO website. An alternative site that is more user-friendly is the Patents Search 
application in Google. Another website from which clear copies of patents can be 
downloaded is www.pat2pdf.org. While Google Patents Search is a user-friendly site, 
it does not have the capability for fi nding patents when the topic is spread over mul-
tiple classes and subclasses, which is common, and therefore it cannot guarantee a 
complete search.  
 E X A M P L E 5 .1  Objective Find patents on the making of parts by powder forging. 
 
 Starting with www.uspto.gov/go/classifi cation, we click on Index to the U.S. Patent 
Classifi cation System at the top of the page. Next click on U.S. Patent Classifi cation 
(USPC) Index. Under P, fi nd  Powder / metallurgy/Sintering then working  because forg-
ing is a metalworking process. This gives classifi cation 419/28. Clicking on 28 produces a 
list of 696 patents and titles. Clicking on any one will give the details of the patent. 
 Using Quick Search with the key words “powder forging” gave 94 patents. 
 5.9.5 Reading a Patent 
 Because a patent is a legal document, it is organized and written in a style much dif-
ferent from the style of the usual technical paper. Patents must stand on their own and 
contain suffi cient disclosure to permit the public to practice the invention after the 
patent expires. Therefore, each patent is a complete exposition on the problem, the 
solution to the problem, and the applications for the invention in practical use. 
 Figure 5.2 shows the fi rst page of a patent for a basketball return apparatus. This 
page carries bibliographic information, information about the examination process, 
an abstract, and a general drawing of the invention. At the very top we fi nd the inven-
tor, the patent number, and the date of issuance. Below the line on the left we fi nd the 
title of the invention, the inventor(s) and address(es), the date the patent application 
was fi led, and the application number. Next are listed the class and subclass for both 
the U.S. patent system and the international classifi cation system and the U.S. classes 
in which the examiner searched for prior art. The references are the patents that the 
examiner cited as showing the most prior art at the time of the invention. The rest of 
the page is taken up with a detailed abstract and a key drawing of the invention. Ad-
ditional pages of drawings follow, each keyed to the description of the invention.  
 The body of the patent starts with a section on the Background of the Invention 
followed by the Summary of the Invention and a Brief Description of the Drawings. 
Most of the patent is taken up by the description of the Preferred Embodiment. This 
comprises a detailed description and explanation of the invention, often in legal terms 
and phrases that are strange-sounding to the engineer. The examples cited show as 
broadly as possible how to practice the invention, how to use the products, and how the 
invention is superior to prior art. Not all examples describe experiments that were actu-
ally run, but they do provide the inventor’s teaching of how they should best be run. 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
185
5
 FIGURE 5.2 
 The fi rst page of a U.S. patent for a basketball return apparatus. 
United States Patent  [19]
Joseph
[11]
[45]
Patent Number:
Date of Patent:
5,540,428
Jul. 30, 1996
[54]
[76]    Inventor:    John G. Joseph,  3305 C.H. 47, Upper
 
        Sandusky, Ohio 43351 
[57]                               ABSTRACT
[21]    Appl. No.: 393,351 
[22]    Filed:          Feb. 23, 1995 
[51]
[58]
[56]
BASKETBALL RETRIEVAL AND RETURN
APPARATUS
Int. Cl.6 ..............................................  A63B 69/00
[52]
U.S. Cl. ..............................................  273/1.5 A
Field of Search ...............................  273/1.5 A, 396,
273/397
 
References Cited
U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS
8 Claims, 5 Drawing Sheets
A basketball retrieval and return apparatus is used in com-
30
10
58
52
26
16
48
36
60
66
68
62
14
74
76
70
64
72
12
56
54
28
32
78
80
82
30
30
4,786,731
4,936,577
5,333,853
5,393,049
11/1988
6/1990
8/1994
2/1995
Postol   ..... .................................
Kington et al.     ........................
Hektor     ...................................
Nelson     ...................................
273/1.5 A
273/1.5 A
273/1.5 A
273/1.5 A
Primary Examiner—Paul E. Shapiro
Attorney, Agent, or Firm—George C. Atwell 
US005540428A
bination with a pole-supported basketball backboard to
collect shot basketballs that either ricochet off 
the backboard or fall through a rim attached to the 
backboard for returning the basketballs to the 
practicing player or players. The apparatus includes a 
bracket removably mountable to the lowest portion of 
the backboard, an elongated support bar pivotally 
mounted to the bracket, and a U-shaped ring bar 
attached to the support bar and which extends 
outwardly from and perpendicular to the backboard 
when the ring bar is pivoted from a non-use to a use 
position. In order to maintain the ring bar in its use 
position, a U-shaped support member is attached to the 
ring bar and pivots downward toward the level surface 
or ground so that a pole brace attached to the support 
member can have one end mounted to a pole bracket 
which is secured generally to the mid-point of the pole. 
When the U-shaped ring bar is disposed in its use 
position, a flexible, collapsibly-extensible netting 
attached to the ring bar encompasses the rim and net, 
collects the thrown basketballs, and directs the 
basketballs to a ball return structure located at the 
lowest part of the netting whereupon the basketballs  
can be retrieved by the players.

186 
engineering design 
5
The last part of the patent comprises the claims of the invention. These are the legal 
description of the rights of invention. The broadest claims are usually placed fi rst, with 
more specifi c claims toward the end of the list. The strategy in writing a patent is to 
aim at getting the broadest possible claims. The broadest claims are often disallowed 
fi rst, so it is necessary to write narrower and narrower claims so that not all claims are 
disallowed. 
 There is a very important difference between a patent and a technical paper. In 
writing a patent, inventors and their attorneys purposely broaden the scope to include 
all materials, conditions, and procedures that are believed to be equally likely to be 
operative as the conditions that were actually tested and observed. The purpose is to 
develop the broadest possible claims. This is a perfectly legitimate legal practice, but 
it has the risk that some of the ways of practicing the invention that are described in 
the embodiments might not actually work. If that happens, then the way is left open to 
declare the patent to be invalid if the patent is ever contested in court. 
 Another major difference between patents and technical papers is that patents 
usually avoid any detailed discussion of theory or why the invention works. Those 
subjects are avoided to minimize any limitations to the claims of the patent that could 
arise through the argument that the discovery would have been obvious from an un-
derstanding of the theory. 
 5.9.6 Copyrights 
 A copyright is the exclusive legal right to publish a tangible expression of literary, 
scientifi c, or artistic work, whether it appears in digital, print, audio, or visual form. 
It gives a right to the owner of the copyright to prevent the unauthorized copying by 
another of that work. In the United States a copyright is awarded for a period of the 
life of the copyright holder plus 50 years. It is not necessary to publish a copyright 
notice for a work to be copyrighted. A copyright comes into existence when one fi xes 
the work in “any tangible medium of expression.” For best protection the document 
should be marked © copyright 2006, John Doe, and registered with the U.S. Copy-
right Offi ce of the Library of Congress. Unlike a patent, a copyright requires no exten-
sive search to ensure the degree of originality of the work. 
 A basic principle of copyright law is the principle of  fair use  in which an indi-
vidual has the right to make a single copy of copyrighted material for personal use for 
the purpose of criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research. 
Copying that does not constitute fair use requires the payment of a royalty fee to the 
Copyright Clearance Center. While the U.S. Copyright Act does not directly defi ne 
fair use, it does base it on four factors: 1 
 
●  The purpose and character of the use—is it of a commercial nature or for nonprofi t 
educational purposes? 
 
●  The nature of the copyrighted work—is it a highly creative work or a more routine 
document?  
 1.  D. V .  Radack ,  JOM, February  1996 . 

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
187
5
 
●  The amount of the work used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole. 
 
●  The effect of the use on the potential market value of the copyrighted work. Usu-
ally this is the most important of the factors.  
 5.10 
 COMPANY-CENTERED INFORMATION 
 We started this chapter with an attempt to alert you to the magnitude of the problem 
with gathering information for design. Then we introduced you to each of the major 
sources of engineering information in the library and on the Internet, as well as giving 
you many trusted places to get started in your “information treasure hunt.” This last 
section deals more specifi cally with company-based information and alerts you to the 
importance of gaining information by networking with colleagues at work and within 
professional organizations. 
 We can differentiate between  formal  (explict) sources of information and  infor-
mal  (tacit) sources. The sources of information considered in this chapter have been 
of the formal type. Examples are technical articles and patents. Informal sources are 
chiefl y those in which information transfers on a personal level. For example, a col-
league may remember that Sam Smith worked on a similar project fi ve years ago and 
suggests that you check the library or fi le room to fi nd his notebooks and any reports 
that he may have written. 
 The degree to which individual engineers pursue one or the other approaches to 
fi nding information depends on several factors: 
 
●  The nature of the project. Is it closer to an academic thesis, or is it a “fi refi ghting” 
project that needs to be done almost immediately? 
 
●  The personality and temperament of the individual. Is he a loner who likes to puz-
zle things out on his own, or a gregarious type who has a wide circle of friends 
willing to share their experience at any time? 
 
●  Conversations are sometimes crucial to the solution of a problem. In this environ-
ment, knowledge sharing can form a community of understanding in which new 
ideas are created. 
 
●  The corporate culture concerning knowledge generation and management. Has the 
organization emphasized the importance of sharing information and developed 
methods to retain the expertise of senior engineers in ways that it can be easily 
accessed? 
 
●  Perhaps the necessary information is known to exist but it is classifi ed, available 
only to those with a need to know. This requires action by higher management to 
gain you access to the information. 
 Clearly, the motivated and experienced engineer will learn to utilize both kinds of 
information sources, but each person will favor either explicit or tacit information 
sources. 
 In the busy world of the design engineer, relevance is valued above all else. In-
formation that supplies just the needed answer to a particular stress analysis problem 
is more prized than a source that shows how to work a class of stress problems and 

188 
engineering design 
5
contains the nugget of information that can be applied to the actual problem. Books 
are generally considered to be highly reliable, but out-of-date. Periodicals can provide 
the timeliness that is required, but there is a tendency to be overwhelmed by sheer 
numbers. In deciding which article to sit down and read, many engineers quickly read 
the abstract, followed by a scan of the graphs, tables, and conclusions. 
 The amount of design information that can be obtained from within the company 
is quite considerable and of many varieties. Examples are: 
 
●  Product specifi cations  
 
●  Concept designs for previous products 
 
●  Test data on previous products 
 
●  Bill of materials on previous products 
 
●  Cost data on previous projects 
 
●  Reports on previous design projects 
 
●  Marketing data on previous products 
 
●  Sales data on previous products 
 
●  Warranty reports on previous products 
 
●  Manufacturing data 
 
●  Design guides prepared for new employees 
 
●  Company standards 
 Ideally this information will be concentrated in a central engineering library. It may 
even be neatly packaged, product by product, but most likely much of the information 
will be dispersed between a number of offi ces in the organization. Often it will need 
to be pried out individual by individual. Here is where the development of a good net-
work among your colleagues pays big dividends. 
5.11
 SUMMARY 
 The gathering of design information is not a trivial task. It requires knowledge of 
a wide spectrum of information sources. These sources are, in increasing order of 
specifi city: 
 
●  The World Wide Web, and its access to digital databases 
 
●  Business catalogs and other trade literature 
 
●  Government technical reports and business data 
 
●  Published technical literature, including trade magazines 
 
●  Network of professional friends, aided by e-mail 
 
●  Network of professional colleagues at work 
 
●  Corporate consultants 
 At the outset it is a smart move to make friends with a knowledgeable librarian or in-
formation specialist in your company or at a local library who will help you become 
familiar with the information sources and their availability. Also, devise a plan to de-
velop your own information resources of handbooks, texts, tearsheets from magazines, 
computer software, websites, and a digital portfolio of your own work products.   

 
chapter 5: Gathering Information 
189
5
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Citation searching
Copyright
Gray literature
HTML
Intellectual property
Internet
Keyword
Monograph
Patent
Periodical
Reference port
Search engine
TCP/IP
Technical journal
Trade magazine
Trademark
URL
World Wide Web
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Anthony ,  L. J .:  Information Sources in Engineering,  Butterworth, Boston ,  1985 .  Guide to Ma-
terials Engineering Data and Information,    ASM International, Materials Park, OH ,  1986 . 
 Lord ,  C. R .:  Guide to Information Sources in Engineering,  Libraries Unlimited, Englewood, 
CO ,  2000 (emphasis on U.S. engineering literature and sources). 
 MacLeod ,  R. A .:  Information Sources in Engineering,   4th ed.,  K. G. Saur, Munich ,  2005  (em-
phasis on British engineering literature and sources). 
 Osif, B. A.: Using the Engineering Literature, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2006. 
 Wall ,  R. A . (ed.):  Finding and Using Product Information,  Gower, London ,  1986 . 
 PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES 
 5.1  Prepare in writing a personal plan for combating technological obsolescence. Be spe-
cifi c about the things you intend to do and read. 
 5.2  Select a technical topic of interest to you. 
(a) 
  Compare the information that is available on this subject in a general encyclopedia 
and a technical encyclopedia. 
(b)  Look for more specifi c information on the topic in a handbook. 
(c) 
 Find fi ve current texts or monographs on the subject. 
 5.3  Use the indexing and abstracting services to obtain at least 20 current references on a 
technical topic of interest to you. Use appropriate indexes to fi nd 10 government reports 
related to your topic. 
 5.4  Search for: 
(a) 
 U.S. government publications dealing with the disposal of nuclear waste; 
(b)  metal matrix composites. 
 5.5  Where would you fi nd the following information? 
(a) 
 The services of a taxidermist. 
(b)  A consultant on carbon-fi ber-reinforced composite materials. 

190 
engineering design 
5
(c) 
 The price of an X3427 semiconductor chip. 
(d)  The melting point of osmium. 
(e) 
 The proper hardening treatment for AISI 4320 steel. 
 5.6  Find and read a technical standard on the air fl ow performance characteristics of vac-
uum cleaners in the ASTM Standards. List some other standards concerning vacuum 
cleaners. Write a brief report about the kind of information covered in a standard. 
 5.7  Find a U.S. patent on a favorite topic. Print it out and identify each element of the patent 
as described in Sec. 5.9.5. 
 5.8  Discuss how priority is established in patent litigation. 
 5.9  Find out more information on the U.S. Provisional Patent. Discuss its advantages and 
disadvantages. 
5.10  Find out about the history of Jerome H. Lemelson, who holds over 500 U.S. patents and 
who endowed the Lemelson prize for innovation at M.I.T. 
5.11  In the discussion of copyrights in Section 5.9.6,
(a) 
What is the meaning of the term “tangible expression”?
(b) Explain the concept of fair use of creative works that have copyright protection.
(c) 
 How does ready electronic access affect the fair use guidelines that were estab-
lished in 1978 before personal computers and the Internet?
(d)  What are some proposals that have been made to modify the copyright law to better 
address the needs of the digital age?  

6
191
6
6
CONCEPT GENERATION
The most innovative products are the result of not only remembering useful design 
concepts but also recognizing promising concepts that arise in other disciplines. The 
best engineers will use creative thinking methods and design processes that assist in 
the synthesis of new concepts not previously imagined. Practical methods for enhanc-
ing creativity like brainstorming and Synectics, developed in the 20th century, are 
now adapted and adopted as methods for generating design concepts.
Creative idea generation is an intuitive way to proceed to a feasible design solution. 
However, being able to fi nd one or two good concept ideas from a creative idea mak-
ing session is not the same as generating a feasible conceptual design in engineering. 
Engineering systems are typically very complex, and their design requires structured 
problem solving at many points in the process. This means that all of the creativity 
available to an engineer or designer is called on several times in the design process and 
is used to arrive at alternative concepts for a small portion of an overall design task. 
Thus, all the creativity-enhancing methods are valuable to engineering designers dur-
ing the conceptual design process (see Fig. 6.1).
Creative thinking is highly valued across many fi elds of endeavor, especially 
those that deal with problem solving. Naturally then, creativity-enhancing methods 
are offered in workplace seminars, and recruiters of new talent are including creativ-
ity as a high-value characteristic in job applicants. This chapter opens with a short 
section on how the human brain is able to perform creatively, and how successful 
problem solving is seen as a demonstration of creative skill. Methods for thinking in 
ways that increase creative results in problem-solving contexts have been codifi ed by 
specialists in several fi elds and are presented here.
No engineering activity requires more creativity than design. The ability to iden-
tify concepts that will achieve particular functions required by a product is a cre-
ative task. Section 6.3 shows how creativity methods and creative problem-solving 

192 
engineering design 
6
techniques are fundamental skills of engineering designers. It follows then that some 
methods for concept generation in the product development process blend engineering 
science and creative thinking techniques. The remainder of the chapter introduces 
three of the most common engineering design methods: Functional Decomposition 
and Synthesis in Sec. 6.5; Morphological Analysis in Sec. 6.6; and, the Theory of In-
ventive Problem Solving, TRIZ, in Sec. 6.7. The basics of each method are presented 
with examples illustrating the method’s core ideas. Each section includes many excel-
lent references for the reader wishing to study the design methods in more detail.
6.1
INTRODUCTION TO CREATIVE THINKING
During past periods of growth in the United States, manufacturing managers believed 
that a product development organization could be successful with only a small number 
of creative people and the majority of the professionals being detail-oriented doers. 
Today’s fi erce worldwide competition for markets, new products, and engineering 
dominance is changing that mindset. Current business strategists believe that only 
organizations that create the most innovative and advanced products and processes 
will survive, let alone thrive. Thus, each engineer has a strong incentive to improve 
his or her own creative abilities and put them to work in engineering tasks.
FIGURE 6.1
Product development process diagram displaying where creativity methods fi t into the con-
ceptual design process.
Define
problem
Problem statement
Benchmarking
Product dissection
House of Quality
PDS
Gather
information
Conceptual design
Internet
Patents
Technical articles
Trade journals
Consultants
Concept
generation
Creativity methods
Brainstorming
Functional models
Decomposition
Systematic design
methods
Evaluate &
select concept
Decision making
Selection criteria
Pugh chart
Decision matrix
AHP
Product
architecture
Arrangement of
physical elements
Modularity
Configuration
design
Preliminary
selection of
materials and
manufacturing
processes
Modeling
Sizing of parts
Parametric
design
Robust design
Set tolerances
DFM, DFA, DFE
Tolerances
Detail
design
Engineering
drawings
Finalize PDS
Embodiment design

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
193
6
Society’s view of creativity has changed over time. During the 19th century, cre-
ativity was seen as a romantic and mysterious characteristic. Scholars believed cre-
ativity to be an unexplainable personal talent present at the birth of an artist. It was 
thought that creativity was unable to be taught, copied, or mimicked. Individual cre-
ativity was a kind of genius that was nurtured and developed in those with the natural 
gift. The rising popularity of the scientifi c approach in the 20th century changed the 
perception of creativity. Creativity was measurable and, therefore, controllable. That 
perspective grew into the progressive notion that creativity is a teachable skill for indi-
viduals and groups. Today’s managers recognize that the same kind of psychological 
and physiologically based cognitive processes that produce artistic creativity are used 
in the deliberate reasoning about and development of solutions.
6.1.1 Models of the Brain and Creativity
The science of thinking and the more narrow science of design are classifi ed as sci-
ences of the artifi cial.1 Exploring natural sciences is based on investigating phenom-
ena that can be observed by the scientist. Unfortunately, it is not possible to observe 
and examine the steps that a creative person’s brain follows while solving a problem 
or imagining a potential design. One can only study the results of the process (e.g., a 
problem solution or a design) and any commentary on how they developed as stated or 
recorded by the producer.2
Advances in medicine and technology have expanded the boundaries of the 
activities of the brain that are observable and can be studied in real time. Modern 
neuroscience uses sophisticated tools such as functional MRI and positron emission 
tomography to observe the brain in action. The fi eld is making great strides in reveal-
ing how the brain works by identifying which parts of the brain are responsible for 
particular actions. While technology is helping scientists to investigate the physical 
workings of the brain, cognitive scientists are still at work on investigating the work-
ings of the human mind so that the best thinking skills and methods of thought can be 
learned and taught for the benefi t of all.
Understanding thinking is the realm of cognitive scientists and psychologists.3 
In general terms, cognition is the act of human thinking. Thinking is the execution 
of cognitive processes like the activities of collecting, organizing, fi nding, and using 
knowledge. Cognitive psychology is the more specialized study of the acquisition and 
use of knowledge by humans in their activities. The psychological aspects of human 
behavior must be considered in helping us to understand a person’s thinking because 
cognitive processes are naturally infl uenced by an individual’s perceptions and repre-
sentations of knowledge. Skills for developing creative thinking come from sciences 
that study human thinking, actions, and behavior.
1. H. A. Simon, Sciences of the Artifi cial, 3d ed., MIT Publishing, Cambridge, MA, 1996.
2. Thinking about one’s own thought process as applied to a particular task is called metacognition.
3. M. M. Smyth, A. F. Collins, P. E. Morris, and P. Levy, Cognition in Action, 2d ed. Psychology Press, 
East Sussex, UK, 1994.

194 
engineering design 
6
Freud’s Model of Levels of the Mind
Psychologists have developed several models of how the brain processes informa-
tion and creates thoughts. Sigmund Freud developed a topographical model of the 
mind consisting of three levels:
 
● Conscious mind : the part of the mind where our current thinking and objects of 
attention take place. You can verbalize about your conscious experience, and you can 
think about it in a logical fashion. The conscious mind has relatively small capacity for 
storage of information in its memory. This memory can be categorized as immediate 
memory, lasting only milliseconds, and working memory lasting about a minute.
 
● Preconscious mind : the long-term memory, lasting anywhere from about an hour 
to several years. This is a vast storehouse of information, ideas, and relationships 
based on past experience and education. While things stored here are not in the 
conscious, they can be readily brought into the conscious mind. 
 
● Subconscious mind : the content of this mind level is out of reach of the conscious 
mind. Thus, the subconscious acts independently of the conscious mind. It may 
distort the relation of the conscious and preconscious through its control of symbols 
and the generation of bias.
Freud developed his model to explain personality types and their behaviors based 
on his own training, experience, and beliefs about cognition. Freud’s work led to the 
important conclusion that much behavior is driven directly from the subconscious 
mind, and these actions cannot be controlled by the conscious mind. One needs to be 
clear that Freud’s levels of the mind are not necessarily physical locations in the brain. 
They are a model of the brain that helps to explain the ways that the brain appears to 
work when judged only by observing the actions of its owner.
Freud’s levels of consciousness are used to help explain the process by which 
problems are solved in a creative fashion. The actions of the conscious mind are used 
to collect relevant information about a task while the pre- and subconscious levels of 
the mind are suspected of working on that information over time and then passing a 
solution to the conscious level of the brain in a fl ash of insight.
Brain-Dominance Theory
A second important model of the brain is the brain-dominance theory. Nobel 
Prize winner Roger Sperry studied the relationships between the brain’s right and left 
hemispheres. He found that the left side of the brain tends to function by processing 
information in an analytical, rational, logical, sequential way. The right half of the 
brain tends to function by recognizing relationships, integrating and synthesizing in-
formation, and arriving at intuitive insights. Thinking that utilizes the left hemisphere 
of the brain is called critical or convergent thinking. Other terms for left-brained 
thinking are analytic or vertical thinking. It is generally associated with persons edu-
cated in the technical disciplines. Thinking that utilizes the right hemisphere of the 
brain is called creative or divergent thinking. Other terms for right-brained thinking 
are associative or lateral thinking. It is found most often with persons educated in the 
arts or social sciences. Examples of these two classifi cations of thinking operations 
are given in Table 6.1.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
195
6
The understanding of the physiology of the brain is useful in research on cogni-
tion. Study of the brain physiology has revealed that there are connections between 
the two hemispheres of the brain and within the same hemisphere.1 The number of 
connections between the hemispheres varies. In general, women appear to have a 
higher number of these cross connections, and this difference is noted as one ex-
planation for women’s higher capacity for multitasking. Connections found within 
the same hemisphere of the brain allow closer connections between the specialized 
areas of thought.
Researchers like Herrmann have developed a means of characterizing how in-
dividuals think according to the preference with which they seem to access different 
areas of the brain. Herrmann’s instrument is a standardized test, the Herrmann Brain 
Dominance Instrument (HBDITM). It is similar in nature to the Kolb Learning Style 
Inventory or the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) personality classifi cation in-
struments. Using tests like these, engineers often test as being as left-brained, prefer-
ring to think in logical, linear, and convergent ways. This skill set is ideal for analysis 
and deductive problem solving, but is not ideal for creative activities.
The brain-dominance model of thinking seems to fall short of giving concrete 
steps that one can follow to think up a creative idea when it is needed. However with 
study and practice, there is no reason that you cannot become adept at using both sides 
of your brain. Many training methods exist to encourage the use of the right side of 
the brain in problem solving such as that proposed by Buzan.2 This model also pro-
vides support for having a team of members with diverse thinking styles working on 
problems requiring creativity and invention.
TABLE 6.1
Comparison of Left-Brained and Right-Brained Thinking
Critical Thinking (Left Brain) 
Creative Thinking (Right Brain)
Logical, analytic, judgmental process
Generative, suspended judgment
Linear
Associative
Leads to only one solution
Creates many possible solutions
Considers only relevant information
Considers broad range of information
Movement is made in a sequential, rule-based 
manner
Movement is made in a more random pattern
Embodies scientifi c principles
Heavily infl uenced by symbols and imagery
Classifi cations and labels are rigid
Reclassifi es objects to generate ideas
Vertical
Lateral
Convergent
Divergent
1. E. Lumsdain, M. Lumsdain, and J. W. Shelnutt, Creative Problem Solving and Engineering Design, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
2. T. Buzan, Use Both Sides of Your Brain, Penguin Group, USA, New York, 1991.

196 
engineering design 
6
6.1.2 Thinking Processes That Lead to Creative Ideas
Researchers have discovered that, generally speaking, the thought processes or mental 
operations used to develop a creative idea are the same processes that are routinely used. 
The good news about this view of creativity is that these strategies for achieving cre-
ative thinking can be accomplished by deliberate use of particular techniques, meth-
ods, or in the case of computational tools, software programs.
The study of creativity usually focuses on both the creator and the created object.1 
The fi rst step is to study people who are considered to be creative and to study the 
development of inventions that display creativity. The assumption is that studying the 
thinking processes of the creative people will lead to a set of steps or procedures that 
can improve the creativity of the output of anyone’s thinking. Similarly, studying the 
development of a creative artifact should reveal a key decision or defi ning moment 
that accounts for the outcome. This is a promising path if the processes used in each 
case have been adequately documented.
The fi rst research strategy will lead us to creativity process techniques like those 
introduced in Sec. 6.2.1 and 6.3. The second strategy of studying creative objects to 
discover the winning characteristic has led to the development of techniques that use 
a previous set of successful designs to fi nd inspiration for new ones. Analogy-based 
methods fall into this category, as do methods that generalize principles for future use, 
like TRIZ (see Sec. 6.7).
6.2
CREATIVITY AND PROBLEM SOLVING
Creative thinkers are distinguished by their ability to synthesize new combinations 
of ideas and concepts into meaningful and useful forms. A creative engineer is one 
who produces a lot of useful ideas. These can be completely original ideas inspired 
by a discovery. More often, creative ideas result from putting existing ideas together 
in novel ways. A creative person is adept at breaking a problem-solving task down to 
take a fresh look at its parts, or in making connections between the current problem 
and seemingly unrelated observations or facts.
We would all like to be called “creative,” yet many of us feel that creativity is 
reserved for only the gifted few. There is the popular myth that creative ideas arrive 
with fl ash-like spontaneity—the fl ash of lightning and clap of thunder routine. How-
ever, researchers of the creative process assure us that most ideas occur by a slow, 
deliberate process that can be cultivated and enhanced with study and practice.
A characteristic of the creative process is that initially the idea is only imperfectly 
understood. Usually the creative person senses the total structure of the idea but ini-
tially perceives only a limited number of its details. There ensues a slow process of 
clarifi cation and exploration as the entire idea takes shape. The creative process can be 
1. K. S. Bowers, P. Farvolden, and L. Mermigis, “Intuitive Antecedents of Insight,” in The Creative 
Cognition Approach, Steven Smith, Thomas Ward, and Ronald Finke (eds.), The MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, 1995.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
197
6
viewed as moving from a vague idea to a well-structured idea, from the chaotic to the 
organized, from the implicit to the explicit. Engineers, by nature and training, usually 
value order and explicit detail and abhor chaos and vague generality. Thus, we need 
to train ourselves to be open to these aspects of the creative process. Recognizing that 
the fl ow of creative ideas cannot be turned on upon command, we need to identify 
the conditions that are most conducive to creative thought. Recognizing that creative 
ideas are elusive, we need to be alert to capture and record our creative thoughts.
6.2.1 Supports to Creative Thinking
A group of researchers in the sciences named the successful use of thought processes 
and existing knowledge to produce creative ideas creative cognition.1 Creative cogni-
tion is the use of regular cognitive operations to solve problems in novel ways. One 
way to increase the likelihood of positive outcomes is to apply methods found to be 
useful for others. Following are steps you can take to enhance your creative thinking.
1. Develop a creative attitude: To be creative it is essential to develop confi dence that 
you can provide a creative solution to a problem. Although you may not visualize 
the complete path through to the fi nal solution at the time you fi rst tackle a prob-
lem, you must have self-confi dence; you must believe that a solution will develop 
before you are fi nished.
2. Unlock your imagination: You must rekindle the vivid imagination you had as a 
child. One way to do so is to begin to question again. Ask “why” and “what if,” 
even at the risk of displaying a bit of naïveté. Scholars of the creative process have 
developed thought games that are designed to provide practice in unlocking your 
imagination and sharpening creative ability.
3. Be persistent: Creativity often requires hard work. Most problems will not succumb 
to the fi rst attack. They must be pursued with persistence. After all, Edison tested 
over 6000 materials before he discovered the species of bamboo that acted as a suc-
cessful fi lament for the incandescent light bulb. It was also Edison who made the 
famous comment, “Invention is 95 percent perspiration and 5 percent inspiration.”
4. Develop an open mind: Having an open mind means being receptive to ideas from 
any and all sources. The solutions to problems are not the property of a particular 
discipline, nor is there any rule that solutions can come only from persons with 
college degrees. Ideally, problem solutions should not be concerned with company 
politics. Because of the NIH factor (not invented here), many creative ideas are not 
picked up and followed through.
5. Suspend your judgment: Nothing inhibits the creative process more than critical 
judgment of an emerging idea. Engineers, by nature, tend toward critical attitudes, 
so special forbearance is required to avoid judgment at an early stage of concep-
tual design.
1. Steven Smith, Thomas Ward, and Ronald Finke (eds.), The Creative Cognition Approach, The MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995.

198 
engineering design 
6
6. Set problem boundaries: We place great emphasis on proper problem defi nition as 
a step toward problem solution. Establishing the boundaries of the problem is an 
essential part of problem defi nition. Experience shows that setting problem bound-
aries appropriately, not too tight or not too open, is critical to achieving a creative 
solution.
Some psychologists describe the creative thinking process and problem solving in 
terms of a simple four-stage model.1
 
● Preparation (stage 1): The elements of the problem are examined and their interre-
lations are studied.
 
● Incubation (stage 2): You “sleep on the problem.” Sleep disengages your conscious 
mind, allowing the unconscious mind to work on a problem freely.
 
● Inspiration (stage 3): A solution or a path toward the solution emerges. 
 
● Verifi cation (stage 4): The inspired solution is checked against the desired result.
The preparation stage should not be slighted. The design problem is clarifi ed 
and defi ned. Information is gathered, assimilated, and discussed among the team. 
Generally, more than one session will be required to complete this phase. Between 
team meetings the subconscious mind works on the problem to provide new ap-
proaches and ideas. The incubation period then follows. A creative experience often 
occurs when the individual is not expecting it and after a period when they have 
been thinking about something else. Observing this relationship between fi xation 
and incubation led Smith to conclude that incubation time is a necessary pause in 
the process. Incubation time allows fi xation to lessen so that thinking can continue.2 
Other theorists suggest that this time allows for the activation of thought patterns and 
searches to fade, allowing new ones to emerge when thinking about the problem is 
resumed.3
One prescription for improving creativity is to fi ll the mind and imagination with 
the context of the problem and then relax and think of something else. As you read 
or play a game there is a release of mental energy that your preconscious can use to 
work on the problem. Frequently there will be a creative “Ah-ha” experience in which 
the preconscious will hand up into your conscious mind a picture of what the solution 
might be.
Insight is the name science gives to the sudden realization of a solution. There 
are many explanations of how insight moments occur. Consultants in creativity train 
people to encourage the insight process, even though it is not a well-understood one. 
Insight can occur when the mind has restructured a problem in such a way that the 
previous impediments to solutions are eliminated, and unfulfi lled constraints are sud-
denly satisfi ed.
1. S. Smith, “Fixation, Incubation, and Insight in Memory and Creative Thinking,” in The Creative Cog-
nition Approach, Steven Smith, Thomas Ward, and Ronald Finke (eds.), The MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, 1995.
2. Ibid.
3. J. W. Schooler and J. Melcher, “The Ineffability of Insight,” in The Creative Cognition Approach, 
Steven Smith, Thomas Ward, and Ronald Finke (eds.), The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
199
6
Since the preconscious has no vocabulary, the communication between the con-
scious and preconscious will be by pictures or symbols. This is why it is important for 
engineers to be able to communicate effectively through sketches. If the inspiration 
stage does not occur in the dramatic manner just described, then the prepared minds 
of the team members achieve the creative concept through a more extended series 
of meetings using the methods considered in the balance of this chapter. Finally, the 
ideas generated must be validated against the problem specifi cation using the evalua-
tion methods discussed in Chap. 7.
To achieve a truly creative solution to a problem, one must utilize two thinking 
styles: convergent thinking and divergent thinking. Convergent thinking is the type of 
analytical thought process reinforced by most engineering courses where one moves 
forward in sequential steps after a positive decision has been made about the idea. If 
a negative decision is made at any point in the process, you must retrace your steps 
along the analysis trail until the original concept statement is reached. In lateral think-
ing your mind moves in many different directions, combining different pieces of in-
formation into new patterns (synthesis) until several solution concepts appear.
6.2.2 Barriers to Creative Thinking
It is important for you to  recognize how mental blocks interfere with creative thinking.1 
A mental block is a mental wall that prevents the problem solver from correctly per-
ceiving a problem or conceiving its solution. A mental block is an event that inhib-
its the successful use of normal cognitive processes to come to a solution. There are 
many different types of mental blocks.
Perceptual Blocks
Perceptual blocks have to do with not properly defi ning the problem and not rec-
ognizing the information needed to solve it.
 
● Stereotyping: Thinking conventionally or in a formulaic way about an event, person, 
or way of doing something. The brain classifi es and stores information in labeled 
groups. When new information is taken in, it is compared with established catego-
ries and assigned to the appropriate group. This leads to stereotyping of ideas since 
it imposes preconceptions on mental images. As a result, it is diffi cult to combine 
apparently unrelated images into an entirely new creative solution for the design.
 
● Information overload: You become so overloaded with minute details that you are 
unable to sort out the critical aspects of the problem. This scenario is termed “not 
being able to see the forest for the trees.” Cognitively this is a situation of engaging 
all the available short-term memory so that there is no time for related searches in 
long-term memory.
 
● Limiting the problem unnecessarily: Broad statements of the problem help keep the 
mind open to a wider range of ideas.
1. J. L. Adams, Conceptual Blockbusting, 3d ed., Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1986.

200 
engineering design 
6
 
● Fixation: 1 People’s thinking can be infl uenced so greatly by their previous experi-
ence or some other bias that they are not able to suffi ciently recognize alternative 
ideas. Since divergent thinking is critical to generating broad sets of ideas, fi xation 
must be recognized and dealt with. A kind of fi xation called memory blocking is 
discussed in the section on intellectual blocks.
 
● Priming or provision of cues: If the thinking process is started by giving examples 
or solution cues, it is possible for thinking to stay within the realm of solutions sug-
gested by those initial starting points. This is known as the conformity effect. Some 
capstone design instructors have noted this commenting that once students fi nd a 
relevant patent for solving a design problem, many of their new concepts follow the 
same solution principle.
Emotional Blocks
These are obstacles that are concerned with the psychological safety of the indi-
vidual. They reduce the freedom with which you can explore and manipulate ideas. 
They also interfere with your ability to conceptualize readily.
 
● Fear of risk taking: This is the fear of proposing an idea that is ultimately found 
to be faulty. This is inbred in us by the educational process. Truly creative people 
must be comfortable with taking risks.
 
● Unease with chaos: People in general, and many engineers in particular, are un-
comfortable with highly unstructured situations.
 
● Inability or unwillingness to incubate new ideas: In our busy lives, we often don’t 
take the time to let ideas lie dormant so they can incubate properly. It is important 
to allow enough time for ideas to incubate before evaluation of the ideas takes place. 
Studies of creative problem-solving strategies suggest that creative solutions usually 
emerge as a result of a series of small ideas rather than from a “home run” idea.
 
● Motivation: People differ considerably in their motivation to seek creative solutions 
to challenging problems. Highly creative individuals do this more for personal sat-
isfaction than personal reward. However, studies show that people are more cre-
ative when told to generate many ideas, so it shows that the motivation is not all 
self-generated.
Intellectual Blocks
Intellectual blocks arise from a poor choice of the problem-solving strategy or 
having inadequate background and knowledge.
 
● Poor choice of problem-solving language or problem representation: It is impor-
tant to make a conscious decision concerning the “language” for your creative prob-
lem solving. Problems can be solved in either a mathematical, verbal, or a visual 
mode. Often a problem that is not yielding to solution using, for example, a verbal 
1. S. Smith, “Fixation, Incubation, and Insight in Memory and Creative Thinking,” in The Creative 
Cognition Approach, Steven Smith, Thomas Ward, and Ronald Finke (eds.), The MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, 1995.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
201
6
mode can be readily solved by switching to another mode such as the visual mode. 
Changing the representation of a problem from the original one to a new one (pre-
sumably more useful for fi nding a solution) is recognized as fostering creativity.1
 
● Memory block: Memory holds strategies and tactics for fi nding solutions as well 
as solutions themselves. Therefore, blocking in memory searches is doubly prob-
lematic to creative thinking. A common form of blocking is maintaining a par-
ticular search path through memory because of the false belief that it will lead to a 
solution. This belief may arise from a false hint, reliance on incorrect experience, 
or any other reason that interrupts or distracts the mind’s regular problem-solving 
processes.
 
● Insuffi cient knowledge base: Usually, ideas are generated from a person’s edu-
cation and experience. Thus, an electrical engineer is more likely to suggest an 
 electronics-based idea, when a cheaper and simpler mechanical design would be 
better. This is a strong reason for working in interdisciplinary design teams. A good 
approach to gathering information is to do enough to get a good feel for the prob-
lem and then use this knowledge base to try to generate creative concepts. After 
that it is important to go back and exhaustively develop an information base to use 
in evaluating the creative ideas.
 
● Incorrect information: It is obvious that using incorrect information can lead to 
poor results. One form of the creative process is the combining of previously unre-
lated elements or ideas (information); if part of the information is wrong then the 
result of creative combination will be fl awed. For example, if you are confi guring 
fi ve elements of information to achieve some result, and the ordering of the ele-
ments is critical to the quality of the result, you have 120 different orderings. If one 
of the elements is wrong, all 120 alternative orderings are wrong. If you only need 
to take two (2) of the fi ve (5) elements, then there are 20 possible combinations. Of 
these 20, four will lead to wrong results because they will contain the incorrect 
element. The higher the number of elements that are combined, the more diffi cult it 
will be to sort out the correct combinations from those that are fl awed.
Environmental Blocks
These are blocks that are imposed by the immediate physical or social environment.
 
● Physical environment: This is a very personal factor in its effects on creativity. 
Some people can work creatively with all kinds of distractions; others require strict 
quiet and isolation. It is important for each person to determine their optimum con-
ditions for creative work, and to try to achieve this in the workplace. Also, many 
people have a time of day in which they are most creative. Try to arrange your work 
schedule to take advantage of this.
 
● Criticism: Nonsupportive remarks about your ideas can be personally hurtful and 
harmful to your creativity. It is common for students in a design class to be hesitant 
1. R. L. Dominowski, “Productive Problem Solving,” in The Creative Cognition Approach, Steven 
Smith, Thomas Ward, and Ronald Finke (eds.), The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995.

202 
engineering design 
6
to expose their ideas, even to their team, for fear of criticism. This lack of confi -
dence comes from the fact that you have no basis of comparison as to whether the 
idea is good. As you gain experience you should gain confi dence, and be able to 
subject your ideas to friendly but critical evaluations. Therefore, it is very important 
for the team to maintain an atmosphere of support and trust, especially during the 
concept design phase.
6.3
CREATIVE THINKING METHODS
Improving creativity is a popular endeavor. A search of Google under Creative 
Methods yielded over 137 million hits, many of them books or courses on creativity 
improvement. Over 150 creativity improvement methods have been cataloged.1 These 
methods are aimed at improving the following characteristics of the problem solver:
 
● Sensitivity: The ability to recognize that a problem exists
 
● Fluency: The ability to produce a large number of alternative solutions to a problem
 
● Flexibility: The ability to develop a wide range of approaches to a problem
 
● Originality: The ability to produce original solutions to a problem
Following are descriptions of some of the most commonly used creativity meth-
ods. Many of these creativity improvement methods directly eliminate the most com-
mon mental blocks to creativity.
6.3.1 Brainstorming
Brainstorming is the most common method used by design teams for generating 
ideas. This method was developed by Alex Osborn2 to stimulate creative magazine 
advertisements, but it has been widely adopted in other areas such as design. The 
word brainstorming has come into general usage in the language to denote any kind 
of idea generation.
Brainstorming is a carefully orchestrated process. It makes use of the broad 
experience and knowledge of groups of individuals. The brainstorming process is 
structured to overcome many of the mental blocks that curb individual creativity in 
team members who are left to generate ideas on their own. Active participation of 
different individuals in the idea generation process overcomes most perceptual, intel-
lectual, and cultural mental blocks. It is likely that one person’s mental block will be 
different from another’s, so that by acting together, the team’s combined idea genera-
tion process fl ows well. 
A well-done brainstorming session is an enthusiastic session of rapid, free- 
fl owing ideas. The brainstorming process was fi rst described in Sec. 4.7. Please review 
1. www.mycoted.com.
2. A. Osborn, Applied Imagination, Charles Scribner & Sons, New York, 1953.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
203
6
this section before proceeding further. To achieve a good brainstorming session, it 
is important to carefully defi ne the problem at the start. Time spent here can help to 
avoid wasting time generating solutions to the wrong problem. It is also necessary to 
allow a short period for individuals to think through the problem quietly and on their 
own before starting the group process.
Participants in brainstorming sessions react to ideas they hear from others by 
recalling their own thoughts about the same concepts. This action of redirecting a 
stream of thought uncovers new possibilities in the affected team member. Some 
new ideas may come to mind by adding detail to a recently voiced idea or taking 
it in different, but related, directions. This building upon others’ ideas is known as 
piggy-backing or scaffolding, and it is an indicator of a well-functioning brainstorm-
ing session. It has been found that the fi rst 10 or so ideas will not be the most fresh and 
creative, so it is critical to get at least 30 to 40 ideas from your session. An important 
attribute of this method is that brainstorming creates a large number of ideas, some of 
which will be creative.
The evaluation of your ideas should be done at a meeting on a day soon after the 
brainstorming session. This removes any fear that criticism or evaluation is coming soon 
and keeps the brainstorming meeting looser. Also, making the evaluation on the day 
after the idea generation session allows incubation time for more ideas to generate and 
time for refl ection on what was proposed. The evaluation meeting should begin by add-
ing to the original list any new ideas realized by the team members after the  incubation 
period. Then the team evaluates each of the ideas. Hopefully, some of the wild ideas can 
be converted to realistic solutions. Chapter 7 will discuss methods of evaluation.
One way to help the brainstorming process is to break up the normal thought pat-
tern by using a checklist to help develop new ideas. The originator of brainstorming 
proposed such a list, which Eberle 1 modifi ed into the acrostic SCAMPER (Table 6.2). 
Generally, the SCAMPER checklist is used as a stimulant when the fl ow of ideas 
begins to fall off during the brainstorming activity. The questions in the SCAMPER 
checklist are applied to the problem in the following way: 2
 
● Read aloud the fi rst SCAMPER question.
 
● Write down ideas or sketch ideas that are stimulated by the question.
 
● Rephrase the question and apply it to the other aspects of the problem.
 
● Continue applying the questions until the ideas cease to fl ow.
Because the SCAMPER questions are generalized, they sometimes will not apply to 
a specifi c technical problem. Therefore, if a question fails to evoke ideas, move on 
quickly to the next question. A group that will be doing product development over 
time in a particular area should attempt to develop their own checklist questions tai-
lored to the situation.
Brainstorming has benefi ts and is an appropriate activity for idea generation 
in a team setting. However, brainstorming does not surmount many emotional and 
1. R. Eberle, SCAMPER: Games for Imagination Development, D.O.K. Press, Buffalo, NY, 1990.
2. B. L. Tuttle, “Creative Concept Development,” ASM Handbook, vol. 20, pp. 19–48, ASM Interna-
tional, Materials Park, OH, 1997.

204 
engineering design 
6
environmental mental blocks. In fact, the process can intensify some of the mental 
blocks in some team members (e.g., unease with chaos, fear of criticism, and per-
petuation of incorrect assumptions). To mitigate these effects that dampen creativity, 
a team can conduct a brainwriting1 exercise prior to the formal brainstorming session.
6.3.2 Refi nement and Evaluation of Ideas
The objective of creative idea evaluation is not to winnow down the set of ideas into a 
single or very small number of solutions. The primary purpose of the refi nement and 
evaluation step in concept generation is the identifi cation of creative, feasible, yet still 
practical ideas. (Convergent thinking dominates this process.) 
The type of thinking used in refi ning the set of creative ideas is more focused 
than the divergent type of thinking that was used in generating creative ideas. (Re-
call that teams often use techniques that purposely encourage divergent thinking (e.g., 
SCAMPER). Here we use convergent thinking to clarify concepts and arrive at ideas 
that are physically realizable.
The fi rst step is to sort the ideas into feasibility categories following the method 
of the affi nity diagram as discussed in Sec. 4.7. A quick way to do this is to group the 
ideas into three categories based on the judgment of the team as to their feasibility.
 
● Ideas that are feasible as they stand. (You would be happy to show them to your 
boss.)
 
● Ideas that may have potential after more thought or research are applied. (These 
ideas you would not want to show your boss.) 
TABLE 6.2
SCAMPER Checklist to Aid in Brainstorming
Proposed Change
Description
Substitute 
What if used in a different material, process, person, power source, place, 
or approach?
Combine
Could I combine units, purposes, or ideas?
Adapt
What else is like this? What other idea does it suggest? Does the past offer 
a parallel? What can I copy?
Modify, magnify, minify
Could I add a new twist? Could I change the meaning, color, motion, 
form, or shape? Could I add something? Make stronger, higher, longer, 
thicker? Could I subtract something?
Put to other uses
Are there new ways to use this as is? If I modify it, does it have other uses?
Eliminate
Can I remove a part, function, person without affecting outcome?
Rearrange, reverse
Could I interchange components? Could I use a different layout or se-
quence? What if I transpose cause and effect? Could I transpose positive 
and negative? What if I turn it backward, upside down, or inside out?
1. CreatingMinds, http://creatingminds.org/tools/brainwriting.htm, accessed February 16, 2007.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
205
6
 
● Ideas that are very unfeasible and have no chance of becoming good solutions. 
Before discarding an idea, ask, “What about this idea makes it not feasible?” and 
“What would have to change for this idea to become feasible? ” This type of exami-
nation of wacky ideas can lead to new insights into the design task.
Checking concept ideas for feasibility is a critical step in the design process. Time is 
a valuable and limited resource the team cannot spend on developing design solutions 
with a low probability of success.
It is diffi cult to choose the right time to eliminate early design concepts. If the 
time is too early, team members may not yet have enough information to determine 
the level of feasibility of some concepts. The more ambitious the design task, the more 
likely this is to be true. A valuable strategy used by successful teams is to document 
ideas and the rationale made for choosing to pursue them or not. When documentation 
is thorough, a team can take some risks in moving rapidly because they can retrace 
their steps through the documented design rationale.
An alternate strategy for classifying concepts is to group the ideas according to 
common engineering characteristics, as in the Shot-Buddy consideration of different 
ideas for a basketball ball return. It would make sense to use critical-to-quality engi-
neering characteristics. There will always be a category for wild ideas.
Next, the team examines each category of designs, one at a time. The team dis-
cusses the concepts within the class with the objective of seeing how they can be com-
bined or rearranged into more completely developed solutions.
Unlike the original brainstorming session, where emphasis was on quantity 
of ideas and discussion was minimized, here discussion and critical thought are 
encouraged.
Team members can elaborate on ideas, piggyback on other ideas, or force-fi t and 
combine ideas to create a new idea. This is shown in Fig. 6.2 by representing each 
idea with a different symbol. First ideas are grouped into categories (Task 1). Then 
concepts are synthesized by combining ideas from the different categories (Task 2). 
Notice that the ideas that are combined to form a concept may come from any of 
the previous categories. Sometimes force-fi tting results in further consolidation of the 
ideas (Task 3). The overall objective is to come out of this session with several well-
developed design concepts.
The above example is idealized. It uses only visual design elements to represent 
ideas, but mechanical design is more complex because functionality is the prime con-
sideration in the generation of concepts. Also, aspects of form must be accommodated 
by the design concept.
Please realize that this evaluation session is as important as the original meeting 
in which ideas were fi rst generated. It should not be rushed. Typically it will take two 
or three times as long as the fi rst brainstorming session, but it is worth it.
6.3.3 Idea Generating Techniques Beyond Brainstorming
Brainstorming is commonly used as the fi rst tool in generating creative ideas. There 
are many other tools and methods that are also effective. This section presents simple 

206 
engineering design 
6
methods that support creative thinking.1 These methods consist of prompting new 
thinking or blocked thinking by providing questions that lead team members to 
considered new perspectives on a problem or creative task. You will note that the 
SCAMPER questions listed in Table 6.2 have the same intent as the methods listed in 
this section.
Six Key Questions
Journalism students are taught to ask six simple questions to ensure that they have 
covered the entire story. These same questions can be used to help you approach the 
problem from different angles.
 
● Who? Who uses it, wants it, will benefi t by it?
 
● What? What happens if X occurs? What resulted in success? What resulted in 
failure?
 
● When? Can it be speeded up or slowed down? Is sooner better than later?
 
● Where? Where will X occur? Where else is possible?
 
● Why? Why is this done? Why is that particular rule, action, solution, problem, fail-
ure involved?
 
● How? How could it be done, should it be done, prevented, improved, changed, 
made?
List of Brainstormed Ideas:
Task 1—Grouping into categories
A = FLOWERS
Task 2—Synthesis within categories:
Task 3—Force-fitting between categories:
ABC
A
B
C
B = SUNS
C = CROSSES
 FIGURE 6.2 
 Schematic diagram of the creative idea evaluation process. (From E. Lumsdaine and 
M. Lumsdaine,  Creative Problem Solving, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995, p. 226.) 
1. R. Harris, Creative Thinking Techniques, http://www.virtualsalt.com/crebook2.htm

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
207
6
Five Whys
The Five Whys technique is used to get to the root of a problem. It is based on the 
premise that it is not enough to just ask why one time. For example:
 
● Why has the machine stopped? A fuse blew because of fan overload.
 
● Why was there an overload? There was inadequate lubrication for the bearings.
 
● Why wasn’t there enough lubrication? The lube pump wasn’t working.
 
● Why wasn’t the pump working? The pump shaft was vibrating because it had worn 
due to abrasion.
 
● Why was there abrasion? There was no fi lter on the lube pump, allowing debris into 
the pump.
Checklists
Checklists of various types often are used to help stimulate creative thoughts. 
Osborn was the fi rst to suggest this method. Table 6.3 is a modifi cation of his orig-
inal checklist of actions to take to stimulate thought in brainstorming. Please note 
that checklists are used often in design in a completely different way. They are used 
in a way to remember important functions or tasks in a complex operation. See, for 
 example, the checklist for a fi nal design review in Chap. 9. Table 6.3 is an example of 
a checklist devised for a specifi c technical problem.
Fantasy or Wishful Thinking
A strong block to creativity is the mind’s tenacious grip on reality. One way to 
stimulate creativity is to entice the mind to think in a fl ight of fancy, in the hope of 
bringing out really creative ideas. This can be done by posing questions in an “invita-
tional way” so as to encourage an upbeat, positive climate for idea generation. Typical 
questions would be:
 
● Wouldn’t be nice if . . . . ?
 
● What I really want to do is . . . .
 
● If I did not have to consider cost, . . .
 
● I wish . . .
TABLE 6.3
A Checklist for Technological Stretching 
(G. Thompson and M. London)
What happens if we push the conditions to the limit? 
Temperature, up or down?
Pressure, up or down?
Concentration, up or down?
Impurities up or down?
G. Thompson and M. London, “A Review of Creativity Principles Applied to Engineering Design,” Proc. Instn. 
Mech. Engrs., vol. 213, part E, pp. 17–31, 1999.

208 
engineering design 
6
The use of an invitational turn of phrase is critical to the success of this approach. For 
example, rather than stating, “this design is too heavy,” it would be much better to say 
“how can we make the design lighter?” The fi rst phrase implies criticism, the latter 
suggests improvement for use.
6.3.4 Random Input Technique
Edward de Bono is a long-time developer of creativity methods.1 He stresses the im-
portance of thought patterns, and he coined the term lateral thinking for the act of 
cutting across thought patterns. One of the key tenets of lateral thinking is the con-
cept that an act of provocation is needed to make the brain switch from one pattern 
of thought to another. The provocative event interrupts the current thinking process 
by introducing a new problem representation, providing a new probe for a memory 
search, or leading to a restructuring of the solution plan.
Suppose you are thinking about a problem and you have a need for a new idea. In 
order to force the brain to introduce a new thought, all you have to do is to introduce a 
new random word. The word can be found by turning at random to a page in a diction-
ary, arbitrarily deciding to take the ninth word on the page, or turning randomly to a 
page in any book and at random selecting a word. Now, the provocation is to fi nd how 
the chosen word is related to the problem under consideration.
As an example,2 consider a group of students who were working on the problem 
of how the rules of basketball could be changed to make shorter players (under 5’ 9”) 
competitive. The word humbug was chosen, which led to the word scrooge, which led 
to mean, which led to rough, which led to the idea of more relaxed foul rules for short 
players. De Bono points out that this forced relationship from a random word works 
because the brain is a self-organizing patterning system that is very good at making 
connections even when the random word is very remote from the problem subject. He 
says, “It has never happened to me that the random word is too remote. On the con-
trary, what happens quite often is that the random word is so closely connected to the 
focus that there is very little provocative effect.” It is also worth noting that the ran-
dom input technique does not apply only to random words. It also works with objects 
or pictures. Ideas can be stimulated by reading technical journals in fi elds other than 
your own, or by attending technical meetings and trade shows in fi elds far from your 
own. The overarching principle is the willingness to look for unconventional inputs 
and use these to open up new lines of thinking.
6.3.5 Synectics: An Inventive Method Based on Analogy
In design, like in everyday life, many problems are solved by analogy. The designer 
recognizes the similarity between the design under study and a previously solved 
1. E. de Bono, Lateral Thinking, Harper & Row, New York, 1970; Serious Creativity, Harper Collins, 
New York, 1993.
2. S. S. Folger and S. E. LeBlanc, Strategies for Creative Problem Solving, Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ, 1995.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
209
6
problem. Whether it is a creative solution depends on the degree to which the analogy 
leads to a new and different design. One type of solution based on analogy recognizes 
the similarities between an existing product and its design specifi cation and the design 
specifi cation of the product under study. This most likely will not be a creative design, 
and it may not even be a legal design, depending on the patent situation of the older 
product.
Synectics (from the Greek word synektiktein, meaning joining together of differ-
ent things into unifi ed connection) is a methodology for creativity based on reason-
ing by analogy that was fi rst described in the book by Gordon.1 It assumes that the 
psychological components of the creative processes are more important in generating 
new and inventive ideas than the intellectual processes. This notion is counterintuitive 
to engineering students, who are traditionally very well trained in the analysis aspects 
of design.
Synectics is a formalized process led by a highly trained facilitator that proceeds 
in stages. The fi rst stage of Synectics is to understand the problem. The problem is 
examined from all angles with the goal of “making the strange familiar.” However, 
examining all aspects of the problem to the extent that is done in Synectics is likely to 
have blocked one’s capacity for creative solution of the problem. Therefore, the second 
phase searches for creative solutions drawing heavily on the four types of analogies 
discussed in this section. The objective is to distance your mind from the problem us-
ing analogies, and then to couple them with the problem in the last phase of Synectics. 
This is done by force-fi tting the ideas generated by analogy into the various aspects of 
the problem defi nition. We have already seen an example of force fi tting in the Ran-
dom Input Technique discussed in Sec. 6.3.4. 
Synectics is used in creative problem solving because of the power of the use of 
analogies. Knowing how to use the four different types of analogies differentiated in 
Synectics is valuable for anyone wishing to generate ideas about an existing problem. 
Synectics recognizes four types of analogy: (1) direct analogy, (2) fantasy analogy, 
(3) personal analogy, and (4) symbolic analogy.
 
● Direct analogy: The designer searches for the closest physical analogy to the situ-
ation at hand. In describing the motion of electrons about the nucleus of an atom 
it is common to use the analogy of the moon’s rotation about Earth or Earth’s 
rotation about our sun. The analogy is direct because in each system there are 
matched physical objects behaving the same way—rotating about a central ob-
ject. A direct analogy may take the form of a similarity in physical behavior (as 
in the previous example), similarity in geometrical confi guration, or in function. 
Analogies are not necessarily the result of complex mental model restructuring 
of ideas if they are from the same domain. Novices are likely to fi nd analogies 
based on physical similarities. It takes special training (like that provided by for-
mal methods) to recognize analogies based on more abstract characteristics like 
functional similarity. Bio-inspired design is a specifi c type of analogy under in-
creased research in the past decade. Bio-inspired design is based on the similarity 
1. W. J. J. Gordon, Synectics: The Development of Creative Capacity, Harper & Brothers, New York, 1961. 

210 
engineering design 
6
between biological systems and engineering systems. This topic is discussed fur-
ther in this section.
 
● Fantasy analogy: The designer disregards all problem limitations and laws of nature, 
physics, or reason. Instead, the designer imagines or wishes for the perfect solution 
to a problem. For example, suppose you enter a large parking lot on a cold, windy, 
and rainy day, only to discover that you have forgotten where your car is parked. In a 
perfect world, you could wish your car to materialize in front of you or to turn itself 
on and drive to where you are standing when you call it. These are far-fetched ideas 
but they contain potential. Many cars now have a chip in their key ring that fl ashes 
the car lights when activated to send you a locator signal. Perhaps the design team 
used some aspect of the fantasy analogy to solve the lost car problem.
 
● Personal analogy: The designer imagines that he or she is the device being de-
signed, associating his or her body with the device or the process under consider-
ation. For example, in designing a high-quality industrial vacuum cleaner, we could 
imagine ourselves as the cleaner. We can suck up dirt through a hose like drinking 
through a straw. We can pick up dirt and debris by running our hands across a 
smooth surface or by combing our fi ngers through a thick and fi brous material. We 
could also lick the surface clean using moisture, friction, and an absorbent material 
like we do when we lick frosting off a cupcake.
 
● Symbolic analogy: This is perhaps the least intuitive of the approaches. Using sym-
bolic analogy the designer replaces the specifi cs of the problem with symbols and then 
uses manipulation of the symbols to discover solutions to the original problem. For 
example, there are some mathematical problems that are converted (mapped) from one 
symbolic domain to another to allow for easier processing. LaPlace transforms are an 
example of this type of symbolic analogy. There is a method for the structural synthe-
sis of mechanisms that requires drawing a graph representing the joints and linkages 
of the mechanism and then converting the graph into a set of equations for solution.1
6.3.6 Biomimetic Design
A particularly intriguing source of direct analogies is those that are inspired by 
biological systems. This subject is called biomimetics, the mimicking of biological 
systems. A well-known example of biomimetics is the invention of the Velcro fas-
tener. Its inventor, George de Mestral, conceived the idea when he wondered why 
cockleburs stuck to his trousers after a walk in the woods. Mestral was trained as 
an engineer. Under the microscope he found that the hook-shaped projections on the 
burs adhered to the small loops on his wool trousers. After a long search he found that 
nylon tape could be shaped into a hook tape with small, stiff hooks and a loop tape 
with small loops. Velcro tape was born. This example also illustrates the principle of 
serendipitous discovery—discovery by accident. It also shows that discovery of this 
1. L. W. Tsai, Mechanism Design: Enumeration of Kinetic Structures According to Function, CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1997.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
211
6
type also requires a curious mind, often called the prepared mind. In most cases of 
serendipitous discovery, the idea comes quickly, but as in the case of Velcro, a long 
period of hard work is required to develop the innovation. 
Biomimetic design combines the principles of using design by direct analogy with 
the knowledge of biological phenomena. Mechanical design is based on satisfying 
what a product or system must do (i.e., the function for which the device is created). 
Therefore, the effective use of biological analogies is based on identifying how bio-
logical systems manage to produce behaviors designers seek in physical systems. The 
challenge for designers is twofold: (1) engineering designers are not trained in a wide 
variety of biological systems and (2) the words engineers use to express behavior do 
not always match words used to describe biological systems. The value of identifying 
biological analogies to mechanical systems has created a rich research literature for 
design. One example of a tool that engineers can use is the website Ask Nature,1 an 
open source website created to facilitate the use of biomimicry. A growing body of 
literature includes many other examples of biological analogies.2
6.3.7 Concept Map
A very useful tool for the generation of ideas by association, and for organizing in-
formation in preparation for writing a report, is the concept map,3 and its close rela-
tion the mind map.4 A concept map is good for generating and recording ideas during 
brainstorming. Because it is a visual method instead of a verbal one, it encourages left-
brained thinking. Because it requires the mapping of associations between ideas it stim-
ulates creative thought. Thus, it also can be very useful in generating solution concepts.
A concept map is made on a large sheet of paper. A concise label for the problem 
or issue is placed at the center of the sheet. Then the team is asked to think about what 
concepts, ideas, or factors are related to the problem.
 
● Write down team-generated thoughts surrounding the central problem label.
 
● Underline or circle them and connect them to the central focus. 
 
● Use an arrow to show which issue drives what. 
 
● Create new major branches of concepts to represent major subtopics. 
 
● If the process develops a secondary or separate map, label it and connect it to the 
rest of the map.
1. “Ask Nature,”The Biomimicry Institute, www.asknature.org, accessed July 19, 2011.
2. T. W. D’Arcy, Of Growth and Form, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1961; S. A. Wainwright et al., Mechan-
ical Design in Organisms, Arnold, London, 1976; M. J. French, Invention and Evolution: Design in 
Nature and Engineering, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1994; S. Vogel, Cat’s Paws and Catapults: Mechani-
cal Worlds of Nature and People, W. W. Norton & Co., New York, 1998; Y. Bar-Cohen, Biomimetics: 
Biologically Inspired Technologies, Taylor & Francis, Inc., 2006; A. von Gleich, U. Petschow, C. Pade, 
E. Pissarskoi, Potentials and Trends in Biomimetics, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2010; J. M. Benyus, 
Biomimcry: Innovation Inspired by Nature, Harper Collins, New York, 2002; P. Forbes, The Gecko’s 
Foot: Bio-inspiration: Engineering New Materials from Nature, W. W. Norton & Co., New York, 2005.
3. J. D. Novak and D. B. Gowan, Learning How to Learn, Cambridge Univ. Press, New York, 1984.
4. T. Buzan, The MindMap Book, 2d ed., BBC Books, London, 1995.

212 
engineering design 
6
The process of creating a concept map builds a network of associations around 
a central problem or topic. The requirement to fi t these into a coherent, logical map 
stimulates new ideas. Note that such a process can quickly produce a messy and hard 
to read map. One way to avoid this is to fi rst write your ideas on fi le cards or “sticky 
notes,” and arrange them on an appropriate surface before committing to a written 
map. Color coding may be helpful in improving the clarity of the map. Figure 6.3 
shows a concept map developed for a project on the recycling of steel and aluminum 
scrap.1
6.4
CREATIVE METHODS FOR DESIGN
The motivation for applying any creativity technique to a design task is to generate as 
many ideas as possible. Quantity counts above quality, and wild ideas are encouraged 
at the early stages of the design work. Once an initial pool of concepts for alterna-
tive designs exists, these alternatives can be reviewed more critically. Then the goal 
FIGURE 6.3
Concept map for the recycling of a metal like steel or aluminum.
1. I. Nair, “Decision Making in the Engineering Classroom,” J. Engr. Education, vol. 86, no. 4, 
pp. 349–56, 1997.
Businesses
Public
relations
Price
of scrap
Technology
Recycling
Jobs
Taxes
Subsidization
Gov’t
Water
Land
Air
Laws & regulations
Uses of product
Cost of
original product
Quantity
of scrap
Quality
of life
Cost of
recycling
Reduces raw
material use
Recycling waste

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
213
6
becomes sorting out infeasible ideas. The team is identifying a smaller subset of ideas 
that can be developed into practical solutions.
6.4.1 Generating Design Concepts
Systematic methods for generating engineering designs exist. The task of the designer 
is to fi nd the best of all possible candidate solutions to a design task. Generative de-
sign is a theoretical construct of a process that creates many feasible alternatives to a 
given product design specifi cation (PDS). The set of all possible and feasible designs 
created in response to the articulation of a design task is pictured as a problem space 
or a design space that consists of states as shown in Fig. 6.4. Each state is a different 
conceptual design. The space has a boundary that encloses only the feasible designs, 
many of which are unknown to the designer.
The set of all possible designs is an n-dimensional hyperspace called a design 
space. The space is more than three dimensions because there are so many charac-
teristics that can categorize a design (e.g., cost, performance, weight, size, etc.). A 
stationary solar system is a useful analogy for a design space. Each planet or star in 
the system is different from the others. Each known body in the space is a potential 
solution to the design task. There are also a number of undiscovered planets and stars. 
These represent designs that no one has discovered. The vastness of outer space is also 
a good analogy for a design space. There are many, many, many, different solutions 
for any design problem. The number of potential solutions can be as high as the order 
of n! where n is equal to the number of different engineering characteristics it takes to 
fully describe the design.
Allen Newell and Herbert Simon popularized this view of a set of problem so-
lutions while working together at Carnegie Mellon University. The design space of 
solutions is the dominant model of problem solving in both the artifi cial intelligence 
FIGURE 6.4
Schematic of an n-dimensional design space.
A Design Space
Articulated designs
Hidden designs
Boundary on feasible region

214 
engineering design 
6
and cognitive psychology fi elds.1 It is also a well-recognized model for a given set of 
designs to many engineering design researchers.
The design space is discrete, meaning that there are distinct and distinguishable 
differences between design alternatives. It is the job of the designer to fi nd the best of 
all available designs. In the context of a design space that defi nes all feasible solutions, 
design becomes a search of the space to fi nd the best available state that represents a 
solution to the task.
Searching a design space is a job complicated by the fact that the feasible designs 
differ in many ways (i.e., the values assigned to the engineering characteristics). There 
is no common metric to pinpoint the coordinates of any single design. It is reasonable 
to assume that once one feasible design is found, another feasible design that is close 
to the fi rst one will be similar in all but one or a very few engineering characteristics. 
Once a designer fi nds a feasible solution to a design problem, she searches the nearby 
design space by making small changes to one or more of the design’s engineering char-
acteristics. This is good if the fi rst design is close to the best design, but this will not 
help the designers sample different parts of the design space to fi nd a set of very dif-
ferent designs. Creative idea generation methods can help a design team fi nd designs in 
different areas of the space but are not as reliable as engineering design requires.
Systematic design methods help the design team consider the broadest possible 
set of feasible conceptual designs for a given task. Many of these methods are easier 
to understand when they are explained using the design space model. Some methods 
make the search through the design space more effi cient. Others focus on narrowing 
into the area of the design space that is most likely where the best solution exists. Still 
other systematic design methods provide operations that allow a designer to travel 
from one design in the space to the next closest design.
Just as some of the creativity improving methods are intended to directly overcome 
barriers to creativity, some of the conceptual design generation methods are created to 
directly apply strategies of the past that were found useful in generating alternative design 
solutions. For example, the method called TRIZ (see Sec. 6.7) uses the concepts of inven-
tive solution principles embodied in successful patents and equivalent databases in other 
countries as the foundation for the contradiction matrix approach to inventive design. The 
method of functional decomposition and synthesis (see Sec. 6.5) relies on restructuring 
a design task to a more abstract level to encourage greater access to potential solutions.
The key idea to remember in design is that it is benefi cial in almost every situation 
to develop a number of alternative designs that rely on different means to accomplish 
a desired behavior.
6.4.2 Systematic Methods for Designing
Some design methods are labeled as systematic because they involve a structured 
process for generating design solutions. Six of the most popular systematic methods 
for mechanical, conceptual design generation are introduced in this section. The fi rst 
1. J. R. Anderson, Cognitive Psychology and Its Implications, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York, 1980.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
215
6
three methods will be presented in much greater detail in subsequent sections of this 
chapter. We mention them briefl y here for the sake of completeness.
Functional Decomposition and Synthesis (Sec. 6.5): Functional analysis is a logi-
cal approach for describing the transformation between the initial and fi nal states of a 
system or device. The ability to describe devices in terms of physical behavior or ac-
tions, rather than components, allows for a logical breakdown of a product in the most 
general way, which often leads to creative concepts of how to achieve the function.
Morphological Analysis (Sec. 6.6): The morphological chart approach to design 
generates alternatives from an understanding of the structure of necessary component 
parts. Entries from an atlas, directory, or one or more catalogs of components can then 
be identifi ed and ordered in the prescribed confi guration. The goal of the method is to 
achieve a nearly complete enumeration of all feasible solutions to a design problem. 
Often, the morphological method is used in conjunction with other generative meth-
ods like the functional decomposition and synthesis method (Sec. 6.5.3).
Theory of Inventive Problem Solving (Sec. 6.7): TRIZ, the better-known Russian 
acronym for this method, is a creative problem-solving methodology especially tai-
lored for scientifi c and engineering problems. Genrich Altshuller and coworkers in 
Russia started developing the method around 1940. From a study of over 1.5 million 
Russian patents they were able to deduce general characteristics of technical problems 
and recurring inventive principles.
Axiomatic Design:1 Design models that claim legitimacy from the context of “fi rst 
principles” include Suh’s Axiomatic Design that articulates and explicates Design Inde-
pendence and Information Axioms (i.e., maintain functional independence and minimize 
information content).2 Suh’s methods provide a means to translate a design task into func-
tional requirements (the engineering equivalent of what the customer wants) and use those 
to identify design parameters (the physical components of the design). Suh’s principles 
lead to theorems and corollaries that help designers diagnose a candidate solution now 
represented as a matrix equation with function requirements and design parameters.
Design Optimization (discussed in Chap. 15): Many of the strongest and currently 
recognized design methods are actually searches of a design space using optimization 
strategies. These algorithms predict a design engineering performance once the design 
specifi cations have been set. This method is treating design as an engineering science 
problem and is effective at analyzing potential designs. There are many valid and verifi ed 
optimization approaches to design. They range from single-objective and single-variable 
models to multi-objective, multi-variable models that are solved using different decompo-
sitions and sequences. Methods are deterministic, stochastic, and combinations of the two.
Decision-Based Design (DBD) is an advanced way of thinking about design.3,4 
The DBD perspective on design differs from past design models that focus on problem 
solving in two major ways. The fi rst is the incorporation of the customers’ requirements 
1. A section on Axiomatic Design can be found online at www.mhhe.com/Dieter.
2. Nam P. Suh, Axiomatic Design, Oxford University Press, New York, 2001; Nam P. Suh, The Principles 
of Design, Oxford University Press, New York, 1990.
3. G. Hazelrigg, Systems Engineering: An Approach to Information-Based Design, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 1986.
4. K. E. Lewis, W. Chen, L. C. Schmidt (eds), Decision Making in Engineering Design, ASME Press, 2006.

216 
engineering design 
6
as the driver of the process. The second is using the design outcomes (e.g., maximum 
profi t, market share capture, or high-quality image) as the ultimate assessment of good 
designs.
6.5
FUNCTIONAL DECOMPOSITION AND SYNTHESIS
A common strategy for solving any complex task or describing any complex system is 
to decompose it into smaller units that are easier to manage. Decomposing must result 
in units that meaningfully represent the original entity. The units of the decomposition 
must also be obvious to the decomposer. Standard decomposition schemes refl ect 
natural groupings of the units that comprise an entity or are mutually agreed upon by 
users. This text decomposes the product development process into three major design 
phases and eight specifi c steps. The decompositions are useful for understanding the 
design task and allocating resources to it. The decomposition defi ned in this section 
is the breaking up of the product itself, not the process of design. Mechanical design 
is recursive. That means the same design process applied to the overall product ap-
plies to the units of the product and can be repeated until a successful outcome is 
achieved.
The product development process includes methods that use product decomposition. 
For example, QFD’s House of Quality decomposes an emerging product into engineer-
ing characteristics that contribute to customers’ perceptions of quality. There are other 
ways to decompose a product for ease of design. For example, an automobile decom-
position is major subsystems of engine, drive train, suspension system, steering system, 
and body. This is an example of physical decomposition and is discussed in Sec. 6.5.1.
Functional decomposition is the second type of representational strategy com-
mon in early stages of concept generation. Here the emphasis is on identifying the 
functions and subfunctions necessary to achieve the overall behavior required by 
the end user. Functional decomposition is a top-down strategy where a general de-
scription of a device is refi ned into more specifi c arrangements of functions and sub-
functions. The decomposed function diagram is a map of focused design problems. 
Functional decomposition can be done with a standardized representation system 
that models a device very generally. Functional decomposition does not initially im-
pose a design, allowing more leeway for creativity and generates a wide variety of 
alternative solutions. This feature of the functional decomposition method is called 
solution-neutrality.
6.5.1 Physical Decomposition
To understand a device, most engineers instinctively begin with physical decomposi-
tion. Sketching the parts of a system, a subassembly, or a physical part is a way to rep-
resent the product and begin accessing all the relevant knowledge about the product. 
Sketching some kind of assembly drawing or schematic is a way to contemplate the 
design without thinking explicitly about the functions each component performs.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
217
6
Physical decomposition means separating the product or subassembly directly 
into its subsidiary subassemblies and components and accurately describing how these 
parts are joined together to create the behavior of the product. The result is a sche-
matic diagram that holds some of the connectivity information found by doing re-
verse engineering. Figure 6.5 displays a partial physical decomposition of a standard 
bicycle.
Decomposition is a recursive process. This is shown in Fig. 6.5, where the entity 
“wheels” is further decomposed on the lower level in the hierarchy. The recursion 
continues until the entity is an individual part that is still essential for the overall func-
tioning of the product. The steps to create a physical decomposition tree diagram as 
shown in Fig. 6.5 are:
1. Defi ne the physical system in total and draw it as the root block of a tree diagram.1
2. Identify and defi ne the fi rst major subassembly of the system described by the root 
block and draw it as a new block below the root.
3. Identify and draw in the physical connections between the subassembly repre-
sented by the newly drawn block and all other blocks in the next higher level of the 
hierarchy in the decomposition diagram. There must be at least one connection to 
a block on the next higher level or the new subassembly block is misplaced.
4. Identify and draw in the physical connections between the subassembly and any 
other subassemblies on the same hierarchical level of the diagram’s structure.
5. Examine the fi rst subassembly block in the now complete level of the diagram. If 
it can be decomposed into more than one distinct and signifi cant component, treat 
it as the root block and return to Step 2 in this list. If the block under examination 
cannot be decomposed in a meaningful way, move on to check the other blocks at 
the same level of the diagram hierarchy.
FIGURE 6.5
Physical decomposition of a bicycle with two levels of decomposition detail on the wheel 
subassembly.
Frame
Seat
Wheels
Brakes
Rim
Spokes
Bicycle
Tire
Gears
1. The physical decomposition diagram is not a true tree diagram because there may be connections 
between blocks on the same level of the hierarchy. There also may be connections to more than one 
higher-level block in the diagram. This is analogous to having a leaf grow from two different branches at 
the same time.

218 
engineering design 
6
6. End the process when there are no more blocks anywhere in the hierarchical dia-
gram that can be physically decomposed in a meaningful way. Some parts of a 
product are secondary to its behavior. Those include fasteners, nameplate, bear-
ings, and similar types.
Physical decomposition is a top-down approach to understanding the physical 
nature of the product. The decomposition diagram is not solution-neutral because it is 
based on the physical parts of an existing design. A physical decomposition will lead 
designers to think about alternatives to parts already called out in the product. That 
will limit the number of alternative designs generated in the design space surrounding 
the existing solution.
Functional decomposition results in a solution-neutral representation of a product 
called a function structure. This type of representation is useful for generating a wide 
variety of design solutions. Functional decomposition is the focus of the rest of this 
section.
6.5.2 Functional Representation
Systematic design is a highly structured design method developed in Germany start-
ing in the 1920s. The method was formalized by two engineers named Gerhard Pahl 
and Wolfgang Beitz. The stated goal of Pahl and Beitz was to “set out a compre-
hensive design methodology for all phases of the product planning, design, and de-
velopment process for technical systems.”1 The fi rst English translation of their text 
was published in 1976 as the result of enormous effort by Ken Wallace, University of 
Cambridge. The work’s popularity continues with the publication of the third English 
edition in 2007.2
Systematic design represents all technical systems as transducers interacting with 
the world around them. The system interacts with its users and use environment by 
exchanging fl ows of energy, material, and signal with them. The technical system is 
modeled as a transducer because it is built to respond in a known way to fl ows from 
the use environment.
A kitchen faucet can be modeled as a transducer that alters the amount and tem-
perature of water fl owing into a kitchen sink. A person controls the amount and tem-
perature of the water by manually moving one or more handles. If someone is at the 
sink to fi ll a drinking glass with cold water, they may hold their hand in the water fl ow 
to determine when it is cold enough to drink. Then they watch as they position the 
glass in the fl ow of water and wait for it to fi ll. When the glass is full, the user moves 
it out of the water fl ow and adjusts the faucet handle to stop the fl ow. This happens 
during a short time interval. The user operates the system by applying human energy 
1. G. Pahl and W. Beitz, Engineering Design: A Systematic Approach, K. Wallace (translator), Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1996.
2. G. Pahl, W. Beitz, J. Feldhusen, and K. H. Grote, Engineering Design: A Systematic Approach, 3d ed., 
K. Wallace (ed.), K. Wallace and L. Blessing and F. Bauert (translators), Springer-Verlag, New York, 2007.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
219
6
to move the faucet control handle and the glass. The user collects information about 
the operation through his or her senses throughout the entire operation. The same 
system can be designed to operate automatically with other sources of energy and a 
control system. In either case, the kitchen faucet is modeled by describing interactions 
of fl ows of energy, material (water), and information signals with the user.
A focused research effort to standardize a function language began in 1997.1 The 
work was motivated by the vision of developing a broad design repository of thou-
sands of devices all represented from the function transformation view of mechanical 
design. This work resulted in the establishment of a function basis.2 The expanded list 
of fl ow types is given in Table 6.4 and the function listing is given in Table 6.5. Natu-
rally, Pahl and Beitz’s function description scheme was prominent among the work 
consulted to develop the basis.
The standardized fl ow types and function block names are organized as general 
classes divided by more specifi c basic types. This allows designers to represent com-
ponents and systems at different levels of abstraction. Using the most general level of 
function representation, function class names, allows the reader to re-represent the 
design problem in the broadest possible terms. This abstraction encourages diverse 
thinking required in conceptual design.
1. A. Little, K. Wood, and D. McAdams, “Functional Analysis,” Proceedings of the 1997 ASME Design 
Theory and Methodology Conference, ASME, New York, 1997.
2. J. Hirtz, R. Stone, D. McAdams, S. Szykman, and K. Wood, “A Functional Basis for Engineering Design: 
Reconciling and Evolving Previous Efforts,” Research in Engineering Design, vol. 13, 65–82, 2002.
TABLE 6.4
Standard Flow Classes and Member Flow Types
Flow Classes
Energy 
Material
Signal
Human
Human
Status
Hydraulic
Solid
 
● Auditory
Pneumatic
Gas
 
● Olfactory
Mechanical
Liquid
 
● Tactile
 
● translational
Plasma
 
● Taste
 
● rotational
Mixture
 
● Visual
Electrical
Control
Acoustic
 
● Analog
Thermal
 
● Discrete
Electromagnetic
Chemical
Biological
R. E. Stone, “Functional Basis”, Design Engineering Lab Webpage, designengineeringlab.org/FunctionCAD/FB.htm, 
accessed November 10, 2011.

220 
engineering design 
6
TABLE 6.5
Standardized Function Names
Function Class
Basic Function Names 
Alternate Wording of Basic Functions
Branch
Separate 
Detach, disassemble, disconnect, divide, 
disconnect, subtract
Remove
Cut, polish, punch, drill, lathe
Distribute
Absorb, dampen, diffuse, dispel dispense, 
disperse, empty, resist, scatter
Refi ne
Clear, fi lter, strain, purify
Channel
Import
Allow, capture, input, receive
Export
Eject, dispose, output, remove
Transfer
Transport
Lift, move
Transmit
Conduct, convey
Guide
Direct, straighten, steer
Translate
Rotate
Spin, turn
Allow DOF
Constrain, unlock
Connect
Couple
Assemble, attach, join
Mix
Add, blend, coalesce, combine, pack
Control Magnitude
Actuate
Initiate, start
Regulate
Allow, control, enable, limit, prevent
Change
Adjust, amplify, decrease, increase, magnify, 
multiply, normalize, rectify, reduce, scale
Form
Compact, compress, crush, pierce, shape
Condition
Prepare, adapt, treat
Stop
Inhibit, end, halt, pause, interrupt, restrain, 
protect, shield
Inhibit
Shield, insulate, protect, resist
Convert
Convert
Condense, differentiate, evaporate, integrate, 
liquefy, process, solidify, transform
Provision
Store
Contain, collect, reserve, capture
Supply (extract)
Expose, fi ll, provide, replenish
Signal
Sense
Discern, locate, perceive, recognize
Indicate
Mark
Display
Process
Calculate, compare, check
Support
Stabilize
Steady
Secure
Attach, fasten, hold, lock, mount
Position
Align, locate, orient
R. E. Stone, “Functional Basis”, Design Engineering Lab Webpage, designengineeringlab.org/FunctionCAD/
FunctionCAD/FB.html, accessed November 10, 2011.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
221
6
Systematic design represents mechanical components abstractly by a labeled 
function block and its interacting fl ow lines. Three standard mechanical components 
are listed in Table 6.6. The function fl ows and class names are expressed in the most 
general possible terms.
Systematic design provides a way to describe an entire device or system in a gen-
eral way. A device can be modeled as a single component entity that transforms inputs 
of energy, material, and signal into desired outputs. An abstract model of a basketball 
return modeled as a single function block is presented in Fig. 6.6.
TABLE 6.6
Components Abstracted into Function Blocks
Function Class
Mechanical Components Repre-
sented as Function Blocks
Flow Legend
Energy 
Material 
Signal 
Control Magnitude 
Fluid
(Flow rate A)
Fluid
(Flow rate B)
Valve
Increase or
decrease
flow
Convert
Electrical
energy
Rotational
energy
Electric motor
Convert
Provision
Linear coil springs
Translational
energy
Store
energy
FIGURE 6.6
Function structure black box for a basketball ball return.
Basketball shot
towards hoop 
Guide
basketball to
shooter’s
position
Signal giving
shooter’s position
Gravity
Basketball returning to
shooter  
Note: A moving basketball will always possess
direction and kinetic energy.
Energy
Material
Signal

222 
engineering design 
6
6.5.3 Performing Functional Decomposition
Functional decomposition produces a diagram called a function structure. A function 
structure is a block diagram depicting fl ows of energy, material, and signal as labeled 
arrows taking paths between function blocks, like those in Table 6.6. The function 
structure represents mechanical devices by the arrangement of function blocks and 
fl ow arrows. Flow lines are drawn with arrows to indicate direction and labels to de-
fi ne the fl ow connecting the function blocks (see Fig. 6.7). Designers use function 
blocks in the diagram to represent the transformations done by the system, assembly, 
or component, and label each block by selecting function names from a predefi ned set 
of transformational verbs in Table 6.5. The function structure is very different from 
the physical decomposition of a product because a function is the combined behavior 
of mechanical components and their physical arrangement. There is no one-to-one 
correspondence of function block to component.
The most general function structure is a single function block description of a 
device, like the basketball return model of Fig. 6.6. This type of function structure 
(a single function block) is called a black box representation of a device. It must list 
the overall function of the device and supply all appropriate input and output fl ows. 
FIGURE 6.7
Function structure for a mechanical pencil.
(a) Black box pencil function structure
(b) Standard function blocks to describe pencil behavior
H. E.
Paper
Lead
H. E.
Paper
Lead
Lead
Paper
(c) Pencil function structure
Capture lead
markings on
paper
Human energy
Marked paper
Pencil lead
Marked paper
Pencil lead
Paper
Pencil lead
Move pencil
to paper
Position lead
on paper
Guide lead
across paper
Regulate
pressure of lead
on paper
Additional Human Energy (H. E.)
Move pencil
to paper
Position lead
on paper
Regulate
pressure of lead
on paper
Guide lead
across paper
Human energy
Paper
Pencil lead
Flow Legend
Energy
Material
Signal

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
223
6
In the case of designing a new device, the black box representation is the most logical 
place to begin the process.
A simplifi ed method for creating a function structure is described in the following 
steps. The example used is that of a lead pencil.
1. Identify the overall function that needs to be accomplished using function basis terms. 
Identify the energy, material, and signal fl ows that will be input to the device. Iden-
tify the energy, material, and signal fl ows that will be output from the device once 
the transformations are complete. Use the standard fl ow classes defi ned in Table 6.4. 
Common practice is to use different line styles for arrows to represent each general 
fl ow type (i.e., energy, material, and signal). Label each arrow with the name of the 
specifi c fl ow. This “black box” model of the product (Fig. 6.7a for the pencil) shows 
the input and output fl ows for the primary high-level function of the design task.
2. Using everyday language, write a description of the individual functions that are 
required to accomplish the overall task described in the black box model of the 
pencil in Fig. 6.7a. The most abstract function of a pencil is to capture lead mark-
ings on paper. The input fl ows of material include both lead and paper. Since a 
human user is needed to operate the pencil, the energy fl ow type is human. For 
example, in everyday language the general functions to be accomplished by the 
pencil and its user are: 
● Movement of pencil lead to the appropriate area of the paper 
● Applying the suffi cient but not overwhelming force to the lead while moving it 
through specifi c motions to create markings on the paper
● Raising and lowering the lead to contact the paper at appropriate times
The list describes the use of the pencil in a conventional way with everyday lan-
guage. This list is not unique. There are different ways to describe the behavior of 
writing with a pencil.
3. Having thought about the details of accomplishing the pencil’s function described 
in the black box, identify more precise functions (from Table 6.5) necessary to 
fulfi ll the more detailed description of the pencil’s function in solution-neutral lan-
guage. This process creates function blocks for a more detailed description of the 
pencil. One set of function blocks for the pencil is shown in Fig. 6.7b.
4. Arrange the function blocks in the order that they must take place for the desired 
functions. The arrangement depicts the precedence required by the functions. This 
means that function block arrangements will include blocks in parallel, in series, and 
in all combinations possible. Sticky notes are a great tool to use in this process, espe-
cially when decisions are made by team consensus. Rearrangement is often necessary.
5. Add the energy, material, and signal fl ows between the function blocks. Preserve 
the input and output fl ows from the black box representation of the device. Not all 
fl ows will travel through each function block. Remember that the function structure 
is a visual representation, not an analytical model. For example, fl ows in a function 
structure do not adhere to the conservation laws used to model systems for ther-
modynamic analysis. An example of this different behavior is the representation of 
a coil spring in Table 6.6. It accepts translational energy without discharging any 
energy. The preliminary function structure for the pencil is depicted in Fig. 6.7c.

224 
engineering design 
6
6. Examine each block in the function structure to determine if additional energy, 
material, or signal fl ows are necessary to perform the function. In the pencil func-
tion structure, an additional human energy fl ow is input to the “Guide lead” func-
tion block to reinforce the idea that there is a second type of activity that the user 
must perform.
7. Review each function block again to see if additional refi nement is necessary. The 
objective is to refi ne the function blocks as much as possible. Refi nement stops 
when a function block can be fulfi lled by a single solution that is an object or ac-
tion, and the level of detail is suffi cient to address the customer needs.
Designers make unstated assumptions that are revealed by examining the pencil 
function structure. The function structure built here presumes that a user can hold and 
manipulate a piece of pencil lead directly. We know that is not the case. Thin lead 
requires a casing.
Function structures are not necessarily unique. Another designer or design team 
can create a slightly different set of descriptive function blocks for a lead pencil. This 
demonstrates the creative potential of design by functional decomposition and synthe-
sis. A designer can look at a portion of a function structure and replace it with a new 
set of function blocks as long as the functional outcome is preserved.
Figure 6.8 displays a function structure for a basketball return device. This func-
tion structure was created from the blackbox representation given in Fig 6.6. This is 
one possible version of a function structure for the Shot-Buddy. Some designers may 
use different combinations of function blocks in the diagram. For example, the initial 
FIGURE 6.8
Function structure for a basketball return device.
Energy
Material
Signal
Channel
moving
basketball
Change
direction
of basketball
Sense
shooter’s
position
Convert
electrical
energy to
mechanical
Rotate return
device outlet
toward
shooter
Mech-
anical
energy
Guide
basketball to
shooter’s
position
Basketball
moving
to shooter
BB
BB
BB
BB
BB
BB
Gravity
Gravity
Gravity
Gravity
Basketball (BB)
Electrical
energy
Channel
basketball
through
return device
Transport
basketball
through
return device
Regulate
basketball
energy
Guide BB to
return
device inlet
Position signal
Mechanical energy

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
225
6
functionality of the Shot-Buddy is to provide a means of catching a basketball shot 
into or near the net. Different functions in the Function Class of channel would be 
appropriate. Figure 6.8 shows several instances where energy in the form of gravity 
is designated. This indicates that the designers are focusing on the natural downward 
forces on a basketball and are probably thinking of using that energy in the design.
Functional decomposition is not easy to implement in all situations. It is 
well-suited for mechanical systems that include components in relative motion with 
one another. It is a poor method for representing load-bearing devices that exist to 
resist other forces. An example is a desk.
6.5.4 Strengths and Weaknesses of Functional Synthesis
The modeling of a mechanical product in a form-independent and solution-neutral 
way will allow for more abstract thinking about the problem and enhance the possibil-
ity of more creative solutions. The function structure’s model of fl ows and functions 
may provide cues for making decisions on how to segment the device into systems 
and subsystems. This is known as determining the product architecture. By creating 
function structures, fl ows separate, begin, end, and transform as they pass through 
the device. It may be advantageous to combine functions that act on the same fl ow 
into subsystems or physical modules. Flow descriptions provide a way to plan for 
measuring the effectiveness of a system, subsystem, or function because a fl ow is 
measurable.
The advantages of functional decomposition and synthesis follow from two key 
elements of the method.
 
● First, creating function structures forces re-representation into a language that is 
useful for the manipulation of mechanical design problems. 
 
● Second, using a function structure to represent a design lends functional labels 
to potential solution components, and these labels serve as hints for new memory 
searches.
Again, we see that the methods use strategies suggested to improve creativity. The 
great advantage of functional decomposition is that the method facilitates the exam-
ination of options that most likely would not have been considered if the designer 
moved quickly to selecting specifi c physical principles or, even worse, selecting spe-
cifi c hardware.
There are several weaknesses to the functional decomposition method. Briefl y:
 
● Some products are better suited to representation and design by functional decom-
position and synthesis than are others. Products that consist of function-specifi c 
modules arranged in a way that all the material fl owing through the product follows 
the same path are the best candidates for this method. Examples include a copying 
machine, a factory, or a peppermill. Any product that acts sequentially on some kind 
of material fl owing through it is well suited for description by a function structure.
 
● The function structure is a fl ow diagram where fl ows are connecting different func-
tions performed by the product the structure represents. Each function applied to a 

226 
engineering design 
6
fl ow is articulated separately by a function block in the function structure, even if 
the action is at essentially the same time. Thus, the ordering of the function struc-
ture boxes seems to imply a sequence in time that may or may not be accurately 
depicting the device’s action. 
 
● There are weaknesses in using functional structures during conceptual design. 
A function structure is not a complete conceptual design. Even after developing a 
function structure, you still need to select devices, mechanisms, or structural forms 
to fulfi ll the function. There are no comprehensive catalogs of solution embodi-
ments like those available in the German technical literature. 
 
● Functional decomposition can lead to excess parts and subsystems if the designer 
does not stop to integrate common function blocks and fl ows. Employing function 
sharing or taking advantage of emergent behavior is diffi cult when the method is so 
focused on the parts instead of the whole.
 
● A fi nal criticism of this method is that the results are not necessarily unique. This 
can bother researchers who want a repeatable process. Ironically, many students 
who are trained in this method fi nd it too constrained because of the requirements 
of expressing functions in predefi ned categories.
6.6
MORPHOLOGICAL METHODS
Morphological analysis is a method for representing and exploring all the relation-
ships in multidimensional problems. The word morphology means the study of shape 
and form. Morphological analysis is a way of creating new forms. Morphological 
methods have been recorded in science as a way to enumerate and investigate solution 
alternatives as far back as the 1700s. The process was developed into a technique for 
generating design solutions by Zwicky.1 Zwicky formalized the process of applying 
morphological methods to design in the mid-1960s with the publication of a text that 
was translated into English in 1969.
Generating product design concepts from a given set of components is one such 
problem. There are many different combinations of components that can satisfy the 
same functionality required in a new product. Examining every candidate design is 
a combinatorially explosive problem. Yet, one wonders how many great designs are 
missed because the designer or team ran out of time for exploring alternative solu-
tions. Morphological methods for design are built on a strategy that helps designers 
uncover novel and unconventional combinations of components that might not ordi-
narily be generated. Success with morphological methods requires broad knowledge 
of a wide variety of components and their uses, and the time to examine them. It’s 
unlikely that any design team will have enough resources (time and knowledge) to 
completely search a design space for any given design problem. This makes a method 
1. F. Zwicky, The Morphological Method of Analysis and Construction, Courant Anniversary Volume, 
pp. 461–70, Interscience Publishers, New York, 1948.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
227
6
like morphological analysis of great interest to design teams. It is a method that is 
especially useful when merged with other generative methods.
The function structure of a design, discussed in Sec. 6.5, is a template for gen-
erating design options by examining combinations of known devices to achieve the 
behavior described by each function block. Morphological analysis is very effective 
for solution synthesis when paired with functional decomposition. The treatment pro-
vided here assumes that the team has fi rst used systematic design to create an accurate 
function structure for the product to be designed and now seeks to generate a set of 
feasible concepts for further consideration.
6.6.1 Morphological Method for Design
Morphological methods help structure the problem for the synthesis of different com-
ponents to fulfi ll the same required functionality. This process is made easier by ac-
cess to a component catalog. Yet it does not replace the interaction of designers on a 
team. Teams are vital for refi ning concepts, communication, and building consensus. 
The best procedure is for each team member to spend several hours working as an 
individual on some subset of the problem, such as how to satisfy the need described by 
an identifi ed function. Morphological analysis assists a team in compiling individual 
research results into one structure to allow the full team to process the information.
The general morphological approach to design is summarized in the following 
three steps.
1. Divide the overall design problem into simpler subproblems.
2. Generate solution concepts for each subproblem.
3. Systematically combine subproblem solutions into different complete solutions and 
evaluate all combinations.
The morphological approach to mechanical design begins with the functional 
decomposition of the design problem into a detailed function structure. We will use 
the redesign of a basketball return device as an illustrative example. The function 
structure is, in itself, a depiction of a number of smaller design problems or subprob-
lems. Each consists of fi nding a solution to replace the function block in the larger 
function structure. If each subproblem is correctly solved, then any combination of 
subproblem solutions comprises a feasible solution to the total design problem. The 
morphological chart is the tool used to organize the subproblem solutions.
The designer or team can continue with morphological analysis once they have 
an accurate decomposition of the problem. The process proceeds with completing a 
morphological chart (Table 6.7). The chart is a table organizing the subproblem solu-
tions. The chart’s column headings are the names of the sub problems identifi ed in 
the decomposition step. The rows hold solutions to the subproblem. Descriptive words 
or very simple sketches depict the subproblem solution in every chart cell. Some col-
umns in the morphological chart may hold only a single solution concept. There are 
two possible explanations. The design team may have made a fundamental assump-
tion that limits the subproblem solution choices. Another reason could be that a satis-
factory physical embodiment is given, or it could be that the design team is weak on 
ideas. We call this limited domain knowledge. 

228 
engineering design 
6
6.6.2 Generating Concepts from a Morphological Chart
The next step in morphological design is to generate all designs by synthesizing pos-
sible combinations of alternatives for each subfunction solution identifi ed in Table 6.7. 
One possible design concept to consider is combining the component alternatives ap-
pearing in the fi rst row under each subfunction. Another potential design is comprised 
of the random selection of one subproblem solution from each column. Designs gen-
erated from the chart must be checked for feasibility and may not represent a viable 
overall design alternative. The advantage of creating a morphological chart is that it 
allows a systematic exploration of many possible design solutions.
One possible basketball return concept for the Shot-Buddy is shown as rough sketch 
in Fig. 6.9. It is made from the fi rst subproblem solution listed under each heading in 
Table 6.7. It is easy to understand how this concept could be changed by substituting 
some other type of system to catch a basketball shot at the net. The advantages of the 
morphological approach become clear when illustrated with an example such as this.
Table 6.7 only includes fi ve of the ten function blocks given in the basketball re-
turn systems function structure. Still the set of possible combinations is quite large. 
For the fi ve function blocks example given here there are 4 × 4 × 4 × 4 × 4 = 1024 
combinations, clearly too many to follow up in detail. Some may be clearly infea-
sible or impractical. Care should be taken not to make this judgment too hurriedly. 
Also, realize that some concepts will satisfy more than one subproblem. Likewise, 
some subproblems are coupled, not independent. This means that their solutions can 
be evaluated only in conjunction with the solutions to other subproblems. 
Do not rush into evaluation of design concepts. Outstanding designs often evolve 
out of several iterations of combining concept fragments from the morphological 
chart and working them into an integrated solution. This is a place where a smoothly 
functioning team pays off.
TABLE 6.7
Morphological Chart for Shot-Buddy Basketball Return System
Subproblem Solution Concepts
Channel Moving 
Basketball
Change Direction of 
Basketball
Sense Shooter’s 
Position
Guide Basketball 
to Return Device 
Inlet
Rotate Return 
Device Outlet 
Toward Shooter
Catch net
Sheet of fl exible 
material
RFID tag worn 
by shooter
Funnel(net or solid 
material)
Ratchet device
Plastic sheeting 
with wire ribs
Solid defl ector panels
Motion sensor
Set of rails
None (rely on ball’s 
direction and 
gravity)
Finger-like 
converging 
structure
Shaped foam
Optical sensor
Tube of netting
Cam mechanism
Tubing (partially 
open or closed)
Paddle arms
Acoustic sensor
Metal guide 
(moving or 
stationary)
Geared shaft

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
229
6
Although design concepts are quite abstract at this stage, it often is very helpful 
to utilize rough sketches. Sketches help us associate function with form, and they aid 
with our short-term memory as we work to assemble the pieces of a design. Moreover, 
sketches in a design notebook are an excellent way of documenting the development 
of a product for patent purposes.
6.7
TRIZ: THE THEORY OF INVENTIVE PROBLEM SOLVING
The Theory of Inventive Problem Solving, known by the acronym “TRIZ,” 1 is a 
 problem-solving methodology tailored to provide innovative solutions for scientifi c 
and engineering problems. Genrich Altshuller, a Russian inventor, developed TRIZ in 
the late 1940s and 1950s. After World War II, Altshuller worked on design problems 
in the Soviet Navy. Altshuller was convinced that he could improve the creativity of 
design engineers. He began by looking into Synectics but was not impressed with the 
method. So in 1946 Altshuller started his work to create a new science of invention.2 
1. TRIZ is an acronym for Teoriya Resheniya Izobreatatelskikh Zadatch.
2. K. Gadd, TRIZ for Engineers: Enabling Inventive Problem Solving, John Wiley & Sons, Incorporated, 
2011. M. A. Orloff, Inventive Thought through TRIZ, 2d ed., Springer, New York, 2006; L. Shulyak, ed., 
The Innovation Algorithm, Technical Innovation Center, Inc., Worchester, MA, 2000.
FIGURE 6.9
Sketch of Shot-Buddy concept.
Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, “JSR 
Design  Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.
Semicircular
sloping ball
catch net
Ratchet
mechanism to
pivot guide is
not shown
Metal guides
with three
possible ball
return paths

230 
engineering design 
6
Altshuller and a few colleagues began by studying author certifi cates, the Soviet 
Union’s equivalent to patents. The basic premise of TRIZ is that the solution prin-
ciples derived from studying novel inventions can be codifi ed and applied to related 
design problems to yield inventive solutions. Altshuller and colleagues constructed 
their methodology for generating inventive solutions and published the fi rst article on 
TRIZ in 1956.
TRIZ offers four different strategies for generating an innovative solution to a 
design problem. They are:
1. Increase the ideality of a product or system.
2. Identify the product’s place in its evolution to ideality and force the next step.
3. Identify key physical or technological contradictions in the product and revise the 
design to overcome them using inventive principles.
4. Model a product or system using substance-fi eld (Su-Field) analysis and apply can-
didate modifi cations.
Altshuller developed a step-by-step procedure for applying strategies of inventive 
problem solving and called it ARIZ.
Space considerations allow us to introduce only the idea of contradictions and to 
give a brief introduction to ARIZ. While this is just a beginning introduction to TRIZ, 
it can serve as a signifi cant stimulation to creativity in design and to further study 
of the subject. Note that this section follows the TRIZ conventions in using the term 
system to mean the product, device, or artifact that is invented or improved.
6.7.1 Invention: Evolution to Increased Ideality
Altshuller’s examination of inventions led to his observation that systems had a level 
of goodness he called ideality and that inventions result when changes were made to 
improve this attribute of a product or system. Altshuller modeled ideality as a math-
ematical construct defi ned as the ratio of the useful effects of a system to its harmful 
effects. Like any ratio, as the harmful effects decrease to approach a value of zero, the 
ideality grows to infi nity. 
Improving system ideality is one of the TRIZ inventive design strategies. Briefl y, 
the six specifi c design suggestions to examine for improving the ideality of a system 
are as follows:
1. Exclude auxiliary functions (by combining them or eliminating the need for them).
2. Exclude elements (i.e., subsystems or components) in the existing system.
3. Identify self-service functions (i.e., exploit function sharing by identifying an exist-
ing element of a system that can be altered to satisfy another necessary function).
4. Replace elements or parts of the total system.
5. Change the system’s basic principle of operation.
6. Utilize resources in system and its immediate surroundings.
The TRIZ strategy of improving ideality is more complex than simply following the 
six guidelines, but the scope of this text limits us to this introduction.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
231
6
The patent research led Altshuller and his colleagues to a second strategy for 
invention. They observed that engineering systems are refi ned over time to achieve 
higher states of ideality. The history of systems displayed consistent patterns of design 
evolution that a system follows as it is reinvented. Again, this inventive strategy of 
forcing the next step in product evolution is complex. The redesign patterns identifi ed 
in TRIZ are listed here.
 
● Development toward increased dynamism and controllability
 
● Develop fi rst into complexity then combine into simpler systems
 
● Evolution with matching and mismatching components
 
● Evolution toward micro level and increasing use of fi elds (more functions)
 
● Evolution toward decreased human involvement
Altshuller believed that an inventor could use one of the suggestions to inspire inven-
tive improvements in existing systems, giving the inventor a competitive advantage.
These strategies for producing inventive designs follow from the theory of in-
novation that Altshuller proposes with the TRIZ methodology. Notice that the guide-
lines developed from researching inventions are similar to suggestions or prompts 
in creativity-enhancing methods for general problem solving. Like many theories of 
design, TRIZ has been demonstrated but not proven. Nevertheless, the principles be-
hind the theory are observable and lead to guidelines for producing inventive design 
solutions.
6.7.2 Innovation by Overcoming Contradictions
Developing a formal and systematic design method requires more than guidelines 
drawn from experience. Continuing with the examination of the inventions verifi ed 
by author certifi cates, Altshuller’s group noted differences in the type of change pro-
posed by the inventor over the existing system design. The solutions fell into one of 
fi ve very specifi c levels of innovation. The following list describes each innovation 
level and shows its relative frequency.
 
● Level 1: (32%) Conventional design solutions arrived at by methods well known in 
the technology area of the system.
 
● Level 2: (45%) Minor corrections made to an existing system by well-known meth-
ods at the expense of some compromise in behavior.
 
● Level 3: (18%) Substantial improvement in an existing system that resolves a basic 
behavior compromise by using the knowledge of the same technology area; the 
improvement typically involves adding a component or subsystem. 
 
● Level 4: (4%) Solutions based on application of a new scientifi c principle to elimi-
nate basic performance compromises. This type of invention will cause a paradigm 
shift in the technology sector. 
 
● Level 5: (1% or less) Pioneering inventions based on a discovery outside of known 
science and known technology.

232 
engineering design 
6
In 95 percent of the cases, inventors arrived at new designs by applying knowl-
edge from the same technical fi eld as the existing system. The more innovative design 
solutions improved a previously accepted performance compromise. In 4 percent of 
the inventions, the compromise was overcome by application of new knowledge to the 
fi eld. These cases are called inventions outside of technology and often proceed to 
revolutionize an industry. One example is the development of the integrated circuit 
that replaced the transistor. Another is the digitizing technology used in audio record-
ings that led to the compact disc.
Diligent application of good engineering practice in the appropriate technical spe-
cialty already leads a designer to Level 1 and 2 inventions. Conversely, the pioneering 
scientifi c discoveries driving the inventions of Level 5 are serendipitous in nature and 
cannot be found by any formal method. Therefore, Altshuller focused his attention 
on analyzing innovations on Levels 3 and 4 in order to develop a design method for 
inventive solutions.
Altshuller had about 40,000 instances of Level 3 and 4 inventions within his 
initial sample of 200,000 Soviet author certifi cates. These inventions were improve-
ments over systems containing a fundamental technical contradiction. This con-
dition exists when a system contains two important attributes related such that an 
improvement in the fi rst attribute degrades the other. For example, in aircraft design 
a technical contradiction is the inherent trade-off between improving an aircraft’s 
crashworthiness by increasing the fuselage wall thickness and minimizing its weight. 
These technical contradictions create design problems within these systems that re-
sist solution by good engineering practice alone. A compromise in performance is 
the best that can be obtained by ordinary design methods. The redesigns that in-
ventors proposed for these problems were truly inventive, meaning that the solution 
surmounts a basic contradiction that occurs because of conventional application of 
known technology.
As seen with other design methods, it is useful to translate a design problem into 
general terms so that designers are not restricted in their search for solutions. TRIZ 
required a means to describe the contradictions in general terms. In TRIZ, the techni-
cal contradiction represents a key design problem in solution-neutral form by identify-
ing the engineering parameters that are in confl ict. TRIZ uses a list of 39 engineering 
parameters (see Table 6.8) to describe system contradictions.
The parameters in Table 6.8 are self-explanatory and the list is comprehensive. 
The terms seem general, but they can accurately describe design problems.1 Con-
sider the example of competing goals of the airplane, being both crashworthy and 
lightweight. Proposing an increase in the thickness of the fuselage material increases 
the strength of the fuselage but also negatively affects the weight. In TRIZ terms, this 
design scenario has the technical contradiction of improving strength (parameter 14) 
at the expense of the weight of a moving object (parameter 1).
1. An excellent description of each TRIZ parameter can be found online in Ellen Domb with Joe Miller, 
Ellen MacGran, and Michael Slocum, “The 39 Features of Altshuller’s Contradiction Matrix,” The TRIZ 
Journal, http://www.triz-journal.com, November, 1998.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
233
6
6.7.3 TRIZ Inventive Principles
TRIZ is based on the notion that inventors recognized technical contradictions in 
design problems and overcame them using a principle that represented a new way 
of thinking about the situation. Altshuller’s group studied inventions that overcame 
technical contradictions, identifi ed the solution principles used in each case, and dis-
tilled them into 40 unique solution ideas. These are the 40 Inventive Principles of 
TRIZ, and they are listed in Table 6.9.
Several elements in the list of Inventive Principles, like Combining (#5) and Asym-
metry (#4), are similar to the prompts provided in some of the creativity-enhancing 
methods like SCAMPER and are self-explanatory. Some of the principles are very spe-
cifi c like numbers 29, 30, and 35. Others, like Spheroidality 1 (#14) require more expla-
nation before they can be applied. Many of the inventive principles listed have special 
meaning introduced by Altshuller.
TABLE 6.8
TRIZ List of 39 Engineering Parameters
Engineering Parameters Used to Represent Contradictions in TRIZ
 1. Weight of moving object
21. Power
 2. Weight of nonmoving object
22. Waste of energy
 3. Length of moving object
23. Waste of substance
 4. Length of nonmoving object
24. Loss of information
 5. Area of moving object
25. Waste of time
 6. Area of nonmoving object
26. Amount of substance
 7. Volume of moving object
27. Reliability
 8. Volume of nonmoving object
28. Accuracy of measurement
 9. Speed
29. Accuracy of manufacturing
10. Force
30. Harmful factors acting on object
11. Tension, pressure
31. Harmful side effects
12. Shape
32. Manufacturability
13. Stability of object
33. Convenience of use
14. Strength
34. Repairability
15. Durability of moving object
35. Adaptability
16. Durability of nonmoving object
36. Complexity of device
17. Temperature
37. Complexity of control
18. Brightness
38. Level of automation
19. Energy spent by moving object
39. Productivity 
20. Energy spent by nonmoving object
1. Principle 14, Spheroidality, means to replace straight-edged elements with curved ones, use rolling 
elements, and consider rotational motion and forces.

234 
engineering design 
6
The fi ve most frequently used Inventive Principles of TRIZ are listed here with 
more detail and examples.
Principle 1: Segmentation
a. Divide an object into independent parts.
 
❍Replace mainframe computer with personal computers.
 
❍Replace a large truck with a truck and trailer.
 
❍Use a work breakdown structure for a large project.
b. Make an object easy to disassemble.
c. Increase the degree of fragmentation or segmentation.
 
❍Replace solid shades with Venetian blinds.
 
❍Use powdered welding metal instead of foil or rod to get better penetra-
tion of the joint.
Principle 2: Extraction—Separate an interfering part or property from an object, 
or single out the only necessary part (or property) of an object.
a. Locate a noisy compressor outside the building where the air is used.
b. Use the sound of a barking dog, without the dog, as a burglar alarm.
TABLE 6.9
The 40 Inventive Principles of TRIZ
Names of TRIZ Inventive Principles
 1. Segmentation
21. Rushing through
 2. Extraction 
22. Convert harm into benefi t
 3. Local quality
23. Feedback
 4. Asymmetry
24. Mediator
 5. Combining
25. Self-service
 6. Universality
26. Copying
 7. Nesting
27.  An inexpensive short-lived object instead of an expensive 
 durable one
 8. Counterweight
28. Replacement of a mechanical system
 9. Prior counteraction
29. Use of a pneumatic or hydraulic construction
10. Prior action
30. Flexible fi lm or thin membranes
11. Cushion in advance
31. Use of porous material
12. Equipotentiality
32. Change the color
13. Inversion
33. Homogeneity
14. Spheroidality-Curvature
34. Rejecting and regenerating parts
15. Dynamicity
35. Transformation of physical and chemical states of an object
16. Partial or overdone action
36. Phase transition
17. Moving to a new dimension
37. Thermal expansion
18. Mechanical vibration
38. Use of strong oxidizers
19. Periodic action
39. Inert environment
20. Continuity of useful action
40. Composite materials

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
235
6
Principle 10: Prior action
a. Perform the required change (fully or partially) before it is needed.
 
❍Prepasted wallpaper.
 
❍Sterilize all instruments needed for a surgical procedure on a sealed tray.
b. Prearrange objects such that they can come into action from the most conve-
nient place and without losing time for their delivery.
 
❍Kanban arrangements in a just-in-time factory.
 
❍Flexible manufacturing cell.
Principle 28: Replacement of mechanical system
a. Replace a mechanical means with a sensory (optical, acoustic, taste or smell) 
means.
 
❍Replace a physical fence to confi ne a dog or cat with an acoustic “fence” 
(signal audible to the animal).
 
❍Use a bad-smelling compound in natural gas to alert users to leakage, 
instead of a mechanical or electrical sensor.
b. Use electric, magnetic, and electromagnetic fi elds to interact with the object.
c. Change from static to movable fi elds or from unstructured to structured.
Principle 35: Transformation of properties
a. Change an object’s physical state (e.g., to a gas, liquid, or solid).
 
❍Freeze the liquid centers of fi lled candies prior to coating them.
 
❍Transport oxygen or nitrogen or natural gas as a liquid, instead of a gas, to 
reduce volume.
b. Change the concentration or consistency.
c. Change the degree of fl exibility.
d. Change the temperature.
The 40 principles of TRIZ have a remarkably broad range of application. How-
ever, they do require considerable study to understand them fully. Complete list-
ings of the 40 Inventive Principles are available in book form1 and online through 
the TRIZ Journal website. There, the TRIZ principles are listed with explanations 
and examples.2 The TRIZ Journal has also published listings of the principles inter-
preted for nonengineering application areas, including business, architecture, food 
technology, and microelectronics, to name a few. 
6.7.4 The TRIZ Contradiction Matrix
TRIZ is a process of reframing a designing task so that the key contradictions are 
identifi ed and appropriate inventive principles are applied. TRIZ leads designers to 
represent problems as separate technical contradictions within the system. Typical 
1. Genrich Altshuller with Dana W. Clarke, Sr., Lev Shulyak, and Leonoid Lerner, “40 Principles Extended 
Edition,” published by Technical Innovation Center, Worcester, MA, 2006. Or online at www.triz.org.
2. “TRIZ 40 Principles”, www.TRIZ40.com, Solid Creativity, 2004. accessed November 10, 2011.

236 
engineering design 
6
confl icts are reliability versus complexity, productivity versus accuracy, and strength 
versus ductility. TRIZ then provides one or more inventive principles that have been 
used to overcome this contradiction in the past, as found by searching documentation 
of prior inventions. The TRIZ Contradiction Matrix is the key tool for selecting the 
right inventive principles to use to fi nd a creative way to overcome a contradiction. 
The matrix is square with 39 rows and columns. It includes about 1250 typical system 
contradictions, a low number given the diversity of engineering systems.
The TRIZ Contradiction Matrix guides designers to the most useful inventive prin-
ciples. Recall that a technical contradiction occurs when an improvement in a desired 
engineering parameter of the system results in deterioration of the other parameter. 
Therefore, the fi rst step to fi nding a design solution is to phrase the problem statement to 
reveal the contradiction. In this format, the parameters to be improved are identifi ed, as 
are those parameters that are being degraded. The rows and columns of the Contradic-
tion Matrix are numbered from 1 to 39, corresponding to the numbers of the engineer-
ing parameters. Naturally, the diagonal of the matrix is blank. To resolve a contradiction 
where parameter i is improved at the expense of parameter j, the designer locates the 
cell of the matrix in row i and column j. The cell includes the number of one or more 
inventive principles that other inventors used to overcome the contradiction.
The TRIZ Contradiction Matrix for parameters 1 through 10 is displayed in 
Table 6.10. An interactive TRIZ Contradiction Matrix is published online at http://
triz40.com/ with thanks to Ellen Domb of PQR Group consulting and  training fi rm 
(www.trizpqrgroup.com) and SolidCreativity.
E X A M P L E 6 .1
A metal pipe pneumatically transports plastic pellets.1 A change in the process requires 
that metal powder now be used with the pipe instead of plastic. The metal must also be 
delivered to the station at the end of the transport pipe at a higher rate of speed. Changes 
in the transport system must be done without requiring signifi cant cost increases. The 
hard metal powder causes erosion of the inside of the pipe at the elbow where the metal 
particles turn 90° (Fig. 6.10).
Conventional solutions to this problem include: (1) reinforcing the inside of the elbow 
with abrasion-resistant, hard-facing alloy; (2) redesigning the path so that any compro-
mised section of pipe could be easily replaced; and (3) redesigning the shape of the elbow 
to reduce or eliminate the instances of impact. However, all of these solutions require sig-
nifi cant extra costs. TRIZ is employed to fi nd a better and more creative solution.
Consider the function that the elbow serves. Its primary function is to change the di-
rection of the fl ow of metal particles. However, we want to increase the speed at which the 
particles fl ow through the system and at the same time reduce the energy requirements. 
We must identify the engineering parameters involved in the design change in order to 
express this as a number of smaller design problems restated as TRIZ contradictions. 
There are two engineering parameters that must be improved upon: the speed of the metal 
powder through the system must be increased, and the energy used in the system must 
improve, requiring a decrease in energy use.
Consider the design objective of increasing the speed (parameter 9) of the metal pow-
der. We must examine the system to determine the engineering parameters that will be 
1. Example adapted from J. Terninko, A. Zusman, B. Zlotin, “Step-by-Step TRIZ”, Nottingham, NH, 1997.

6
237
TABLE 6.10
Partial TRIZ Contradiction Matrix (Parameters 1 to 10)
TRIZ 
CONTRADICTION MATRIX FOR  
ENGINEERING PARAMETERS 1 
THROUGH 10
DEGRADING ENGINEERING PARAMETER
Weight of moving object
Weight of stationary object
Length of moving object
Length of stationary object
Area of moving object
Area of stationary object
Volume of moving object
Volume of stationary 
object
Speed
Force (Intensity)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Improving Engineering Parameter
1
Weight of moving object


15, 8, 
29, 34

29, 17, 
38, 34

29, 2, 
40, 28

2, 8, 15, 
38
8, 10, 
18, 37
2
Weight of stationary 
object



10, 1, 
29, 35

35, 30, 
13, 2

5, 35, 
14, 2

8, 10, 
19, 35
3
Length of moving object
8, 15, 
29, 34



15, 
17, 4

7, 17, 4, 
35

13, 4, 8
17, 10, 4
4
Length of stationary 
object
35, 28, 
40, 29



17, 7, 
10, 40

35, 8, 
2, 14

28, 10
5
Area of moving object
2, 17, 
29, 4

14, 15, 
18, 4



7, 14, 
17, 4
29, 30, 
4, 34
19, 30, 
35, 2
6
Area of stationary object

30, 2, 
14, 18

26, 7, 
9, 39




1, 18, 
35, 36
7
Volume of moving object
2, 26, 
29, 40

1, 7, 4, 
35

1, 7, 4, 
17



29, 4, 
38, 34
15, 35, 
36, 37
8
Volume of stationary 
object

35, 10, 
19, 14
19, 14
35, 8, 
2, 14




2, 18, 
37
9
Speed
2, 28, 
13, 38

13, 
14, 8

29, 30, 
34

7, 29, 
34


13, 28, 
15, 19
10
Force (Intensity)
8, 1, 
37, 18
18, 13, 
1, 28
17, 19, 
9, 36
28, 10
19, 10, 
15
1, 18, 
36, 37
15, 9, 
12, 37
2, 36, 
18, 37
13, 28, 
15, 12

“TRIZ 40 Principles”, www.TRIZ40.com, Solid Creativity, 2004. accessed November 10, 2011.

238 
engineering design 
6
degraded by the increase in speed. Then Inventive Principles are identifi ed from querying 
the TRIZ contradiction matrix. If we think about increasing the speed of the particles, we 
can envision that other parameters of the system will be degraded, or affected in a nega-
tive way. For example, increasing the speed increases the force with which the particles 
strike the inside wall of the elbow, and erosion increases. This and other degraded param-
eters are listed in Table 6.11. Also included in the table are the inventive principles taken 
from a contradiction table for each pair of parameters. For example, to improve speed 
(9) without having an undesirable effect on force (10), the suggested inventive principles 
to apply are 13, 15, 19, and 28.
The most direct way to proceed is to look at each inventive principle and sample 
applications of the principle and attempt to use a similar design change on the system 
under study.
Solution Idea 1: Principle 13, inversion, requires the designer to look at the problem 
in reverse or the other way around. In this problem, we should look at the next step of the 
processing of the metal powder and see what kind of solution can come from bringing 
materials for the next step to the location of the metal powder. This eliminates the con-
tradiction by removing the need to transport the powder through any kind of direction-
changing fl ow.
Solution Idea 2: Principle 15, dynamicity or dynamics, suggests: (a) allowing the 
characteristics of an object to change to become more benefi cial to the process; and 
(b) make a rigid or infl exible object moveable or adaptable. We could apply this principle 
by redesigning the elbow bend in the pipe to have a higher wall thickness through the 
bend so that the erosion of the inner surface will not compromise the structure of the 
bend. Another option might be to make the bend area elastic so that the metal particles 
would transmit some of their impact energy to deformation instead of erosion. Other in-
terpretations are possible.
FIGURE 6.10
Metal powder hitting bend in pipe.
TABLE 6.11
Technical Contradictions for Improving Speed of 
Metal Powder and Principles to Eliminate Them
Improved Speed (9) 
Degraded Parameter
Parameter Number
Principle to be Applied to 
Eliminate Contradiction
Force
10
13, 15, 19, 28
Durability
15
8, 3, 14, 26
Loss of matter
23
10, 13, 28, 38
Quantity of substance
26
10, 19, 29, 38

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
239
6
Another tactic for using TRIZ would be to determine which principles are most often 
suggested when looking across all degraded engineering parameters. A count of the fre-
quency with which individual inventive principles were suggested shows that four inven-
tive principles appear twice as suggested redesign tactics. They are: Principle 10—Prior 
action, 19—Periodic action, 28—Replacement of a mechanical system, and 38—Use 
strong oxidizers.
Solution Idea
The full description of Principle 28, Replacement of a mechanical system
a. Replace a mechanical system with an optical, acoustical, or odor system.
b. Use an electrical, magnetic, or electromagnetic fi eld for interaction with the object.
c. Replace fi elds. Example: (1) stationary fi eld change to rotating fi elds; (2) fi xed fi elds 
become fi elds that change in time; (3) random fi elds change to structured ones.
d. Use a fi eld in conjunction with ferromagnetic particles.
Principle 28(b) suggests the creative solution of placing a magnet at the elbow to attract and 
hold a thin layer of powder that will serve to absorb the energy of particles navigating the 
90° bend, thereby preventing erosion of the inside wall of the elbow. This solution will only 
work if the metal particles are ferromagnetic so that they can be attracted to the pipe wall.
The example of improving the transport of metal powder through a pipe seems 
simple. Use of the TRIZ Contradiction Matrix yielded three diverse, alternative solu-
tions that used unconventional principles to eliminate a couple of the technical con-
tradictions identifi ed in the problem statement. A practice problem is included at the 
end of the chapter that will allow you to continue the solution generation process. The 
power of TRIZ inventive principles and their organization should be evident now that 
the use of the Contradiction Matrix has been demonstrated.
The Contradiction Matrix is powerful, but it only makes use of one of the TRIZ 
creative solution generation strategies. ARIZ is the more complete, systematic pro-
cedure for developing inventive solutions. ARIZ is a Russian acronym and stands for 
Algorithm to Solve an Inventive Problem. Like Pahl and Beitz’s systematic design, the 
ARIZ algorithm is multiphased, exceedingly prescriptive, precise in its instructions, 
and uses all the strategies of TRIZ. The interested reader can fi nd more details on 
ARIZ in a number of texts—for example, see Altshuller.1
6.7.5 Strengths and Weaknesses of TRIZ
TRIZ presents a complete design methodology based on a theory of innovation, a 
process for describing a design problem, and several strategies for solving a design 
problem. Altshuller intended that TRIZ be systematic in guiding designers to a nearly 
ideal solution. He also intended that TRIZ be repeatable and reliable, unlike the tools 
for improving creativity in design (for example, brainstorming).
1. G. Altshuller, The Innovation Algorithm, L. Shulyak and S. Rodman (translators), Technical Innova-
tion Center, Inc., Worcester, MA, 2000.

240 
engineering design 
6
Strengths of TRIZ
The TRIZ design method has achieved popularity outside of academic circles un-
matched by other methods for technical design. This is due in part to the connection 
between the application of TRIZ principles and patents. 
 
● The principles at the heart of TRIZ are based on designs that are certifi ed as inven-
tive through the patent-type system of the country of the inventor.
 
● The developers of TRIZ continued to expand their database of inventive designs 
beyond the original 200,000.
 
● A dedicated TRIZ user community (including students of Altshuller) continues to ex-
pand the examples of inventive principles, keeping the TRIZ examples contemporary.
Weaknesses of TRIZ
TRIZ has weaknesses common to all design methods that rely on designer inter-
pretation. These include:
 
● Inventive Principles are guidelines subject to designer interpretation.
 
● The principles are too general for application in a particular design domain, espe-
cially in newly developed areas like nanotechnology.
 
● The designer must develop her own analogous design solution for the given problem, 
even with an example of an Inventive Principle in the same technical application 
domain. This calls into question the repeatability of TRIZ principle applications.
 
● There are differences in the interpretation of TRIZ concepts. For example, some 
treatments of TRIZ also describe a separate set of four separation principles that 
can be used to overcome strictly physical contradictions. Two of the separation 
principles direct the inventor to consider separating confl icting elements of the sys-
tem in space or time. The other two are more vague. Some works on TRIZ con-
clude that the separation principles are included in the inventive principles, so they 
are redundant and not mentioned.
 
● There are aspects of TRIZ that are less intuitive, less available in application ex-
amples, and largely overlooked. TRIZ includes techniques for representing techni-
cal systems graphically for additional insight and solution. This strategy is called 
Su-Field Analysis. Altshuller created 72 standard solutions, represented as transfor-
mations of Su-Field graphs.
This section presents an introduction to the complex methodology of TRIZ and 
the philosophy supporting it. The TRIZ Contradiction Matrix and Inventive Principles 
represent a design methodology that has appeal within the engineering community 
and may continue to grow in prominence.
6.8
SUMMARY
Engineering design success requires the ability togenerate concepts that are broad 
in how they accomplish their functions but are also feasible. This requires that each 
design team member be trained and ready to use all the tools. In presenting this 

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
241
6
subject we have discussed both the attitudes with which you should approach these 
tasks and techniques for creativity.
Current research on creativity shows that all people naturally perform basic 
intellectual functions required to fi nd creative solutions to problems, including de-
sign problems. Many methods have been developed that can lead one or more de-
signers in fi nding creative solutions to any problem. Designers must only be open 
to using the methods that have been shown to work. There is a four-stage model 
proposed for creative thinking: preparation, incubation, inspiration, and verifi ca-
tion. There are many barriers to creative thinking, including different types of 
blockages in normal thinking processes. There are also techniques to help people 
to push through the mental blocks. Some of these methods seem far-fetched, like 
using the SCAMPER technique, fantasy analogy, asking series of general ques-
tions, and incorporating random input into solution ideas. Nevertheless, these 
methods are useful and can be applied to increase the number of high-quality so-
lution concepts and less formalized design ideas. The idea of a design space fi lled 
with alternative solutions is introduced as a meta-model for the conceptual design 
problem.
The chapter introduced several specifi c methods for generating conceptual design 
solutions. Each method includes steps that capitalize on some technique known to be 
effective in creative problem solving. For example, Synectics is a process of purpose-
fully searching for a variety of analogies that can be used whenever a designer must 
provide optional solution principles.
Three formal methods for design are introduced in this chapter. Systematic 
design’s functional decomposition process works on intended behavior like physical 
decomposition works on the form of an existing design. The function structures cre-
ated with standard function and fl ow terms serve as templates for generating design 
solutions. Morphological analysis is a method that works well with a decomposed 
structure (like that provided in a function structure) to guide in the identifi cation of 
subproblem solutions that can be combined into alternative design concepts. TRIZ is 
one of the most recognized and commercially successful design methods today. TRIZ 
is the method based on innovations extracted from patents and generalized into inven-
tive principles by G. Altshuller. TRIZ’s most popular tool for design innovation is the 
Contradiction Matrix.
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Axiomatic Design
Biomimetics
Concept maps
Creative cognition
Design fi xation
Design space
Functional decomposition
Function structure
Generative design
Intellectual blocks
Lateral thinking
Mental blocks
Morphological analysis
Synectics
Technical contradiction
TRIZ

242 
engineering design 
6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Creativity
De Bono, E.: Serious Creativity, HarperCollins, New York, 1992.
Lumsdaine, E., and M. Lumsdaine: Creative Problem Solving, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995.
Weisberg, R. W.: Creativity: Beyond the Myth of Genius, W. H. Freeman, New York, 1993.
Conceptual Design Methods
Cross, N: Engineering Design Methods, 3d ed., John & Sons Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2001.
French, M. J.: Conceptual Design for Engineers, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1985.
Orloff, M. A., Inventive Thought through TRIZ, 2d ed., Springer, New York, 2006.
Otto, K. N., and K. L. Wood: Product Design: Techniques in Reverse Engineering and New 
Product Development, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2001.
Suh, N. P.: The Principles of Design, Oxford University Press, New York, 1990.
Ullman, D. G.: The Mechanical Design Process, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2010.
Ulrich, K. T., and S. D. Eppinger: Product Design and Development, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 2011.
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
 6.1 Go to an online catalog of personal use items. Randomly select two products from their 
inventory and combine them into a useful innovation. Describe the key functionality.
 6.2 A technique for removing a blockage in the creative process is to apply transformation 
rules (often in the form of questions) to an existing but unsatisfactory solution. Apply 
the key question techniques to the following problem: As a city engineer, you are asked 
to suggest ways to eliminate puddles from forming on pedestrian walkways. Start with 
the current solution: waiting for the puddles to evaporate.
 6.3 Create a concept map to track your progress through a team brainstorming exercise. 
Show your map to those present during the session and record their comments.
 6.4 Central power plant operators consider converting their energy sources from existing 
fuels to coal only to discover that they lack the empty property near their facility to 
store massive piles of coal. Conduct a brainstorming session to propose new ways to 
store coal.
 6.5 Dissect a small appliance and create a physical decomposition diagram. Write a narra-
tive accompanying the diagram to explain how the product works.
 6.6 Using the function basis terms provided in the chapter, create a valid function structure 
for the device chosen in Problem 6.5.
 6.7 Create a function structure of a dishwasher.

 
chapter 6: Concept Generation 
243
6
 6.8 Use the idea of a morphological box (a three-dimensional morphological chart) to 
develop a new concept for personal transportation. Use as the three main factors (the 
axes of the cube) power source, media in which the vehicle operates, and method of pas-
senger support.
 6.9 Sketch and label an exploded view of your favorite mechanical pencil. Create a function 
structure for it. Use the function structure to generate new designs.
6.10 Use the morphological chart of subproblem solution concepts in Table 6.7 to generate 
two new basketball return design concepts. Sketch and label your concepts.
6.11 Create a morphological chart for a mechanical pencil. 
6.12 Research the personal history of Genrich Altshuller and write a short report on his life.
6.13 Return to Example 6.1, the metal powder transport through an elbow bend. The second 
engineering parameter to improve is 19. Use the TRIZ Contradiction Matrix to identify 
inventive principles and generate new solutions to the problem.

7
7
DECISION MAKING AND CONCEPT 
SELECTION
7.1
INTRODUCTION
Some writers have described the engineering design process as a series of decisions 
carried out with less than adequate information. Certainly, creativity, the ability to 
acquire information, and the ability to combine physical principles into working con-
cepts are critically important in making wise design decisions. So, too, are an un-
derstanding of the psychological infl uences on the decision maker, the nature of the 
trade-offs embodied in the selection of different options, and the uncertainty inherent 
in the alternatives. The need to understand the principles behind good decision mak-
ing is equally important to the business executive, the surgeon, or the military com-
mander as it is to the engineering designer.
Figure 7.1 depicts the concept generation and selection processes as a succession of 
divergent and convergent steps. Initially we spread the net wide to capture all kinds of 
customer and industry information about a proposed design. This is then “boiled down” 
into a product design specifi cation, PDS. Then, with effi cient information gathering and 
creativity stimulation methods, assisted with systematic design methods like function 
structure analysis and TRIZ, we formulate a set of design concepts using divergent 
ways of thinking. Convergent thinking comes into play as the design concepts are eval-
uated at a high level. Often new concepts emerge as the team begins to think about new 
combinations and adaptations among the concepts—a divergent step. Once again there 
is an evaluation of concepts against obvious selection criteria that assess broad accept-
ability of the concepts. The steps of widening the pool of possible concepts and elimi-
nating the clearly inferior ones can repeat until only a small set of concepts remain.
The rounds of successive concept generation and selection cycles modeled in 
Fig. 7.1 will result in a set of improving concepts if the cycles are controlled by the 
proper design specifi cation criteria in both the generation and elimination of concepts. 
The creation of a set of proper design criteria was formalized in Chap. 3. The product 
or system’s design selection criteria are the engineering characteristics that emerged 

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
245
7
from the House of Quality as the most important design variables whose values were 
not set by constraints. Additional design selection criteria may be discovered in con-
sultation with design process sponsors as the process continues, as the result of chang-
ing regulations or the unceasing demands of a competitive marketplace.
During any stage of the design process selecting among design alternatives re-
quires: (1) a set of design selection criteria; (2) a set of alternatives believed to satisfy 
the set of criteria; and (3) a means to evaluate the design alternatives with respect to 
each criterion. Earlier chapters presented strategies and methods to set design specifi -
cations and design criteria, and to generate design alternatives that are likely to meet 
the criteria. This chapter focuses on determining a decision strategy appropriate to 
both the design environment and the phase of the design process, creating models 
to assess design alternatives on decision criteria, and using evaluation processes to 
reduce a set of alternatives to a few or a single best alternative. Using these methods, 
a designer or team can decide on one design to carry forward into the embodiment 
design process after having produced a set of good design alternatives.
The evaluation, modeling, and decision methods described in this chapter are fi rst 
used in selecting alternatives during conceptual design. The methods will also be useful 
in any phase of engineering design during which a selection must be made from a set of 
alternatives. What will differ is the amount of information required for the evaluation, the 
detail and accuracy of the performance models, and the detail of the design alternatives. 
The amount of detail increases as design teams move forward in their process.
7.2
DECISION MAKING
Theory for decision making is rooted in many different academic disciplines, in-
cluding pure mathematics, economics (macro and micro), psychology (cognitive and 
behavioral), probability, and many others. For example, the discipline of operations
FIGURE 7.1
Concept generation and selection, viewed as alternating divergent and convergent processes.
Concept generation
Collect ideas
Concept
selection
Concept
selected
New concepts
added
Further
reduction
Further
addition

246 
engineering design 
7
research contributed to decision theory. Operations research evolved from the work 
of a brilliant collection of British and American physicists, mathematicians, and en-
gineers who used their technical talent to provide creative solutions to problems of 
military operations 1 in World War II. We discuss some of these ideas as they pertain 
to decision making in the fi rst part of the chapter.
This is followed by a discussion of methods for evaluating and selecting between
alternative concepts. As Fig. 7.2 shows, these steps complete the conceptual design
phase of the design process.
7.2.1 Behavioral Aspects of Decision Making
Behavioral psychology provides an understanding of the infl uence of risk taking in
individuals and teams.2 Making a decision is a stressful situation for most people 
when there is no way to be certain about the information about the past or the predic-
tions of the future. This psychological stress arises from at least two sources.3 First, 
FIGURE 7.2
Steps in the design process, showing evaluation and selection of concepts as the completing 
step in conceptual design.
Deﬁne
problem
Problem statement
Benchmarking
Product dissection
House of Quality
PDS
Gather
information
Conceptual design
Internet
Patents
Technical articles
T
Trade jour
T
nals
Consultants
Concept
generation
Creativity methods
Brainstorming
Functional models
Decomposition
Systematic design
methods
Evaluate &
select concept
Decision making
Selection criteria
Pugh chart
Decision matrix
AHP
Product
architecture
Arrangement of
physical elements
Modularity
Conﬁguration
design
Preliminary
selection of
materials and
manufacturing
processes
Modeling
Sizing of parts
Parametric
design
Robust design
Set tolerances
DFM, DFA, DFE
F
Tolerances
T
Detail
design
Engineering
drawings
Finalize PDS
Embodiment design
1. A typical problem was how to arrange the ships in a convoy to best avoid being sunk by submarines.
2. R. L. Keeney, Value-Focused Thinking, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992.
3. I. L. Janis and L. Mann, Am. Scientist, November–December 1976, pp. 657–67.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
247
7
decision makers are concerned about the material and social losses that will result 
from either course of action that is chosen. Second, they recognize that their reputa-
tions and self-esteem as competent decision makers are at stake. Severe psychologi-
cal stress brought on by decisional confl ict can be a major cause of errors in decision 
making. There are fi ve basic patterns by which people cope with the challenge of 
decision making.
1. Unconfl icted adherence: Decide to continue with current action and ignore infor-
mation about risk of losses.
2. Unconfl icted change: Uncritically adopt whichever course of action is most 
strongly recommended.
3. Defensive avoidance: Evade confl ict by procrastinating, shifting responsibility to
someone else, and remaining inattentive to corrective information.
4. Hypervigilance: Search frantically for an immediate problem solution.
5. Vigilance: Search painstakingly for relevant information that is assimilated in an 
unbiased manner and appraised carefully before a decision is made.
All of these patterns of decision making, except the last one, are defective.
A decision is made on the basis of available facts. Great effort should be made to 
evaluate possible bias and relevance of the facts. It is important to ask the right ques-
tions to pinpoint the problem. Emphasis should be on prevention of arriving at the 
right answer to the wrong question. When you are getting facts from subordinates, it is 
important to guard against the selective screening out of unfavorable results. Remem-
ber that the same set of facts may be open to more than one interpretation. Of course,
the interpretation of qualifi ed experts should be respected, but blind faith in expert 
opinion can lead to trouble.
Facts must be carefully weighed in an attempt to extract the real meaning: knowl-
edge. In the absence of real knowledge, we must seek advice. It is good practice to 
check your opinions against the counsel of experienced associates. There is an old 
adage that there is no substitute for experience, but the experience does not have to be
your own. You should try to benefi t from the successes and failures of others. Unfor-
tunately, failures rarely are recorded and reported widely. There is also a reluctance to 
properly record and document the experience base of people in a group.
Before a decision can be made, the facts, the knowledge, and the experience must 
be brought together and evaluated in the context of the problem. Previous experience 
will suggest how the present situation differs from other situations that required deci-
sions, and thus precedent will provide guidance. If time does not permit an adequate
analysis, then the decision will be made on the basis of intuition, an instinctive feeling
as to what is probably right (an educated guess). An important help in the evaluation
process is discussion of the problem with peers and associates.
The last and most important ingredient in the decision process is judgment. Good 
judgment cannot be described, but it is an integration of a person’s basic mental pro-
cesses and ethical standards. Judgment is a highly desirable quality, as evidenced by 
the fact that it is one of the factors usually included in personal evaluation ratings. 
Judgment is particularly important because most decisional situations are shades of 
gray rather than either black or white. An important aspect of good judgment is to 
understand clearly the realities of the situation.

248 
engineering design 
7
A decision usually leads to an action. A situation requiring action can be thought 
of as having four aspects:1 should, actual, must, and want. The should aspect identifi es
d
what ought to be done if there are no obstacles to the action. A should is the expected
standard of performance if organizational objectives are to be obtained. The should
is compared with the actual, the performance that is occurring at the present point 
in time. The must action draws the line between the acceptable and the unaccept-
t
able action. A must is a requirement that cannot be compromised. A want action is
t
a requirement that is subject to bargaining and negotiation. Want actions are usually
ranked and weighted to give an order of priority. They do not set absolute limits but 
instead express relative desirability.
To summarize this discussion of the behavioral aspects of decision making, we
list the sequence of steps that are taken in making a good decision.
1. The objectives of a decision must be established fi rst.
2. The objectives are classifi ed as to importance. (Sort out the musts and the wants.)
3. Alternative actions are developed.
4. The alternatives are evaluated against the objectives.
5. The choice of the alternative that holds the best promise of achieving all of the
objectives represents the tentative decision.
6. The tentative decision is explored for future possible adverse consequences.
7. The effects of the fi nal decision are controlled by taking other actions to prevent 
possible adverse consequences from becoming problems and by making sure that 
the actions decided on are carried out.
7.2.2 Decision Theory
An important area of activity within the broad discipline of operations research has
been the development of a mathematically based theory of decisions.2 Decision theory
is based on utility theory, which develops values, and probability theory, which as-
sesses our stage of knowledge. Decision theory was fi rst applied to business man-
agement situations and has now become an active area for research in engineering
design.3 The purpose of this section is to acquaint the reader with the basic concepts 
of decision theory and point out references for future study.
A decision-making model contains the following six basic elements:
1. Alternative courses of action can be denoted as a1, a2, . . . an. As an example of al-
ternative actions, the designer may wish to choose between the use of steel (a( 1), alu-
minum (a( 2), or fi ber-reinforced polymer (a( 3) in the design of an automotive fender.
1. C. H. Kepner and B. B. Tregoe, The New Rational Manager: A Systematic Approach to Problem
Solving and Decision Making, Kepner-Tregoe, Inc., Skillman, NJ, 1997.
2. H. Raiffa, Decision Analysis, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1968; S. R. Watson and D. M. Buede, 
Decision Synthesis: The Principles and Practice of Decision Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 1987.
3. K. E. Lewis, W. Chen, and L. C. Schmidt, eds. Decision Making in Engineering Design, ASME Press, 
New York, 2006.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
249
7
2. States of nature are the environment of the decision model. Usually, these condi-
tions are out of the control of the decision maker. If the part being designed is to 
withstand salt corrosion, then the state of nature might be expressed by θ1
θ = no 
salt, θ2
θ = weak salt concentration, etc.
3. Outcome is the result of a combination of an action and a state of nature.
4. Objective is the statement of what the decision maker wants to achieve.
5. Utility is the measure of satisfaction that the decision maker associates with each 
outcome.
6. States of knowledge is the degree of certainty that can be associated with the states 
of nature. This is expressed in terms of probabilities.
Decision-making models usually are classifi ed into four groups with respect to 
the state of knowledge.
●Decision under certainty: Each action results in a known outcome that will occur 
with a probability of 1.
●Decision under uncertainty: Each state of nature has an assigned probability of 
occurrence.
●Decision under risk: Each action can result in two or more outcomes, but the prob-
abilities of the outcomes are unknown.
●Decision under confl ict: The states of nature are replaced by courses of action de-
termined by an opponent who is trying to maximize his or her objective function. 
This type of decision theory usually is called game theory.
In the situation of decision under certainty, the decision maker has all the informa-
tion necessary to evaluate the outcome of her choices. She also has information about 
different conditions under which the decision must be made. Therefore, the decision 
maker need only recognize the situation in which the decision is occurring and look up 
the outcomes of all possible choices. The challenge here is having the information on 
the outcomes ready when needed. This decision strategy is illustrated with Example 7.1.
E X A M P L E 7.1 Decision Under Certainty
To select the best material to resist road salt corrosion in an automotive fender, we con-
struct a table of the utilities for each outcome. The possible states of nature are the road 
conditions for driving. They are: θ1
θ : no salt; θ2
θ : mild salt; and, θ3
θ : heavy salt. A utility can 
be thought of as a generalized loss or gain, all factors of which (cost of material, cost of 
manufacturing, corrosion resistance) have been converted to a common scale. Assume
that utility has been expressed on a scale of “losses.” Table 7.1 shows the loss table for 
this material selection decision. Note that, alternatively, the utility could be expressed
TABLE 7.1
Loss Table for a Material Selection Decision
State of Nature
Course of Action
θ1
θ
θ2
θ
θ3
θ
a1: steel
1
4
10
a2: aluminum
3
2
4
a3: FRP
5
4
3

250 
engineering design 
7
in terms of gains, and then the table would be called the payoff matrix. Using a decision
under certainty condition, we only have to look at the values of a column to determine
the appropriate selection. Examination of Table 7.1 would lead us to conclude that a1
(steel) is the material of choice (lowest loss) when there is no salt present, a2 (aluminum) is
the choice when mild salt is present in the environment, and a3 (FRP) is the best material 
when heavy salt corrosion is present.
For decision making under uncertainty, the probability of occurrence for each of 
the states of nature must be able to be estimated. This allows us to determine the ex-
pected value for each of the alternative design parameters (courses of action).
E X A M P L E 7. 2 Decision Under Uncertainty
The probability of occurrence of the states of nature are estimated as:
State of nature
θ1
θ
θ2
θ
θ3
θ
Probability of occurrence
0.1
0.5
0.4
The expected value of an action, a1, is given by
a
Pa
i
ia
i
i
Pa
i
Expectedvalueof
(
a
E
i
E
)∑
 
(7.1)
Thus, for the three materials in Table 7.1, the expected losses would be
a
a
E
Steel:
(
E
)
0.1(1)
0.5(4)
0.4(10)
6.1
Aluminum:
(
E
)
0.1(3)
0.5(2)
0.4(4)
2.9
FRP:
(
)
a
0.1(5)
0.5(4)
0.4(3)
3.7
1
2
3
=
+
0.1(1)
+
=
0.4(10)
=
+
0.1(3)
+
=
0.4(4)
=
+
0.1(5)
+
=
0.4(3)
Therefore, we would select aluminum for the car fender since it has the lowest value of 
loss in utility.
The assumption in decision making under risk is that the probabilities associ-
k
ated with the possible outcomes are not known. The approach used in this situation
is to form a matrix of outcomes, usually expressed in terms of utilities, and base the
selection (decision) on various decision rules. Ex. 7.3 and 7.4 illustrate decision rules
Maximin and Maximax, respectively.
E X A M P L E 7. 3 Maximin Rule
The maximin decision rule states that the decision maker should choose the alternative 
that maximizes the minimum payoff that can be obtained. Since we are dealing with
losses in utility, we should select the alternative that minimizes the maximum loss.
Looking at Table 7.1, we fi nd the following maximum losses for each alternative:
a :
4
:
a
5
1
3
2
3
3
1
:
θ
θ
10
:
a
3
2 :
θ
=
3
θ
:
a :
=
The maximin rule requires selection of aluminum, a2, because it has the smallest of 
the maximum losses. The best outcome is to select the worst-case situation that results in 
the lowest loss.
E X A M P L E 7. 4 Maximax Rule
An opposite extreme in decision rules is the maximax decision rule. This rule states that 
the decision maker should select the alternative that maximizes the maximum value of 

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
251
7
the outcomes. This is an optimistic approach because it assumes the best of all possible
worlds. For the loss table in Table 7.1 the alternative selected would be the one with the 
smallest possible loss.
a
a
:
2
:
3
1
1
2
2
3
3
:
θ
θ
a
1
:
1
2 :
θ
a :
2 :
The decision based on a maximax criterion would be to select steel, a1, because it has the 
smallest loss of the best outcome for each alternative.
The use of the maximin decision rule implies that the decision maker is very pes-
simistic. On the other hand, the decision maker who adopts the maximax approach is an
optimist who places little utility on values below the maximum. Neither decision rule is
particularly logical. Since the pessimist is too cautious and the optimist is too audacious, 
we would like to have an in-between decision rule. It can be obtained by combining the 
two rules. By using an index of optimism, α, the decision maker can weigh the relative
amount of pessimistic and optimistic components of the combined decision rule.
E X A M P L E 7. 5 Combined Criterion
We weight the decision criterion as three-tenths optimistic. Next we construct Table 7.2. 
Under the optimistic column, place the lowest loss for each alternative, while under the 
pessimistic column place the largest loss for each material. When each term is multiplied 
by α and (1 − α) and summed to total we obtain Table 7.2. After a quick read of the table, 
aluminum, a2, is selected once again for use as the fender material.
TABLE 7.2
Revised Loss Estimates Combining States 
of Nature Information (with α = 0.3)
Alternative
Optimistic
Pessimistic
Total
Steel
0.3(1)
+0.7(10)
= 7.3
Aluminum
0.3(2)
+0.7(4)
= 3.4
FRP
0.3(3)
+0.7(5)
= 4.4
Decisions will be different if the conditions under which they are made vary. 
Table 7.1 shows that there is a state of nature that justifi es the use of each material on 
the basis that it provides the best outcome. Knowing that the states of nature in which 
the car will be used can vary, the decision maker must determine a strategy for choos-
ing fender material. Several examples in this section showed how different decision 
rules (maximin and maximax) have been developed to take into account the decision 
maker’s comfort with uncertainty and risk.
7.2.3 Decision Trees
Decision trees are a graphical and mathematical method for decision making under un-
certainty. The construction of a decision tree is a useful technique when a string of deci-
sions must be made in succession and probabilities of each outcome are known or can 
be estimated. Figure 7.3 shows the decision tree concerned with deciding whether an 
electronics fi rm should carry out R&D in order to develop a new product. The fi rm is a 

252 
engineering design 
7
large conglomerate that has had extensive experience in electronics manufacture but no 
direct experience with the product in question. With the preliminary research done so 
far, the director of research estimates that a $4 million ($4M) R&D program conducted 
over two years would provide the knowledge to introduce the product to the marketplace.
A decision point in the decision tree is indicated by a square, and circles designate 
chance events (states of nature) that are outside the control of the decision maker. The 
length of line between nodes in the decision tree is not scaled with time, although 
the tree does depict precedence relations.
The fi rst decision point is whether to proceed with the $4M research program or 
abandon it before it starts. We assume that the project will be carried out. At the end 
of the two-year research effort the research director estimates there is a 50-50 chance 
of being ready to introduce the product. If the product is introduced to the market, it 
is estimated to have a life of fi ve years. If the research is a failure, it is estimated that 
an investment of an additional $2M would permit the R&D team to complete the work 
in an additional year. The chances of successfully completing the R&D in a further 
year are assessed at 3 in 10. Management feels that the project should be abandoned 
if a successful product is not developed in three years because there will be too much 
competition. On the other hand, if the product is ready for the marketplace after three 
years, it is given only a 1 in 10 chance of producing high sales.
The payoffs expected at the end are given to the far right at the end of each branch. 
The dollar amounts should be discounted back to the present time by using techniques 
of the time value of money (Chap. 16). When selecting branches in a decision tree the 
FIGURE 7.3
Decision tree for an R&D project.
High sales: P  0.3
Medium sales: P  0.5
Low sales: P  0.2
$1.8M
Payoffs
$1.0M
High sales: P  0.1
Abandon project
Abandon
t  3 years
Stop
$2M
Further
research
Failure
P  0.5
$4M
Do research
Failure
P  0.7
Success
P  0.3
Success
P  0.5
Introduce
late
2
2
1
3
3
Introduce
product
$1.4M
0
0
Medium sales: P  0.5
$0.8M
Low sales: P  0.4
$0.3M
$0.4M
Abandon
0
Abandon project at start
0
t  7 years
t  2 years
t  0

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
253
7
decision rule used the largest expected value of the payoff. (It is possible to use other 
decision rules, such as maximin).
The best place to start in this problem is at the ends of the branches and work 
backward. The expected values for the chance events are:
E = 0.3(1.8) + 0.5(1.0) + 0.2(0.4) = $1.12M for the on-time project
E = 0.1(1.4) + 0.5(0.8) + 0.4(0.3) = $0.66M for the delayed project at 
decision point 3
E = 0.3(0.66) + 0.7(0) − 2 = −$1.8M for the delayed project at decision point 2
Thus, carrying the analysis for the delayed project backward to decision point 2 shows 
that to continue the project beyond that point results in a large negative expected 
payoff. The proper decision, therefore, is to abandon the research project if it is not 
successful in the fi rst two years. Further, the calculation of the expected payoff for the 
on-time project at point 1 is a large negative value.
E = 0.5(1.12) + 0.5(0) − 4.0 = −$3.44M
Thus, either the expected payoff is too modest or the R&D costs are too great to be 
warranted by the payoff. Therefore, based on the estimates of payoff, probabilities, 
and costs, this R&D project should not have been undertaken.
7.2.4 Utility Theory
Maximax and maximin are strategies that incorporate attitude toward risk in decision 
problems. The examples presented in the previous section presuppose the ability to 
determine the utility of each outcome. A more direct method is to use Utility Theory 
in establishing the problem.
In Utility Theory, everyday words take on precise meanings that are not the same 
as in common usage. Defi nitions are required: 
 
● Value is an attribute of an alternative that is implied by choice (e.g., if A is chosen 
over B, it is assumed that A has more value than B). Nowadays, money is the me-
dium of exchange that is used to express value. A buyer will exchange an amount of 
money (B) for a material good (A) only if the buyer perceives A to be worth more 
than B at the time of the exchange.
 
● Preference is the statement of relative value in the eyes of the decision maker. Pref-
erence is a subjective quality that depends totally on the decision maker.
 
● Utility is a measure of preference order for a particular user. Utility is not necessar-
ily equal to the value of exchange in the marketplace. 
 
● Marginal utility: A key concept of utility theory is the understanding of the nature 
of what is gained by adding one more unit to the amount already possessed. Most 
decision makers have utility functions that are consistent with the Law of Dimin-
ishing Marginal Utility.1
1. It may seem intuitive that more is always better. However, consider servings of a favorite dessert. In 
1738 Bernoulli established the fact that money has decreasing marginal utility. The more one has, the 
less value the next unit brings to the decision maker.

254 
engineering design 
7
Utility for a particular set of alternatives is often represented by a function, and 
that function is usually assumed to be continuous. When presented with a utility func-
tion, U(x), you can draw some conclusions about the preferences of the person from 
whom it was constructed. First, you can determine a preference ordering of two dif-
ferent amounts of something. Second, you can determine some idea of the decision 
maker’s attitude toward risk as shown in Fig. 7.4. The utility functions curves are for a 
risk-averse and risk-taking individual.
E X A M P L E 7. 6
Table 7.3 lists the probabilities associated with various outcomes related to the acceptance 
of two contracts that have been offered to a small R&D laboratory. Using expected values 
only, a decision maker would choose Contract I because it has a greater expected value 
than Contract II.
FIGURE 7.4
Utility functions implied by decision maker’s risk tolerance.
1.0
0
Risk Seeking
Value of outcome
Utility
Risk Averse
Risk Neutral 
TABLE 7.3
Probabilities and outcomes to illustrate utility
Contract I
Contract II
Outcome
Probability
Outcome
Probability
+100,000
0.6
+60,000
0.5
+15,000
0.1
+30,000
0.3
−40,000
0.3
−10,000
0.2
E
E
(I)
0.6(100,000)
0.1(15,000)
0.3( 40,000)
$62,700
(II)
0.5(60,000)
0.3(30,000)
0.2( 10,000)
$37,000
=
+
0.6(100,000)
+ 0.3(
=
=
+
0.5(60,000)
+ 0.2(
=
The decision in Example 7.6 is straightforward when the probability of each outcome
is known and the decision maker is going to act according to the expected value cal-
culation. Complications arise when the probabilities are not known or the decision
maker includes more than just expected value of the outcome in the decision process.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
255
7
Reviewing Example 7.6, Contract I has a higher expected value ($62,700) than 
Contract II ($37,000). However, Contract I has a 30 percent chance of incurring a 
fairly large loss (−$40,000), whereas Contract II has only a 20 percent chance of a 
much smaller loss. If the decision maker decided to take the worst-case scenario into 
 account and minimize the loss exposure of the company, Contract II would be se-
lected. In this case, expected value analysis is inadequate because it does not include 
the value of minimizing loss to the decision maker.
What is needed is expected utility analysis so that the attitude of the decision
maker toward risk becomes part of the decision process. Under expected utility the-
ory, the decision maker always chooses the alternative that maximizes expected util-
ity. The decision rule is: maximize expected utility.
To establish the utility function, we rank the outcomes in numerical order: 
+100,000, +60,000, +30,000, +15,000, 0, −10,000, −40,000. The value $0 is introduced 
to represent the situation in which we take neither contract. Because the scale of the 
utility function is wholly arbitrary, we set the upper and lower limits as
U(
,
)
.
(
,
) =
)
000
00
U(
000
0  
(7.2)
Note that in the general case the utility function is not linear between these limits.
E X A M P L E 7.7
Determine the utility value of the outcome of earning $60,000 under a contract to the
decision maker choosing contracts. To establish the utility associated with the outcome of 
+60,000, decision makers (DM) ask themselves a series of questions.
Question 1: Which would I prefer?
A: Gaining $60,000 for certain; or,
B: Having a 75% chance of gaining $100,000 and a 25% chance of losing $40,000.
DM Answer: I’d prefer option A because option B is too risky.
Question 2: Changing the probabilities of option B, which would I now prefer?
A: Gaining $60,000 for certain; or,
B: Having a 95% chance of gaining $100,000 and a 5% chance of losing $40,000.
DM Answer: I’d prefer option B with those probabilities.
Question 3: Again changing the probabilities for option B, which would I prefer?
A: Gaining $60,000 for certain; or,
B: Having a 90% chance of gaining $100,000 and a 10% chance of losing $40,000?
DM Answer: It would be a toss-up between A and B with those chances.
These answers tell us that this decision maker sees the utility of option A and has found
the certainty equivalent to the chances given by option B. He’s determined that the certain
outcome of gaining $60,000 is equivalent to the uncertain outcome expressed by the lot-
tery of option B.
U(
U +
( 60,000) = 0.9U(
U +
( 100,000) + 0.1U(
U −40,000),
substituting in values from Eq. (7.2),
U(
U +
( 60,000) = 0.9(1.0) + 0.1(0)
U(
U +
( 60,000) = 0.9.

256 
engineering design 
7
Example 7.7 shows us that a technique for fi nding utility values is to vary the odds 
on the choices until the decision maker is indifferent to the choice between A and B. 
The same procedure is repeated for each of the other values of outcomes to establish 
the utility for those points. A diffi culty with this procedure is that many people have 
diffi culty in distinguishing between small differences in probability at the extremes, 
for example, 0.80 and 0.90 or 0.05 and 0.01.
A critical concept about expected utility is that it is not the same as the expected 
value. This can be emphasized by reviewing the choices the decision maker gave in 
response to questions 1 and 2 in Example 7.7. The expected values of option B in ques-
tions 1 and 2 are +65,000 and +95,000, respectively. In Question 1, the decision maker 
rejected an option that had an expected value of a 65,000 gain in favor of a certain 
gain of 60,000. Here the decision maker wants to avoid risk, making him risk adverse. 
It takes the possibility of a huge increase in gain to convince the decision maker to ac-
cept risk. Question 2’s option B has an expected value of +93,000. That’s a differential 
of 33,000 over the certain option of a 60,000 gain.
Nonmonetary values of outcome can be converted to utility in various ways. 
Clearly, quantitative aspects of a design performance, such as speed, effi ciency, or 
horsepower, can be treated as dollars were in Example 7.7. Qualitative performance 
indicators can be ranked on an ordinal scale, for example, 0 (worst) to 10 (best), and 
the desirability evaluated by a questioning procedure similar to the above.
Two common types of utility functions that are found for the design variables 
are shown in Fig. 7.5. The utility function shown in Fig. 7.5a is the most common. 
Above the design value the function shows diminishing marginal return for increasing 
the value of the outcome. The dependent variable (outcome) has a minimum design 
value set by specifi cations, and the utility drops sharply if the outcome falls below that 
value. The minimum pressure in a city water supply system and the rated life of a tur-
bine engine are examples. For this type of utility function a reasonable design criterion 
would be to select the design with the maximum probability of exceeding the design 
value. The utility function sketched in Fig. 7.5b is typical of a high- performance situ-
ation. The variable under consideration is very dominant, and we are concerned with 
maximum performance. Although there is a minimum value below which the design is 
useless, the probability of going below the minimum value is considered to be very low.
FIGURE 7.5
Common types of utility functions in engineering design.
Utility
Minimum
value
Utility
Design
value
Outcome
(a)
Outcome
(b)

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
257
7
In the typical engineering design problem more than one dependent variable is 
important to the design. This requires developing a multiattribute utility function.1 
These ideas, originally applied to problems in economics, have been developed into a 
design decision methodology called methodology for the evaluation of design alterna-
tives (MEDA).2 Using classical utility theory, MEDA extends the usual design evalua-
tion methods to provide a better measure of the worth of the performance levels of the 
attributes to the designer and more accurately quantify attribute trade-offs. The price 
is a considerable increase in the resources required for evaluation analysis.
7.3
EVALUATION PROCESSES
We have seen that decision making is the process of identifying alternatives and the 
outcomes from each alternative and subjecting this information to a rational process 
of making a decision. Evaluation is a type of process in which alternatives are fi rst 
appraised according to some standard. Their scores or rank as determined by that 
standard are compared to make the decision as to which is best.
Figure 7.6 reviews the main steps in concept generation (Chap. 6) and shows the 
steps that make up concept evaluation. Note that these evaluation steps are not limited 
FIGURE 7.6
Steps that are involved in concept generation and its evaluation.
Gono-go screening
Internal
to team
Brain-
storming
External
to team
Explore systematically
Morphological chart
Explore for ideas
Relative criteria
Pugh concept selection
Decision matrix
Analytic hierarchy
process
Problem decomposition
Absolute criteria
Concept Generation
Evaluation
Best concept
1. R. L. Keeney and H. Raiffa, Decisions with Multiple Objectives, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, 1993.
2. D. L. Thurston, Research in Engineering Design, vol. 3, pp. 105–22, 1991.

258 
engineering design 
7
to the conceptual design phase of the design process. They are just as applicable,
and should be used, in embodiment design when deciding which of several compo-
nent designs is best or which of fi ve possible fabrication materials should be chosen.
Figure 7.7 displays a set of fi ve concepts for automated basketball return devices that 
were generated by the JSR Design team.
FIGURE 7.7
Shot-Buddy concepts generated by design team.1
(a) Concept 1: Square-
opening net, trampoline,
ground-based rotating shaft
system
(c) Concept 3
g
: Open slopin
net to ground based shaft
rotating system
(b) Concept 2:
Semicircular opening net,
single rotating chute with
attached motor system
(e) Concept 5: Open sloping net to pivot a
single guide to multiple positions
(d) Concept 4: Square funnel non-rotating
director and multiple chutes
1. Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan
Quinn, “JSR Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
259
7
In an absolute comparison the concept is directly compared with a fi xed and 
known set of requirements such as a PDS or design code. In a relative comparison
the concepts are compared with each other on the basis of a metric. Checking to see 
if a design alternative would be under the weight limit specifi ed in the PDS is an 
example of an absolute comparison. On the other hand, if the best design possible 
would be the lightest design, the design team would need to estimate the weight of 
each design alternative, and then compare the results. The most suitable alterna-
tive in terms of weight would be the one with the lowest estimate. This is a relative 
comparison.
7.3.1 Design Selection Based on Absolute Criteria
It makes no sense to subject several design concepts to a rigorous evaluation process if 
it is obvious, or soon becomes clear, that some aspect about the concept disqualifi es it 
for selection. Therefore, it is good practice to begin the evaluation process by using a
series of absolute fi lters.1
1. Evaluation based on judgment of functional feasibility of the design: The ini-
tial screening is based on the overall evaluation of the design team as to the feasi-
bility of each concept. Concepts should be placed into one of three categories:
(a) It is not feasible (it will never work). Before discarding an idea, ask “why is it 
not feasible?” The answer may provide new insight into the problem.
(b) Feasibility is conditional—it might work if something else happens. The some-
thing else could be the development of a critical element of technology or the 
appearance in the market of a new microchip that enhances some function of 
the product.
(c) It will work. This is a concept that seems worth developing further.
The reliability of these judgments is strongly dependent on the expertise of the design 
team. When making this judgment, err on the side of accepting a concept unless there 
is strong evidence that it will not work.
2. Evaluation based on assessment of technology readiness: Except in unusual
circumstances, the technology used in a design must be mature enough that it 
can be used in the product design without additional research effort. Product 
design is not the appropriate place to do R&D. Some indicators of technology
maturity are:
(a) Can the technology be manufactured with known processes?
(b) Are the critical parameters that control the function identifi ed?
(c) Are the safe operating latitude and sensitivity of the parameters known?
(d) Have the failure modes been identifi ed?
(e) Does hardware exist that demonstrates positive answers to the above four 
questions?
1. D. G. Ullman, The Mechanical Design Process, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2010.

260 
engineering design 
7
3. Evaluation based on go/no-go screening of the constraints and threshold
levels of engineering characteristics: After a design concept has passed fi lters 
1 and 2, the emphasis shifts to establishing whether it satisfi es the constraints of 
the problem. The emphasis is not on a detailed examination (that comes below) but 
on eliminating any design concepts that clearly are not able to meet constraints or 
minimum acceptable levels of important engineering characteristics. 
E X A M P L E 7. 8
In Sec. 6.6.2, a morphological chart was used to generate a concept for the automated
basketball return device designed by the JSR Design team and is shown in Fig. 6.9. This
alternative is also shown in Fig. 7.7 as Concept 5. It consists of a roughly semicircular 
shot catch net supported on a frame connected to the court edge at the ground which
fi ts under the basketball net. The catch net tapers down to the size of a basketball and
terminates in a curved metal guide somewhat like a sloping ski jump ramp that the ball
will follow as it continues its downward travel after passing through or near the basket-
ball hoop. It is assumed that the ball’s kinetic energy will provide enough force to allow
it to ride the guide ramp back to the direction of the shooter. Figures 6.9 and 7.7 do
not include any detail about the system that will be used to pivot the ball return guide 
between the three possible positions shown in the sketch. Nor does the sketch detail the
ability of the pivoting mechanism to sense the location of the shooter to determine the
acceptable guide position. This is the typical amount of detail that would be provided
in an early concept.
Apply the functional feasibility screening criterion to this Shot-Buddy concept.
Question: Can this concept return a basketball to the shooter?
Answer: There are some missing subsystems as described above, but they could be
specifi ed and work to control the position of the guide.
Question: Assuming you augment the design, is it feasible as a concept?
Answer: This is not a feasible design. 
t
●The catch net is only supported at the sides. Some means of extending the net out 
over the basketball court is needed, which would obstruct the play.
●The guide rail appears to be hanging from the catch net. This is not a rigid position,
so the guide’s ability to direct the motion of the basketball would be jeopardized.
Summary and Decision: This Shot-Buddy concept is not functionally feasible as repre-
sented in the sketch. (1) A catch net of the size required in the specifi cation (Table 3.4)
could not be supported as shown. (2) Adjustments to the design to provide the support 
for the physics of changing the basketball’s motion would violate an implied but critical
constraint of not interfering with the shooter’s play. There may be value in the pivoting
guide mechanism if it were supported from a fi xed position.
Proceed in this way through all of the proposed concepts. Note that if a design con-
cept shows mostly “go” responses, but it has a few no-go responses, it should not be 
summarily discarded. The weak areas in the concept may be able to be fi xed by bor-
rowing ideas from another concept. Or the process of doing this go/no-go analysis
may trigger a new idea.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
261
7
7.3.2 Measurement Scales
Rating a design parameter of several alternative designs is a measurement process. 
Therefore, we need to understand the various scales of measurement that can be used 
in this type of process.1
●Nominal scale is a named category or identifi er like “thick or thin,” “red or black,” 
or “yes or no.” The only comparison that can be made is whether the categories are 
the same or not. Variables that are measured on a nominal scale are called categori-
cal variables.
●Ordinal scale is a measurement scale in which the items are placed in rank order, fi rst,
second, third, and so on. These numbers are called ordinals, and the variables are 
called ordinal or rank variables. Comparisons can be made as to whether two items 
are greater or less than each other, or whether they are equal, but addition or subtrac-
tion is not possible using this scale. The ordinal scale says nothing about how far apart 
the elements are from each other. However, the mode can be determined for data mea-
sured on this scale. (The Pugh concept selection method uses an ordinal scale).
Ranking on an ordinal scale calls for decisions based on subjective preferences. 
One method of ranking alternatives on an ordinal scale is to use pairwise comparison.
Each design criterion is listed and is compared to every other criterion, two at a time. 
In making the comparison the objective that is considered the more important of the 
two is given a 1 and the less important objective is given a 0. The total number of possi-
ble comparisons is N = n(n 
( −1)/2, where n is the number of criteria under consideration.
Consider the case where there are fi ve design alternatives, A, B, C, D, and E. In
comparing A to B we consider A to be more important, and give it a 1. ( In building 
this matrix, a 1 indicates that the objective in the row is preferred to the objective in 
the column.) In comparing A to C we feel C ranks higher, and a 0 is recorded in the 
A line and a 1 on the C line. Thus, the table is completed. The rank order established 
is B, D, A, E, C. Note that we used head-to-head comparisons to break ties, as shown 
in the rows of the following table.
Design Criterion
A
B
C
D
E
Row Total
A
—
1
0
0
1
2
B
0
—
1
1
1
3
C
1
0
—
0
0
1
D
1
0
1
—
1
3
E
0
0
1
0
—
1
—
10
1. K. H. Otto, “Measurement Methods for Product Evaluation,” Research in Engineering Design, vol. 7, 
pp. 86–101, 1995.

262 
engineering design 
7
Since the ratings are ordinal values, we cannot say that A has a weighting of 2/10 because
division is not a possible arithmetic operation on an ordinal scale. In other words, it is
mathematically incorrect to use the numerical values in the table as weighting factors.
●Interval scale is the type needed to determine how much worse A is compared
with D. On an interval scale of measurement, differences between arbitrary pairs of 
values can be meaningfully compared, but the zero point on the scale is arbitrary. 
Addition and subtraction are possible, but not division and multiplication. Central 
tendency can be determined with the mean, median, or mode. 
For example, we could distribute the results from the previous table along a 1 to
10 scale to create an interval scale. This can be done only if additional information is
available to quantify the differences between the alternatives. 
C
E
A
D
B
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
The most important alternative designs have been given a value of 10, and the others 
have been given values relative to this.
●Ratio scale is an interval scale in which a zero value is used to anchor the scale.
Each data point is expressed in cardinal numbers (2, 2.5, etc.) and is ordered with
respect to an absolute point. All arithmetic operations are allowed. A ratio scale is 
needed to establish meaningful weighting factors. Most engineering characteris-
tics in engineering design, like weight, force, and velocity, are measured on a ratio
scale.
7.4
USING MODELS IN EVALUATION
Analyzing performance is an important step in conceptual design. In evaluating com-
peting concepts, it is necessary to analyze information obtained from models of vari-
ous sorts. Models fall into three categories: iconic, analog, and symbolic.
An iconic model is a physical model that looks like the real thing but is a scaled 
l
representation. Generally the model scale is reduced from the real situation, as in a 
scale model of an aircraft for wind tunnel tests. An advantage of iconic models is that 
they tend to be smaller and simpler than the real object, so they can be built and tested 
more quickly and at lower cost. Iconic models are geometric representations. They
may be two-dimensional, as in maps, photographs, or engineering drawings, or three-
dimensional as in machined parts. Three-dimensional CAD models are commonly
used with a computer to do analysis and simulate behavior.
Analog models are models that are based on an analogy, or similarity, between 
different physical phenomena. This approach allows the use of a solution based in 
one physical science discipline, for example, electric circuits, to solve a problem
in a completely different fi eld, for example, heat transfer. Analog models are often 
used to compare something that is unfamiliar with something that is very familiar. 

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
263
7
An ordinary graph is really an analog model because distances represent the magni-
tudes of the physical quantities plotted on each axis. Since the graph describes the real 
functional relation that exists between those quantities, it is a model. Another com-
mon class of analog models is process fl ow charts.
Symbolic models are abstractions of the important quantifi able components of a
physical system that use symbols to represent properties of the real system. A math-
ematical equation expressing the dependence of the system output parameter on the 
input parameters is a common symbolic or mathematical model. A symbol is a short-
hand label for a class of objects, a specifi c object, a state of nature, or simply a number. 
Symbols are useful because they are convenient, assist in explaining complex concepts, 
and increase the generality of the situation. Symbolic models probably are the most 
important class of model because they provide the greatest generality in attacking a 
problem. The use of a symbolic model to solve a problem calls on our analytical, math-
ematical, and logical abilities. A symbolic model is also important because it leads to 
quantitative results. When a mathematical model is reduced to computer software, we 
can use the model to investigate design alternatives in a relatively inexpensive way. 
In conceptual design we use both iconic and symbolic models. Simple mathemati-
cal models like free body diagrams and heat balances are used to help formalize a
concept and to provide data, not just opinions, to use in decision evaluation tools. 
A proof-of-concept prototype is typically made by the end of conceptual design. Ide-
ally, a succession of models, some physical, others rough sketches, are made to serve 
as learning tools until reaching the fi nal proof-of-concept model. This is just the fi rst 
of a succession of prototypes (physical models) that will be made until the product 
reaches the marketplace (see Sec. 8.11.1). 
Choosing Appropriate Models
The type of model and its level of detail and accuracy changes depending upon 
the stage of the design process in which you are working.
● In conceptual design, the emphasis is on geometrical modeling using multiple
hand sketches supplemented with quick physical prototypes made from wood, 
foam board, and so on. Simple mathematical models based on concepts learned 
from your engineering science courses are applied in concept evaluation using 
hand-calculation levels of precision. After concept selection is completed, it is usu-
ally capped off by the development of a geometrical computer-based model (CAD 
model). This serves as a proof-of-concept prototype that is frequently supplemented 
with a physical prototype, often made by a rapid prototyping process.
●In embodiment design, where major emphasis is given to establishing shape, di-
mensions, and tolerances, the level of detail in mathematical and physical models 
increases. It is usually helpful to use a computational tool such as Excel, MATLAB, 
or a specialized software program. Often a fi nite analysis program is used to deter-
mine stresses in a part with complex shape or critical to quality issues. This design 
phase ends with the testing of a proof-of-product prototype using full size parts
made from the materials selected for the product.
●In detail design, more complex mathematical modeling may be conducted to optimize 
some product characteristic or to improve its robustness. A complete set of detail and 

264 
engineering design 
7
assembly drawings suitable to manufacture the product will be completed. A proof-of-
process prototype will be tested using the exact materials and processes that will be
used to manufacture the product. For more details on the sequence of prototypes used 
throughout the product design process see Sec. 8.11.1.
7.4.1 Aids to Mathematical Modeling
Engineering courses teach fi rst principles in subjects like statics, dynamics, mechan-
ics of materials, fl uids, and thermodynamics by describing a physical system and its
immediate environment in a complex word problem that you learned to solve using a
variety of analytical, logical, mathematical, and empirical methods. The key to fi nd-
ing a solution is to understand the mathematical model appropriate for the problem. 
Engineering design courses provide the opportunity to use this knowledge in more
applied ways. 
Dimensional Analysis
A useful tool in model building is dimensional analysis. There are usually fewer 
dimensionless groups than there are physical quantities in the problem, so the groups
become the real variables of the problem. You most likely learned about dimensional
analysis in a course on fl uid mechanics1 or heat transfer. The importance of dimen-
sional analysis is that it allows you to express a problem with a minimum number of 
design variables. Also, representing a complex phenomenon in a concise way can make
diffi cult problems understandable. An important advantage to using dimensional analy-
sis is that it signifi cantly reduces the number of trials required when seeking to improve
the robustness of a design or to optimize it for some property such as minimum weight.2
Scale Models
Scale models are often used in design because they can be made more quickly
and at less cost. In using physical models, it is necessary to understand the conditions
under which similitude prevails for both the model and the prototype.3 By similitude
we mean the condition of physical response is similar between the model and the
prototype. There are several forms of similitude: geometric, kinematic (similar ve-
locities), and dynamic (similar forces). Geometric similarity is the form most usually
encountered in product design. The conditions for it are a three-dimensional equiva-
lent of a photographic enlargement or reduction, that is, identity of shape, equality of 
corresponding angles or arcs, and a constant proportionality or scale factor relating
corresponding linear dimensions.
1. B. R. Munson, D. F. Young, and T. H. Okiishi, Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics, 5th ed., John Wiley 
& Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2006, pp. 347–69. For an advanced treatment see T. Szirtes, Applied Dimensional 
Analysis and Modeling, 2d ed., Butterworth-Heinneman, Boston, 2007. See Wikipedia at Dimensional 
quantities for a large collection of dimensionless numbers.
2. D. Lacey and C. Steele, Journal of Engineering Design, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 55–73, 2006.
3. D. J. Schuring, Scale Models in Engineering, Pergamon Press, New York, 1977; E. Szucs, Similitude
and Modeling, Elsevier Scientifi c Publ. Co., New York, 1977.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
265
7
To illustrate scale modeling, consider a bar loaded in tension. The stress in the bar 
due to axial loading is:
P/
/
A
P (
/
D
4)
2
σ
P/
/
A
P (
P A
(7.3)
where P is the axial load on the bar
A is the cross sectional area with a diameter D
If the left side of Eq. (7.3) is divided by the right side we obtain
D
P
4
1
2
πσ
=
(7.4)
Equation (7.4) is dimensionless. This illustrates that for a relationship to be a valid
indicator of similitude it must be dimensionless. If we designate the model with a 
subscript m and the prototype with subscript p, we can write one equation for m and
another for p, and equate them because they each are equal to unity.
P D
P D
p
m
p
m
p
m
P D
2
2
P D
σ
σ
P D
p
m
P
p
2
 
(7.5)
We are testing the model and want to determine what this tells us about the per-
formance of the prototype. Therefore, solving Eq. (7.5) for σp
σ
D
D
P
P
p
m
p
p
P
m
P
m
2
σ
σ
p
m
p
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
2
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟⎠
⎟
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(7.6)
Equation (7.6) tells us what to expect from the prototype for a measured stress on
the model. The answer depends on two scale factors that emerge in Eq. (7.6). If we 
have a 1/10th scale model, it means that the geometric scale factor S = Dm /Dp
D is 1/10. 
The second scale factor is the load scale factor L = Pm /Pp
P . Since the model is much 
smaller than the prototype, it cannot withstand the same loads as the prototype. For 
example, L = 1/3 might be an appropriate load factor. Then Eq. (7.6) can be written
/
(
/
S
L)
/
p
m
(
)
2
σ
σ
(
/
S
L)
/
p
(
/
S
L)
/
 
(7.7)
The form of the scaling relationship between the prototype and the model will 
change depending on the physical situation, but the approach will be as above. For ex-
ample, if we wanted to model the displacement of the axially loaded bar, δ, based on 
δ
the strength of materials relationship, δ = PL/AE, the scaling equation would contain 
three terms, S, L, and E, the last one being an elastic modulus scaling factor.
7.4.2 A Process for Mathematical Model Building 
There are four distinct characteristics of mathematical models consisting of two classes 
each (1) steady-state or transient (dynamic), (2) continuous media or discrete events, (3) 
deterministic or probabilistic, and (4) lumped or distributed. A steady-state model is 
one in which the input variables and their properties do not change with time. In a dy-
namic (transient) model the parameters change with time. Models based on continuous 

266 
engineering design 
7
media, such as solids or fl uids, assume that the medium transmitting a stress or fl ow
vector does not contain voids or holes, while a discrete model deals with individual en-
tities, such as cars in a traffi c model or digital packets in a wireless transmission. 
The following is a listing of the general steps required to build a mathematical
design model.
Step 1. Determine problem statement
Step 2. Defi ne the boundaries of the model
Step 3.  Determine which physical laws are pertinent to the problem and identify
the data that is available to support building the model
Step 4. Identify assumptions
Step 5. Construct the model
Step 6. Perform computations and verify the model
Step 7. Validate the model
1. Problem Statement
Determine the purpose of the model, its inputs and desired outputs. For example, is
the purpose of the model to decide between alternative shapes, to determine the value
of a critical dimension, or to improve the effi ciency of an entire system? Write out the
questions that you expect the model to help you answer. An important task in this step is
to determine the desired inputs and outputs of the model. The amount of resources spent 
on the model will depend on the importance of the decision that needs to be made.
2. Defi ne the Boundaries of the Model
Closely related to the previous step is to defi ne the model’s boundaries. The
boundary of the design problem distinguishes a part of the model from the model’s
environment. The boundaries of the model are often called the control volume. The
control volume can be drawn either as a fi nite control volume, which defi nes the over-
all system behavior, or a differential control volume at some point in the system. The
latter is the standard way to set up a model for something like the stress state at a point 
or the fl ow of heat in conduction.
3.  Determine What Physical Laws Are Pertinent to the Problem and What
Data Is Available to Support Building the Model
With all the thought that has gone into defi ning the problem, we should now know
what physical knowledge domain(s) we will use to represent the physical situation. As-
semble the necessary textbooks, handbooks, and class notes to review the theoretical
basis for constructing the model. 
4. Assumptions
In building a model we should be aware that the model is an abstraction of reality.
Model building walks a fi ne line between simplifi cation and authenticity. One way to
achieve simplifi cation is to minimize the number of physical quantities that must be
considered in the model to make it easier to achieve a mathematical solution. We do
this by making assumptions to neglect what we believe to be small effects. Thus, we
may assume a structural member is completely rigid when its elastic deformation is

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
267
7
considered of little consequence to the problem. One of the distinctions between an 
engineering design model and a scientifi c model is our willingness to make these kinds 
of assumptions so long as we can justify that they will not lead to wrong conclusions.
Modeling is often an iterative process, where we start with an order of magnitude 
model that aims to predict outputs to within a factor of 10. Then as we gain confi dence
that the variables have been properly identifi ed and their behavior understood, we can
remove some of the assumptions to gain the needed precision. Remember that design
modeling is always a balance between the necessary resources and the required preci-
sion of outputs.
Some common modeling simplifi cations are: (1) neglecting changes in physi-
cal and mechanical properties with temperature, (2) starting with a two-dimensional 
model when it is really a 3-D problem, (3) replacing the distributed properties of a 
variable with “lumped” parameters, (4) assuming a linear model when most real-
world behavior is nonlinear.
5. Construct the Model
A helpful fi rst step in building the model is to make a careful sketch of the physical 
elements of the problem. Try to make the sketch approximately to scale, as this will help 
in visualization. Next, relate the various physical quantities to one another by the appro-
priate physical laws. These are modifi ed in ways appropriate to the model to provide the
governing equations that transform the input quantities into the desired output. Usually
the analytical description of the model starts with either appropriate conservation laws,
like the conservation of energy, or balance equations like the summation of the forces 
and moments equal zero.
6. Computation and Verifi cation
With the model developed the next step is to try it out with a computational tool.
For simple models hand calculators will suffi ce, but spreadsheet computation is often 
very helpful. The model needs to be tested to see that it contains no mathematical
errors and gives reasonable answers. This is the process of model verifi cation. Veri-
fi cation is checking to see that the model works as you intended. For more advanced 
models involving fi nite element analysis, the preparation and verifi cation of the model 
is much more detailed and time consuming.
7. Validation of the Model
Validation1 is checking to see if the model gives an accurate representation of the
real world. A common way to validate a model is to vary the inputs over a wide range 
to see if the outputs of the model appear to be physically reasonable, especially at the 
limits of performance. Find how sensitive the outputs are to the inputs. If the impact 
of a particular variable is weak, then it may be possible to replace that variable in the
model with a constant. Full validation of a model requires a set of critical physical
tests to establish how well the model describes the model.
1. D. D. Frey and C. L. Dym, Research in Engineering Design, vol. 17, pp. 45–57, 2006.

268 
engineering design 
7
Although the foundations of engineering design models are fi rmly based in physical
principles, sometimes the problem is just too complex to create a mathematical model
of suffi cient precision with the available resources, and the design engineer must use ex-
perimental test data to create an empirical model. This is an acceptable approach, since
the goal of a design model is not to advance scientifi c understanding but rather to pre-
dict actual system behavior with suffi cient accuracy and resolution for decision making.
Empirical data needs to be treated with curve-fi tting methods that describe the design
parameter as a high-order polynomial equation. It must be understood that an empirical
model is only valid over the range of parameters for which the tests were conducted.
7.4.3 Shot-Buddy Example
The JSR Design team’s Shot-Buddy is designed to catch a ball falling through or 
around the rim and direct it back toward the user. For the Shot-Buddy to work effec-
tively, it must be capable of enduring certain forces that will be applied to it when in
use. The Shot-Buddy must also provide a suffi cient catch area for shots that miss the
basketball hoop. Reviewing JSR Design’s concepts for the Shot-Buddy (see Fig. 7.7)
reveals that a key challenge will be to design a ball catch subsystem that is large
enough to catch a majority of missed shots while being light enough to be supported
by attachments to the backboard of the basketball hoop (and compact enough to be
readily packaged). This creates a common engineering design trade-off of stiffness
vs. weight. Example 3.5 provided an overview of the mathematical model JSR Design
used to estimate the maximum force exerted by the intended end-user of the Shot-
Buddy. A more formal model building will be shown in Example 7.9.1
E X A M P L E 7. 9 Part 1
Create a model for the force exerted by a basketball on the Shot-Buddy. This model will
be used to determine the maximum loading that the parts must withstand. This example
follows the process described in Sec. 7.4.2. 
Step 1: Determine problem statement.
The purpose of this model is to determine the maximum forces that will be applied to the
Shot-Buddy catch area subsystem support frame during use.
The answers to this question will help address the following, more specifi c issues
about Shot-Buddy concept performance, which will need to be addressed during embodi-
ment design.
1. Can a catch area subsystem be designed that will withstand the direct impact of a
missed basketball shot from the three-point line? 
2. What is the approximate weight of a catch area subsystem?
3. Can this weight be supported by simple attachments to a basketball backboard?
Step 2: Defi ne the boundaries of the model.
The boundary of the model is a rectangular volume of one-half of the basketball court 
extending to a line just behind the basketball hoop and 15 feet above the surface of the court.
1. Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn,
“JSR Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
269
7
Step 3: Determine which physical laws are pertinent to the problem, and identify the 
data that is available to support building the model.
The position and velocity of an object under constant accelerated motion is equal to:
t
t
t
t
1
2
0
0
2
0
p
p
v
a
t
0
v
v
t
a
=
+
0
p
=
+
0
v
where
t is the time during the object’s motion
p is a position vector that has components in the x and
x
y directions
v is a the velocity vector with components in the x and 
x
y directions
a is a constant acceleration vector applied to the object components in the x and 
x
y
directions
Any projectile object acting under constant acceleration (like gravity) will follow a 
parabolic trajectory with a path determined by its initial velocity and angle (θ) that the 
θ
velocity vector makes with respect to a horizontal axis.
The impulse momentum theorem leads to the result that an applied force can be cal-
culated from the change in momentum of a body.
I
t
v
c
c
m v
=
Δ
F
=
Δ
m
where
F is the average force (a vector) applied during contact
F
Δtc is the duration of time over which the force is applied during contact
m is mass of the object 
vt is velocity (a vector) of the object at time of fi rst contact
t
Step 4: Identify assumptions.
1. The shooter has a height of 1.69 meters. This height is based on the height of the aver-
age 8th grade male.
2. A regulation basketball (m = 0.624 kg) will be used by the shooters.
3. The basketball court has a regulation height hoop, 3.05 meters high.
4. The shooter releases the ball very near the top of his head.
5. The shooter releases the ball from a regulation 3-point line, 6.02 meters away from the 
basket in the x direction. The ball will move in the plane defi ned by the shooter and
the center of the basketball hoop and mounted Shot-Buddy. 
6. The Shot-Buddy catch area assembly is rectangular with dimensions of 6-feet wide by 
4-feet deep. These dimensions are called out in the PDS. 
7.
The only force acting on the basketball once it is in the air is gravity. Any other forces 
(i.e., drag, wind, ball spin) are neglected.
8. The collision of the basketball and Shot-Buddy catch area causes the basketball to 
lose its velocity. This assumption is based on the fact that the system is meant to get 
the ball to stop its motion and roll back to the user. Some of the velocity remains as 
it slides down the system, but because we want to assume the maximum impulse, we
assume the momentum of the ball reaches zero. This momentum is transferred into 
the Shot-Buddy.
9. For the purpose of these calculations, all objects will be treated as rigid bodies.

270 
engineering design 
7
Step 5: Construct the model.
Known
●For any time t:
a
m
s
a
g and g
m
s
x
y
s
0
,
m
9.81
.
2
a
g and g
ya
,
9.81
=
a
0
= −
●For any time t: v(t)x = v(t)0
●Time t = 0, the ball leaves the shooter’s hands at an angle θ,θ
x
y
0
1.69
0
0
=
=
●Adjusting the frame of reference so that ball is released at point (0, 0) gives 
y
m
y
m
f
0
1 36
0
●Time t = tf t , the ball hits the front of the Shot-Buddy frame
x
m
y
m
f
f
5.33
1 36
●Unknowns: θ(t),
θ
v(t), and tf t .
Find an expression for the velocity of the ball when it hits the Shot-Buddy frame, without 
knowing the initial velocity vector’s magnitude or direction. 
x
t
t
x
x
(
)
v
0
0
(v
=
+
x0
(a)
y
t
gt
t
y
y
(
)
v
1
2
(v
2
=
+
y0
+
(b)
gt
t
y
y
( )
vt
(
)
v0
=
+
y
(
)
v
(c)
t
t
y
t
x
tan ( )
( )
vt
( )
vt
θ
=
(d)
At this point in the design process only a good approximation is needed. In a general
study on the science of basketball,1 the minimum shooting velocity to make a basket at a
distance of 6.10 m (20 ft) was reported as 8.138 m/s, and the recommended best launch
angle from the horizontal was 47.9º. We also know that the recommended best launch
angle for a free throw shot is 52º 2 and that shot is made from 15 feet (4.572 m) from the 
target point. To fi nd the velocity of the ball as it might hit the Shot-Buddy frame from the
3-point line, we will try out the velocity vector of 8.138 m/s at 52º.
1. S. L. Blanding and J. J. Monteleone, The Science of Sports, Barnes and Noble Books, New York, 2003.
2. C. M. Tran and L. M. Silverberg, “Optimal release conditions for the free throw in men’s basketball,”
Journal of Sports Sciences, 26:11, 1147–1155, 2008.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
271
7
Finding the x and y components of the launch velocity:
m
s
m
s
x
(
)
v
8.138
cos(52 )
5.232
0
= ⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
° =
)
m
s
m
s
y
(
)
v
8.138
sin(52 )
6.234
0
= ⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
° =
)
Step 6: Perform calculations and verify the model.
A. Calculate the time, tft , to reach the Shot-Buddy frame:
f
Use Eq. (a) to determine the time at which the basketball travels the 5.33 m to the frame.
t
x
m
m
s
s
f
f
x
(
)
v
5.33
5.232
1.02
0
=
=
f
=
B.  Use this result to calculate the fi nal velocities of the ball when it impacts the Shot-
Buddy’s frame.
Using Eq. (b), fi nd (v( fv )
f y, knowing tft = 1.02 seconds.
y
t
gt
f
f
y
y
ft
f
(
)
v fv
1
2
2
=
+
y
+
y
y
gt
t
m
m
s
s
s
m
s m
f
y
f
f
y
gt
f
(
)
v f
1
2
1.36
1
2 9.81
(1.02 )
1.02
3.67
2
2
2
=
−
y
=
−
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
= −
The negative sign indicates that the basketball is now moving downward in its trajec-
tory toward the Shot-Buddy frame.
Find the magnitude and direction of the velocity vector at time tft = 1.02 seconds.
m
s
t
f
f
x
f
y
f
s
t
v
)
fv
(
)
(
)
v fv
6 39
( )
35
2
2
(
)
θ
+
=
(
)
v
2
t ft( )
= 6 39
−
°
35
C.  To verify that this model and assumptions work: use Eq. (b) to calculate the basket-
ball’s vertical position at time tft .
f
y
t
gt
f
f
y
y
ft
f
(
)
v fv
1
2
2
=
+
y
+
y
m
s
s
m
s
s
f
0
3.67
(1.02 )
1
2 9.81
(1.02 )
1.36
2
2
=
+
0
−
⎛
⎝−
⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
+
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
=
 The coordinates for the middle of the Shot-Buddy frame as shown in Fig. 7.8 are 
x = 5.33 m and y = 1.36 m. The model for fi nding the velocity is verifi ed.
D. Use the impulse force model to determine the force on the Shot-Buddy frame.
I
t
v
c
c
m v
=
Δ
F
=
Δ
m
(e)

272 
engineering design 
7
 The velocity at the moment the basketball hits the Shot-Buddy frame was found in Step
6, part B. The standard basketball has a mass of 0.624 kg. Assume that the frame will
stop the ball before it rebounds and that the duration of the contact, Δtct , is 0.1 second.
F
m v
t
F
m
s
s
f
y
((
)
0
y
)
0.624 kg 0
6.39
0.1
39.8 N
=
Δ
=
−
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠=
Step 7: Validate the model.
It is diffi cult to validate the force fi nding model. The assumption of the time elapsed during
collision with the Shot-Buddy catch area frame could be estimated using collisions with
the basketball rim. Empirical data in the form of a video recording could be analyzed to
estimate contact time, taking into account the defl ection of the ball, and so on. This level of 
detail is not necessary during conceptual design, but will be for sizing Shot-Buddy compo-
nents during parametric design. 
Since each of the design concepts depends on having a large catch area to direct 
the ball into the return device, a major decision in conceptual design is to determine
whether a large frame (6 ft × 4 ft) can be made light enough to be easily mounted and
stiff enough to resist permanent deformation when struck at mid-span by a basketball.
FIGURE 7.8
Sketch of key model building factors.
5.33 m
Not to Scale
(5.33, 1.36)
6 ft
4 ft = 1.22 m
Backboard
Shot-Buddy
Catch Ar
Frame
3 Point line
SIDE VIEW
PLAN VIEW
5.33 m
1.69 m
(0.0)
y
x
V0
V
1.36 m
3.05 m
x =
x
0

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
273
7
Possible materials from which to make the frame are low-carbon steel, alumi-
num, and an extruded thermoplastic polymer. We fi rst investigate a carbon steel since
it has the highest elastic modulus and elastic limit of these materials. If the design
cannot work with steel, the concept will have to be radically changed. It is desirable 
to minimize bracing so as to not obstruct the movement of the ball in the catch area; 
therefore defl ection due to the weight of the frame will also be a consideration. We
continue Example 7.9, again using the method for creating a mathematical model. 
E X A M P L E 7. 9 Part 2
Step 1: Determine problem statement.
Can a catch area subsystem frame be designed that will withstand the direct impact of a 
missed basketball shot from the three-point line?
Step 2: Defi ne the boundaries of the model.
The boundary of the model is a rectangular volume enclosing the basketball and the front 
rod of the Shot-Buddy frame at the time of impact.
Step 3: Determine which physical laws are pertinent to the problem and identify the data
that is available to support building the model.
PL
EI
48
3L
δ =
(f)
where 
δ  is the defl ection (inches) at the tip of the beam where the load is applied
δ
P is the load applied at the midpoint of a simply beam
L is the length of the beam
E is the elastic modulus of the material
I is the moment of inertia of the cross-sectional shape of the beam
I
Step 4: Identify assumptions.
1. The Shot-Buddy catch area frame will be constructed from 1-in. diameter steel rods 
with special corner connectors, so it can be assembled by the user. The front and back 
rods will be L = 6 ft, and the side rods will be 4 ft long. 
2. The end connectors of the sides of the frame will behave as simple beam supports so 
we can use the standard equation for the defl ection a beam loaded at mid-span by a 
point load.
3. The low-carbon steel selected for the frame has an elastic limit (yield strength), σy
σ , of 
50,000 psi and the elastic modulus, E, of 30 × 106psi. 
4. The moment of inertia for a circular cross-section is I = πr 
π
4/4.
Step 5: Construct the model.
Known: The front rod of the Shot-Buddy is modeled as a simply supported beam.
●P = 40 N or 9 lbf
1
●L = 6 ft 
●E = 30 × 106 psi
1. lbf used as the abbreviation for pound-force.
f

274 
engineering design 
7
Step 6: Perform calculations and verify the model.
A.  We can use Hooke’s law to fi nd the strain at which elastic deformation gives way to
permanent deformation: e = σy 
σ /E
/
= 50 × 103/30 × 106 = 0.00167 in/in. 
B.  Using Eq. (f) fi nd the defl ection, δ, for a simply supported beam loaded at mid-point
δ
by a force P = 40 N or 9 lbf:
PL
EI
48
9(6 12)
48(30
10 )(0.0491)
0.0474 in.
3
3
L
9(6 12)
6
δ =
=
=
where I = moment of inertia = πr
π 4r /4 = 0.0491 in4
C.  Using Eq. (g) below, determine if the strain induced by the load exceeds the elastic
limit of the front rod. The strain in the fi bers of an elastically bent beam is the ratio
of the distance from its neutral axis, y, to the radius of curvature of the beam given
by ρ. One over the curvature is given by M/EI, where M is the bending moment.1
e
y
My
M
EI
y
EI
x
(
/
PL 4)
9
72
0.5
(30
10 )0.0491
0.00022 in.
6
ρ
=
=
=
=
×
72
=
(g)
 The strain in bending is well below the limiting elastic strain of 0.00167, indicating
that the beam behaves elastically.
D.  Verifi cation: Structural static loads are applied slowly and continuously. The classic 
beam theory is inaccurate for the Shot-Buddy situation because the load is applied by
an impact. When the basketball strikes the front of the frame, it hits with an estimated
velocity of 6.39 m/s or 251.6 in/s. This dynamic load is assumed to be applied in less 
d
than 0.1 s.
A dynamic load magnifi es the force for the short time it is applied, and the defl ec-
tion is greater than the static defl ection determined with Eq. (f). Equating the potential
energy released by a falling mass with the elastic energy absorbed by the structure
results in the relationship2 between dynamic defl ection δdy
δ  and static defl ection δst
δ .
v
g
dy
st
st
st
1
1
(I.F.)
2
δ
δ
dy
δ
δ
+
1
st
δ
+
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟⎠
⎟=
(h)
where v is the impact velocity, g = acceleration of gravity, 32.2 ft/s2 or 386.4 in/s.2
I.F. is called the impact factor. It can be applied to the defl ection as shown above, or 
r
it can be applied to the force P. Calculating I.F. from Eq. (h) gives a value of 60.
P
Using an impact factor of 60 leads to a defl ection of the front bar in the amount 
of 2.84 in. and a strain of 0.013. This value of the strain exceeds the elastic limit 
given by Eq. (g), which would mean that the steel rod would be plastically deformed
by the impact of the basketball. Engineering reasoning leads to questioning this
result. Further research is needed.
Step 7: Validate the model.
Equation (h) is derived on the assumption that all of the energy of the colliding body will
go into the stationary object. This gives very conservative results and is not valid for a
1. F. P. Beer, E. R. Johnston. and J. T. DeWolf, Mechanics of Materials, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 2006, p. 218.
2. R. C. Juvinall and K. M. Marshek, Fundamentals of Machine Component Design, 4th ed., John Wiley
& Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2006, pp. 269–279.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
275
7
basketball, which deforms viscoelastically. Research shows that for a basketball colliding 
with the frame only about 15 percent of the energy goes into the frame.1 A more realistic
value would be I.F. = 0.15(60) = 9 and δdy
δ = 9(0.047) = 0.426 in. Thus, calculations show 
that a frame made from 1-in. diameter rods should resist strikes from a basketball without 
damage. Further calculations can be done to show that defl ection of the frame from its
own weight (53 lbs) and from nylon netting would be negligible.
The analysis that went into the Shot-Buddy’s conceptual design model revealed
issues that need to be addressed in embodiment design. Among these are: (1) trade-
offs between rod material, cross-section shape, and cost to make the frame lighter and
easier to package, ship, and assemble, (2) the design of rugged brackets to attach the
frame to the backboard, and (3) designs that will allow brackets for stiffness without 
obstructing ball travel so that aluminum or plastics could be used in the frame.
7.4.4 Geometric Modeling on the Computer 
Geometric modeling on the computer was the fastest-changing area of engineering
design in the late 20th century. When computer-aided design (CAD) was introduced
in the late 1960s, it essentially provided an electronic drafting board for draw-
ing in two dimensions. Through the 1970s CAD systems were improved to provide
three-dimensional wireframe and surface models. By the mid-1980s nearly all CAD
products had true solid modeling capabilities. In the beginning CAD required main-
frame or minicomputers to support the software. Today, with the enhanced capabilities
of personal computers, solid modeling software runs routinely on desktop machines.
An aspect of CAD modeling that has grown in importance is data associativity,
the ability to share digital design data with other applications such as fi nite element 
analysis or numerical controlled machining without each application having to trans-
late or transfer the data. An important aspect of associativity is that the database
of the application is to be updated when a change is made in the basic CAD design 
data. In order to integrate digital design models from design to manufacturing, there
must be a data format and transfer standard. First IGES, Initial Graphics Exchange
Specifi cation, and now Standard for the Exchange of Product model data (STEP)
has been adopted by major CAD vendors. STEP has evolved into a complex sys-
tem of interlocking standards and applications. (See Wikipedia at List of STEP (ISO
103-03) parts.) STEP also makes possible an open system of engineering informa-
tion exchange using the World Wide Web or private networks based on the Internet 
(intranets).
Computer modeling software increasingly includes analysis tools for simulation
of manufacturing processes (see Chap. 13). Solid modeling software can handle large
assemblies with thousands of parts. It can deal with the associativity of the parts and
manage the subsequent revisions to the parts. An increasing number of systems are
providing top-down assembly modeling functions, where the basic assembly can be
laid out and then populated later with parts.
1. L. C. Silverberg, C. Tran, and K. Adcock, “Numerical Analysis of the Basketball Shot,” Journal of 
Dynamic Systems, Measurement and Control, December 2003, vol. 125, pp. 531–540.

276 
engineering design 
7
For more details on computer generation of solids and creation of features in solid
models, see Computer Modeling at www.mhhe.com/dieter.
7.4.5 Finite Element Analysis
Most classical models treat solids and fl uids as continuous, homogeneous bodies so
that properties such as stress or heat fl ux can only be predicted on an average basis.
This is one of the modeling assumptions that is commonly negated by reality. It has
been realized since the 1940s that if a continuum could be divided into small, well-
defi ned fi nite elements, it would be possible to determine fi eld-properties on a local-
ized basis. Each element’s behavior would be determined by its material and geo-
metrical properties, interacting with all other elements in its vicinity. The theory was
sound, but computational diffi culty of solving thousands of simultaneous equations
prevented much progress. With the advent of the digital computer applications of fi -
nite element analysis (FEA) grew steadily, but were mainly confi ned to large main-
frame computers. It has only been in the past 20 years that FEA has become available
for use on the design engineer’s computer.
FEA applications that are available to the design engineer are almost endless:
static and dynamic, linear and nonlinear, stress and defl ection analysis; buckling anal-
ysis; free and forced vibrations; heat transfer; thermally induced stresses and defl ec-
tions; fl uid mechanics, acoustics, electrostatics, and magnetics. An important develop-
ment is multiphysics software which allows ready interaction of models from multiple
engineering sciences with excellent computer graphics capability.
In FEA, a continuum solid or fl uid is divided into small elements. The behavior 
over each element is described by the value of the unknown variables evaluated at 
nodes and the physical laws for the behavior of the material (constitutive equations).
All elements are then linked together taking care to ensure continuity at the bounda-
ries between elements. Provided the boundary conditions are satisfi ed, a unique solu-
tion can be obtained for the large system of linear algebraic equations that result. 
Since the elements can be arranged in virtually any fashion, they can be used to
model very complex shapes. Thus, it is no longer necessary to fi nd an analytical solution
that treats a close “idealized” model and guess at how the deviation from the model af-
fects the prototype. As the fi nite element method has developed, it has replaced a great 
deal of expensive preliminary cut-and-try experimentation with quicker and cheaper 
computer modeling. In contrast to the analytical methods that often require the use of 
higher-level mathematics, the fi nite element method is based on linear algebraic equa-
tions. For an elementary introduction to the mathematics behind FEA and a discussion
of types of elements, see FEA Math and Elements at www.mhhe.com/dieter. 
Phases in the FEA Process
Finite element modeling is divided into three phases: preprocessing, computation,
and post processing. However, even before entering the fi rst phase, a careful engineer 
will perform a preliminary analysis to defi ne the problem. Is the physics of the prob-
lem known well enough? What is an approximate solution based on simple methods 
of analysis?

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
277
7
Preprocessing: In the preprocessing phase the following actions are taken.
●Import the geometry of the part from the CAD model. Because solid models 
contain great detail, they often must be simplifi ed by deleting small nonstructural 
features and taking advantage of symmetry to reduce computation time.
●Determine the division of the geometry into elements, often called meshing.
The issue with selecting a mesh is knowing which types of elements to use, 
linear, quadratic, or cubic interpolation functions, and building a mesh that will 
provide a solution with the needed accuracy and effi ciency. Most FEA software 
provides a means for automatically meshing the geometry.
●Determine how the structure is loaded and supported, or in a thermal problem 
determine the initial conditions of temperature. Make sure you understand the 
boundary conditions. It is important to incorporate suffi cient restraints to dis-
placement so that rigid body motion of the structure is prevented.
●Select the constitutive equation for describing the material (linear, nonlinear, 
etc.) that relates displacement to strain and then to stress.
Computation: The operations in this phase are performed by the FEA software.
●The FEA program renumbers the nodes in the mesh to minimize computa-
tional resources.
●It generates a stiffness matrix for each element and assembles the elements to-
gether so that continuity is maintained to form the global matrix. Based on the
load vector, the software generates the external loads and applies displacement 
boundary conditions.
●Then the computer solves the massive matrix equation for the displacement 
vector or whatever is the dependent variable in the problem. The constraint 
forces are also determined.
Post processing: These operations are also performed by the FEA software.
●In a stress analysis problem, post processing takes the displacement vector and 
converts it into strains, element by element, and then, with the appropriate con-
stitutive equation, into a fi eld of stress values.
●A fi nite element solution could easily contain thousands of fi eld values. There-
fore, post processing operations are needed to interpret the numbers effi ciently. 
Typically the geometry of the part is shown over which contours of constant 
stress have been plotted. Mathematical operations may have to be performed 
on the data by the FEA software before it is displayed, such as determining the 
Von Mises effective stress.
●Increasingly, FEA software is being combined with an optimization package 
and used in iterative calculations to optimize a critical dimension or shape.
The key to practical utilization of fi nite element modeling is for the FEA soft-
ware to be integrated with CAD so that FEA is executed without leaving the CAD
program. This means the use of solid modeling, parametric, feature-based CAD 
software. In this way unimportant geometric features can be temporarily suppressed 
without permanently deleting them, and different design confi gurations can be easily 
examined using the parametric formulation of the CAD model. While in most cases

278 
engineering design 
7
the default choices in meshing and element selection are acceptable, the FEA software
should provide the ability for custom settings.
To minimize cost, the model should contain the smallest number of elements to
produce the needed accuracy. The best procedure is to use an iterative modeling strat-
egy whereby coarse meshes with few elements are increasingly refi ned in critical ar-
eas of the model. Coarse models can be constructed with beam and plate structural
models, ignoring details like holes and fl anges. Once the overall structural character-
istics have been found with the coarse model, a fi ne-mesh model is used, with many
more elements constructed in regions where stress and defl ection must be determined
more accurately. Accuracy increases rapidly as a function of the number of degrees of 
freedom (DOF), defi ned as the product of the number of nodes times the number of 
unknowns per node. However, cost increases exponentially with DOF.
The application of FEA to the complex problem of a truck frame is illustrated
in Figure 7.9. A “stick fi gure” or beam model of the frame is constructed fi rst to fi nd
the defl ections and locate the high-stress areas. Once the critical stresses are found, a
fi ne-mesh model is constructed to get detailed analysis. The result is a computer gen-
erated drawing of the part with the stresses plotted as contours.
FIGURE 7.9
Example of use of FEA in design.
Wheels
Beam model
of truck and
trailer frame
Mesh model for
detailed analysis

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
279
7
7.4.6 Simulation
Design models are created to imitate the behavior of a part or system under a par-
ticular set of conditions. When we exercise the model by inputting a series of values 
to determine the behavior of the proposed design under a stated set of conditions, we 
are performing a simulation. The purpose of the simulation is to explore the various
outputs that might be obtained from the real system by subjecting the model to envi-
ronments that represent the situations requiring additional understanding. Simulation
models are built from individual models of parts of a larger system. The parts are
modeled by logic rules that decide which of a set of predefi ned behaviors will occur 
and mathematical models to calculate the values of the behavior variables. The part 
models often rely on a probability distribution to select one of the predefi ned behav-
iors. It is the arrangement of the individual models that creates an overall system for 
the prediction of the behavior under study.
A simulation model can also be used to understand an existing system when data is 
not readily available. In this instance, a behavior model is usually made of logic rules,
and mathematical descriptions of all potential outputs from the component are created 
for each component of the system. The model is streamlined so that it outputs only the
characteristics required for the study. The model is verifi ed by running it under histori-
cally accurate inputs and checking model outputs against prior data. Often a simulation
model is created for an existing system so that design changes can be proposed or tested.
7.5
PUGH CHART
A particularly useful method for identifying the most promising design concepts
among the alternatives generated is the Pugh chart.1 Pugh’s method compares each 
concept relative to a reference or datum concept and for each criterion determines 
whether the concept in question is better than, poorer than, or about the same as the 
reference concept. Thus, it is a relative comparison technique. The Pugh chart is cre-
ated by the design team, usually in iterative rounds of examination and deliberation. 
The design concepts submitted for the Pugh method should all have passed the abso-
lute fi lters discussed in Sec. 7.3.1. The steps in the concept selection method, as given 
by Clausing, are:
1. Choose the criteria by which the concepts will be evaluated: QFD’s House of 
Quality is is the starting place from which to develop the criteria. If the concept is 
well worked out, then the criteria will be based on the engineering characteristics 
listed in the columns of the House of Quality.
1. S. Pugh, Total Design, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1991; S. Pugh, Creating Innovative Prod-
ucts Using Total Design, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1996; D. Clausing, Total Quality Development,
ASME Press, New York, 1994. D. D. Frey, P. M. Herder, Y. Wijnia, E. Subrahamanian, K. Kastsikopou-
los, and D. P. Clausing, “The Pugh Controlled Convergence Method: Model-Based Evaluation and Impli-
cations for Design Theory,” Research in Engineering Design, (2009) 20, pp. 41–58.

280 
engineering design 
7
In formulating the fi nal list of criteria, it is important to consider the ability of 
each criterion to differentiate among concepts. A criterion may be very important,
but if every design concept satisfi es it well, it will not help you to select the fi nal
concept. Therefore, this criterion should be left out of the concept selection ma-
trix. Also, some teams want to determine a relative weight for each criterion. This
should be avoided at this point in the selection process, since it adds a degree of 
detail that is not justifi ed at the concept level of information. Instead, list the crite-
ria in approximate decreasing order of priority.
2. Formulate the decision matrix: The criteria are entered into the matrix as the
row headings. The concepts are the column headings of the matrix. Again, it is
important that concepts to be compared be the same level of abstraction. If a con-
cept can be represented by a simple sketch, this should be used in the column
heading. Otherwise, each concept is defi ned by a text description or a separate set 
of sketches, as shown in Fig. 7.7.
3. Clarify the design concepts: The goal of this step is to bring all members of the
team to a common level of understanding about each concept. If done well, this 
will also develop team “ownership” in each concept. This is important, because if 
individual concepts remain associated with different team members the fi nal team
decision could be dominated by political negotiation. A good team discussion about 
the concepts often is a creative experience. New ideas often emerge and are used to
improve concepts or to create entirely new concepts that are added to the list.
4. Choose the datum concept: One concept is selected by the team as a datum for the
fi rst round. This is the reference concept to which all other concepts are compared.
In making this choice it is important to choose one of the better concepts. A poor 
choice of datum would cause all of the concepts to be positive and would unneces-
sarily delay arriving at a solution. It is good to choose the leading product in the
market if one exists. For a redesign, the datum is the existing design reduced to the
same level of abstraction as the other concepts. The column chosen as datum is
marked accordingly, DATUM.
5. Complete the matrix entries: It is now time to do the comparative evaluation. Each 
concept is compared with the datum for each criterion. A three-level ordinal scale
is used. At each comparison we ask the question, is this concept better (+( ), worse
+
(−), or about the same (S) as the datum, and the appropriate symbol is placed in 
the cell of the matrix. Same (S) means that the concept is judged to be roughly the
same as the datum with regard to the criterion for that row.
There should be brief constructive discussion when scoring each cell of the
matrix. It will be necessary to conduct research or model the concepts to determine
estimates of some performance criteria before completing the matrix. Divergent 
opinions lead to greater team insight about the design problem. Long, drawn-out 
discussion usually results from insuffi cient information and should be terminated
with an assignment to someone on the team to generate the needed information.
Again, the team discussion often stimulates new ideas that lead to additional
improved concepts. Someone will suddenly see that combining this idea from con-
cept 3 solves a defi ciency in concept 8, and a hybrid concept evolves. Another col-
umn is added for the new concept. A major advantage of the Pugh method is that 
it helps the team to develop better insights into the types of features that strongly
satisfy the design requirements.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
281
7
6. Evaluate the ratings: Once the comparison matrix is completed, the sum of the +
and −ratings is determined for each concept. Do not become too quantitative with 
these ratings. Be careful about rejecting a concept with a high negative score with-
out further examination. The few positive features in the concept may really be
“gems” that could be picked up and used in another concept. For the highly rated 
concepts determine what their strengths are and what criteria they treat poorly. 
Look elsewhere in the set of concepts for ideas that may improve these low-rated 
criteria. Also, if most concepts get the same rating on a certain criterion, examine
it to see whether it is stated clearly or not uniformly evaluated from concept to 
concept. If this is an important criterion, then you will need to spend effort to gen-
erate better concepts or to clarify the criterion.
7. Establish a new datum and rerun the matrix: The next step is to establish a new
datum, usually the concept that received the highest rating in the fi rst round, and 
run the matrix again. Eliminate the lowest rating concepts from this second round.
The main intent of this round is not to verify that the selection in round 1 is valid 
but to gain added insight to inspire further creativity. The use of a different datum 
will give a different perspective at each comparison that will help clarify relative
strengths and weaknesses of the concepts.
8. Examine the selected concept for improvement opportunities: Once the superior con-
cept is identifi ed, consider each criterion that performed worse than the datum. Keep 
asking questions about the factors detracting from the merits of an idea. New ap-
proaches emerge; negative scores can change to positive scores. Answers to your ques-
tions often lead to design modifi cations that eventually provide a superior concept. 
Example 7.10 describes the use of the Pugh chart as applied to the Shot-Buddy 
concept selection task.
E X A M P L E 7.10 Pugh Concept Selection Process
The JSR Design team generated fi ve concepts for the automated basketball return device
using the tools and methods found in Chap. 6.1 These early stage concepts are shown in
Fig. 7.7. Apply the Pugh Concept Selection Process to the set of fi ve concepts to reduce
the group to the three best alternatives for future examination. Note: In Example 7.8 it 
was determined that Concept 5 in the set is not functionally feasible. We will include it 
here for purposes of demonstrating the Pugh Concept Selection method.
The decision criteria for the selection process are determined from the development 
and interpretation of the House of Quality for the design of the Shot-Buddy reported in
Example 3.8. The critical to quality engineering characteristics (CTQ ECs) are listed below 
along with cost. To complete the list of decision criteria, it is necessary to review the prod-
uct design specifi cation, PDS (Table 3.4), for the Shot-Buddy for any threshold constraints 
to be used in this process. (A threshold constraint is an engineering characteristic that has a 
fi rm target level. However, if different concepts exceed the target level by various amounts 
that threshold constraint can be used as a valid selection criterion.) The PDS includes the 
requirement that the Shot-Buddy work on battery power, so the JSR Design team added a 
criterion of the power needed to operate the ball return device. The less power required by 
the device, the longer it can be used without recharging or replacing the batteries.
1 Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, 
“JSR Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.

282 
engineering design 
7
The list of decision criteria for selecting a Shot-Buddy concept is as follows:
●Catch area confi guration
●Low jamming probability
●Weather resistance
●Sensing the position of the shooter
●Effectiveness of ball return (i.e., a measure that includes accuracy and time)
●Cost
●Weight
●Time to mount to existing basketball hoop (if necessary)
●Work required to rotate ball return mechanism
●Storage volume required when not in use
There is no existing automatic basketball return device, so JSR Design decides to
use a simple net return system called the RolBak™ Basketball Return Net System1 as the 
datum design. The RolBak uses a 10-foot high net, mounted on the basketball backboard,
that catches and returns balls that are in or near the rim. However, the net projects out-
ward onto the court, obstructing any close shot that the user may want to practice, like a
lay-up. The RolBak system is the simplest of the net systems on the market, and is priced
at $189.90.
JSR Design completes the Pugh Concept Selection Matrix shown in Table 7.4. At 
fi rst it seems apparent that none of the concepts is an outstanding improvement over the
RolBak Gold Pro product. All proposed concepts offer improvements in the catch area
and sensing the position of the shooter. All concepts fail to meet the same level of perfor-
mance on weather resistance, price, weight, and storage volume.
1. “The Rolbak Basketball Protecto Net,” http://www.jumpusa.com/rolbak.htm, accessed July 8, 2011.
TABLE 7.4
Pugh Selection Chart 1 for Shot-Buddy Concepts shown in Fig. 7.7
Selection Criteria
RolBak Gold Pro
Concepts 
1
2
3
4
5
Catch area
DATUM
+
+
+
+
+
Probability of jamming
S
S
+
+
+
Weather resistance
−
−
−
−
−
Sensing position of shooter
+
+
+
S
+
Effectiveness of ball return
+
+
+
+
+
Cost
−
−
−
S
S
Weight
−
−
−
−
−
Time to mount to hoop
−
−
+
+
−
Work required to rotate
−
−
−
S
−
Storage volume
−
−
−
−
−
# of Pluses 
3
3
5
4
4
# of Minuses
6
6
5
4
5

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
283
7
Concept 4 has the fewest minus ratings and matches three other concepts for plus 
ratings. The criteria that differentiate Concept 4 from the other proposed concepts must 
be examined. Concept 4 has a better rating on mounting to existing basketball hoops (be-
cause it stands on the court). Concept 4 is the only concept that does not sense the posi-
tion of the shooter. It does not improve on the Datum design in this criterion row. This 
is a serious functional feasibility defi ciency that could have been avoided if the team had
checked the absolute criteria fi rst! Thus the Rolbak design is not a great selection for a 
datum concept. Based on the results of the chart, Concept 4 can be eliminated. A new 
Pugh chart is created using Concept 3 as the datum (this concept has the highest number 
of pluses) and appears in Table 7.5.
The second Pugh Selection Chart (Table 7.5) indicates that there are good concepts 
in the set of those generated. The number of minus ratings is much lower than in the 
previous chart. Focusing again on the areas of difference between the ratings, Concept 5 
is showing relative weakness in the effectiveness of the ball return. This defi ciency is 
enough to overcome positive aspects in terms of work to rotate and storage volume. The 
team decides to eliminate Concept 5 and take Concepts 1, 2, and 3 forward for more mod-
eling and development.
7.6
WEIGHTED DECISION MATRIX
A decision matrix is a method of evaluating competing concepts by ranking the de-
sign criteria with weighting factors and scoring the degree to which each design con-
cept meets the criterion. To do this it is necessary to convert the values obtained for 
different design criteria into a consistent set of values. The simplest way of dealing 
with design criteria expressed in a variety of ways is to use a point scale. A 5-point 
TABLE 7.5
Pugh Selection Chart 2 for Shot-Buddy Concepts from in Fig. 7.7
Selection Criteria
Concepts
3
1
2
5
Catch area
DATUM
S
S
S
Probability of jamming
+
S
S
Weather resistance
S
S
S
Sensing position of shooter
+
+
+
Effectiveness of ball return
+
S
−
Cost
S
S
S
Weight
−
+
+
Time to mount to hoop
S
S
S
Work required to rotate
S
S
+
Storage volume
S
+
+
# of Pluses 
3
3
4
# of Minuses
1
0
1

284 
engineering design 
7
scale is used when the knowledge about the criteria is not very detailed. An 11-point 
scale (0–10) is used when the information is more complete (Table 7.6). It is best if 
several knowledgeable people participate in this evaluation.
Determining weighting factors for criteria is an inexact process. Intuitively we
recognize that a valid set of weighting factors should sum to 1. Therefore, when n is 
the number of evaluation criteria and w is the weighting factor,
w
and
w
1.0
0
1
w
i
i
n
i
1∑
=
and
1.0
0
=
(7.8)
Systematic methods can be followed for determining weighting factors. Three are
listed below.
●Direct Assignment: The team decides how to assign 100 points between the differ-
ent criteria according to their importance. Dividing each criterion’s score by 100 
normalizes the weights. This method is only recommended for design teams where
d
there are many years of experience designing the same product line.
●Objective Tree: Weighting factors can be determined by using a hierarchical objec-
tive tree as shown in Example 7.11. Better decisions regarding preferences will be
made when the comparisons are made at the same level in the hierarchy, because 
you will be comparing “apples with apples and oranges with oranges”. Again, this 
method relies on some experience with the importance of the criteria in the design
process.
●Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP): AHP is the least arbitrary method for determin-
ing weighting factors. This method is presented in detail in Sec. 7.7.
E X A M P L E 7.11
A heavy steel crane hook, for use in supporting ladles fi lled with molten steel as they are
transported through the steel mill, is being designed. Two crane hooks are needed for 
each steel ladle. These large, heavy components are usually made to order in the steel mill
machine shop when one is damaged and needs to be replaced.
TABLE 7.6
Evaluation Scheme for Design Alternatives or Objectives
11-point Scale
Description
5-point Scale
Description
0
Totally useless solution
0
Inadequate
1
Very inadequate solution
2
Weak solution
1
Weak
3
Poor solution
4
Tolerable solution
2
Satisfactory
5
Satisfactory solution
6
Good solution with a few drawbacks
7
Good solution
3
Good
8
Very good solution
9
Excellent (exceeds the requirement)
4
Excellent
10
Ideal solution

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
285
7
Three concepts have been proposed: (1) built up from fl ame-cut steel plates, welded 
together; (2) built up from fl ame-cut steel plates, riveted together; (3) a monolithic cast-steel 
hook.
The fi rst step is to identify the design criteria by which the concepts will be evalu-
ated. The product design specifi cation is a prime source of this information. The design
criteria are identifi ed as (1) material cost, (2) manufacturing cost, (3) time to produce a
replacement hook if one fails, (4) durability, (5) reliability, (6) reparability.
The next step is to determine the weighting factor for each of the design criteria. 
We do this by constructing a hierarchical objective tree (Fig. 7.10). We do this by direct 
assignment based on engineering judgment. This is easier to do using the objective tree 
because the problem is broken down into two levels. The weights of the individual catego-
ries at each level of the tree must add to 1.0. At the fi rst level we decide to weight cost at 
0.6 and quality at 0.4. Then at the next level it is easier to decide the weights between cost 
of material, cost of manufacturing, and cost to repair, than it would be if we were trying
to assign weights to six design criteria at the same time. To get the weight of a factor on
a lower level, multiply the weights as you go up the chain. Thus, the weighting factor for 
material cost, O111 = 0.3 × 0.6 × 1.0 = 0.18.
The decision matrix is given in Table 7.7. The weighting factors are determined from 
Fig. 7.10. Note that three of the design criteria in Table 7.7 are measured on an ordinal 
scale, and the other three are measured on a ratio scale. The score for each concept for 
each criterion is derived from Table 7.6 using the 11-point scale. When a criterion based 
on a ratio scale changes its magnitude from one design concept to another, this does not 
necessarily refl ect a linear change in its score. The new score is based on the team assess-
ment of suitability of the new design based on the descriptions in Table 7.7.
The rating for each concept at each design criterion is obtained by multiplying the 
score by the weighting factor. Thus, for the criterion of material cost in the welded-plate 
design concept, the rating is 0.18 × 8 = 1.44. The overall rating for each concept is the sum
of these ratings.
The weighted decision matrix indicates that the best overall design concept would be 
a crane hook made from elements cut from steel plate and fastened together with rivets.
FIGURE 7.10
Objective tree for the design of a crane hook.
Durability
Reliability
Quality in Service
Time to
produce
Matl. Cost
Mfg. Cost
Cost
Crane Hook
Reparability
O121  0.6 O122  0.3
O12  0.4
O123  0.1
O111  0.3
O112  0.5
O11  0.6
O1  1.0
O113  0.2

286 
engineering design 
7
The simplest procedure in comparing design alternatives is to add up the ratings
for each concept and declare the concept with the highest rating the winner. A bet-
ter way to use the decision matrix is to examine carefully the components that make
up the rating to see what design factors infl uenced the result. This may suggest areas
for further study or raise questions about the validity of the data or the quality of the
individual decisions that went into the analysis. Pugh points out 1 that the outcome of 
a decision matrix depends heavily on the selection of the criteria. He worries that the 
method may instill an unfounded confi dence in the user and that the designer will
tend to treat the total ratings as being absolute.
7.7
ANALYTIC HIERARCHY PROCESS (AHP)
The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is a problem-solving methodology for making
a choice from among a set of alternatives when the selection criteria represent multiple
objectives, have a natural hierarchical structure, or consist of qualitative and quantitative 
measurements. AHP was developed by Saaty.2 AHP builds upon the mathematical prop-
erties of matrices for making consistent pairwise comparisons. An important property
of these matrices is that their principal eigenvector can generate legitimate weighting
factors. Not only is AHP mathematically sound, but it is also intuitively correct.
AHP is a decision analysis tool that is used throughout a number of fi elds in
which the selection criteria used for evaluating competing solutions that do not have
exact, calculable outcomes. Operations research scholars Forman and Gass describe
the AHP’s key functions as structuring complexity, measurement, and synthesis.3 Like 
TABLE 7.7
Weighted Decision Matrix for a Steel Crane Hook
Design
Criterion
Weight
Factor Units
Built-Up Plates Welded
Built-Up Plates Riveted
Cast Steel Hook
Magnitude Score Rating Magnitude Score Rating Magnitude Score Rating
Material cost
0.18
c/lb
60
8
1.44
60
8
1.44
50
9
1.62
Manufacturing 
cost
0.30
$
2500
7
2.10
2200
9
2.70
3000
4
1.20
Reparability
0.12
Experience
Good
7
0.84
Excellent
9
1.08
Fair
5
0.60
Durability
0.24
Experience
High
8
1.92
High
8
1.92
Good
6
1.44
Reliability
0.12
Experience
Good
7
0.84
Excellent
9
1.08
Fair
5
0.60
Time to 
produce
0.04
Hours
40
7
0.28
25
9
0.36
60
5
0.20
7.42
8.58
5.66
1. S. Pugh, op. cit., pp. 92–99.
2. T. L. Saaty, The Analytic Hierarchy Process, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1980; T. L. Saaty, Decision
Making for Leaders, 3d ed., RWS Publications, Pittsburgh, PA, 1995.
3. E. H. Forman and S. I. Gass, “The Analytic Hierarchy Process—An Exposition,” Operations
Research, vol. 49, July–August 2001, pp. 469–86.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
287
7
other mathematical methods, AHP is built on principles and axioms such as top-down 
decomposition and reciprocity of paired comparisons that enforces consistency 
throughout an entire set of alternative comparisons.
AHP is an appropriate tool for selecting among alternative engineering designs. 
AHP is relevant for choice problems in the following categories: comparing untested 
concepts; structuring a decision-making process for a new situation; evaluating non-
commensurate trade-offs; performing and tracking group decision making; integrat-
ing results from different sources (e.g., analytical calculations, HOQ relative values, 
group consensus, and expert opinion); and performing strategic decision making.
Many evaluation problems in engineering design are framed in a hierarchy or system 
of stratifi ed levels, each consisting of many elements or factors.
AHP Process
AHP leads a design team through the calculation of weighting factors for deci-
sion criteria for one level of the hierarchy at a time. AHP also defi nes a pairwise,
comparison-based method for determining relative ratings for the degree to which 
each of a set of options fulfi lls each of the criteria. AHP includes the calculation of 
an inconsistency measurement and threshold values that determine if the comparison 
process has remained consistent.
AHP’s application to the engineering design selection task requires that the de-
cision maker fi rst create a hierarchy of the selection criteria. We will use the crane 
hook design problem of Ex. 7.11 to illustrate AHP’s workings. We no longer need the 
intermediate level of the hierarchy since it’s not necessary for setting the weights, and 
all the criteria are similar. The criteria all measure aspects of the product’s design 
performance. We have six criteria as follows: (1) material cost, (2) manufacturing cost, 
(3) reparability, (4) durability, (5) reliability, and (6) time to produce. 
Table 7.8 shows the rating system for the pairwise comparison of two criteria and 
gives explanations for each rating. The rating of pair A to pair B is the reciprocal of the 
TABLE 7.8
AHP’s Ratings for Pairwise Comparison of Selection Criteria
Rating 
Factor
Relative Rating of Importance of Two 
Selection Criteria A and B
Explanation of Rating
1
A and B have equal importance.
A and B both contribute equally to the prod-
uct’s overall success.
3
A is thought to be moderately more impor-
tant than B.
A is slightly more important to product suc-
cess than B.
5
A is thought to be strongly more important 
than B.
A is strongly more important to product suc-
cess than B.
7
A is thought to be very much more impor-
tant than B, or is demonstrated to be more 
important than B.
A’s dominance over B has been demonstrated.
9
A is demonstrated to have much more 
importance than B.
There is the highest possible degree of 
evidence that proves A is more important to 
product success than B.
The ratings of even numbers 2, 4, 6, and 8 are used when the decision maker needs to compromise between two
positions in the table.

288 
engineering design 
7
rating of pair B to A. That means if it is determined that A is strongly more important 
than B, the rating of A to B is set as 5. This makes the rating of B to A 1/5 or 0.20.
AHP Process for Determining Criteria Weights
We will now use the AHP rating system to create the initial comparison matrix
[C] shown in Table. 7.9. Enter the data into Excel to do the simple mathematics and the
matrix multiplication. The process is:
1. Complete criteria comparison matrix [C] using 1–9 ratings described in Table 7.8.
2. Normalize the matrix [C] to give [NormC].
3. Average row values. This is the Criteria Weights vector {W}.
4. Perform a consistency check on [C] as described in Table 7.10.
The matrix [C] is square with n rows and columns, n being the number of selection cri-
teria. The matrix is constructed one pairwise comparison at a time. The diagonal entries
are all 1 because comparing (A) with (A) means they are of equal importance. Once
[C] is complete, the matrix entries are normalized by dividing each column cell by the
column sum. The normalized matrix is called [NormC] in Table 7.9. Average each row
to calculate a candidate set of criteria weights shown in vector {W} in Table 7.9.
Each pair of criteria are compared and assigned a value for the matrix entry. The
fi rst comparison of two different criteria in [C] is done between material cost (A) and
TABLE 7.9
Development of Candidate Set of Criteria Weights {W} for Crane Hook
Criteria Comparison Matrix [C]
Material 
Cost
Mfg Cost Reparability Durability Reliability Time Prod
Material Cost
  1.00
  0.33
 0.20
0.11
0.14
  3.00
Mfg Cost
 3.00
  1.00
 0.33
0.14
0.33
  3.00
Reparability
 5.00
  3.00
 1.00
0.20
0.20
  3.00
Durability
  9.00
  7.00
  5.00
1.00
3.00
 7.00
Reliability
  7.00
  3.00
  5.00
0.33
1.00
 9.00
Time Prod
 0.33
  0.33
 0.33
0.14
0.11
  1.00
Sum
25.33
14.67
11.87
1.93
4.79
26.00
Normalized Criteria Comparison Matrix [Norm C]
Material 
Cost
Mfg Cost Reparability Durability Reliability Time Prod
Criteria 
Weights {W}
Material Cost
0.039
0.023
0.017
0.058
0.030
0.115
0.047
Mfg Cost
0.118
0.068
0.028
0.074
0.070
0.115
0.079
Reparability
0.197
0.205
0.084
0.104
0.042
0.115
0.124
Durability
0.355
0.477
0.421
0.518
0.627
0.269
0.445
Reliability
0.276
0.205
0.421
0.173
0.209
0.346
0.272
Time Prod
0.013
0.023
0.028
0.074
0.023
0.038
0.033
Sum
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
289
7
manufacturing cost (B). The rating factor becomes the entry for the fi rst row, second 
column of [C] (also referred to as entry Ci,j). Referring back to Table 7.8, we determine 
that material and manufacture costs are both important in determining the goodness
of the crane hook design. Yet, material cost is slightly less critical than manufacturing 
cost to the design of a hook. Therefore the value of C1,2 is set at 1/3. The correspond-
ing value of C2,1 is 3.
Now consider the rating factor comparing material cost (A) to reliability (B), to 
set the value of C1,5. These are not easy criteria to compare. In product design, reli-
ability is almost taken for granted. The materials of a product contribute to the over-
all reliability, but some are more critical to functionality than others are. The crane 
hook is designed to be a single component, so the material properties are of higher 
importance than if the hook were an assembly of fi ve components. One of our design 
alternatives is a cast steel hook that has properties tied closely to the integrity of the 
casting, i.e., whether it is free of voids and porosity. This perspective can lead us to 
setting C1,5 to a value between 3 and 7. Another factor to consider is the application 
of the crane. Since the hook is for use in a steel melting shop, failure could be cata-
strophic and would cause a work stoppage or even loss of life. The same is not true 
if the hook is to be fi tted onto a small crane used by a roofer to lift shingles up to the 
roof of a one- or two-story home. We set C1,5 to 1/7 because reliability is more critical 
to the operation than material cost. That means C5,1 is 7, as shown in Table 7.9.
This process may seem as easy as the simple binary rating scheme used in an 
earlier section. However, creating a consistent set of rating factors is diffi cult. The
t
pair rating factors for the crane design discussed in the last two paragraphs involve 
 relationships among material cost, manufacturing cost, and reliability. The pair not 
yet discussed is manufacturing cost (A) and reliability (B) for C2,5. It’s tempting to use 
1/7 again since the logic applied to material cost should be similar for manufacturing 
cost. However, earlier decisions set manufacturing cost as more important than mate-
rial cost. This difference must carry through to the relationships manufacturing and 
material costs have to other criteria.
Consistency Check Process for AHP Comparison Matrix [C]
As the number of criteria increases, it is diffi cult to assure consistency. That is 
why the AHP process includes a consistency check on [C]. The process is as follows:
1. Calculate weighted sum vector, {Ws} = [C] × {W}
2. Calculate consistency vector, {Cons} = {Ws}/{W}
3. Estimate λ as the average of values in {Cons} 
4. Evaluate consistency index, CI = (λ −n)/(
n
n( − 1)
5. Calculate consistency ratio, CR = CI/RI. The random index (RI) values are the
consistency index values for randomly generated versions of [C]. The values for 
RI are listed in Table 7.11. The rationale for this comparison is that the [C] matrix
constructed by a knowledgeable decision maker will show much more consistency 
than a matrix randomly populated with values from 1 to 9.
6. If CR < 0.1 the {W} is considered to be valid; otherwise adjust [C] 
t
entries and repeat.
The consistency check for the crane hook design problem’s criteria weights is shown 
in Table 7.10. An Excel spreadsheet provides an interactive and updatable tool for set-
ting up [C] and working through the consistency checking process.

290 
engineering design 
7
TABLE 7.11
RI Values for Consistency Check
# of Criteria
RI Value
3
0.52
4
0.89
5
1.11
6
1.25
7
1.35
8
1.40
9
1.45
10
1.49
11
1.51
12
1.54
13
1.56
14
1.57
15
1.58
TABLE 7.10
Consistency Check for {W} for Crane Hook
Consistency Check
{Ws} = [C]{W}
=
1
Weighted Sum Vector
{W} Criteria
Weights
{Cons} = {Ws}/{W}
=
Consistency Vector
0.286
0.047
6.093
0.515
0.079
6.526
0.839
0.124
6.742
3.090
0.445
6.950
1.908
0.272
7.022
0.210
0.033
6.324
Average of {Cons} = λ
6.610
Consistency Index, CI = (λ −n)/(n − 1)  0.122
Consistency Ratio, CR = CI/RI  0.0982
Is Comparison Consistent: CR < 0.10
Yes
1 The values in column are the matrix product of the [C] and {W} arrays. Excel has
a function MMULT(array1, array2) that will easily calculate the matrix product.
The number of columns in array1 must be equal to the number of rows in array2. 
The result of the matrix product is a single column matrix with the same number 
of rows as [C]. When using the Excel function MMULT, remember that the arrays
must be entered as array formula by pressing Ctrl-Shift-Enter.
2 If this value is equal to or greater than 0.10 the [C] matrix must be reset.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
291
7
The AHP process does not stop with the criteria weights. It continues by provid-
ing a similar comparison method for rating the design alternatives. The mathematical 
benefi ts of AHP are only realized if you continue through the process.
Before proceeding to evaluate each of the alternative designs using AHP, review 
the weighting factors. Members of the design team may have insight into the expected
ranking of the factors. They should apply their experience in this review process be-
fore accepting the weights. If there is one that is much less signifi cant than the others, 
the design team could eliminate that criterion from further use in evaluation before 
rating the alternative designs against each criterion.
Determining Ratings for Design Alternatives with Respect to a Criterion
AHP’s pairwise comparison step is different from the simple one introduced in 
Sec. 7.3.2 on measurement scales. In AHP’s pairwise comparison the decision maker 
must judge which of two options (A and B) is superior to the other with respect to some
criterion and then make a judgment about the number of times better the superior 
option is to the inferior one (the comparison is unit-less). AHP allows the decision 
maker to use a scale of 1 to 9 to describe the strength of the rating. In this way, AHP’s 
rating factors are not interval values. They are ratios and can be added and divided for 
the evaluation of competing design alternatives.1
Table 7.12 shows the rating system for the pairwise comparison of two alterna-
tives, A and B, with respect to one specifi c engineering selection criterion. The ex-
planation of each rating is given in the third column. The scale is the same as that 
described in Table 7.8, but the explanations have been adjusted for comparing the 
performance of design alternatives. The differences in performance are likely to be 
fractional improvements, like a $0.10/lb lower cost.
The process of using AHP will ultimately give us a priority vector {Pi} of the 
design alternatives with respect to their performance for each selection criterion. This 
TABLE 7.12
AHP’s Ratings for Pairwise Comparison of Design Alternatives
Rating 
Factor
Relative Rating of the Performance of 
 Alternative A Compared to Alternative B
Explanation of Rating
1
A = B
The two are the same with respect to the
criterion in question.
3
A is thought to be moderately superior to B.
Decision maker slightly favors A over B.
5
A is thought to be strongly superior to B.
Decision maker strongly favors A over B.
7
A is demonstrated to be superior to B.
A’s dominance over B has been
demonstrated.
9
A is demonstrated to be absolutely superior to B.
There is the highest possible degree of 
evidence that proves A is superior to B
under appropriate conditions.
The ratings of even numbers 2, 4, 6, and 8 are used when the decision maker needs to compromise between two
positions in the table.
1. T. L. Saaty, Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, vol. 6:324–35, 1997.

292 
engineering design 
7
will be used in the same way as the ratings developed in Sec. 7.6. The process is sum-
marized as:
1. Complete comparison matrix [C] using 1–9 ratings of Table 7.12 to evaluate pairs
of competing design alternatives.
2. Normalize the matrix [NormC].
3. Average row values—This is the vector priority {Pi} of design alternative ratings.
4. Perform a consistency check on [C].
Notice that steps 2, 3, and 4 are the same as the steps to determine the criteria weight 
factors.
The design alternatives for the crane hook design example are: (1) built up plates 
with welding, (2) built up plates with rivets, and (3) a monolithic steel casting. Con-
sider the material cost criterion. Design teams use their standard cost estimation
practices and experience to determine estimates of the material costs of each of the 
design alternatives. These costs are embedded in Table 7.7 in Sec. 7.6. We know that 
the material costs for each design are 0.60 $/lb for both plate designs and 0.50 $/lb for 
cast steel. Since we are comparing three design alternatives, the comparison matrix
[C] is 3 × 3 (see Table 7.13). All the diagonal elements are ratings of 1, and reciprocals
will be used for the lower triangular matrix. That leaves only three comparisons to
rate as follows:
● C1,2 is the comparison of the welded plate design’s material cost (A) to the riveted
plate design’s material cost (B). This rating is 1 since the costs are the same.
● C1,3 is the comparison of the welded plate design’s material cost (A) to the cast steel
design’s material cost (B). Alternative A is slighty more expensive than alternative 
B, so the rating is set to 1/3. (If the $0.10/lb cost differential is signifi cant to the 
decision maker, the rating could be set lower as in 1/5, 1/6, . . . 1/9.)
● C2,3 is the comparison of the riveted plate design’s cost (A) to the cast steel design’s 
material cost (B). Since the riveted plate’s material cost is the same as the welded
plate’s cost, C2,3 must be set the same as C1,3 at 1/3. This is enforcing the consis-
tency of the matrix.
The development of the matrix [C] and {Pi} for the alternative design’s material costs
are shown in Table 7.13. Notice that the consistency check is almost trivial in this case
because the relationships were clear to us as we set the [C] values.
The process is repeated for each of the fi ve other criteria until all the {Pi} of de-
sign alternative ratings are complete for each criterion. The {Pi} vectors will be used 
to determine the [FRating] decision matrix Table 7.14, as described next.
Determine Best of Design Alternatives
The process of using AHP to select the best design alternative can be done once
all alternatives have been rated to produce a separate and consistent priority matrix
for each criterion. The process is summarized below:
1. Compose Final Rating Matrix [FRating]. Each {Pi} is transposed to give the ith
row of the [FRating] matrix. Table 7.14 is a 6 × 3 matrix describing the relative
priority of each criterion for the three alternative designs.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
293
7
TABLE 7.13
Design Alternative Ratings for Material Cost
Material Cost Comparison [C]
Plates Weld
Plates Rivet
Cast Steel
Plates Weld
1.000
1.000
0.333
Plates Rivet
1.000
1.000
0.333
Cast Steel
3.000
3.000
1.000
Sum
5.000
5.000
1.667
Normalized Cost Comparison [NormC]
Plates Weld
Plates Rivet
Cast Steel
Design Alternative
Priorities {Pi}
Plates Weld
0.200
0.200
0.200
0.200
Plates Rivet
0.200
0.200
0.200
0.200
Cast Steel
0.600
0.600
0.600
0.600
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
Consistency Check
{Ws} = [C]{P
=
i}1
{Pi} Alternative 
{Cons} = {Ws}/{P
=
i}
Weighted Sum Vector
Priorities
Consistency Vector
0.600
0.200
3.000
0.600
0.200
3.000
1.800
0.600
3.000
Average of {Cons} =
3.000
Consistency Index, CI =
0
Consistency Ratio, CR =
0
Is Comparison Consistent
YES
n = 3,  RI = 0.52; λ Estimate; (λ −n)/(n −1); CI/RI; CR < 0.10
1The weighted sum vector {Ws} can be calculated in Excel using the function MMULT.
TABLE 7.14
Final Rating Matrix
Selection Criteria
Welded Plates
[FRating]
Riveted Plates
Cast Steel
Material Cost
0.200
0.200
0.600
Manufacturing Cost
0.260
0.633
0.106
Reparability
0.292
0.615
0.093
Durability
0.429
0.429
0.143
Reliability
0.260
0.633
0.105
Time to Produce
0.260
0.633
0.106

294 
engineering design 
7
2. Calculate [FRating]T{W}={Alternative Value} by fi rst taking the transpose of 
[FRating]. Now matrix multiplication is possible because we are multiplying a
(3 × 6) times (6 × 1) matrix. This produces a column matrix, the Alternative Value.
Weighting vector {W} was calculated in Table 7.9.
Alternative Value
Welded plate design
0.336
Riveted plate design
0.520
Monolithic casting
0.144
3. Select the alternative with the highest rating relative to others.
The design alternative with the highest alternative relative value is the riveted plates 
design.
Since this is the same conclusion as found using the weighted design matrix ap-
proach that is interpreted from Table 7.7, one might question the value of using the 
AHP method. The AHP advantage is that the criteria weights are determined in a
more systematic fashion and have been judged to meet a standard of consistency. The
design selection process template has been set up (assuming Excel is used), and dif-
ferent decision maker assumptions can be used to test the sensitivity of the selection.
This section used Excel to implement the AHP process. One reference for addi-
tional information on this topic is a text on decision models by J. H. Moore et al.1 The 
popularity of AHP for decision making can be measured by searching for business
consultants who provide AHP training and software for implementing AHP. For ex-
ample, one commercially available software package for AHP is called Expert Choice
(http://www.expertchoice.com).
7.8
SUMMARY
In all stages of the design process, decisions are made to select options from a set of 
alternatives. The decision making process involves understanding the nature of the
decision to be made as well as the nature of the decision-maker. These topics are ad-
dressed by aspects of decision theory and utility theory. Decision in design requires
identifying choices, predicting the expectations for the outcomes of each choice, de-
termining a way to rate alternatives against a set of criteria, and performing the selec-
tion process in a mathematically valid and consistent way.
Modeling the physical behavior of design alternatives is a prerequisite for good en-
gineering decision making. Section 7.4 addresses the kinds of models available to de-
signers and provides a logical method for building models that can be used throughout 
all the engineering design stages. The example presented in the section is customized to
match the model to the level of concept detail available at the conceptual design stage.
1. J. H. Moore (ed.), L. R. Weatherford (ed.), Eppen, Gould, and Schmidt, Decision Modeling with 
Microsoft Excel, 6th edition, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2001.

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
295
7
The fi rst evaluation of alternative designs should be a screening process based on 
meeting absolute criteria (e.g., functional feasibility, technology readiness, constraint 
satisfaction). The chapter presented three frequently used design tools for decision 
making: the Pugh chart, weighted decision matrix, and AHP. Each tool uses compari-
sons of alternatives to make a selection.
The use of the Pugh chart deserves a special note. This evaluation tool is used fre-
quently by engineering students. However, students often fail to realize that the num-
bers resulting from creating a Pugh chart are less important than the insights about 
the problem and solution concepts that are obtained from vigorous team participation
in the process. Creating a Pugh chart should be an intensive team exercise from which 
improved concepts often result.
The reality of modern engineering is that mere analysis of engineering perfor-
mance is not suffi cient for making choices among design alternatives. Engineers are 
increasingly required to factor other outcomes (e.g., performance in the marketplace 
and risk to meet a product launch schedule) into their decision-making process as
early as conceptual design.
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Absolute comparison 
Expected value 
Preference
Analytic hierarchy process (AHP) 
Evaluation 
Pugh concept selection chart
Decision Based Design 
Marginal utility 
Ratio scale
Decision tree 
Maximin strategy 
Relative comparison
Decision under certainty 
Minimax strategy 
Utility
Decision under risk 
Objective tree 
Value
Decision under uncertainty 
Ordinal scale 
Weighted decision matrix
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Clemen, R. T.: Making Hard Decisions: An Introduction to Decision Analysis, 2d ed.,
Wadsworth Publishing Co., Belmont, CA, 1996.
Cross, N.: Engineering Design Methods, 2d ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1994.
Dym, C.I. and P. Little: Engineering Design, 3rd ed, Chap. 3, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken,
NJ, 2008.
Lewis, K. E., W. Chen, and L. C. Schmidt: Decision Making in Engineering Design, ASME 
Press, New York, 2006.
Pugh, S.: Total Design, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1990.
Starkey, C. V.: Engineering Design Decisions, Edward Arnold, London, 1992.
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
7.1
Construct a simple personal decision tree (without probabilities) for whether to take an 
umbrella when you go to work on a cloudy day.

296 
engineering design 
7
7.2 
You are the owner of a new company that is deciding to invest in the development and
launch of a household product. You have learned that there are two other companies
preparing to enter the same market that have products close to one of your models.
Company 1, Acme, will market a basic version of the same household item. Company 2,
Luxur, will market the item with several extra features. Some end users will not need all
Luxur’s extra features. There is also a possibility that both Acme and Luxur will have
their products in the marketplace when you launch yours.
You have designed three different versions of the product. However, resources limit 
you to launching only one product model.
●Model a1 is a basic functional model with no extra features. You have designed model
a1 to be of higher quality than Acme’s proposed product, and it will also cost more.
●Model a2 is your model with a set of controls allowing variable output. This function-
ality is not on Acme’s product but is on Luxur’s Model. a2 will be priced between the 
two competitors’ products.
●Model a3 is the deluxe, top-of-the-line model with features exceeding those on the 
Luxur model. It will also be priced above the Luxur model.
Your best marketing team has developed the following table summarizing the an-
ticipated market share that your company can expect under the different competition
scenarios with Acme and Luxur products. However, no one knows which products will
be on the market when you launch your new product.
Predicted Market Share for Your New Product 
When It Faces Competition
Your Model To
Be Launched
Competitors in Market When Product ax Is Launched
Acme
Luxur
Acme & Luxur
a1
45%
60%
25%
a2
35%
40%
30%
a3
50%
30%
20%
You must decide which product model to develop and launch, a1, a2 or a3?
(a)  Assume that you will know which competing products will be in the market.
Choose the model you will launch under each of the three possible conditions.
(b)  Assume that you have inside information about the likelihood of the competitors
entering the market with their products. You are told that Acme will enter the mar-
ket alone with a 32% probability; Luxur will enter the market alone with a 48%
probability; and there is a 20% probability that both companies will enter the mar-
ket together when you are ready to launch your product.
(c)  Assume that you have no information on the actions of the competitors. You are told
that you need to be very conservative in your decision so that you will capture the
largest share of the market even if the competition is fi erce.
7.3 
This decision concerns whether to develop a microprocessor-controlled machine tool.
The high-technology microprocessor-equipped machine costs $4 million to develop,
and the low-technology machine costs $1.5 million to develop. The low-technology

 
chapter 7: Decision Making and Concept Selection 
297
7
machine is less likely to receive wide customer acclaim (P
(
= 0.3) versus P = 0.8 for the
microprocessor-equipped machine. The expected payoffs (present worth of all future 
profi ts) are as follows:
Strong Market Acceptance
Minor Market Acceptance
High technology
P = 0.8
P = 0.2
PW = $16M
PW = $10M
Low technology
P = 0.3
P = 0.7
PW = $12M
PW = 0
If the low-technology machine does not meet with strong market acceptance (there is 
a chance its low cost will be more attractive than its capability), it can be upgraded 
with microprocessor control at a cost of $3.2 million. It will then have an 80 percent 
chance of strong market acceptance and will bring in a total return of $10 million. The 
non- upgraded machine will have a net return of $3 million. Draw the decision tree and 
decide what you would do on the basis of (a) net expected value and (b) net opportunity 
loss. Opportunity loss is the difference between the payoff and the cost for each strategy.
7.4
The prototype of a tie rod is designed to be 10 feet long and have a rectangular cross 
section with width, w = 2 inches and breadth, b = 1 inch. The material will be a heat-
treated steel with Young’s modulus of 30 × 106 lb/in2. The tie rod is intended to be 
loaded axially in tension. A model of the rod is to be made and tested from a soft, easy-
to-machine, aluminum alloy with Young’s modulus of 10 × 106 lb/in2. The model must 
remain elastic during testing as must the prototype during service. The yield strength 
for the aluminum alloy is 20,000 psi (or lb/in2). Therefore, the model cannot be loaded
as heavily as the prototype. It has been decided that every pound of load on the model 
will be equivalent to 10 pounds on the prototype. Now we need to determine the dimen-
sions of the model based on scale relationships.
(a)  Derive the scaling relationship between the predicted defl ection of the prototype, 
δp
δ , for the defl ection of the model, δm.
(b)  Determine the geometric, load, and elastic scale factors, and determine δp
δ  when the
model is at its largest possible defl ection.
7.5
In the search for more environmentally friendly design, paper cups have replaced Sty-
rofoam cups in most fast-food restaurants. These cups are less effective insulators, and 
the paper cups often get too hot for the hand. A design team is in search of a better dis-
posable coffee cup. The designs to be evaluated are: (a) a standard Styrofoam cup, (b) a 
rigid injection-molded cup with a handle, (c) a paper cup with a cardboard sleeve, (d) a
paper cup with a pull-out handle, and (e) a paper cup with a cellular wall. These design 
concepts are to be evaluated with the Styrofoam cup as the datum.
The engineering characteristics on which the cups are evaluated are:
1. Temperature in the hand
2. Temperature of the outside of the cup
3. Material environmental impact
4. Indenting force of cup wall
5. Porosity of cup wall
6. Manufacturing complexity

298 
engineering design 
7
 7. Ease of stacking the cups
 8. Ease of use by customer
 9. Temperature loss of coffee over time
10. Estimated cost for manufacturing the cup in large quantities
Using your knowledge of fast-food coffee cups, use the Pugh concept selection method 
to select the most promising design.
7.6
Four concepts for improving the design of an on/off switch in a right-angle drill are 
sketched in the fi gure below. Determine a set of criteria for an on/off switch. Use this in-
formation to prepare a Pugh chart and select the best option from the given alternatives. 
Concept A is a modest change to the existing switch, and will be the DATUM. Concept 
B adds three buttons for on/off/ and reverse. Concept C is a track and slider design, and 
D is an add-on accessory to make it easier to operate the existing switch. 
Enlargement
of existing
switch
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Multiple
switch design
Track and
slider switch
design
Accessory
add-on to
existing
switch
7.7 
Four preliminary designs for sport-utility vehicles had the characteristics listed in the 
following table. Using the weighted decision matrix, which design looks to be the most 
promising?
Characteristics
Parameter
Weight factor
Design A
Design B
Design C
Design D
Gas mileage
Miles per gal
0.175
20
16
15
20
Range
Miles
0.075
300
240
260
400
Ride comfort
Rating
0.40
Poor
Very good
Good
Fair
Ease to convert to 
4-wheel drive
Rating
0.07
Very good
Good
Good
Poor
Load capacity
lb.
0.105
1000
700
1000
600
Cost of repair
Avg. of 5 parts
0.175
$700
$625
$600
$500
7.8 
Repeat Prob. 7.7 using the AHP method. Determine your own weighting factors for the 
characteristics according the AHP method. Then continue applying AHP until you can 
recommend the best Design for a customer with your weight factors.

8
299
8
EMBODIMENT DESIGN
8.1
INTRODUCTION
Prior chapters have described the engineering design process to the point where a set 
of concepts has been generated and evaluated to produce a single concept or small 
set of concepts for further development. It may be that some of the major dimensions 
have been established roughly, and the major components and materials have been 
tentatively selected. 
The next phase of the design process is often called embodiment design. It is the 
phase where the design concept is invested with physical form, where we “put meat 
on the bones.” We have divided the embodiment phase of design into three activities 
(Fig. 8.1):
 
● Product architecture—setting the arrangement of the physical elements of the de-
sign into groupings, called modules
 
● Confi guration design—designing special-purpose parts and the selection of stan-
dard components, like pumps or motors
 
● Parametric design—determining the exact values, dimensions, or tolerances of the 
components or component features that are deemed critical-to-quality
Also, in this chapter we consider such important issues as setting the dimensions on 
parts, designing to enhance the aesthetic values of the design, and achieving a design 
that is both user friendly and environmentally benign. These are but a small sample 
of the requirements that a good design needs to meet. Therefore, we conclude this 
chapter with a listing of the many other issues that must be considered in complet-
ing the design, and point the reader to where these subjects are discussed in detail in 
the text.

300 
engineering design 
8
8.1.1 Comments on Nomenclature Concerning 
the Phases of the Design Process
It is important to understand that writers about engineering design do not use the 
same nomenclature to label the phases of the design process. Nearly everyone agrees 
that the fi rst step in design is problem defi nition or needs analysis. Some writers con-
sider problem defi nition to be the fi rst phase of the design process, but in agreement 
with most designers we consider it to be the fi rst step of the conceptual design phase, 
Fig. 8.1. The design phase that we consider in this chapter, which we call embodiment 
design, is also often called preliminary design. It has also been called system-level 
design in the description of the PDP given in Fig. 2.1. The term embodiment design 
comes from Pahl and Beitz1 and has been adopted by most European and British writ-
ers about design. We continue the trend that adopts the terminology conceptual de-
sign, embodiment design, and detail design because these words seem to be more 
descriptive of what takes place in each of these design phases.
However, doing this raises the question of what is left in the design process for 
Phase 3, detail design. The last phase of design is uniformly called detail design, but 
the activities included in detail design vary. Prior to the 1980s it had been the design 
Define
problem
Problem statement
Benchmarking
Product dissection
House of Quality
PDS
Gather
information
Conceptual design
Internet
Patents
Technical articles
Trade journals
Consultants
Concept
generation
Creativity methods
Brainstorming
Functional models
Decomposition
Systematic design
methods
Evaluate &
select concept
Decision making
Selection criteria
Pugh chart
Decision matrix
AHP
Product
architecture
Arrangement of
physical elements
Modularity
Configuration
design
Preliminary
selection of
materials and
manufacturing
processes
Modeling
Sizing of parts
Parametric
design
Robust design
Set tolerances
DFM, DFA, DFE
Tolerances
Detail
design
Engineering
drawings
Finalize PDS
Embodiment design
FIGURE 8.1
Steps in the design process showing that embodiment design consists of establishing the 
product architecture and carrying out the confi guration and parametric design.
1. G. Pahl and W. Beitz, Engineering Design: A Systematic Approach, First English edition, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1996.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
301
8
phase where fi nal dimensions and tolerances were established, and all information on 
the design was gathered into a set of “shop drawings” and bill of materials. However, 
moving the setting of dimensions and tolerances into embodiment design is in keeping 
with the adoption of computer-aided engineering methods to move the decision making 
forward as early as possible in the design process to shorten the product development 
cycle. Not only does this save time, but it saves cost of rework compared to when errors 
are caught in detail design at the very end of the design process. Most of the specifi cs 
of the design of components are set during parametric design, yet detail design is still 
required to provide information to describe the designed object fully and accurately in 
preparation for manufacturing. As will be shown in Chap. 9, detail design is becoming 
more integrated into information management than just detailed drafting.
Returning once more to the consideration of design nomenclature, it needs to be 
recognized that engineering disciplines other than mechanical often use different no-
menclature to describe the phases of the design process. For example, one text on de-
signing steel building and bridge structures uses the terms conceptual design, design 
development, and construction documentation, while another uses the descriptors 
conceptual design, preliminary design, and fi nal design. One long-standing text in 
chemical process design, where the emphasis is on designing by assembling standard 
components like piping and evaporators into economical process systems uses the ter-
minology preliminary (quick-estimate) designs, detailed estimate designs, and fi rm 
process designs for the three design phases we have been considering.
8.1.2 Idealization of the Design Process Model
It is important to realize that Fig. 8.1 does not capture the intricacies of the design 
process in at least two major respects. In this fi gure the design process is represented 
as being sequential, with clear boundaries between each phase. Engineering would 
be easy if the design process fl owed in a nice serial fashion from problem to solution, 
but it does not. To be more realistic, Fig. 8.1 should show arrows looping back from 
every phase to those phases previous to it in the process. This would represent the fact 
that design changes may be needed as more information is uncovered. For example, 
increases in weight brought about by the addition of heavier components demanded by 
a failure modes and effects analysis would require going back and beefi ng up support 
members and bracing. Information gathering and processing is not a discrete event. It 
occurs in every phase of the process, and information obtained late in the process may 
necessitate changes to decisions made at an earlier phase of the process.
The second simplifi cation is that Fig. 8.1 also implies that design is a linear pro-
cess. For purposes of learning, we characterize design as a phased process in time 
sequence. But we learned in the discussion of concurrent engineering in Sec. 2.4.4 
that performing some design activities in parallel is the key to shortening the product 
development cycle time. Thus, it is quite likely that one member of the design team 
is testing some subassembly that has been fi nished early, while other team members 
are still sizing the piping, and yet another member may be designing tooling to make 
another component. Different team members are often working on different design 
steps in parallel.

302 
engineering design 
8
Not all engineering design is of the same type or level of diffi culty.1 Much of design 
is routine, where all possible solution types are known and often prescribed in codes and 
standards. Thus, in routine design the attributes that defi ne the design and the strategies 
and methods for attaining them are well known. In adaptive design not all attributes of 
the design may be known beforehand, but the knowledge base for creating the design is 
known. While no new knowledge is added, the solutions are novel, and new strategies 
and methods for attaining a solution may be required. In original design neither the attri-
butes of the design nor the precise strategies for achieving them are known ahead of time.
The conceptual design phase is most central to original design. At the opposite end 
of the spectrum is selection design, which is more central to routine design. Selection 
design involves choosing a standard component, like a bearing or a cooling fan, from a 
catalog listing similar items. While this may sound easy, it really can be quite complex 
owing to the presence of many different items with slightly different features and spec-
ifi cations. In this type of design the component is treated as a “black box” with speci-
fi ed properties, and the designer selects the item that will meet the requirements in the 
best way. In the case of selecting dynamic components (motors, gearboxes, clutches, 
etc.) its characteristic curve and transfer function must be carefully considered.2
8.2
PRODUCT ARCHITECTURE
Product architecture is the arrangement of the physical elements of a product to carry 
out its required functions. Product architecture begins to emerge in the conceptual 
design phase from such things as diagrams of functions, rough sketches of concepts, 
and perhaps a proof-of-concept model. However, it is in the embodiment design phase 
that the layout and architecture of the product must be established by defi ning the 
basic building blocks of the product and their interfaces. (Some organizations refer to 
this as system-level design.) Note that a product’s architecture is related to its function 
structure, but it does not have to match it. In Chap. 6 function structure was presented 
as a way of generating design concepts. A product’s architecture is selected to estab-
lish the best system for functional success once a design concept has been chosen. 
The physical building blocks that the product is organized into are usually called 
modules. Other terms are subsystem, subassembly, cluster, or chunk. Each module is 
made up of a collection of components that carry out functions. The architecture of 
the product is given by the relationships among the components in the product and 
the functions the product performs. There are two entirely opposite styles of product 
architecture, modular and integral. Systems with modular architecture are most com-
mon; they usually are a mixture of standard modules and customized components.
Understanding the interfaces between modules is critical to successful product 
functioning. These are often the sites for corrosion and wear. Unless interfaces are 
1. M. B. Waldron and K. J. Waldron (eds.), Mechanical Design: Theory and Methodology, Chap. 4, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1996.
2. J. F. Thorpe, Mechanical System Components, Allyn and Bacon, Boston, 1989.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
303
8
designed properly, they can cause residual stresses, unplanned defl ections, and vibra-
tion. Examples of interfaces are an IC engine piston and its chamber or the connec-
tion between a computer monitor and the CPU. Interfaces should be designed to be as 
simple and stable as possible (see Sec. 8.4.2). Standard interfaces, those that are well 
understood by designers and parts suppliers, should be used if possible. The personal 
computer is an outstanding example of the use of standard interfaces. PCs can be cus-
tomized, module by module, from parts supplied by many different suppliers. A USB 
port can attach a variety of drives, printers, and PDAs to any computer. 
8.2.1 Integral Architecture
In an integral architecture the implementation of functions is accomplished by only 
one or a few modules. In integral product architectures, components perform multiple 
functions. This reduces the number of components, generally decreasing cost unless 
the integral architecture is obtained at the expense of extreme part complexity. A sim-
ple example is the humble crowbar, where a single part provides both the functions 
of leverage and acting as a handle. A more complex example is found in the BMW 
model R1200S motorcycle where the transmission case serves as part of the structural 
frame, thereby saving both weight and cost. When a component provides more than 
one function it enables function sharing. 
Integral product architecture is often adopted when constraints of weight, space, 
or cost make it diffi cult to achieve required performance. Another strong driver toward 
integration of components is the design for manufacturing and assembly (DFMA) 
strategy, which calls for minimizing the number of parts in a product (see Chap. 13). 
There is a natural trade-off between component integration to minimize costs and 
integral product architecture. Thus, product architecture has strong implications for 
manufacturing costs. DFM studies should begin early in design when the product ar-
chitecture is being established to defi ne these trade-offs. The trade-off is that with 
integral architecture design, parts tend to become more complex in shape and features 
because they serve multiple purposes, thus costing more to manufacture.
8.2.2 Modular Architecture
A modular architecture makes it easier to evolve a design over time. The product can 
be adapted to the needs of different customers by adding or deleting modules. Obso-
lescence can be dealt with by replenishing components as they wear out, and at the 
end of its useful life the product can be remanufactured. Modular design may even be 
carried to the point of using the same set of basic components in multiple products, 
creating a product family. This form of standardization allows the component to be 
manufactured in higher quantities than would otherwise be possible, achieving cost 
savings due to economy of scale. An excellent example of a modular component with 
many uses is the rechargeable battery pack used in many electrical hand tools. 
In a modular architecture, each module implements only one or a few func-
tions, and the interactions between modules are well defi ned. An example would be 

304 
engineering design 
8
a personal computer where different functionality can be achieved with an external 
mass storage device or adding special-purpose software.
A modular architecture also tends to shorten the product development cycle be-
cause modules can be developed independently provided that interfaces are well laid 
out and understood. A module’s design can be assigned to a single individual or small 
design team because the decisions regarding interactions and constraints are con-
fi ned within that module. In this case, communication with other design groups is 
concerned primarily with the interfaces. However, if a function is implemented using 
two or more modules, the interaction problem becomes much more challenging. That 
explains why designs “farmed out” to an outside supplier or remote location within 
the corporation usually are subsystems of a highly modular design, for example, auto-
motive seats. 
There are three types of modular architectures defi ned by the type of interfaces 
used to assemble them to the body of the product: slot, bus, and sectional. Each of 
the modular types involves a one-on-one mapping from the functional elements to 
the physical product and well-defi ned interfaces. Differences in the types of modular 
architectures lie in the way the interfaces between the modules are laid out. Figure 8.2 
illustrates these differences.
 
● Slot-modular. Each of the interfaces between modules is of a different type from the 
others. This is the most common situation for modular architecture since typically 
each module requires a different interface to perform its function with the product. 
For example, an automobile radio cannot be interchanged with the DVD player.
 
● Bus-modular. The modules can be assembled along a common interface, or bus. 
Therefore, interchange of modules can be done readily. The use of a power bus is 
common in electrical products, but it can also be found in such mechanical systems 
as shelving systems.
 
● Sectional-modular. All interfaces are of the common type, but there is no single 
element to which the other chunks attach. The design is built by connecting the 
chunks to each other through identical interfaces, as in a piping system.
8.2.3 Modularity and Mass Customization 
Society has benefi ted from the exploitation of mass production, by which the unit 
price of most consumer goods has been reduced through large-scale production aimed 
Slot-modular
architecture
Bus-modular
architecture
Sectional-modular
architecture
FIGURE 8.2
Three types of modular architectures.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
305
8
at large, homogeneous consumer markets. However, current competitive conditions 
make it diffi cult to maintain this situation. Increasingly, customers look for products 
with variety and distinctiveness. Thus, there is growing interest in fi nding ways to 
produce products at a reasonable cost but also with enough variety and customization 
(mass customization) so that everyone can buy exactly what they want. Such products 
have economy of scope as well as economy of scale. Designing products with a modu-
lar architecture is one of the best ways to approach the goal of mass customization. 
There are four distinct strategies for using modularity in product design and 
manufacturing.
 
● Component-sharing modularity. This type of modularity exists when a family of 
dissimilar products uses the same assembly or component. For example, an entire 
family of rechargeable battery-powered hand tools would be designed to use the 
same battery, thus achieving lower cost as a result of economy of scale in manufac-
ture and providing a desirable marketing feature in that the user would need only a 
single recharging station for several different tools. 
 
● Component-swapping modularity. This type of modularity exists in a product that 
is differentiated only by a single component or assembly. Automobiles are good 
examples of this type of modularity. Consumers buy a certain model car and select 
one or more options that differentiate their car from others. A purchaser may order 
or select a model with a power package that includes power windows, door locks, 
and seat adjustment controls. Once the car is in service, it is not a simple matter 
of exchanging modules to switch from power to manual door locks. The module 
selection must occur prior to fi nal assembly. Another example of component swap-
ping modularity occurs in some refrigerator lines that feature in-door water and 
ice dispensing options. The differentiation occurs in the manufacturing process by 
exploiting the modular design architecture. 
 
● Cut-to-fi t modularity. This is a customization strategy whereby a component’s pa-
rameters or features can be adjusted within a given range to provide a variety of 
products. Tailored clothing is one example of cut-to-fi t modularity. So are window 
blinds, shelving units, and housing siding. 
 
● Platform modularity. This form of modularity describes products that consist of 
different combinations of modules assembled on the same basic structure, as in the 
bus modularity discussed above or automobiles. It is now common for an automaker 
to design different vehicles on the same frame. Design with common platforms is 
necessary in the auto business because of the huge investment in tooling required 
to manufacture frames and the relentless need to introduce new car models into the 
marketplace every year. 
8.2.4 Budgeted Resources
In any design there is at least one scarce resource that needs to be carefully allo-
cated or budgeted. While cost or performance/cost ratio comes fi rst to mind, often 
other design variables fi t into this category, for example, weight, cubic space to be 
installed in a fi xed volume, temperature rise in a computer chip, battery life, and fuel 
consumption.

306 
engineering design 
8
Establishing product architecture is the fi rst place in the design process where 
resource budgeting can be accomplished. For effective resource budgeting, the design 
team needs to decide on the need for the budgeted resource. In addition, there should 
be one person responsible for allocating and tracking the resource. All team members 
must know what their allocation is and be informed regularly how close they are to 
their limit of the resource. 
8.3
STEPS IN DEVELOPING PRODUCT ARCHITECTURE
Establishing the product architecture is the fi rst task of embodiment design. Product 
subsystems, called modules or chunks, are defi ned and details of integration with each 
other are determined. To establish a product’s architecture, a designer defi nes the geo-
metric boundaries of the product and lays out the proposed elements of the design within 
its envelope. The design elements are both functional elements and physical elements. 
The functional elements are the functions that the product must perform to conform to 
its PDS. The physical elements are components, either standard parts or special-purpose 
parts, needed to achieve the functions. As will be seen below, at the time of developing 
the product architecture not all functions have been selected down to the part level, so 
the designer must leave room in the architecture for developing the physical realization 
of the function. A function element is inserted as a place-holder in the layout.
The process of developing the product architecture includes clustering the physi-
cal elements and the functional elements into groupings, often called chunks, to per-
form specifi c functions or sets of functions. The chunks are then placed in locations 
and orientations relative to each other within the overall physical constraints imposed 
on the product.
Ulrich and Eppinger1 propose a four-step process for establishing product 
architecture.
 
● Create a schematic diagram of the product
 
● Cluster the elements of the schematic
 
● Create a rough geometric layout
 
● Identify the interactions between modules
8.3.1 Create a Schematic Diagram of the Design
The schematic diagram ensures that the team understands the basic elements of the 
product needed to produce an operating design. Some of these elements will be actual 
components that the team recognizes are required for the design, like the ball return 
trampoline. Other elements will still be in functional form because the team has not 
yet specifi ed their embodiment, like the trampoline turning mechanism. Figure 8.3 
shows the schematic diagram for the Shot-Buddy.
1. K. T. Ulrich and S. H. Eppinger, Product Design and Development, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 
2008.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
307
8
Development of the schematic diagram starts with the function structure, Fig. 6.8, 
and the concept sketch, Fig. 7.7. Note that the fl ows of energy, material, and signal that 
were used in functional analysis are traced through the schematic diagram. 
Judgment should be used in deciding what level of detail to show on the sche-
matic. Generally, no more than 30 elements should be used to establish the initial 
product architecture. Also, realize that the schematic is not unique. As with every-
thing in design, the more options you investigate (i.e., the more you iterate in the pro-
cess), the better the chance of arriving at a good solution.
8.3.2 Cluster the Elements of the Schematic Diagram
The second step of setting product architecture is to create groups of the elements 
in the schematic. The purpose of this step is to arrive at an arrangement of design 
elements (clusters) that will become modules. Looking at Fig. 8.4, we see that the 
FIGURE 8.3
Schematic diagram of the Shot-Buddy showing fl ows between components.1
Energy
Material
Shot ball
Returned
ball
Rotational
energy
Electrical
energy
Electrical
energy
Electrical
energy
Shaft
Signal
Ball catch net
Drop out guide
Ball return
trampoline
Trampoline
support
Trampoline
turning
mechanism
Motor
Power supply
Motor
controller
Ball player
practicing
shots from
around the
court
Power supply
Attachment to
shooter
Shooter’s
direction signal
generator
Shooter’s
directional
signal receiver
1. Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, 
“JSR Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.

308 
engineering design 
8
following modules have been established: (1) ball catch module, (2) ball return 
module, (3) return positioning module, (4) return control module, (5) shooter’s sig-
nal module, and (6) infrared (IR) receiver module. The Shot-Buddy has one module 
made up of a single component (the IR receiver module). Another interesting feature 
in Fig. 8.4 is that there are two modules (return positioning and return control) sharing 
a power supply. This is denoted by the overlap of modules 3 and 4. This refl ects the 
practical nature of engineering. We could draw the schematic with two separate power 
supplies, but it is inevitable that designers will choose to use only one. 
One way of deciding on the formation of modules is to start with the assumption 
that each design element will be an independent module and then cluster the elements 
to realize advantages, or commonalities. Some of the reasons for clustering elements in-
clude requiring close geometric relationship or precise location, elements that can share 
a function or an interface, the desire to outsource part of the design, and the portability 
FIGURE 8.4
Schematic diagram of the Shot-Buddy showing components clustered into modules.1
2. Ball return
module
1. Ball catch
module
Ball catch net
Drop out guide
Ball return
trampoline
Trampoline
Support
Rotational
Energy
3. Return
positioning
module
Trampoline
turning
mechanism
Shaft
Power supply
Power supply
Motor
controller
Ball player
practicing
shots from
around the
court
Shot ball
Returned
ball
Motor
Electrical
energy
Electrical
energy
Electrical
energy
Attachment to
shooter
Shooter’s
direction signal
generator
Shooter’s
directional
signal receiver
6. IR
receiver
module
5. Shooter’s
signal
module
Energy
Material
Signal
4. Return
control
module
1. Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, 
“JSR Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
309
8
of interfaces. For example, digital signals are much more portable and can be distributed 
more easily than mechanical motions. Clustering is natural for elements that have the 
same fl ows through them. Other issues that could affect clustering include the use of stan-
dard parts or modules, the ability to customize the product in the future (make a product 
family), or the allowance for improved technology in future versions of the product.
8.3.3 Create a Rough Geometric Layout
Making a geometric layout allows the designer to investigate whether there is likely to 
be geometrical, thermal, or electrical interference between elements and modules. A 
trial layout positions modules in a possible physical confi guration. For some problems 
a two-dimensional drawing is adequate (Fig. 8.5), while for others a three-dimen-
sional model (either physical or computer) is required. 
The layout of the Shot-Buddy in Fig. 8.5 indicates no physical contact between the 
shooter’s signal module and any other module in the product. The ball catch module 
doesn’t connect to other components of the Shot-Buddy but is designed to be mounted on 
the basketball hoop and backboard (a fact not indicated in the layout). Three modules have 
contact interfaces: the ball return module, return positioning module, and return control 
module. As a result the interactions between these modules will have to be analyzed and 
FIGURE 8.5
Geometric layout of the Shot-Buddy.1
Ball catch
module
Ball return
module
Return
positioning
module
IR
receiver
module
Shooter’s
signal
module
Return
control
module
1. Adapted from Josiah Davis, Jamil Decker, James Maresco, Seth McBee, Stephen Phillips, and Ryan Quinn, 
“JSR Design Final Report: Shot-Buddy,” unpublished, ENME 472, University of Maryland, May 2010.

310 
engineering design 
8
planned. Vibration and electromagnetic interference will have to be carefully consid-
ered in order to prevent any harmful effect on the sensing or positioning components. 
Tolerances and geometries will also have to be considered to ensure all parts fi t together. 
Interactions with the other three modules will still have to be considered in terms of en-
ergy fl ows and material fl ows, but there should be no direct interference issues.
An acceptable layout is one in which all modules (roughly sized) fi t into the en-
velope of the fi nal design. If there are objects in the use environment that will interact 
with the fi nal design, it is good to include a representation of them in the layout. Dur-
ing a review of the layout, designers should indicate motion direction to assure there 
is no physical interference in the operation. Sometimes it is not possible to arrive at a 
geometrically feasible layout, even after trying several alternatives. This means it is 
necessary to go back to the previous step and change the assignment of elements to 
modules until an acceptable layout is achieved. 
8.3.4 Defi ne Interactions and Determine Performance Characteristics
The most critical task in determining a product’s architecture is accurately model-
ing the interactions between the modules and setting the performance characteristics 
for the modules. Function happens primarily at the interfaces between modules, and 
unless modules are carefully thought out, complexity can build up at these interfaces. 
Therefore at the conclusion of the embodiment design phase of the product develop-
ment process, each product module must be described in complete detail. The docu-
mentation on each module should include:
 
● Functional requirements
 
● Drawings or sketches of the module and its component parts
 
● Preliminary component selection for the module
 
● Detailed description of placement within the product
 
● Detailed descriptions of interfaces with neighboring modules
 
● Accurate models for expected interactions with neighboring modules
The most critical items in the module description are the descriptions of the inter-
faces and the modeling of interactions between neighboring modules. There are four 
types of interactions possible between component modules—spatial, energy, informa-
tion, and material.
 
● Spatial interactions describe physical interfaces between modules. These exist be-
tween mating parts and moving parts. The engineering details necessary for de-
scribing spatial interactions include information on mating geometry, surface fi n-
ish, and tolerancing. A good example of a spatial interface between two moving 
parts is the relationship between the padded headrest and the notched metal sup-
ports connecting it to the car seat.
 
● Energy fl ows between modules represent another important type of interaction. 
These fl ows may be intentional, like the need to route electrical current from a 
switch to a motor, or they may be unavoidable, like the generation of heat by a 
motor contacting the case of a drill. Both planned and secondary types of energy 
interactions must be anticipated and described.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
311
8
 
● Information fl ow between modules often takes the form of signals to control the 
product’s operation or feedback relative to that operation. Sometimes these signals 
must branch out to trigger multiple functions simultaneously.
 
● Material can fl ow between product modules if required by product’s functionality. 
For example, the paper path for a laser printer involves moving the paper through 
many different modules of the printer.
The design of modules may often proceed independently after the product ar-
chitecture is completed. This allows the module design tasks to be given to teams 
specializing in the design of one particular type of subsystem. For example, a major 
manufacturer of power hand tools has defi ned motor design as one of the company’s 
core competencies and has an experienced design team profi cient in small motor de-
sign. In this case, the motor module description becomes the design specifi cation for 
the motor design team. The fact that product design is divided into a group of module 
design tasks reemphasizes the need for clear communication between design teams 
working on separate modules. 
There are two important issues with respect to the arrangement of the modules. 
The fi rst is to ensure that the interfaces between the modules are designed to enable 
proper functioning of the adjacent components.  The second issue is that the compo-
nents at the interfaces can be assembled properly as discussed in Section 8.5.2. Guide-
lines on the design for assembly can be found in Chap. 13.
8.4
CONFIGURATION DESIGN
In confi guration design we establish the shape and general dimensions of components. 
Exact dimensions and tolerances are established in parametric design (Sec. 8.6). The 
term component is used in the generic sense to include special-purpose parts, stan-
dard parts, and standard assemblies.1 A part is a designed object that has no assembly 
operations in its manufacture. A part is characterized by its geometric features such as 
holes, slots, walls, ribs, projections, fi llets, and chamfers. The arrangement of features 
includes both the location and orientation of the geometric features. Figure 8.6 shows 
four possible physical confi gurations for a component whose purpose is to connect 
two plates at right angles to each other. Note the variety of geometric features, and 
their much different arrangement in each of the designs.
A standard part is one that has a generic function and is manufactured rou-
tinely without regard to a particular product. Examples are bolts, washers, rivets, and 
I-beams. A special-purpose part is designed and manufactured for a specifi c purpose 
in a specifi c product line, as in Fig. 8.6. An assembly is a collection of two or more 
parts. A subassembly is an assembly that is included within another assembly or subas-
sembly. A standard assembly is an assembly or subassembly that has a generic function 
and is manufactured routinely. Examples are electric motors, pumps, and gearboxes.
1. J. R. Dixon and C. Poli, Engineering Design and Design for Manufacturing, pp. 1–8, Field Stone 
Publishers, Conway, MA, 1995.

312 
engineering design 
8
As already stated several times in previous chapters, the form or confi guration 
of a part develops from its function. However, the possible forms depend strongly on 
available materials and production methods used to generate the form from the mate-
rial. Moreover, the possible confi gurations are dependent on the spatial constraints 
that defi ne the envelope in which the product operates and the product architecture. 
This set of close relationships is depicted in Fig. 8.7.
Generally, detailed decisions about the design of a component cannot proceed 
very far without making decisions about the material and the manufacturing process 
from which it will be made. These vital topics are considered in detail in Chaps. 11, 
12, and 13.
In starting confi guration design we should follow these steps: 1
 
● Review the product design specifi cation and any specifi cations developed for the 
particular subassembly to which the component belongs.
Material
Production
Manufacture
Assembly
Function
Form
Constraints
Interfaces
Components
FIGURE 8.7
Schematic illustrating the close interrelationship between function and form and, in turn, 
their dependence on the material and the method of production. (After Ullman)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 8.6
Four possible confi gurations of features for a right-angle bracket. (a) Bent from a fl at plate. 
(b) Machined from a solid block. (c) Bracket welded from three pieces. (d) Cast bracket.
1. J. R. Dixon and C. Poli, op. cit., Chap. 10; D. G. Ullman, The Mechanical Design Process, 4th ed., 
McGraw-Hill, 2010.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
313
8
 
● Establish the spatial constraints that pertain to the product or the subassembly  being 
designed. Most of these will have been set by the product architecture (Sec. 8.3). In ad-
dition to physical spatial constraints, consider the constraints of a human working with 
the product (see Sec. 8.9) and constraints that pertain to the product’s life cycle, such as 
the need to provide access for maintenance or repair or to dismantle it for recycling.
 
● Create and refi ne the interfaces or connections between components. Again, the 
product architecture should give much guidance in this respect. Much design effort 
occurs at the connections between components, because this is the location where 
failure often occurs. Identify and give special attention to the interfaces that trans-
fer the most critical functions.
 
● Before spending much time on the design, answer the following questions: Can the 
part be eliminated or combined with another part? Studies of design for manufac-
ture (DFM) show that it is almost always less costly to make and assemble fewer, 
more complex parts than it is to design with a higher part count.
 
● Can a standard part or subassembly be used? While a standard part is generally less 
costly than a special-purpose part, two standard parts may not be less costly than 
one special-purpose part that replaces them.
Generally, the best way to get started with confi guration design is to just start 
sketching alternative confi gurations of a part. The importance of hand sketches should 
not be underestimated.1 Sketches are an important aid in idea generation and a way for 
piecing together unconnected ideas into design concepts. Later as the sketches be-
come scale drawings they provide a vehicle for providing missing data on dimensions 
and tolerances, and for simulating the operation of the product (3-D solid modeling, 
Fig. 8.8). Drawings are essential for communicating ideas between design engineers 
and between designers and manufacturing people, and as a legal document for ar-
chiving the geometry and design intent.
Consider the task of applying confi guration design to create a special-purpose part 
to connect two plates with a bolted joint. Figure 8.9 portrays the images of  possible 
solutions that would go through the mind of an experienced designer as he or she thinks 
about this design. Note that such issues as alternate bolt designs, the force distribution 
in the joint, the relationship of the design to surrounding components, and the ability to 
assemble and disassemble are considerations. Of special prominence in the designer’s 
mind would be visualization of how the design would actually be manufactured.
8.4.1 Generating Alternative Confi gurations
As in conceptual design, generally the fi rst attempt at a confi guration design does not 
yield the best that you can do, so it is important to generate a number of alternatives 
for each component or subassembly. Ullman 2 characterizes confi guration design as 
1. J. M. Duff and W. A. Ross, Freehand Sketching for Engineering Design, PWS Publishing Co., Boston, 
1995; G. R. Bertoline and E. N. Wiebe, Technical Graphics Communication, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 2007.
2. D. G. Ullman, op.cit. pp. 260–264.

314 
engineering design 
8
refi ning and patching. Refi ning is a natural activity as we move through the design 
process in which we develop more specifi city about the object as we move from an 
abstract to a highly detailed description. Figure 8.8 illustrates the increase in detail 
as we refi ne the design. At the top is a rough sketch of a support bracket, while at the 
bottom is a detailed drawing showing the fi nal dimensions after machining. Patching 
is the activity of changing a design without changing its level of abstraction. Refi ning 
and patching leads to a succession of confi gurational arrangements that hopefully im-
prove upon the defi ciencies of the previous designs.
Patching can be facilitated by applying the aids for brainstorming listed in 
Table 6.2.
 
● Substituting looks for other concepts, components, or features that will work in 
place of of the current idea.
 
● Combining aims to make one component replace multiple components or serve 
multiple functions. This is a move toward integral architecture, which we have seen 
FIGURE 8.8
Showing the progression of a design confi guration from a rough sketch (a) to a 3-D computer 
model (b) to a detailed three-view engineering drawing (c) Note the increase in detail from 
(a) to (b) to (c).
(a)
(b)
(c)
0.30
2.25
1.00
4.00
3.00
0.60
0.81
1.50
3.50
0.25
0.45
1.60
0.80

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
315
8
is benefi cial in reducing part count, and therefore lowering manufacturing and as-
sembly costs.
 
● Decomposing is the opposite approach from combining. As new components and 
assemblies are developed through decomposing, it is important to consider whether 
the new confi gurations affect your understanding of the constraints on and connec-
tions between each component.
 
● Magnifying involves making some feature of a component larger relative to adja-
cent components.
 
● Minifying involves making some feature of a component smaller. In the limit, it means 
eliminating the component if its function can be provided for in some other way.
 
● Rearranging involves reconfi guring the components or their features. Changes in 
shape force rethinking of how the component carries out its functions. Another way 
to stimulate new ideas is to rearrange the order of the functions in the functional 
fl ow.
Another way to stimulate ideas for patching is to apply the 40 Inventive Principles of 
TRIZ presented in Sec. 6.7.
(e) Relationship to
other parts
(d) Space for assembly
(b) Locking
(c) Treatment
of corner
(j) Flow of force
(i) Boring
(g) Chamfering
(h) Tapping
(f) Prepared
     hole
(a) Various bolt
      connections
(k) Situation of
contact
(l) Representation of 
shape
FIGURE 8.9
Images that come to a designer’s mind when making a design of a bolted connection.
(From Y. Hatamura, The Practice of Machine Design, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1999, p. 78. Used with 
permission.)

316 
engineering design 
8
While patching is necessary for a good design, it is important to note that ex-
cessive patching probably means that your design is in trouble. If you are stuck on 
a particular component or function, and just can’t seem to get it right after several 
iterations, it is worthwhile to reexamine the design specifi cations for the component 
or function. These may have been set too stringently, and upon reconsideration, it may 
be possible to loosen them without seriously compromising the design. If this is not 
possible, then it is best to return to the conceptual design phase and try to develop new 
concepts. With the insight you have gained, better concepts are likely to come more 
easily than on your fi rst attempt.
8.4.2 Analyzing Confi guration Designs
The fi rst step in analyzing the confi guration design of a part is the degree to which it 
satisfi es the functional requirement and product design specifi cation (PDS). Typically 
these involve issues of strength or stiffness, but they can include issues such as reliabil-
ity, safety in operation, ease of use, maintainability, reparability, etc. A comprehensive 
listing of design for function factors and other critical design issues is given in Table 8.1.
Note that the fi rst 14 design for functionality factors, often called design for per-
formance factors, deal with technical issues that can be addressed through analysis 
based on mechanics of materials or machine design fundamentals, if it is a strength 
issue, or fl uid fl ow or heat transfer, if it is a transport question. Mostly this can be done 
with hand calculators or PC-based equation solvers using standard or simple models 
of function and performance. More detailed analysis of critical components is carried 
out in the parametric design step. Typically this uses the fi eld-mapping capabilities of 
fi nite-element methods and more advanced computational tools. The rest of the factors 
are all product or design characteristics that need special explanation as to their mean-
ing and measurement. These factors are all discussed in detail elsewhere in this text.
8.4.3 Evaluating Confi guration Designs
Alternative confi guration designs of a part should be evaluated at the same level of ab-
straction. We have seen that design for function factors are important, because we need 
some assurance that the fi nal design will work. The analysis used for this  decision is 
fairly rudimentary, because the objective at this stage is to select the best of several 
possible confi gurations. More detailed analysis is postponed until the parametric de-
sign stage. The second most important criterion for evaluation is to answer the ques-
tion, “Can a quality part or assembly be made at minimum cost?” The ideal is to be 
able to predict the cost of a component early in the design process. But because the cost 
depends on the material and processes that are used to make the part, and to a greater 
degree on the tolerances and surface fi nish required to achieve functionality, this is dif-
fi cult to do until all of the specifi cations have been determined for the part. Accordingly, 
a body of guidelines that result in best practice for design for manufacture and design 
for assembly have been developed to assist designers in this area. Chapter 13 is devoted 
to this topic, while Chap. 17 covers cost evaluation in considerable detail.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
317
8
The Pugh chart or weighted decision matrix, as discussed in Chap. 7, are useful 
tools for selecting the best of the alternative designs. The criteria are a selection of the 
design for function factors in Table 8.1 determined by management or the design team 
to be critical to quality plus the cost-related factors of design for manufacture (DFM) 
and design for assembly (DFA). Because these factors are not equally important, the 
weighted decision matrix is preferred for this task.
TABLE 8.1
Typical Design for Function and Other Critical Design Issues
Factor
Issues
Strength
Can the part be dimensioned to keep stresses below yield levels?
Fatigue
If cyclic loads, can stresses be kept below the fatigue limit?
Stress concentrations
Can the part be confi gured to keep local stress concentration low?
Buckling
Can the part be confi gured to prevent buckling under compressive 
loads?
Shock loading
Will the material and structure have suffi cient fracture toughness?
Strain and deformations
Does part have required stiffness or fl exibility?
Creep
If creep is a possibility, will it result in loss of functionality?
Thermal deformation
Will thermal expansion compromise functionality? Can this be handled 
by design?
Vibration
Has design incorporated features to minimize vibration?
Noise
Has frequency spectrum been determined, and noise abatement consid-
ered in design?
Heat transfer
Will heat generation/transfer be an issue to degrade performance?
Fluids transport/storage
Has this been adequately considered in design? Does it meet all 
regulations?
Energy effi ciency
Has the design specifi cally considered energy consumption and 
effi ciency?
Durability
Estimated service life? How has degradation from corrosion and wear 
been handled?
Reliability
What is the predicted mean time to failure?
Maintainability
Is the prescribed maintenance typical for this type of design? Can it be 
done by the user?
Serviceability
Has a specifi c design study been done for this factor? Is cost for repair 
reasonable?
Life-cycle costs
Has a credible study been done on LCC?
Design for environment
Has reuse and disposal of product been explicitly considered in the 
design?
Human factors/ergonomics
Are all controls/adjustments logically labeled and located?
Ease of use
Are written installation and operating instructions clear?
Safety
Does design go beyond safety regulations in preventing accidents?
Styling/aesthetics
Have styling consultants adequately determined customer taste and 
wants?

318 
engineering design 
8
8.5
BEST PRACTICES FOR CONFIGURATION DESIGN
It is more diffi cult to give a prescribed set of methods for confi guration design than for 
conceptual design because of the variety of issues that enter into the development of the 
product architecture and performance of components. In essence, the rest of this text is 
about these issues, like selection of materials, design for manufacture, and design for 
robustness. Nevertheless, many people have thought carefully about what constitutes 
the best practice of embodiment design. We record some of these insights here.
The general objectives of the embodiment phase of design are the fulfi llment of 
the required technical functions, at a cost that is economically feasible, and in a way 
that ensures safety to the user and to the environment. Pahl and Beitz 1 give the basic 
guidelines for embodiment design as clarity, simplicity, and safety.
 
● Clarity of function pertains to an unambiguous relationship between the various 
functions and the appropriate inputs and outputs of energy, material, and signal 
fl ow. This means that various functional requirements remain uncoupled and do not 
interact in undesired ways, as if the braking and steering functions of an automo-
bile would interact.
 
● Simplicity refers to a design that is not complex and is easily understood and read-
ily produced. This goal is often expressed as a design with minimum information 
content. One way to minimize information content is to reduce the number and 
complexity of the components.
 
● Safety should be guaranteed by direct design, not by secondary methods such as 
guards or warning labels.
 
● Minimal impact on the environment is of growing importance, and should be listed 
as a fourth basic guideline.
8.5.1 Design Guidelines
In the extensive list of principles and guidelines for embodiment design, along with de-
tailed examples, that are given by Pahl and Beitz,2 four stand out for special mention.
 
● Force transmission
 
● Division of tasks
 
● Self-help
 
● Stability
Force Transmission
In mechanical systems the function of many components is to transmit forces 
and moments between two points. This is usually accomplished through a physical 
connection between components. In general, the force should be accommodated in 
1. G. Pahl and W. Beitz, Engineering Design: A Systematic Approach, 2d ed. English translation by 
K. Wallace, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1996. 
2. G. Pahl and W. Beitz, op. cit., 199–403.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
319
8
such a way as to produce a uniformly distributed stress on the cross section of the 
part. However, the design confi guration often imposes nonuniform stress distributions 
because of geometric constraints. A method for visualizing how forces are transmitted 
through components and assemblies called force-fl ow visualization is to think of forces 
as fl ow lines, analogous to low-turbulence fl uid fl ow streamlines or magnetic fl ux. In 
this model, the force will take the path of least resistance through the component.
Figure 8.10 shows the force fl ow through a yoke connection. Use sketches to trace 
out the path of the fl ow lines through the structure, and use your knowledge of me-
chanics of materials to determine whether the major type of stress at a location is ten-
sion (T), compression (C), shear (S), or bending (B). The fl ow of force through each 
member of the joint is indicated diagrammatically by the dashed lines in Fig. 8.10. 
Following along the path from left to right, the critical areas are indicated by jagged 
lines and numbered consecutively:
a. Tensile loading exists at section 1 of the fork. If there are ample material and gen-
erous radii at the transition sections, the next critical location is 2.
3
4
4
4
4
6
2
1
Blade
5
5
2
2
Fork
Pin
1
2
1
4
3
1
2
3
3
4
2
F
F
Side and top views of yoke connection, consisting of fork (left), pin (center), and blade (right).
F
F
F
F
b
b
d
d
2b
m
F
F
a
2
FIGURE 8.10
Force-fl ow lines and critical sections in a yoke connection. (After Juvinal.)

320 
engineering design 
8
b. At 2 the force fl ow lines crowd together due to the reduced area caused by the 
holes. Note that with this symmetrical design the force F is divided into four identi-
cal paths, each of which has an area of (m − a)b at the critical section. The loading 
at section 2 includes bending (due to defl ections) as well as tension. The amount of 
bending load will depend upon the rigidity of the parts. Also, bending of the pin 
will cause some concentration of loading at the inside edges of the fork tines.
c. At section 3 the forces create shearing stresses, tending to “push out” the end seg-
ments bounded by the jagged lines.
d. At location 4 bearing loading is applied. If the strength at locations 1 to 4 is ad-
equate, the force will fl ow into the pin. Surfaces 4' of the outer portions of the pin 
will be subjected to the same loading as surfaces 4 of the fork. The distribution 
of the bearing loading will depend upon the fl exibilities involved. In any case, 
the loading will tend to be highest at the inner edges of contact. In like manner, 
bearing stresses will be developed at surface 4' at the center of the pin, where it is 
in contact with the blade. As a result of pin defl ection, the bearing loading on the 
inner surface 4' will tend to be highest at the edges.
e. The bearing forces on areas 4' load the pin as a beam, giving rise to maximum shear 
loading at the two sections 5 and maximum bending loading at the center section 6. 
After the forces emerge from the pin and enter the blade, they fl ow across critical ar-
eas 4, 3, 2, and 1, which correspond directly to the like-numbered sections of the fork.
This procedure provides a systematic approach for examining structures to fi nd 
sections of potential weakness. Areas where the fl ow lines crowd together or sharply 
change direction are likely spots for possible failure. Force-fl ow and mechanics of ma-
terials considerations lead to the following guidelines for designs to minimize elastic 
deformations (increased rigidity):
 
● Use the shortest and most direct force transmission path.
 
● Bodies that are shaped such that the material is uniformly stressed throughout will 
be the most rigid. The use of structures of tetrahedron or triangle shapes results in 
uniform stresses in tension and compression.
 
● The rigidity of a machine element can be increased by increasing its cross section 
or making the element shorter.
 
● To avoid sudden changes in the direction of force-fl ow lines, avoid sudden changes 
in cross section and use large radii at fi llets, grooves, and holes.
 
● When there is a choice in the location of a discontinuity (stress raiser), such as a 
hole, it should be located in a region of low nominal stress.
Mismatched deformation between related components can lead to uneven stress 
distributions and unwanted stress concentrations. This usually occurs in redundant 
structures, such as in weldments. A redundant structure is one in which the removal of 
one of the load paths would still leave the structure in static equilibrium. When redun-
dant load paths are present, the load will divide in proportion to the stiffness of the 
load path, with the stiffer path taking a proportionately greater fraction of the load. 
If problems are to be avoided with uneven load sharing, the design must be such that 
the strength of each member is approximately proportional to its stiffness. Note that 
stiffness mismatch can lead to high stress concentrations if mating parts are poorly 
matched in deformation.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
321
8
Division of Tasks
The question of how rigorously to adhere to the principle of clarity of function 
is ever present in mechanical design. A component should be designed for a single 
function when the function is deemed critical and will be optimized for robustness. 
Assigning several functions to a single component (integral architecture) results in 
savings in weight, space, and cost but may compromise the performance of individual 
functions, and it may unnecessarily complicate the design.
Self-Help
The idea of self-help concerns the improvement of a function by the way in which 
the components interact with each other. A self-reinforcing element is one in which 
the required effect increases with increasing need for the effect. An example is an 
O-ring seal that provides better sealing as the pressure increases. A self-damaging ef-
fect is the opposite. A self-protecting element is designed to survive in the event of an 
overload. One way to do this is to provide an additional force-transmission path that 
takes over at high loads, or a mechanical stop that limits defl ection.
Stability
The stability of a design determines whether the system will recover appropri-
ately from a disturbance to the system. The ability of a ship to right itself in high seas 
is a classic example. Sometimes a design is purposely planned for instability. The tog-
gle device on a light switch, where we want it to be either off or on and not at a neutral 
position, is an example. Issues of stability are among those that should be examined 
with the Failure Modes and Effects Analysis, Secs. 8.6.4 and 14.5.
Additional Design Suggestions
In this section additional design suggestions for good practice are presented.1
 
● Tailor the shape to the stress or load distribution. Loading in bending or torsion 
results in nonuniform distributions of stress. For example, a cantilever beam loaded 
at its free end has maximum stress at its clamped end and none at the point of load 
application. Thus, most of the material in the beam contributes very little to carry-
ing the load. In situations such as this, think about changing the dimensions of the 
cross section to even out the stress distribution, thereby minimizing the material 
used, which will reduce the weight and the cost.
 
● Avoid geometry that is prone to buckling. The critical Euler load at which buckling 
occurs is proportional to the area moment of inertia (I), for a given length. But I 
is increased when the shape of the cross section is confi gured to place most of the 
material as far as possible from the axis of bending. For example, a tube with cross-
sectional area equal to that of a solid of the same area has three times the resistance 
to buckling.
1. J. A. Collins, Mechanical Design of Machine Elements and Machines, John Wiley & Sons, 2003, 
Chap. 6.

322 
engineering design 
8
 
● Use triangular shapes and structures. When components need to be strengthened 
or stiffened, the most effective way is to use structures employing triangle shapes.
In Fig. 8.11, the box frame would collapse without the shear web to transmit the 
force A from the top to the bottom surface. The triangular rib provides the same 
function for the force B.
 
● Don’t ignore strain considerations in design. There is a tendency to give greater 
emphasis to stress considerations than strain in courses on mechanics of materials 
and machine design. Remember that otherwise good designs can become disasters 
by wobbly shafts or fl uttering panels. At interfaces where load is transferred from 
one component to another, the goal should be to confi gure the components so that 
as load is applied and deformation occurs, the deformation of one component will 
be matched by the others in both magnitude and direction. Figure 8.12 shows a 
shaft surrounded by a journal bearing. In Fig. 8.12a, when the shaft bends under 
FIGURE 8.12
Journal bearings with mismatched and matched deformation.
(From J. G. Skakoon, “Detailed Mechanical Design,” ASME Press, New York, 2000, p. 114. Used with permission.)
Load
Load
(a)
(b)
a
b
Flange
Hub
A
B
FIGURE 8.11
The use of a triangulated component to improve stiffness.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
323
8
load it will be supported by the bearing chiefl y at point (a) because the fl ange is 
thick at that end and allows minimal defl ection of the bearing out along the axis 
from this point. However, in the design shown in Fig. 8.12b, the bending of the 
shaft is matched well by the defl ection in the bearing because the bearing hub is 
less stiff at point (b). Therefore, the hub and shaft can defl ect together as load is ap-
plied, and this results in more uniform load distribution.
One of the famous Augustine’s Laws1 is that “the last 10 percent of product per-
formance generates one-third of the cost and two-thirds of the problems.” Although 
developed from designs for military aircraft, the law carries a strong message for ci-
vilian products and systems.
8.5.2 Interfaces and Connections
We have mentioned several times in this section that special attention needs to be paid 
to the interfaces between components. Interfaces are the surfaces forming a common 
boundary between two adjacent objects. Often an interface arises because of the con-
nection between two objects. Interfaces must always support force equilibrium and 
provide for a consistent fl ow of energy, material, and signal. Much design effort is 
devoted to the design of interfaces and connections between components.
Connections between components can be classifi ed into the following types:2
 
● Fixed, nonadjustable connection. Generally one of the objects supports the other. 
These connections are usually fastened with rivets, bolts, screws, adhesives, welds, 
or by some other permanent method.
 
● Adjustable connection. This type must allow for at least one degree of freedom 
that can be locked. This connection may be fi eld-adjustable or intended for factory 
adjustment only. If it is fi eld-adjustable, the function of the adjustment must be clear 
and accessibility must be provided. Clearance for adjustability may add spatial con-
straints. Generally, adjustable connections are secured with bolts or screws.
 
● Separable connection. If the connection must be separated, the functions associ-
ated with it need to be carefully explored.
 
● Locator connection. In many connections the interface determines the location or 
orientation of one of the components relative to another. Care must be taken in 
these connections to account for errors that can accumulate in joints.
 
● Hinged or pivoting connection. Many connections have one or more degrees of 
freedom. The ability of these to transmit energy and information is usually key to 
the function of the device. As with the separable connections, the functionality of 
the joint itself must be carefully considered.
In designing connections at interfaces it is important to understand how geometry 
determines one or more constraints at the interface. A constrained connection is one 
1. N. R. Augustine, Augustine’s Laws, 6th ed., American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Res-
ton, VA, 1997.
2. D. G. Ullman, op. cit., pp. 249–253.

324 
engineering design 
8
that can move only in its intended direction. Every connection at an interface has 
potentially six degrees of freedom, translations along the x, y, and z-axes and rotation 
about these axes. If two components meet in a planar interface, six degrees of free-
dom are reduced to three—translation in the x and y directions (in both the positive 
and negative directions), and rotation about the z-axis (in either direction). If the plate 
is constrained in the positive x direction by a post, and the plate is kept in contact 
with the post by a nesting force, the plate has lost one degree of freedom (Fig. 8.13a). 
However, the plate is still free to translate along y and to rotate about the z-axis. Plac-
ing a second post, as in Fig. 8.13b, adds the additional constraint against rotation, but 
if the post is moved as in Fig. 8.13c the constraint is placed on translation along the 
y-axis, but rotation about the z-axis is allowed. It is only when three constraints (posts) 
are applied, and the nesting force is great enough to resist any applied forces, that 
the plate is perfectly fi xed in a 2-D plane with zero degrees of freedom. The nesting 
force is a force vector that has components that are normal to the contacting surface 
at each contact point. It is usually provided by the weight of a part, locking screws, or 
a spring.
Figure 8.13 illustrates the important point that it takes three points of contact in a 
plane to provide exact constraint. Moreover, the nesting forces for any two constraints 
FIGURE 8.13
Illustration of the geometrical constraint in 2-D.
(From J. G. Skakoon, Detailed Mechanical Design, ASME Press, New York, 2000. Used with permission.)
Nesting
force
Nesting
force
Nesting
force
Nesting
force
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
325
8
must not act along the same line. In three dimensions it takes six constraints to fi x the 
position of an object.1
Suppose in Fig. 8.13a we attempted to contain movement in the x-axis by plac-
ing a post opposite the existing post in the fi gure. The plate is now constrained from 
moving along the x-axis, but it actually is overconstrained. Because parts with perfect 
dimensions can be made only at great cost, the plate will be either too wide and not fi t 
between the posts, or too small and therefore provide a loose fi t. Overconstraint can 
cause a variety of design problems, such as loose parts that cause vibration, tight parts 
that cause surface fracture, inaccuracies in precision movements, and diffi culties in 
part assembly. Usually it is diffi cult to recognize that theses types of problems have 
their root cause in an overconstrained design.2
Conventional mechanical systems consist of many overconstrained designs, such 
as bolted fl ange pipe connections and the bolts on a cylinder head. Multiple fasteners 
are used to distribute the load. These work because the interfaces are fl at surfaces, 
and any fl atness deviations are accommodated by plastic deformation when tighten-
ing down the mating parts. A more extreme example of the role of deformation in 
converting an overconstrained design into one with inconsequential overconstraint is 
the use of press fi t pins in machine structures. These work well because they must be 
inserted with considerable force, causing deformation and a perfect fi t between parts. 
Note however, with brittle materials such as some plastics and all ceramics, plastic 
deformation cannot be used to minimize the effects of an overconstrained design.
The subject of design constraint is surprisingly absent from most machine de-
sign texts. Two excellent references present the geometrical approach 3 and a matrix 
approach.4
8.5.3 Checklist for Confi guration Design
This section, an expansion of Table 8.1, presents a checklist of design issues that 
should be considered during confi guration design.5 Most will be satisfi ed in confi gura-
tion design, while others may not be completed until the parametric design or detail 
design phases.
Identify the likely ways the part might fail in service.
● Excessive plastic deformation. Size the part so that stresses are below the yield 
strength.
1. Of course, in dynamic mechanisms one does not want to reduce the design to zero degrees of freedom. 
Here one or more degrees of freedom must be left unconstrained to allow for the desired motion of the 
design.
2. J. G. Skakoon, The Elements of Mechanical Design, ASME Press, New York, 2008, pp. 8–20.
3. D. L. Blanding, Exact Constraint: Machine Design Using Kinematic Principles, ASME Press, New 
York, 1999.
4. D. E. Whitney, Mechanical Assembly, Chap. 4, Oxford University Press, New York, 2004. (Available 
at knovel.com.)
5. Adapted from J. R. Dixon, Conceptual and Confi guration Design of Parts, ASM Handbook Vol. 20, 
Materials Selection and Design, pp. 33–38, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1997.

326 
engineering design 
8
● Fatigue failure. If there are cyclic loads, size the part so that stresses are below 
the fatigue limit or fatigue strength for the expected number of cycles in service.
● Stress concentrations. Use generous fi llets and radii so that stress raisers are 
kept low. This is especially important where service conditions are susceptible 
to fatigue or brittle failure.
● Buckling. If buckling is possible, confi gure the part geometry to prevent 
buckling.
● Shock or impact loads. Be alert to this possibility, and confi gure the part geom-
etry and select the material to minimize shock loading.
Identify likely ways that part functionality might be compromised.
● Tolerances. Are too many tight tolerances required to make the part work well? 
Have you checked for tolerance stack-up in assemblies?
● Creep. Creep is change of dimensions over time at elevated temperature. Many 
polymers exhibit creep above 100°C. Is creep a possibility with this part, and if 
so, has it been considered in the design?
● Thermal deformation. Check to determine whether thermal expansion or con-
traction could interfere with the functioning of a part or assembly.
Materials and manufacturing issues.
● Is the material selected for the part the best one to prevent the likely failure 
modes in service?
● Is there a history of use for the material in this or similar applications?
● Can the form and features of the part be readily made on available production 
machines?
● Will material made to standard quality specifi cations be adequate for this part?
● Will the chosen material and manufacturing process meet the cost target for 
the part?
Design knowledge base.
● Are there aspects of the part design where the designer or design team is work-
ing without adequate knowledge? Is the team’s knowledge of forces, fl ows, 
temperatures, environment, and materials adequate?
● Have you considered every possible unfortunate, unlikely, or unlucky event 
that could jeopardize the performance of the design? Have you used a formal 
method like FMEA to check for this?
8.5.4 Design Catalogs
Design catalogs are collections of known and proven solutions to design problems. 
They contain a variety of information useful to design, such as physical principles to 
achieve a function, solutions of particular machine design problems, standard compo-
nents, and properties of materials. These are generally different in purpose and scope 
than the catalogs available from suppliers of components and materials. They provide 
quick, more problem-oriented solutions and data to design problems, and because they 
aim to be comprehensive, they are excellent places to fi nd a broad range of design 
suggestions and solutions. Some catalogs, like the sample shown in Fig. 8.14 provide 

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
327
8
specifi c design suggestions for a detailed task and are very useful in embodiment de-
sign. Most available design catalogs have been developed in Germany and have not 
been translated into English.1 Pahl and Beitz list 51 references to the German litera-
ture for design catalogs.2
Example of Structure
Screw
Bolts
Clamp
Collet
Metal ring and rubber
Fixing of
shaft, pipe,
and cable
Screw and nut
Features
Simple, with few parts.
Coarse position alignment by screw.
More parts involved, but it is easier to
detach the shaft for disassembly or
replacement.
Bolts are to be used to fix block-like
objects.
Commonly used method.
Fixing of two coaxial objects by
contraction.
Commonly used for fixing pipes and
electric cables and wires.
Function
Fixing of shaft
Fixing of shaft
and block
FIGURE 8.14
Designs for fi xing and connecting two components.
(From Y. Hatamura, The Practice of Machine Design, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1999. Used with 
permission.)
1. While they are not strictly design catalogs, two useful references are R. O. Parmley, Illustrated 
Sourcebook of Mechanical Components, 3d ed, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2005. Available online 
at knovel.com and N. Sclater and N. P. Chironis, Mechanisms and Mechanical Devices Sourcebook, 
4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2007. (Available online at knovel.com)
2. G. Pahl and W. Beitz, op. cit.

328 
engineering design 
8
8.6
PARAMETRIC DESIGN
In confi guration design the emphasis was on starting with the product architecture 
and then working out the best form for each component. Qualitative reasoning about 
physical principles and manufacturing processes played a major role. Dimensions and 
tolerances were set tentatively, and while analysis was used to “size the parts” it gen-
erally was not highly detailed or sophisticated. Now the design moves into parametric 
design, the latter part of embodiment design.
In parametric design the attributes of components identifi ed in confi guration de-
sign become the design variables for parametric design. A design variable is an at-
tribute of a part whose value is under the control of the designer. This typically is a 
dimension or a tolerance, but it may be a material, heat treatment, or surface fi nish 
applied to the part. This aspect of design is much more analytical than conceptual or 
confi guration design. The objective of parametric design is to set values for the design 
variables that will produce the best possible design considering both performance and 
cost (as manifested by manufacturability).
Making the distinction between confi guration design and parametric design is of 
fairly recent origin. It has grown out of massive efforts by industry to improve the 
quality of their products, chiefl y by improving robustness. Robustness means achiev-
ing excellent performance under the wide range of conditions that will be found in 
service. All products function reasonably well under ideal (laboratory) conditions, but 
robust designs continue to function well when the conditions to which they are ex-
posed are far from ideal.
8.6.1 Systematic Steps in Parametric Design
A systematic parametric design takes place in fi ve steps: 1
Step 1. Formulate the parametric design problem. The designer should have 
a clear understanding of the function or functions that the component to be 
designed must deliver. This information should be traceable back to the PDS 
and the product architecture. Table 8.1 gives suggestions in this respect, but 
the product design specifi cation (PDS) should be the guiding document. From 
this information we select the engineering characteristics that measure the 
predicted performance of the function. These solution evaluation parameters 
(SEPs) are often metrics like cost, weight, effi ciency, safety, and reliability.
Next we identify the design variables. The design variables (DVs) are the 
parameters under the control of the designer that determine the performance of 
the component. Design variables most infl uence the dimensions, tolerances, or 
choice of materials for the component. The design variables should be identifi ed 
with variable name, symbol, units, and upper and lower limits for the variable.
1. J. R. Dixon and C. Poli, op. cit., Chap. 17; R. J. Eggert, Engineering Design, Pearson/Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2005, pp. 183–99.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
329
8
Also, we make sure we understand and record the problem defi nition pa-
rameters (PDPs). These are the operational or environmental conditions under 
which the component or system must operate. Examples are loads, fl ow rate, 
and temperature increase.
Finally, we develop a Plan for Solving the Problem. This will involve some 
kind of analysis for stresses, or vibration, or heat transfer. Engineering analy-
sis encompasses quite a spectrum of methods. These range from the educated 
guess by a very smart and experienced engineer to a very complex fi nite element 
analysis that couples stress analysis, fl uid fl ow, and heat transfer. In conceptual 
design you used elementary physics and chemistry, and a “gut feel” for whether 
the concept would work. In confi guration design you used simple models from 
engineering science courses, but in parametric design you will most likely use 
more detailed models, including fi nite-element analysis on critical components. 
The deciding factors for the level of detail in analysis will be the time, money, 
and available analysis tools, and whether, given these constraints, the expected 
results are likely to have suffi cient credibility and usefulness. Often there are too 
many design variables to be comfortable with using an analytical model, and a 
full-scale proof test is called for. Testing of designs is discussed in Sec. 8.11.5.
Step 2. Generate alternative designs. Different values for the design variables are 
chosen to produce different candidate designs. Remember, the alternative con-
fi gurations were narrowed down to a single selection in confi guration design. 
Now, we are determining the best dimensions or tolerances for the critical-to-
quality aspects of that confi guration. The values of the DVs come from your or 
the company’s experience, or from industry standards or practice.
Step 3. Analyze the alternative designs. Now we predict the performance of each 
of the alternative designs using either analytical or experimental methods. Each 
of the designs is checked to see that it satisfi es every performance constraint 
and expectation. These designs are identifi ed as feasible designs.
Step 4. Evaluate the results of the analyses. All the feasible designs are evalu-
ated to determine which one is best using the solution evaluation parameters. 
Often, a key performance characteristic is chosen as an objective function, 
and optimization methods are used to either maximize or minimize this value. 
 Alternatively, design variables are combined in some reasonable way to give a 
fi gure of merit, and this value is used for deciding on the best design. Note that 
often we must move back and forth between analysis and evaluation, as is seen 
in the example in Sec. 8.6.2.
Step 5. Refi ne/Optimize. If none of the candidate designs are feasible designs, then 
it is necessary to determine a new set of designs. If feasible designs exist, it may 
be possible to improve their rating by changing the values of the design vari-
ables in an organized way so as to maximize or minimize the objective function. 
This involves the important topic of design optimization discussed in Chap. 15.
It is worthwhile to note that the process followed in parametric design is the same 
as followed in the overall product design, but it is done with a narrower scope. This is 
evidence of the recursive nature of the design process.

330 
engineering design 
8
8.6.2 A Parametric Design Example: Helical Coil Compression Spring
Design Problem Formulation
Figure 8.15 shows a brake for an electric hoist that is actuated by a helical coil 
compression spring.1 The brake must provide 850 ft-lb stopping torque. Given the 
geometry of the brake drum and the frictional characteristics of the brake shoes, it 
was determined that the required compressive force applied by the spring should be 
P = 716 ± 34 lb. The design of the spring should allow for 1/8 in. break pad wear, and 
the brake shoe must clear the drum by an additional 1/8 in.
The problem situation describes a service environment that is essentially static 
loading. However, as the brake pad wears it will cause a change in the length of the 
spring. Assuming a maximum wear of 1/8 in. before the pad is replaced, the change 
in spring defl ection will be Δδ = [(9.5 + 8.5)/8.5] × 0.125 = 0.265 in. Also, during 
brake wear the allowable change in spring force is ΔP = (716 + 34) − (716 − 34) = 
68 lb. Therefore, the required spring constant (spring rate) is k = ΔP/Δδ = 68/0.265 = 
256 lb/in. In addition, the brake shoe must clear the drum by 1/8 in. This causes the 
spring to be compressed by an additional 0.265 in. Therefore, the force the spring 
must deliver is P = (716 + 34) + 256 × 0.265 = 820 lb.
The geometrical constraints on the spring are as follows: The ID of the spring 
must fi t readily over the 2-inch-diameter tie rod. To allow for this we will use a 10% 
clearance. There is ample space for the free length of the spring, and the compressed 
length is not critical so long as the coils of the spring do not close on themselves to 
produce “solid stacking.” The OD of the spring could be as large as 5 inches.
Solution Evaluation Parameters
The metrics that determine whether the design is performing its intended function 
are listed in Table 8.2.
Limits are placed on the spring geometry by the spring index C = D/d. Since this is 
a static loading situation with normal temperature and corrosive conditions, a low safety 
factor is called for. For more on safety factors, see Chap. 14. Also, since the load is es-
sentially static, we are not concerned with designs for alternating fatigue stresses, or for 
resonance conditions due to vibrations. The expected failure mode is gross yielding at 
the inside surface of the spring (see the following discussion of stresses).
Design Variables
We defi ne the following design variables:
Geometry of spring: d, wire diameter; D, mean coil diameter. D is measured from 
the center of one coil to the center of the opposite coil along a plane normal to 
the spring axis; see Fig. 8.16a.
C, spring index: C = D/d. The spring index typically ranges from 5 to 12. Below 
C = 5 the spring will be diffi cult to make because of the large diameter wire. 
C above 12 means the wire diameter is small, so the springs tend to buckle in 
service or tangle together when placed in a bin.
1. D. J. Myatt, Machine Design, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1962, pp. 181–185.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
331
8
Outside spring diameter: OD = d (C + 1) = D + d
Inside diameter of spring: ID = d (C − 1) = D − d
N, number of active turns: Active coils are those that are effective in giving “spring 
action.” Depending on the modifi cations in the geometry at the ends of the spring 
made to ensure the spring seats squarely, there can be between 0.5 and 2 inactive 
turns that do not participate in the spring action.
Nt, total number of turns: It equals the sum of the active and inactive turns.
Ls, the solid length of the spring: It equals total turns times wire diameter. This is 
the length (height) when the coils are compressed tight.
Kw, the Wahl factor: It corrects the torsional shear stress in the wire for a transverse 
shear stress induced by the axial stress and the curvature of coils. See Eq. (8.5).
Spring wire material: Because the service conditions are mild we will limit con-
sideration to ordinary hard-drawn steel spring wire. This is the least costly 
spring wire material.
3
Brake
shoe and pad
Spring
9 ½
8 ½
Tie rod
FIGURE 8.15
Drawing of hoist brake, showing brake block (at top) bearing on hoist drum.
TABLE 8.2 
Solution Evaluation Parameters for the Helical Coil Spring
Parameter
Symbol
Units
Lower Limit
Upper Limit
Spring force
P
lb
820
Spring defl ection
δ
in.
0.265
Spring index
C
5
12
Spring inside
diameter
ID
in.
2.20
2.50
Safety factor
FS
1.2

332 
engineering design 
8
Plan for Solving the Problem
The constraints imposed by the design are given in the design problem formula-
tion. We have selected the least expensive material, and we will upgrade if the design 
requires it. We will start by making an initial selection of wire diameter based on C = 7, 
near the mid-range of allowable values of C. We will check that the constraints are not 
violated, particularly that the spring load falls within the required limits. The initial 
design criterion will be that the yield strength of the spring wire is not exceeded at the 
critical failure site. This will constitute a feasible design. Then we will check that the 
spring is not compressed to its solid height or in danger of buckling. The design goal 
will be to minimize the mass (cost) of the spring within all of these design constraints.
Generate Alternative Designs Through Analysis
This analysis follows that in standard machine design texts.1 Figure 8.16 shows 
the stresses developed in a helical spring loaded axially in compression. They consist 
of both a torsional shear stress and a transverse shear stress.
Wire diameter, d
Outside diameter
P
Pitch
Helix angle
Mean coil diameter, D
P
A
1.23
Spring axis
(a)
(b)
(c)
KcT
J/r
FIGURE 8.16
(a) Details of the spring. (b) Torsional stress distribution. (c) Transverse shear stress 
distribution.
1. J. E. Shigley and C. R. Mishke, Mechanical Engineering Design, 6th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York; 
J. A. Collins, Mechanical Design of Machine Elements and Machines, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2003.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
333
8
The primary stress is produced by a torsional moment T = PD/2, which produces
a torsional shear stress on the outer fi ber of the wire.
τ
π
π
=
=
=
Tr
J
d
d
PD
d
(
/
PD 2) 2
32
8
torsion
4
3
(8.1)
In addition, a transverse shear stress is induced in the wire by the axial stress. This 
shearing stress reaches a maximum value at the mid-height of the wire cross section, 
with a magnitude given by1
τ
=
P
A
1.23
transverse
wire
 
(8.2)
Also, because of the curvature of the coils in the spring, a slightly larger shearing 
strain is produced by the torsion at the inner fi ber of the coil than at the outer fi ber. 
This curvature factor, KC
K , is given by
K
C
C
C
C
4
1
C
4
4
C
where
i
C s the spring index
=
 
(8.3)
Therefore, the critical failure site is the mid-height of the wire on the inner coil radius.
r
Because the two shear stresses are in alignment at the inner surface, we can add them
to fi nd the maximum shearing stress.
C
C
PD
d
P
A
4
1
C
4
4
C
8
1.23
whichcanberewrittenas
max
3
τ
π
= ⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠+
 
(8.4)
τ
π
π
max
a
/
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠+
⎛
4
1
−
4
4
−
8
1 2. 3
4
2
π
3
.
⎠+1 2. 3
C
C
PD
d
π
3
P
d
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠=
+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
D
D
d
d
C
C
C
1
−
4C
4C −
0 615
.
⎥
⎤
⎦
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
8
3
PD
d 3
π
 (8.5)
The term in brackets is called the Wahl factor, Kw
K . Thus, the max shear stress can be
written
τ
π
max
a =
×
8
3
PD
d
Kw
(8.6)
Solution Plan
1. Initial Criterion: Provide for the maximum load without yielding.
Finding the design parameters for a spring is an inherently iterative process. We
start by selecting C = 7 and D = 5 in. Therefore, our fi rst trial will be using a
wire of diameter d = D/C = 5/7 = 0.714 in. We use Eq. (8.6) to determine if a 
1. A. M. Wahl, “Mechanical Springs,” McGraw-Hill, New York, 1963.

334 
engineering design 
8
hard-drawn steel spring wire is strong enough to prevent yielding at the failure
site. This steel is covered by ASTM Standard A227. A227 steel is a high-carbon,
plain carbon steel that is sold in the drawn condition. The ultimate tensile strength
is the mechanical property most readily available for spring steel, but to use
Eq. (8.6) we need to know a typical value for the yield strength in shear. Also, be-
r
cause of the process that is used to make wire, the value of the strength decreases
with increasing size of the wire.
Fortunately, machine design texts give data on properties of spring wire as
a function of wire diameter, but most data do not extend much beyond 0.6 in.
diameter. Therefore, as a fi rst compromise, we will try a wire with d = 0.5 in. 
giving C = 10. Also, 0.50 is the upper limit for commercially available hard-drawn
wire. An empirical equation giving the tensile strength, Su versus wire diameter is, 
Su = 140d−
d 0.190, which gives a value of 160 ksi.1 The same reference also tells us that 
for this steel, torsional yield stress is 50% of the ultimate tensile strength, which
is 80,000 psi. But we have decided to use a factor of safety of 1.2, so the allowable 
stress that cannot be exceeded by Eq. (8.6) is 80,000/1.2 = 66,666 psi.
We can now use Eq. (8.6) to solve for the allowable compressive load on the
spring. From Table 8.2 we see that the spring must be able to carry a load of 820
lb without yielding. Table 8.3 shows the results of the fi rst three iterations. Note
that in three iterations we have found a feasible design based on the load-carrying
capacity of the spring, C = 6, D = 3.0, d = 0.5.
2. Second Criterion: Deformation of the spring.
The deformation of the spring from force P is given by:
PD L
JG
PD
d
G
D PN
P
d G
4
(
)
DN
4 32
8
2
2
L
PD
4
3
4
δ
π
=
=
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
=
(8.7)
where L = πDN
π
is the active spring length.
N
G is the elastic modulus in shear, equal to 11.5 × 106 lb/in.2 for hard-drawn 
spring wire. Solving for the number of active coils, N: 
N
N
d G
D k
k
k
P
8
8
D P
where
i
k s the spring constant,
4
3
4
3
δ
δ
d G
h
i
k
h
i
1
4
=
=
=
 
(8.8)
TABLE 8.3
 Load at Yielding Calculated from Equation (8.6)
Iteration
C
D
d
Kw
P
1
10
5.0
0.5
1.145
572
2
7
3.5
0.5
1.213
771
3
6
3.0
0.5
1.253
870
1. J. E. Shigley and C. R. Mischke, op. cit., p. 600. 

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
335
8
Substituting into Eq. (8.8) to fi nd the number of free coils:
)
(
)
)
(
(
=
×
×
=
N
0.5
11.5
10
8 3.0
256
13 coils
4
6
3
 
(8.9)
We decide that the spring requires squared ends to facilitate axial loading. 
This requires two inactive coils, so the total number of coils in the spring is 
Nt
N = N + Ni
N = 13 + 2 = 15
The solid height, when the coils are closed tight on each other, is given by
=
=
15(0.5)
7.5 in.
L
N
=
d
s
t
N
(8.10)
To ensure that the spring will operate in the linear portion of the P −δ curve, we 
add 10% to the solid height. This is often called a “clash allowance” and the length
at this condition is called the load height, LP = 1.10 (7.5) = 8.25 in. Next we deter-
mine the amount the spring defl ects from its original length to reach the maximum 
load of 820 lb. δP
δ = P/
P k/ = 820/256 = 3.20. If we add this length to the load height 
we have the original length of the spring in the unloaded condition. This length is 
the free length of the spring. 
L
L
8.25 3.20
11.45 in.
f
P
P
δ
+
LP
L
=
+
8.25
=
 
(8.11)
3. Third Criterion: Buckling under the compressive load. 
We have provided for square ends to assist with maintaining an axial load. We
could go to the more expensive ground ends if buckling is a problem. Collins 1
presents a plot of critical defl ection ratio, δ/
δ L
/
fL versus slenderness ratio,
f
Lf 
L /D
/ . For 
the spring designed in the third iteration, these values are:
Critical defl ection ratio: 3.20/11.45 = 0.28
Slenderness ratio: 11.45/3.00 = 3.82
For a fi xed-end spring, this is well within the stable region. If the ends were to 
slide for some reason, it would place the spring close to the region of buckling, but 
because the rod used to apply the force through the spring goes through the center 
of the spring, it will also serve as a guide rod to minimize buckling.
Specifi cation of the Design
We have found a feasible design for a helical compression spring with the follow-
ing specifi cation:
Material: ASTM 227 hard-drawn spring wire
Wire diameter, d: 0.500 This is a standard wire size for ASTM 227 spring steel.
Outside diameter, OD: OD = D + d = 3.00 + 0.50 = 3.50 in.
Inside diameter, ID: ID = D – d = 3.00 – 0.50 = 2.50 in.
1. J. A. Collins, op. cit., p. 528.

336 
engineering design 
8
Spring ratio, C: 6
Clearance between ID and tie rod: (2.5 −2.0)/2 = 0.25 in.
Maximum load to produce yielding with SF = 1.2: 870 lb
Number of coils, Nt
N: 15(13 active coils and 2 inactive coils due to squared ends)
Free length, LfL : 11.45 in.
Solid height, Ls: 7.5 in.
Compressed length at maximum load, Lp
L : 8.25
Spring constant(spring rate), k: 256 lb/in.
Critical defl ection ratio: 0.28
Slenderness ratio: 3.82
Refi nement
Although we have found a feasible design, it may not be the best design that could
be achieved for the problem conditions. We have kept the wire diameter constant in
fi nding this design. By changing this and other design variables we might be able to 
create a better design. An obvious criterion for evaluating further designs is the cost of 
a spring. A good surrogate for the cost is the mass of the spring, since within a class 
of springs and spring materials, the cost will be directly proportional to the amount of 
material used in the spring. The mass of a spring is given by
m
d
y
l
d L
d
DN
Cd N
(
)
density (
)
volume
4
4
4
t
t
2
2
L
d
2
3
ρ π
ρ π
π
ρ π
=
)
density (
)
volume
=
t
= ρ
 
(8.12)
Since the fi rst two terms in Eq. (8.12) are common to all spring steels, we can defi ne 
a fi gure of merit, f.o.m., for evaluating alternative spring designs as Cd3 Nt
N . Note that 
in this situation, smaller values of f.o.m. are preferred. Eq. (8.12) suggests that lower 
mass (cost) springs will be found with smaller diameter wire.
Equation (8.6) can be written as
τ
π
=
P
d
CK
8
w
max
2
(8.13)
If we decide that we shall continue to use the least expensive spring wire, ASTM
A227, then Eq. (8.13) becomes 
P
CK
= 26,189d
w
2
 
(8.14)
Since Kw
K does not vary much, Eq. (8.14) indicates that the highest load-carrying
capacity springs will be found with large-diameter wires and low values of spring 
index C. There is a trade-off between d and load capacity, Eq. (8.13), and cost,
d
Eq. (8.12). However, reducing C is benefi cial in both instances. As noted previously, 
there is a manufacturing limitation in drawing wire larger than 0.5 in. without incur-
ring extra costs, and C can only vary from about 4 or 5 to 12 for reasons discussed 
C
earlier.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
337
8
Also, we have a constraint on the inside diameter of the spring. Therefore, we 
reduce the clearance for the 2-inch diameter tie rod from 0.25 to 0.10 in. Clearance = 
(ID − 2.0)/2 = 0.10 in. The minimum ID can now be as small as 2.20 in. Alternatively, 
we could keep the original clearance and reduce the diameter of the tie rod. This 
shows how modest changes in specifi cation can often lead to improved designs.
Table 8.4 shows the design variables and problem defi nition parameters for the 
spring design for the variations of C in the design to this point.
As previously stated, the fi rst feasible design was found in iteration 3. It was the 
only one that could sustain the required 820 lb load without yielding. However, the 
choice of D and d resulted in a rather large spring with 15 coils at 3.5 OD. Because of 
this the relative cost is high. We then reduced d to 0.40 in., and as expected the relative 
cost decreased substantially, and although P was increasing nicely with decreasing C 
we soon ran into the constraint on the ID of the spring. In iteration 7 we selected a stan-
dard wire size between 0.4 and 0.5, to see whether this would be a good compromise.
It is clear that the constraint on the ID limits how far we can raise the load capac-
ity. Iteration 7 is as far as we can go with a wire diameter less than 0.5 in. We are ap-
proaching the target of 820 lb, but we are still not there.
Realizing now the extent of the constraint imposed by the ID criterion, it is now 
worth removing the design restriction on using only hard-drawn spring steel. Let us 
now see whether the increased cost of wire, with higher yield strength, would be off-
set by the ability to reach the required load with a smaller diameter wire, resulting in a 
spring that is less costly than the one given by iteration 3 in Table 8.4.
The class of steel spring wire that is next stronger than hard-drawn wire is oil 
quenched and tempered wire, ASTM Standard A229. A standard machine design 
text1 gives its tensile strength as a function of wire diameter as Su = 147d−0.187 = 
174 ksi. The yield strength in shear is 70% of the ultimate tensile strength, whereas 
the yield strength in shear was 0.5 ultimate tensile strength for the hard-drawn spring 
wire. Thus, τmax = 121.8 ksi, and applying the safety factor of 1.2, the working value 
of τmax is 100 ksi. Using Eq. (8.13) with the new value of τmax = 100/66.7 = 1.5 times 
larger raises the calculated values of P in Table 8.4 by 50%. The cost of A229 is 
TABLE 8.4 
Maximum Applied Load (Limited by Yielding) and Relative Cost
Iteration
C
D
d
ID = D − d
Kw
P
Nt
f.o.m.
1
10
5.00
0.5
4.5
1.145
572 lb
16
20
2
7
3.5
0.5
3.0
1.213
771
15
13.13
3
6
3.00
0.5
2.5
1.235
870
15
11.25
4
4
2.00
0.5
1.5
Not feasible based on ID constraint
5
7
2.80
0.4
2.40
1.213
493
9
4.03
6
6.5
2.60
0.40
2.20
1.231
523
10
4.16
7
6.03
2.637
0.437
2.20
1.251
663
13
6.54
1. J. E. Shigley and C. R. Mischke, op. cit., p. 600.

338 
engineering design 
8
given as 1.3 times the cost of A227 spring wire. This opens up new opportunities
to fi nd design parameters that satisfy the load conditions but have lower costs than
iteration 3.
We fi rst go for a large reduction in wire diameter, to a standard size of 0.312 in.,
iteration 8, Table 8.5. However, even with a 50% increase in wire strength, this size 
wire will support only 401 lbs before yielding. Therefore, we return to wire diameters
greater than 0.40, and select the smallest standard wire diameter in this range, 0.406 in.
(iteration 9). This results in a load-carrying capacity of 815 lb, only 0.6 % less than the 
820 lb requirement. The next standard wire size, 0.437, gives a load-carrying capacity
of 994 lb. This is well above the load-carrying requirement, and even including the
30% increase in cost in the fi gure of merit, the relative cost is less than the previous
feasible design, iteration 3. Table 8.5 records these results.
Design 10 is an attractive alternative to Design 3 because it offers the possibil-
ity of signifi cant reduction in cost. It will need to be explored in greater detail by
fi rst checking on the buckling of the spring and other spring parameters such as solid
height and free length. Then the cost estimate needs to be verifi ed by getting quota-
tions from possible suppliers.
8.6.3 Design for Manufacture (DFM) and Design for Assembly (DFA)
It is imperative that during embodiment design decisions concerning shape, dimen-
sions, and tolerances be closely integrated with manufacturing and assembly deci-
sions. Often this is achieved by having a member of the manufacturing staff as part of 
the design team. Since this is not always possible, all design engineers need to be fa-
miliar with manufacturing and assembly methods. To assist in this, generalized DFM
and DFA guidelines have been developed, and many companies have specifi c guide-
lines in their design manuals. Design software, to aid in this task, has been developed
and is being used more widely. Chapter 13 deals with DFM and DFA in considerable
detail, and should be consulted during your embodiment design activities.
The reason for the strong emphasis on DFM/DFA is the realization by U.S. man-
ufacturers in the 1980s that manufacturing needs to be linked with design to pro-
duce quality and cost-effective designs. Prior to this time there was often a separa-
tion between the design and manufacturing functions in manufacturing companies.
These disparate cultures can be seen by the statement, often made in jest by the design 
engineers, “we fi nished the design and threw it over the wall for the manufacturing
TABLE 8.5 
Maximum Applied Load (Limited by Yielding) and 
Relative Cost (f.o.m.) for Quenched and Tempered Steel Spring Wire
Iteration
C
D
d
ID =
D - d
Kw
P
Nt
f.o.m.
8
8.03
2.512
0.312
2.20
1.183
401 lb
9
6.42
2.606
0.406
2.20
1.236
815
20
8.59
10
6.03
2.637
0.437
2.20
1.251
994
13
6.55

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
339
8
engineers to do with it what they will.” Today, there is recognition that integration of 
these functions is the only way to go.1
8.6.4 Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA)
A failure is any aspect of the design or manufacturing process that renders a compo-
nent, assembly, or system incapable of performing its intended function. FMEA is a 
methodology for determining all possible ways that components can fail and estab-
lishing the effect of failure on the system. FMEA analysis is routinely performed dur-
ing embodiment design. To learn more about FMEA, see Sec. 14.5.
8.6.5 Design for Reliability and Safety
Reliability is a measurement of the ability of a component or system to operate with-
out interruption of service or failure in the service environment. It is expressed as
the probability of the component functioning for a given time without failure. Chap-
ter 14 gives considerable detail on methods for predicting and improving reliability. 
Durability is the amount of use that a person gets out of a product before it deterio-
rates—that is, it is a measure of the product lifetime. While durability, like reliability, 
is measured by failure, it is a much more general concept than reliability, which is a 
technical concept using probabilities and advanced statistical modeling. However, it is 
more likely to be able to estimate product lifetime than reliability.
Safety involves designing products that will not injure people or damage property. 
A safe design is one that instills confi dence in the customer and does not incur product 
liability costs. To develop a safe design one must fi rst identify the potential hazard, 
and then produce a design that keeps the user free from the hazards. Developing safe 
designs often requires trade-offs between safe design and wanted functions. Details of 
design for safety can be found in Sec. 14.8.
8.6.6 Design for Quality and Robustness
Achieving a quality design places great emphasis on understanding the needs and 
wants of the customer, but there is much more to it than that. In the 1980s there
was the realization that the only way to ensure quality products is to design quality
into the product, as opposed to the then-current thinking that quality products were 
produced by careful inspection of the output of the manufacturing process. Other 
contributions to design from the quality movement are the simple total quality 
1. In fact, in Japan, which has been recognized as a leader in manufacturing and product design, it is 
common for all university engineering graduates taking employment with a manufacturing company to 
start their careers on the shop fl oor.

340 
engineering design 
8
management tools, presented in Chap. 4, that can be quickly learned and used to
simplify team understanding of various issues in the design process, and QFD, in
Chap. 6, for aligning the needs of the customer with the design variables. Another 
important tie between quality and design is the use of statistics to set the limits on
tolerances in design and the relationship to the capability of a manufacturing pro-
cess to achieve a specifi ed quality (defect) level. These topics are discussed in detail
in Chap. 15.
A robust design is one whose performance is insensitive to variations in the man-
ufacturing processes by which it has been made or in the environment in which it 
operates. It is a basic tenet of quality that variations of all kinds are the enemy of qual-
ity, and a guiding principle to achieving quality is to reduce variation. The methods
used to achieve robustness are termed robust design. These are basically the work of 
a Japanese engineer, Genichi Taguchi, and his co-workers, and have been adopted 
by manufacturing companies worldwide. They employ a set of statistically designed
experiments by which alternative designs are generated and analyzed for their sensi-
tivity to variation. The parametric design step is the place where design for robustness 
methods are applied to critical-to-quality parameters. Methods for robust design, es-
pecially Taguchi’s methods, are presented in Chap. 15.
8.7
DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES
Dimensions are used on engineering drawings to specify size, location, and orienta-
tion of features of components. Since the objective of product design is to market a
profi table product, the design must be manufactured and to make that product the
design must be described in detail with engineering drawings. Dimensions are as 
important as the geometric information that is conveyed by the drawing. Each draw-
ing must contain the following information:
●The size of each feature
●The relative position between features
●The required precision (tolerance) of sizing and positioning features
●The type of material, and how it should be processed to obtain its expected me-
chanical properties
A tolerance is the acceptable variation in the dimension. Tolerances must be placed
on a dimension or geometric feature of a part to limit the permissible variations in 
size because it is impossible to repeatedly manufacture a part exactly to a given di-
mension. A small (tight) tolerance results in greater ease of interchangeability of parts 
and improved functioning. Tighter tolerances result in less play or chance for vibration
in moving parts. However, smaller (tighter) tolerances are achieved at an increased
cost of manufacture. Larger (looser) tolerances reduce the cost of manufacture and
make it easier to assemble components, but often at the expense of poorer system per-
formance. An important responsibility of the designer is to make an intelligent choice
of tolerances considering the trade-off between cost and performance.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
341
8
8.7.1 Dimensions
The dimensions on an engineering drawing must clearly indicate the size, location, 
and orientation of all features in each part. Standards for dimensioning have been
published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME).1
Figure 8.17a shows that the overall dimensions of the part are given. This infor-
mation is important in deciding how to manufacture the part, since it gives the size 
and weight of the material needed for making the part. Next, the dimensions of the
features are given: the radius of the corner indicated by R and the diameter of the hole
by a circle with forward leaning slash through it, ∅. In Fig. 8.17b the centerline of 
the hole is given by dimensions B and C. A and D are the horizontal position dimen-
sions that locate the beginning of the sloping angle. The orientation dimension of the
sloping portion of the part is given by the angle dimension measured from the hori-
zontal reference line extending out from the top of the part.
Section views, drawings made as if a portion of the part were cut away, are useful 
to display features that are hidden inside the part. A section view in Fig. 8.18 presents 
a clear understanding of the designer’s intent so that an unequivocal message is sent to 
the machine operator who will make the part. Section views are also useful in speci-
fying position dimensions.
Figure 8.19 illustrates the importance of removing redundant and unnecessary 
dimensions from chained dimensions on a drawing. Since the overall dimensions are 
given, it is not necessary to give the last position dimension. With all four position
1. ASME Standard Y14.5 2009; P. J. Drake Jr., Dimensioning and Tolerancing Handbook, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1999. (Available online at knovel.com.)
FIGURE 8.17
(a) Proper way to give dimensions for size and features; (b) proper way to give dimensions for 
location and orientation of features.
Depth
Width
R Radius
Height
B
C
A
D
Angle
Ø Diameter
(a)
(b)

342 
engineering design 
8
dimensions given, the part is overconstrained because of overlap of tolerances.
Fig. 8.19 also illustrates the good practice of laying out the overall part dimensions
from a common datum reference, in this case datum planes in the x and y directions
that intersect at the lower left corner of the part.
8.7.2 Tolerances
A tolerance is the permissible variation from the specifi ed dimension. The designer 
must decide how much variation is allowable from the basic dimension of the compo-
nent to accomplish the desired function. The design objective is to make the tolerance
no tighter than necessary, since smaller tolerances increase manufacturing cost and
make assembly more diffi cult.
50
20
18
30
18
20
change to
Leave this dimension unspecified to 
emphasize the importance of controlling
the other four horizontal dimensions.
86
Ø12 Drill, 2 holes
50
20
18
30
18
86
Ø12 Drill, 2 holes
FIGURE 8.19
Elimination of redundant dimension.
(Courtesy of Professor Guangming Zhang, University of Maryland.)
FIGURE 8.18
Use of section view to clarify dimensioning of internal features. 
(Courtesy of Professor Guangming Zhang, University of Maryland.)
45
5
15
18
35
Ø18
Ø10

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
343
8
The tolerance on a part is the difference between the upper and lower allowable 
limits of a basic size dimension. Note that so long as the dimension falls within the 
tolerance limits the part is acceptable and “in spec.” The basic size is the theoretical 
dimension, often a calculated size, for a component. As a general rule, the basic size 
of a hole is its minimum diameter, while the basic size for its mating shaft is the maxi-
mum diameter. Basic size is not necessarily the same as nominal size. For example, 
a ½ in. bolt has a nominal diameter of ½ inch, but its basic size may be different, for 
example, 0.492 in. The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) gives tables of 
“preferred” basic sizes which can be found in all machine component design books 
and handbooks. The object of a preferred series of basic sizes is to make possible the
use of standard components and tools.1
Tolerances may be expressed in several ways.
●Bilateral tolerance. The variation occurs in both directions from the basic
 dimension. That is, the upper limit exceeds the basic value and the lower limit falls 
below it.
❍ Balanced bilateral tolerance: The variation is equally distributed around the ba-
sic dimension: 2.500 ± 0.005. This is the most common way of specifying toler-
ances. Alternatively, the limits of allowable variation may be given: 2 505
2 495
.
.
❍ Unbalanced bilateral tolerance: The variation is not equal around the basic di-
mension: 2 500 0 030
0 070
.
.
.
−
+
●Unilateral tolerance: The basic dimension is taken as one of the limits, and varia-
tion is in only one direction: 2 500 0 010
0 000
.
.
.
−
+
Each manufacturing process has an inherent ability to maintain a certain range of 
tolerances, and to produce a certain surface roughness (fi nish). To achieve tolerances 
outside of the normal range requires special processing that typically results in an 
exponential increase in the manufacturing cost. For further details refer to Sec. 13.4.5. 
Thus, the establishment of the needed tolerances in embodiment design has an impor-
tant infl uence on the choice of manufacturing processes and the cost. Fortunately, not 
all dimensions of a part require tight tolerances. Typically those related to critical-to-
quality functions require tight tolerances. The tolerances for the noncritical dimen-
sions should be set at values typical for the process used to make the part.
An engineering drawing must indicate the required tolerance for all dimensions. 
Usually, only the critical dimensions have labeled tolerances. The other dimensions
gain their tolerance from a general (default) tolerance statement like “All dimensions
have a tolerance of ±0.010 unless otherwise specifi ed.” Often this information is given 
in the title block of the drawing.
1. It would be ridiculous if a machine shop had to keep in its tool room every decimal size drill in incre-
ments of 0.001 in. Using standard sizes keeps this to a manageable number.

344 
engineering design 
8
A second use for tolerance information is to set the upper and lower limits for 
quality control of the manufacturing process. Figure 8.20 shows a quality control 
chart for the machining of shafts on a CNC lathe. Every hour the diameter of four 
t
samples made that hour is measured and their average is plotted on the chart. The
upper and lower control limits are based on the tolerances adjusted by a statistically
relevant multiplier. When a sample mean exceeds one of the control limits it tells the 
operator that something is out of control with the process, perhaps a worn cutting
tool, and that an adjustment must be made. This procedure helps to produce a product 
having minimum variability, but it is never a substitute for designing quality into the
product with robust design, see Chap. 15. For more information on quality control, see
Sec. 15.3.
There are generally two classes of issues in parametric design associated with
tolerances on parts when they must be assembled together. The fi rst deals with fi t,
how closely the tolerances should be held when two components fi t together in an
assembly. The second is tolerance stackup, the situation where several parts must be 
assembled together and interference occurs because the tolerances of the individual
parts overlap.
Fit
A typical mechanical assembly where fi t is of concern is a shaft running in a
bearing or a piston sliding in a cylinder. The fi t between the shaft and the bear-
ing, as expressed by the clearance, is important to the functioning of the machine. 
Figure 8.21 illustrates the situation.
The clearance for the fi t is the distance between the shaft and the inner race of 
the bearing. Because of the tolerances on the components, this will have an upper 
limit (when the bearing ID is at a maximum and the shaft OD is at a minimum) and a
lower limit (when the bearing ID is at a minimum and the shaft OD is at a maximum
limit). From Fig. 8.21:
Maximumclearance
A
B
30.40
29.70
0.70mm
Minimumclearance
A
B
30.00
29.80
0.20mm
max
min
min
max
=A
=
−
30 40
=
=A
=
−
30 00
=
FIGURE 8.20
Quality control chart based on sampling the diameter of shafts.
1
2
3
Upper control limit: 13
Lower control limit: 7
Mean: 10
16.0
13.0
10.0
7.0
4.0
SAMPLES
AVERAGE
4
5
6
7
Out of control
8
9
10

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
345
8
Since tolerance is the permissible difference between maximum and minimum limits 
of size, the tolerance of the shaft/bearing assembly is 0.70 – 0.20 = 0.50 mm.
There are three zones of tolerance when dealing with fi ts.
●Clearance fi ts. As shown above, both the maximum and minimum clearances are
positive. These fi ts always provide a positive clearance and allow for free rotation or 
sliding. ANSI has established nine classes of clearance fi ts, ranging from close slid-
ing fi ts that assemble without perceptible play (RC 1) to loose running fi ts (RC 9).
●Interference fi ts. In this category of fi ts, the shaft diameter is always larger than 
the hole diameter, so that both the maximum and minimum clearance are negative. 
Such fi ts can be assembled by heating the outer body and/or cooling the shaft, or 
by press fi tting. They provide a very rigid assembly. There are fi ve ANSI classes of 
interference fi ts, ranging from FN 1, light drive fi ts, to FN 5, heavy shrink fi ts.
●Transition fi ts. In this category of fi ts the maximum clearance is positive and the
minimum clearance is negative. Transition fi ts provide accurate location with either 
slight clearance or slight interference. ANSI class LC, LT, and LN fi ts apply in this 
case.
Another way of stating clearance fi t is to give the allowance. Allowance is the tightest 
possible fi t between two mating parts, that is, the minimum clearance or the maxi-
mum interference.
Stackup
Tolerance stackup occurs when two or more parts must be assembled in contact.
Stackup occurs from the cumulative effects of multiple tolerances. This is called a 
stackup because as the dimensions and their tolerances are added together they “stack 
up” to add to the possible total variation. A stackup analysis typically is used to prop-
erly tolerance a dimension that has not been given a tolerance or to fi nd the limits on a 
clearance (or interference) gap. Such an analysis allows us to determine the maximum 
possible variation between two features on a single component or between compo-
nents in an assembly.
Refer to the drawing on the left side of Fig. 8.19. Assume that the tolerance on 
each dimension giving the location of the holes along the x-axis is ±0.01 mm. Then
the dimensions from left to right would be A = 18 ± 0.01, B = 30 ± 0.01, C = 18 ± 0.01, 
Part A
Ø300.40
0.00
Ø30 0.20
0.30
Part B
Part A and Part B before assembly
FIGURE 8.21
The bearing (Part A) and the shaft (Part B) before assembly.

346 
engineering design 
8
D = 20 ± 0.01. If all dimensions are at the top of the tolerance limit, then the overall
length is given by:
L
18.01 30.01 18.01 20.01
86.04mm
max =
+
18.01
+
+
18.01
=
If all dimensions are at the bottom of the tolerance limit:
L
17.99
29.99 17.99 19.99
85.96mm
min =
+
17.99
+
+
17.99
=
The tolerance on the overall length is TL
T = Lmax – Lmin = 86.04 – 85.96 = 0.08 and 
L = 86 ± 0.04 mm. We see that the tolerances “stack up”, that is, they add together.
The tolerance on the chain (assembly) of dimensions is
T
T
T
T
T
T
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
i
aT ssembly
A
B
T
C
D
T
∑
+
TA
T
+
TC
T
(8.15)
We can now see why it is good practice to not give all of the dimensions in a 
chain; see the right side of Fig. 8.19. Suppose we set the tolerance on the length di-
mension, L = 86 ± 0.01. We keep L fi xed at its tolerance limits and fi nd the limits on
L
the dimension at the right end, D, while keeping the other three dimensions at their 
limits.
D
D
T
D
85.99 18.01 30.01 18.01
85.99
66.03
19.96
86.01 17.99
29.99 17.99
86.01 65.97
20.04
20.04 19.96
0.08
and
20.00
0.04
D
T
min
max
=
−
85 99
−
−
30 01
=
−
=
85 99
66 03
=
−
86 01
−
−
29 99
=
−
86 01
=
=
D
±
The tolerance o n D is four times the tolerance on the other hole locations.
Note that if we laid out the centerlines of the three holes, starting with a datum 
plane at the left and moving successively to the right, the tolerance stackup would not 
have been an issue.
if wedefine 3 = A
B
C , the
3
L
T
3 = A + B + C , then
L
T
= 0 02
0
+
02
.
02
0
+
+
−
=
−
=
0 02
0
=
06
0 08
0
−
06
0 02
.
02
0
.
08
0
and
3
T
T
=
T
D
L
T
T
T
T
L
T
But if we laid out the fi rst hole at the left, and then moved to the hole on the far right,
we would have encountered stack up problems that would have required a change in
the tolerance to achieve the design intent. Therefore, using a dimensioning scheme of 
referring all dimensions to a datum reference eliminates tolerance stackup and pre-
serves design intent.
Worst-Case Tolerance Design
In the worst-case tolerance design scenario the assumption is made that the di-
mension of each component is at either its maximum or minimum limit of the toler-
ance. This is a very conservative assumption, for in reality when a manufacturing
process is running in control many more of the components will be closer to the basic
dimension than will be close to the limits of the tolerance. Figure 8.22 shows one way
of systematically determining the tolerance stackup.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
347
8
E X A M P L E 8 .1
Figure 8.22 shows an assembly consisting of a pin in a wall with a washer under its head 
and a sleeve and snap ring, going from right to left. Dimensions and tolerances are given
on the sketch. Use worst-case tolerance design to fi nd the mean gap A-B between the wall 
and the snap ring and the limits on the gap.
The steps for solving problems of this type are: 1
1. Select the gap or dimension whose variation needs to be determined.
2. Label one end of the gap A and the other B.
3. Select a dimension that spans the gap to be analyzed. Establish the positive 
direction (usually to the right) and label it on the drawing.
4. Follow the chain of dimensions from point A to point B: see dashed line on 
Fig. 8.22. You should be able to follow a continuous path. For this example 
it is: wall to head of pin interface; right surface of washer to left surface of 
washer; right end of sleeve to left end of sleeve; right end of snap ring to 
point B; point B to point A.
5. Convert all dimensions and tolerances to equivalent balanced bilateral format, 
if they are not in this format already.
6. Set up Table 8.6, being careful to include all dimensions and their tolerances 
in the chain and paying attention to their direction.
Note that to use this method of tolerance analysis requires that the tolerance must 
be in balanced bilateral format. To make this conversion from unequal bilateral 
or unilateral, fi rst fi nd the limits of the tolerance range. For example, 8.500+0.030
 
 
−0 0.010 =
8.530 − 8.490 = 0.040. Divide this tolerance range by 2 and add it to the lower limit to
get the new basic dimension 8.490 + 0.020 = 8.510 ± 0.020.
1. B. R. Fischer, Mechanical Tolerance Stackup and Analysis, Chap. 7, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2004.
FIGURE 8.22
Finding tolerance stackup using a 2-D dimension chain.
0.250  0.001”
0.125  0.001”
1.000  0.002”
1.385  0.005”
Positive direction
A
B

348 
engineering design 
8
Statistical Tolerance Design
An important method used to determine assembly tolerances is based on statisti-
cal interchangeability. This approach assumes that a manufacturing process will more 
likely produce parts for which each dimension is a normal distribution with a mean 
μ and standard deviation σ. Thus, a very large percentage of the available parts are 
interchangeable. As a result, this approach results in larger allowable tolerances at the 
expense of having a small percentage of mating parts that cannot be assembled during 
the fi rst attempt. The method is based on the following additional assumptions:
 
● The manufacturing process for making the components is in control, with no parts 
going outside of the statistical control limits. In effect, the basic manufacturing di-
mension is the same as the design basic dimension. This also requires that the cen-
ter of the tolerance band coincides with the mean of the basic dimension produced 
by the production machine. For more on process capability, see Chap. 15.
 
● The dimensions of the components produced by the manufacturing process follow 
a normal or Gaussian frequency distribution.
 
● The components are randomly selected for the assembly process.
 
● The product manufacturing system must be able to accept that a small percentage 
of parts produced will not be able to be easily assembled into the product. This may 
require selective assembly, reworking, or scrapping these components.
The process capability index, Cp, is commonly used to express the relationship 
between the tolerance range specifi ed for the component and the variability of the 
process that will make it. Variability is given by the standard deviation, σ, of a criti-
cal dimension that is produced by the process. It is also considered that the natural 
tolerance limits represent plus or minus three standard deviations from the mean 
of the distribution of the dimension. For a normal distribution, when design toler-
ance limits are set at the natural tolerance limits, 99.74% of all dimensions would 
fall within tolerance and 0.26% would be outside the limits; see Sec. 15.5 for more 
details. Thus,
TABLE 8.6 
Determination of Basic Gap Dimension and Its Tolerance
Direction
Tolerance
Positive +
Negative −
Wall to washer
1.385 in.
±0.005
Across washer
0.125
±0.001
Across sleeve
1.000
±0.002
Across snap ring
0.250
±0.001
Totals
1.385
1.375
±0.009
Positive total
1.385
Gap tolerance
±0.009
Negative total
1.375
Basic gap
0.010
Maximum gap = 0.010 + 0.009 = 0.019
Minimum gap = 0.010 − 0.009 = 0.001

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
349
8
σ
σ
σ
=
=
=
C
USL
L
−
S
SL
L
p
desired process spread
actual process spread
tolerance
3
3
σ +
6
(8.16)
where USL and 
L
LSL are the upper and lower specifi cation limits, respectively. A capa-
L
ble manufacturing process has a Cp
C at least equal to unity (1). Equation (8.16) provides 
a way to estimate what the tolerance should be based on the standard deviation of the 
parts coming off the production machine.
The relationship between the standard deviation of a dimension in an assembly of 
components and the standard deviation of the dimensions in separate components is 
∑
σ
σ
∑
=
assembly
i
i
n
2
2
∑σ
∑
1
(8.17)
where n is the number of components in the assembly and σiσ  is the standard
deviation of each component. From Eq. (8.16), when Cp
C = 1, the tolerance is given by
T = 6σ and the tolerance on an assembly is
σ
T
T
aT ssembly
iT
i
n
2
1∑
=
(8.18)
Because the tolerance of an assembly varies as the square root of the sum of the
squares of the tolerance of the individual components, the statistical analysis of toler-
ances is often referred to as the root sum of the squares, RSS, method.
E X A M P L E 8 . 2
We can now apply these ideas to the tolerance design problem given in Fig. 8.22. We 
proceed in exactly the same way as in Example 8.1, determining a positive direction, and 
writing down the chain of dimensions and their tolerances. The only difference is that in 
the solution table, Table 8.7, we must add a column for the square of the tolerances.
TABLE 8.7
Determination of Gap and Its Tolerance Using Statistical Method
Direction
Tolerance
(Tolerance)2
Positive +
Negative -
Wall to washer
1.385 in.
±0.005
25 × 10−6
Across washer
0.125
±0.001
1 × 10−6
Across sleeve
1.000
±0.002
4 × 10−6
Across snap ring
0.250
±0.001
1 × 10−6
Totals
1.385 in.
1.375 in.
±0.009 in.
31 × 10−6
Positive total
1.385
Tassembly =
×
=
−
31 10
5 5
1
× 0
0
= ± 006
6
3
5 57
1
× 0−
.
57
1
× 0
0
±
in.
Negative total
1.375
Basic gap
0.010
Maximum gap = 0.010 + 0.006 = 0.016
Minimum gap = 0.010−0.006 = 0.004

350 
engineering design 
8
We see that by using statistical tolerance design the tolerance on the clearance gap
has been signifi cantly reduced compared with that found using worst-case tolerance
design, 0.012, compared with 0.018 for the worst-case design. The risk one runs by
using this scenario is the possibility that 0.24% of the parts would present a problem in
assembly.
Suppose that the designer decides that the clearance gap is not all that critical to qual-
ity, but she would rather use statistical tolerance design to relieve some of the  tolerance
requirements for the components in the assembly while maintaining the gap tolerance at 
± 0.009 in. So long as the gap width does not go negative, it will not affect the function. 
The question is, which part in the assembly should be considered for an increase in toler-
ance? A quick took at the tolerances shows that the tolerance on the length of the pin is
the largest, but to be sure to determine which tolerance makes the greatest contribution to
the clearance gap tolerance she needs to make a sensitivity analysis. Table 8.8 shows the 
method and results.
The standard deviation of a part was determined by dividing the tolerance range
by 6, in agreement with Eq. (8.16). The percent variation attributed to each part was found
by dividing the total square of the standard deviation into that for each part. The result 
shows overwhelmingly that the tolerance on the length of the pin contributes in the great-
est degree to the tolerance in the gap.
Now the designer decides to fi nd out how much the tolerance on the pin length could
be loosened without putting the clearance into interference. As a safety factor, she decides
to keep the clearance at 0.009 in., as found in Example 8.1. Then setting Tassembly
T
= 0.009 
in Table 8.7, and solving for the new tolerance on the pin, it turns out that the tolerance
can be increased from ± 0.005 to ± 0.008. This is just enough increase in tolerance to 
allow a cheaper cold heading process to substitute for the screw machine manufacturing
process that was necessary to achieve the original tolerance on the pin length. This is an
example of a typical trade-off that is common in engineering design, substituting one
model of reality for another (worst-case versus an allowable small level of defects) by de-
ciding how much additional analysis is justifi ed to achieve a modest cost savings.
There is one last step in the statistical tolerance design. Having established the
mean and tolerance on the clearance gap, we need to determine how many parts would
be expected to produce defects in manufacturing. Given a mean gap of g
0.010 in
=
and a tolerance of ± 0.009, the standard deviation is obtained from Eq. (8.16) as
C
1
, and
 = 0.003 in.
p
0 019 0 001
6
σ
=1
σ
 Since the dimensions are random variables that 
follow a normal frequency distribution, we can use the table for the area under the
TABLE 8.8 
Determination of Variation Contribution of Each Part in Assembly
Part
T
Tolerance 
range
r
r2
% Contribution 
To Variation
Pin
±0.005
0.010
1.666 × 10−6
2.777 × 10−6
80.6
Washer
±0.001
0.002
0.333 × 10−6
0.111 × 10−6
3.2
Sleeve
±0.002
0.004
0.667 × 10−6
0.445 × 10−6
13.0
Snap ring
±0.001
0.002
0.333 × 10−6
0.111 × 10−6
3.2
3.444 × 10−6

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
351
8
normal distribution when problem variables are transformed into the standard normal 
distribution, z, according to
z
x
μ
σ
=
−
(8.19)
where μ is the mean of the clearance, in this case 
μ
g
0.010 in.
=
, σ = 0.003, and x is
x
any cutoff point along the axis of z. There are two cutoff points that constitute failure
of the design. The fi rst is if x = 0, the clearance disappears. As Fig. 8.23 shows, this
represents a point at z = −3.33.
x
g
z
When
0,
0
0.010
0.003
3.33.
−=
=
z
0
−
= −
The probability of z
3.33
≤−
is very 
small. From tables of the area under the z-distribution (see Appendix B), we see the 
probability is 0.00043 or 0.043%. 
When x
g
0.019,
=
g
the value of z is z
0.019
0.010
0.003
3.0.
=
−
=
 Once again, the
probability of exceeding 0.0019 is small, 0.14%. We conclude that the probability of 
encountering these types of design failures with the mean and tolerance of the clear-
ance gap as shown above is indeed very low.
Advanced Tolerance Analysis
The example given in Fig. 8.22 is a relatively simple problem involving only 
variation along one axis and only four dimensions in the stackup. If you ever looked 
in the gear case of your car, you can appreciate that many mechanical systems are 
much more complicated. When many dimensions are involved, and the mechanism 
is defi nitely three-dimensional, it is helpful to have a better way of keeping track 
of what you are doing. To accomplish this, a system of tolerance charts has been
1. D. H. Nelson and G. Schneider, Jr., Applied Manufacturing Process Planning, Chap. 7, Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2001; B. R. Fischer, op. cit., Chap. 14.
99.74%
95%
68%
  3
  2
z  3
z  2
z  1
z  0
z  1
z  2
z  3
  2
  3
  
  

FIGURE 8.23
Normal distribution in terms of z.

352 
engineering design 
8
developed.1 They basically add and subtract dimensions and tolerances, as was done in 
Example 8.1, but with extra embellishments. Tolerance charting can be expedited with
spreadsheet calculations, but for complicated issues computer programs are advisable.
For tolerance analysis on three-dimensional problems, specialized computer pro-
grams are almost mandatory. Some of these are standalone software applications, but 
most major CAD systems have packages to perform tolerance analysis. They also typ-
ically support the Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing system that is discussed
in the next section.
8.7.3 Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing
The information presented thus far in this section helps you assign dimensions that 
defi ne the size and location of features. However, it does not consider the variation 
in the form of the component, which involves such geometric aspects as fl atness or 
straightness. For example, the diameter of the pin in Fig. 8.22 could be completely
in tolerance on its diameter, but not fi t inside the sleeve because the diameter was 
slightly bowed so it was outside the tolerance band for straightness. In engineering
practice this and many other tolerance issues are described and specifi ed by a sys-
tem of Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing (GD&T) based on ASME standard
Y14.5–2009. GD&T is a universal design language to precisely convey design intent.
It avoids ambiguous situations that arise when only size tolerances are used.
Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing introduces two important pieces of in-
formation to an engineering drawing: (1) it clearly defi nes the datum surfaces from
which dimensions are measured, and (2) it specifi es a tolerance zone that must contain
all points of a geometric feature.
Datums
Datums are theoretically perfect points, lines, and planes that establish the origin
from which the location of geometric features of a part is determined. In Fig. 8.19 the
datums were implied as the x-z and y-z planes, where z is the direction normal to the 
plane of the page. However, most engineering drawings are not as simple as Fig. 8.19,
so a system of clearly identifying the datum surfaces is necessary. Datums serve the
purpose of explicitly telling the machinist or inspector the point from which to take
measurements. In assigning datums the designer should consider how the part will be
manufactured and inspected. For example, the datum surface should be one that can 
be defi ned by the machine table or vise used in making the part, or the precision sur-
face plate used to inspect the part.
A part has six degrees of freedom in space. It may be moved up or down, left 
or right, and forward or backward. Depending on the complexity of the part shape
there may be up to three datums. The primary datum, A, is usually a fl at surface that 
predominates in the attachment of the part with other parts in the assembly. One of 
the other datums, B or C, must be perpendicular to the primary datum. The datum
surfaces are shown on the engineering drawing by datum feature identifi ers in which 
a triangle identifi es the surface and a boxed letter identifi es the order of the datums,
Fig. 8.24.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
353
8
Geometric Tolerances
Geometric tolerances can be defi ned for the following characteristics of geometric 
features:
●Form—fl atness, straightness, circularity, cylindricity
●Profi le—line or surface
●Orientation—parallelism, angularity
●Location—position, concentricity
●Runout—circular runout or total runout
Figure 8.25 shows the symbol for each geometric characteristic and how a geometric
tolerance is shown on the engineering drawing. The sketches at the right side of the 
fi gure show how the tolerance zones are defi ned.
For example, if the tolerance for fl atness is given as 0.005 in. it means that the 
surface being controlled by this tolerance must lie within a tolerance zone consisting 
of two parallel planes that are 0.005 inches apart. In addition to the geometric toler-
ance, the part must also conform to its size tolerance.
Circularity refers to degree of roundness, where the tolerance zone is represented
by the annulus between two concentric circles. In the example shown in Fig. 8.25
the fi rst circle is 0.002 outside of the basic dimension, and the second circle is 0.002 
inside of the basic circle. Cylindricity is the three-dimensional version of circularity.
The tolerance zone lies between two coaxial cylinders in which the radial distance 
between them is equal to the tolerance. Cylindricity is a composite form tolerance 
that simultaneously controls circularity, straightness, and taper of a cylinder. Another 
combined geometric tolerance is circular runout. To measure runout, a cylindrical 
part is rotated about its axis and the “wobble” is measured to see if it exceeds the tol-
erance. This measure controls both circularity and concentricity (coaxiality).
Material Condition Modifi ers
Another aspect of GD&T is the ability to modify the size of the tolerance zone of 
a feature depending on the size of the feature. There are three possible material condi-
tion modifi ers.
●Maximum material condition (MMC) is the condition in which an external feature
like a shaft is at its largest size allowable by the size tolerance. MMC also means
that an internal feature like a hole is at its smallest allowable size. The symbol for 
MMC is an M inside a circle.
FIGURE 8.24
Datum feature identifi ers.
A
B
C

354 
engineering design 
8
Geometric 
Symbol 
Flatness 
Straightness 
(of an axis) 
Straightness 
(surface element) 
Circularity 
(roundness) 
Cylindricity
Perpendicularity 
Angularity 
Parallelism 
-B- 
.003 
30 
.004 
A 
-C- 
-C- 
.002 
.001 
.001 
.002 
.500  .003 
.500  .003 
.500  .002 
.500  .003 
-A - 
B
-B- 
As Shown on 
Drawing 
Depicted Tolerance 
Conditions 
.001 
.005 
Two parallel
planes
.005 apart
.001 diameter same
length as shaft
Two parallel
lines .002 apart
Two concentric
circles
.004 apart
Two concentric
cylinders
.001 apart
.002 
Two parallel
planes
.004 apart
.003 - wide
tolerance
zone
90 
30

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
355
8
FIGURE 8.25
Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing symbols and interpretation.
(From D. H. Nelson and G. Schneider, Jr., Applied Manufacturing Process Planning, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper 
Saddle River, NJ, 2001, p. 95. Used with permission.)
Geometric
Symbol
Profile of
a line
Profile of
a surface
Profile
unilateral zone
Runout (circular)
Runout (total)
Concentricity
Position
Perfect
position
.500 	 .002
.500 	 .002
.400 	 .002
.250 	 .003
.001
.001
.001
A
.001
.001
Two parallel
lines
C
.002
.002 cylinder
.002 zone
at MMC
A
.002
.750
.375
-C-
M C
-B-
-A-
A B
-A-
-C-
-A-
.002
.002 - wide zone
on one side
A
-A-
Basic dimensions
are required
to define
the true
profile
.002
Basic dimensions
are required
to define the
true profile
.001 - wide zone
around true
profile
.002 - wide around
true profile
.001
As Shown on
Drawing
Depicted Tolerance
Conditions
-A-
-C-
-A-

356 
engineering design 
8
 
● Least material condition (LMC) is the opposite of MMC, that is, a shaft that is its 
smallest allowed by the size tolerance or a hole at its largest allowable size. The 
symbol for LMC is an L inside a circle.
 
● Regardless of feature size (RFS) means that the tolerance zone is the same no mat-
ter what the size of the feature. When there is no modifying symbol M or L, this 
material condition prevails.
The increase in the tolerance zone with size of the feature is usually called a bonus 
tolerance because it allows extra fl exibility in manufacturing. The designer needs to 
recognize that in some situations this is a true bonus, but in others it results in greater 
variability.1
Feature Control Frame
A geometric tolerance is specifi ed on an engineering drawing with the use of a 
feature control frame, Fig. 8.26. The fi gure shows a solid cylinder. The dimension 
for the length is 1.50 ± 0.02 inches. The rectangular box at the upper left is a control 
frame. The fi rst box of the control frame gives the required feature control symbol, 
two parallel lines indicating that the left end of the cylinder must be parallel to the 
right end, the datum surface. The second box in the rectangle indicates that the toler-
ance zone is .01 inches. Referring to Fig. 8.25 we see that the left surface must lie 
between two parallel planes spaced at 0.01 inches and parallel to the datum surface A.
A second control frame applies to the diameter of the cylinder. The size tolerance 
is that the diameter must be between 0.735 and 0.755 inches. The feature control frame 
tells us that the cylinder must not deviate from a perfect circle by more than 0.010 inches.
E X A M P L E 8 . 3
The left hole in Fig. 8.24 has a size tolerance of 2.000 ± 0.040. In addition, the hole is toler-
anced with a feature control frame. The size tolerance shows that the hole size can be as 
small as ∅1.960 (the maximum material condition) and as large as 2.040 (the minimum 
material condition). The geometric tolerance, as shown by the feature control frame, speci-
fi es that the hole must be positioned with a cylindrical tolerance zone of 0.012 in. diameter 
1. B. R. Fischer, Mechanical Tolerance Stackup and Analysis, Chap. 12, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2004. 
G. Henzold, Geometrical Dimensioning for Design, Manufacturing, and Inspection, 2d ed., Butterworth-
Heinemann, Boston, 2006.
FIGURE 8.26
A simple example of the use of a feature control frame.
1.50  0.02
0.010
0.755
0.735
0.01 A
A

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
357
8
(see last row in Fig. 8.25). The circle M symbol also specifi es that that this tolerance holds 
when the hole is produced at its maximum material condition (MMC).
 .012
A
M
B
If the hole size falls below MMC, additional tolerance on hole location, called bonus 
tolerance, is allowed. If the hole is actually made with a diameter of 2.018, then the total 
tolerance on the hole position would be: 
 
Actual hole size 
2.018
 
Minus maximum material condition 
−1.960
 
Bonus tolerance 
0.058
 
Geometric tolerance on the feature (hole) 
+0.012
 
Total tolerance 
0.070
Note that the use of the maximum material modifi er to the geometric tolerance allows the 
designer to take advantage of all available tolerance.
There are many other geometrical features that can be specifi ed precisely with 
GD&T. Understanding GD&T is detailed but straightforward. Space considerations 
do not begin to allow a thorough discussion. Any engineer involved in detailed design 
or manufacturing will have to master this information. A quick search of the library 
or the World Wide Web will yield many training courses and self-study manuals on 
GD&T.1
8.7.4 Guidelines for Tolerance Design
The following guidelines summarize much of this section.
 
● Focus on the critical-to-quality dimensions that most affect fi t and function. This is 
where you should spend most of your efforts on tolerance stackup analysis.
 
● For the noncritical dimensions, use a commercial tolerance recommended for the 
production process of the components.
 
● A possible alternative for handling a diffi cult tolerance problem might be to rede-
sign a component to move it to the noncritical classifi cation.
 
● A diffi cult problem with tolerance stackup often indicates that the design is over-
constrained to cause undesirable interactions between the assembled components. 
Go back to the confi guration design step and try to alleviate the situation with a 
new design.
 
● If tolerance stackup cannot be avoided, it often is possible to minimize its impact 
by careful design of assembly fi xtures.
1. G. R. Cogorno, Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing for Mechanical Design, McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 2006. G. Henzold, Geometrical Dimensioning and Tolerancing for Design, Manufacturing, 
and Inspection, 2d ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2006. A short, well illustrated description of 
the GD&T control variables, including how they would be measured in inspection, is given in G. R. Ber-
toline, op. cit., pp. 731–44.

358 
engineering design 
8
 
● Use selective assembly where critical components are sorted into narrow dimen-
sional ranges before assembling mating components. Before doing this, give careful 
consideration to possible customer repercussions with future maintenance problems.
 
● Before using statistical tolerancing make sure that you have the agreement from 
manufacturing that the product is receiving components from a well-controlled 
process with the appropriate level of process capability.
 
● Consider carefully the establishment of the datum surfaces, since the same datums 
will be used in manufacture and inspection of the part.
8.8
INDUSTRIAL DESIGN
Industrial design, also often called just product design, is concerned with the visual 
appearance of the product and the way it interfaces with the customer. The terminol-
ogy is not precise in this area. Up until now, what we have called product design has 
dealt chiefl y with the function of the design. However, in today’s highly competitive 
marketplace, performance alone may not be suffi cient to sell a product. The need to 
tailor the design for aesthetics and human usability has been appreciated for many 
years for consumer products, but today it is being given greater emphasis and is being 
applied more often to technically oriented industrial products.
Industrial design1 deals chiefl y with the aspects of a product that relate to the 
user. First and foremost is its aesthetic appeal. Aesthetics deal with the interaction of 
the product with the human senses—how it looks, feels, smells, or sounds. For most 
products the visual appeal is most important. This has to do with whether the shape, 
proportion, balance, and color of the elements of the design create a pleasing whole. 
Often this goes under the rubric of styling. Proper attention to aesthetics in design can 
instill a pride of ownership and a feeling of quality and prestige in a product. Appro-
priate styling details can be used to achieve product differentiation in a line of similar 
products. Also, styling often is important in designing the packaging for a product. 
Finally, proper attention to industrial design is needed to develop and communicate to 
the public a corporate image about the products that it makes and sells. Many compa-
nies take this to the point where they have developed a corporate style that embodies 
their products, advertising, letterheads, and so on. Aspects of the style can include 
colors, color ratios, and shapes.2
The second major role of industrial design is in making sure that the product 
meets all requirements of the user human interface, a subject often called ergonomics 
or usability.3 This activity deals with the user interactions with the product and making 
sure that it is easy to use and maintain. The human interface is discussed in Sec 8.9.
1. P. S. Jordan, Design of Pleasurable Products, Taylor & Francis, 2000. B. E. Bürdek, Design: History, 
Theory and Practice of Product Design, Birkauser Publishers, Basel, 2005.
2. To explore a world of industrial design, go to Google, select Images, and type in industrial design.
3. A. March, “Usability: The New Dimension of Product Design,” Harvard Business Review, September–
October 1994, pp. 144–49.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
359
8
The industrial designer is usually educated as an applied artist or architect. This 
is a decidedly different culture than that of the education of the engineer. While en-
gineers may see color, form, comfort, and convenience as minor issues in the product 
design, the industrial designer is more likely to see these features as intrinsic in sat-
isfying the needs of the user. The two groups have roughly opposite styles. Engineers 
work from the inside out. They are trained to think in terms of technical details. In-
dustrial designers, on the other hand, work from the outside in. They start with a con-
cept of a complete product as it would be used by a customer and work back into the 
details needed to make the concept work. Industrial designers often work in indepen-
dent consulting fi rms, although large companies may have their own in-house staff. 
Regardless, it is important to have the industrial designers involved at the beginning 
of a project, for if they are called in after the details are worked out, there may not be 
room to develop a proper concept.
1. Z. M. Lewalski, Product Esthetics: An Interpretation for Designer, Design & Development Engineer-
ing Press, Carson City, NV, 1988.
Apple Computer has for a long time maintained a profi table niche market in 
personal computers and digital appliances because of its superior industrial de-
sign. Once a leader in software technology, in recent times it has been industrial 
design that has kept Apple profi table. In the late 1990s the translucent iMac in an 
array of eye-catching colors made it an instant success. Then the Power Mac G4 
cube, looking more like a postmodern sculpture than a piece of offi ce equipment, 
became a high-status must have product. But the iPod and iPhone are the biggest 
hits of all. 
8.8.1 Visual Aesthetics
Aesthetics relate to our emotions. Since aesthetic emotions are spontaneous and de-
velop beneath our level of consciousness, they satisfy one of our basic human needs. 
Visual aesthetic values can be considered as a hierarchy of human responses to vi-
sual stimuli.1 At the bottom level of the hierarchy is order of visual forms, their sim-
plicity, and clarity—our visual neatness. These values are derived from our need to 
recognize and understand objects. We relate better to symmetric shapes with closed 
boundaries. Visual perception is enhanced by the repetition of visual elements re-
lated by similarity of shape, position, or color (rhythm). Another visual character-
istic to enhance perception is homogeneity, or the standardization of shapes. For 
example, we relate much more readily to a square shape with its equal angles than 
to a trapezoid. Designing products so that they consist of well-recognized geo-
metric shapes (geometrizing) greatly facilitates visual perception. Also, reducing 

360 
engineering design 
8
the number of design elements and clumping them into more compact shapes aids 
recognition.
The second level of visual aesthetics is concerned with recognition of the func-
tionality or utility of the design. Our everyday knowledge of the world around us gives 
us an understanding of the association between visual patterns and specifi c functions. 
For example, symmetrical shapes with broad bases suggest inertness or stability. 
Patterns showing a tendency toward visual separation from the base suggest a sense 
of mobility or action (see Fig. 8.27). A streamlined shape suggests speed. Looking 
around, you can observe many visual symbols of function.
The highest level of the visual aesthics hierarchy deals with the group of aesthetic 
values derived from the prevailing fashion, taste, or culture. These are the class of 
values usually associated with styling. There is a close link between these values and 
the state of available technology. For example, the advent of steel beams and columns 
made the high-rise building a possibility, and high-strength steel wire made possible 
the graceful suspension bridge. A strong driver of prevailing visual taste traditionally 
has been the infl uence of people in positions of power and wealth. In today’s society 
this is most likely to be the infl uence of media stars. Another strong infl uence is the 
human need and search for newness.
FIGURE 8.27
Note how the design of the four-wheel-drive agricultural tractor projects rugged power. The 
clearly defi ned grid of straight lines conveys a sense of unity. The slight forward tilt of the 
vertical lines adds a perception of forward motion.
(From Z. M. Lewalski, Product Esthetics, Design & Development Engineering Press, Carson City, NV. Used with 
permission.)

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
361
8
8.9
HUMAN FACTORS DESIGN
Human factors is the study of the interaction between people, the products and sys-
tems they use, and the environments in which they work and live. This fi eld also is 
described by the terms human factors engineering and ergonomics.1 Human factors 
design applies information about human characteristics to the creation of objects, fa-
cilities, and environments that people use. It considers the product as part of a hu-
man and machine system in which the operator, the machine, and the environment in 
which it operates must all function effectively. Human factors goes beyond the issues 
of usability to consider design for ease of maintenance and for safety. Human factors 
expertise is found in industrial designers, who focus on ease of use of products, and in 
industrial engineers, who focus on design of production systems for productivity.
We can relate the human interaction with a product to the inputs used in Chap. 6 
to describe the function structure of a design. A person provides energy to the system 
by applying forces and torques with human muscle power. People also provide signal 
information through their senses of sight, hearing, touch, and to a limited degree, with 
taste and smell. They provide material input when their body must be contained by the 
product (the door must be large enough for the shoulders of the body, or the light switch 
must be within reach). Thus, it is important to understand more about human factors de-
sign to achieve a harmonious interaction with human functions. Products that rate high 
in human factors engineering are generally regarded as high-quality products since they 
are perceived to work well by the user. Table 8.9 shows how various important product 
characteristics can be achieved by focusing on key human factors characteristics.
8.9.1 Human Physical Effort
Measurement of the physical effort that a man could perform in the manual handling 
of materials (shoveling coal) and supplies was one of the fi rst studies made in human 
factors engineering. Such studies involve not only measurement of the force that can 
be applied by ligaments and muscles but also measurement of the cardiovascular and 
respiratory systems of the body to assess the physiological distress (energy expendi-
ture) that occurs during sustained work. In today’s mechanized workplace this infor-
mation is less important than knowing the magnitude of forces and torques that can be 
applied by the human body, Fig. 8.28.
Figure 8.28 is just one example of information that is available.2 Note that it is 
for males who are at the 5th percentile of the strength distribution, meaning that it 
1. From the Greek words ergon (work) and nomos (study of).
2. Human Engineering Design Criteria for Military Systems and Facilities, MIL-STD 1472F, http://
hfetag.dtic.mil/docs-hfs/mil-std-1472f.pdf; Human Factors Design Guide, DOT/FAA/CT-96/1, www.
asi.org/adb/04/03/14/faa-hf-design-guide.pdf; N. Stanton et al., Handbook of Human Factors and 
Ergonomic Methods, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2004; M. S. Sanders and E. J. McCormick, Human 
Factors in Engineering and Design, 7th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1993. J. H. Burgess, Designing for 
Humans: Human Factors in Engineering, Petrocelli Books, Princeton, NJ, 1986.

362 
engineering design 
8
represents only the weakest 5 percent of the male population. It is characteristic of 
data on human performance that there is a wide deviation from the mean. The data for 
females is different from that for men. In addition, the force or torque that can be ap-
plied depends on the range of motion and position of the various joints of the human 
body. For example, Fig. 8.28 shows that the force that can be applied depends on the 
angle that the elbow makes with the shoulder. This gets us into the topic of biome-
chanics. The force that can be exerted also depends on whether the person is seated, 
standing, or lying down. Thus, the references noted here need to be consulted for data 
referring to the specifi c type of action or motion.
Human muscle output is typically applied to a machine at a control interface, like 
a brake pedal or a selector switch. These control interfaces can take many forms: a 
handwheel, rotary knob, thumbwheel, rollerball, lever, joystick, toggle switch, rocker 
switch, pedal, handle, or slide. These devices have been studied1 to determine the 
force or moment needed for their operation, and whether they are best suited for 
on-off control, or more precise control.
In designing control interfaces it is important to avoid awkward and extreme mo-
tions for the product user. Controls should not require a large actuation force unless 
they are used in emergencies. It is particularly important to design the location of 
controls so that bending and movements of the spine are not required, particularly if 
these motions will be repetitive. This can lead to cumulative trauma disorders, where 
stresses cause nerve and other damage. Such situations will lead to operator fatigue 
and errors.
8.9.2 Sensory Input
The human senses of sight, touch, hearing, taste, and smell are chiefl y used for pur-
poses of controlling devices or systems. They provide signals to the user of the design. 
Visual displays are commonly used, Fig. 8.29. In selecting visual displays remember 
that individuals differ in their ability to see, so provide suffi cient illumination. As 
shown in Fig. 8.30, different types of visual displays differ in their ability to provide 
on-off information, or exact values and rate of change information.
1. G. Salvendy (ed.), Handbook of Human Factors, 3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2006.
TABLE 8.9 
Correspondance Between Human Factors Characteristics and Product Performance 
Product Performance
Human Factors Characteristic
Comfortable to use
Good match between product and person in the workspace
Easy to use
Requires minimal human power; clarity of use
Operating condition easily sensed
Human sensing
Product is user-friendly
Control logic is natural to the human

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
363
8
FIGURE 8.28
Muscle strength of the arm, hand, and thumb for males at 5th percentile. From 
MIL-STD-1472F, p. 95.
1
7
6
8
OUT
PUSH
PULL
IN
2
3
5
9
10
4
UP
BOTTOM
Arm Strength
Hand and Thumb-Fingers Strength (lb)
(8)
Hand Grip
(9)
Thumb-Finger
Grip (Palmar)
(10)
Thumb-Finger
Grip (Tips)
Degree of Elbow
Flexion
(deg)
Momentary Hold
Sustained Hold
*L = Left; R = Right
180
50
52
42
50
9
14
13
17
13
20
8
14
150
42
56
30
42
15
18
18
20
15
20
8
15
120
34
42
26
36
17
24
21
26
20
22
10
15
90
32
37
22
36
17
20
21
26
16
18
10
16
60
26
24
22
34
15
20
18
20
17
20
12
17
Pull
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
L
56
59
13
13
33
35
8
8
R
L
L
R
R*
L
R
L
R
L
R
L
R
Push
Up
Down
In
Out

364 
engineering design 
8
Digital counter
Linear dial
Curved dial
Fixed pointer on moving scale
Moving pointer on a fixed scale
Graphical display
Indicator light
Icon, symbol display
Mechanical indicator
Pictorial display
4
110
100
120
3
0
7
0
Linear dial
Circular dial
DANGER
   fdgfjk#k   gf   f
frkg   ekfgtejxj   j
FIGURE 8.29
Types of visual displays. 
(After Ullman.)
FIGURE 8.30
Characteristics of common visual displays.
(After Ullman.)
Exact
value
Digital
counter
Rate of
change
Trend,
direction
of change
Discrete
information
Adjusted to
desired
value
Moving pointer
on fixed scale
Fixed pointer
on moving scale
Mechanical
indicator
Icon, symbol
display
Indicator
light
Graphical
display
Pictorial
display
Not suitable
Acceptable
Recommended

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
365
8
The human ear is effective over a frequency range from 20 to 20,000 Hz. Often 
hearing is the fi rst sense that indicates there may be trouble, as in the repetitive thump-
ing of a fl at tire or the scraping sound of a worn brake. Typical auditory displays that 
are used in devices are bells, beeps (to acknowledge an action), buzzers, horns and 
sirens (to sound an alarm) and electronic devices to speak a few words.
The human body is especially sensitive to touch. With tactile stimulation we can 
feel whether a surface is rough or smooth, hot or cold, sharp or blunt. We also have a 
kinesthetic sense that uses receptors to feel joint and muscle motion. This is an ability 
that is highly developed in great athletes.
User-Friendly Design
Careful attention to the following design issues will create user-friendly designs:
 
● Simplify tasks: Control operations should have a minimum number of operations 
and should be straightforward. The learning effort for users must be minimal. In-
corporating microcomputers into the product may be used to simplify operation. 
The product should look simple to operate, with a minimum number of controls 
and indicators.
 
● Make the controls and their functions obvious: Place the controls for a function 
adjacent to the device that is controlled. It may look nice to have all the buttons in a 
row, but it is not very user-friendly.
 
● Make controls easy to use: Shape knobs and handles of controls differently so they 
are distinguishable by look and by touch. Organize and group them to minimize 
complexity. There are several strategies for the placement of controls: (1) left to 
right in the sequence they are used, (2) key controls located near the operator’s right 
hand, (3) most commonly used controls near the operator’s hand.
 
● Match the intentions of the human with the actions required by the system: There 
should be a clear relationship between the human intent and the action that takes 
place on the system. The design should be such that when a person interacts with it 
there is only one obviously correct thing to do.
 
● Use mapping: Make the control refl ect, or map, the operation of the mechanism. For ex-
ample, the seat position control in an automobile could have the shape of a car seat, and 
moving it up should move the seat up. The goal should be to make the operation clear 
enough that it is not necessary to refer to nameplates, stickers, or the operator’s manual.
 
● Displays should be clear, visible, large enough to read easily, and consistent in 
direction: Analog displays are preferred for quick reading and to show changing 
conditions. Digital displays provide more precise information. Locate the displays 
where viewing would be expected.
 
● Provide feedback: The product must provide the user with a clear, immediate re-
sponse to any actions taken. This feedback can be provided by a light, a sound, 
or displayed information. The clicking sound and fl ashing dashboard light, in re-
sponse to actuating an automobile turn signal, is a good example.
 
● Utilize constraints to prevent incorrect action: Do not depend on the user always 
doing the correct thing. Controls should be designed so that an incorrect movement 
or sequence is not possible. An example is the automatic transmission that will not 
go into reverse when the car is moving forward.

366 
engineering design 
8
 
● Standardize: It pays to standardize on the arrangement and operation of controls 
because it increases the users knowledge. For example, in early days the place-
ment of the brake, clutch, and accelerator pedals in an automobile was arbitrary, but 
once standardized they become part of the user knowledge base and should not be 
changed.
Norman contends that in order for a design to be truly user-friendly it must employ 
the general knowledge that many people in the population possess.1 For example, a 
red light means stop, and the higher values on a dial should be in the clockwise di-
rection. Be sure that you do not presume too much knowledge and skill on the part 
of the user.
Reaction Time
The reaction time is the time to initiate a response when a sensory signal has been 
received. The reaction time is made up of several actions. We receive information in 
the form of a sensory signal, interpret it in the form of a set of choices, predict the 
outcomes of each choice, evaluate the consequence of each choice, and then select 
the best choice—all in about 200 ms. To achieve this the product should very quickly 
provide clear visual and auditory signals. To achieve this in simple products, the con-
trols must be intuitive. In complex systems, like a nuclear power plant, the human con-
trol interface must be very carefully designed in terms of the concepts mentioned in 
this section, but in addition, the operators must be disciplined and well trained.
8.9.3 Anthropometric Data
Anthropometrics is the fi eld of human factors that deals with the measurements of the 
human body. Humans vary in size. On average, children are smaller than adults and 
men are taller than women. Variations in such factors as height when standing, shoul-
der width, length and width of fi ngers, arm reach (Fig. 8.31), and eye height on sitting 
need to be considered when designing products. This information is available online 
in MIL-STD-1472F and the FAA Human Factors Design Guide.
In design there is no such thing as an “average person.” The choice of which per-
centile of the distribution of human dimensions to use depends upon the design task at 
hand. If the task is to make a decision on the placement of a critical emergency lever 
in a crowded aircraft cockpit, use the smallest expected reach, that for a woman in 
the 1st percentile. If you were designing the escape hatch in a submarine, use the 99th 
percentile of the shoulder width of men. Clothing manufacturers use a close fi t design 
approach rather than the extreme case approach. They select their “off the rack” sizes 
to provide an acceptable fi t for their customers in each size range. In other products it 
often is possible to design for an adjustable fi t. Adjustable car seats, desk chairs, and 
stereo headphones are common examples.
1. D. A. Norman, The Design of Everyday Things, Doubleday, New York, 1988. This book is full of 
good and poor ways to practice human factors design.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
367
8
8.9.4 Design for Serviceability
Human factors issues are related to many of the design for X strategies mentioned in 
this chapter (see Sec. 8.12). Serviceability is concerned with the ease with which main-
tenance can be performed on a product.1 Many products require some form of mainte-
nance or service to keep them functioning properly. Products often have parts that are 
subject to wear and that are expected to be replaced at periodic intervals. There are two 
general classes of maintenance. Preventive maintenance is routine service required to 
prevent operating failures, such as changing the oil in your car. Breakdown mainte-
nance is the service that must take place after some failure or decline in function has 
occurred.
It is important to anticipate the required service operations during the design of 
the product. Repair may only require replacing a gasket or fi lter, but if the part is not 
accessible without dismantling most of the machine, then maintenance costs will be 
excessive. Don’t make a design like the automobile that requires the removal of a 
wheel to replace the battery. Also, remember that service often will be carried out in 
“the fi eld” where special tools and fi xtures used in factory assembly will not be avail-
able. Design for fi eld service is not complete until a successful simulation of how the 
failed component will be repaired or replaced in the fi eld has been carried out.
The best way to improve serviceability is to reduce the need for service by im-
proving reliability. Reliability is the probability that a system or component will per-
form without failure for a specifi ed period of time (see Chap. 14). Failing this, the 
product must be designed so that components that are prone to wear or failure, or re-
quire periodic maintenance, are easily visible and accessible. It means making covers, 
panels, and housings easy to remove and replace. It means locating components that 
must be serviced in accessible locations. Avoid press fi ts, adhesive bonding, riveting, 
1. J. C. Bralla, Design for Excellence, Chap. 16., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996; M. A. Moss, Designing 
for Minimum Maintenance Expense, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1985.
FIGURE 8.31
Anthropometric data on the extended reach of men and women. 
(From FAA Human Factors Design Guide.)
44
44  Functional (thumb-tip) reach, extended. Measured 
similarly to functional (thumb-tip) reach, except 
that the right shoulder is extended forward as far as 
possible, while the left shoulder is kept pressed fi rmly 
against the wall.
 
Percentiles
 
Sample  
1st 
5th 
50th 
95th 
99th
A Men 
cm 
77.9 
80.5 
87.3 
94.2 
97.7
 
 
(in.) (30.0) (31.7) (34.4) 
(37.1) (38.5)
B Women cm 
71.2 
73.5 
79.6 
86.2 
89.0
 
 
(in.) (28.0) (28.9) (31.3) 
(33.9) (35.0)

368 
engineering design 
8
welding, or soldering for parts that must be removed for service. Modular design is a 
great boon to serviceability.
A concept closely related to serviceability is testability. This is concerned with 
the ease with which faults can be isolated in defective components and subassem-
blies. In complicated electronic and electromechanical products, testability must be 
designed into the product.
8.9.5 Design for Packaging
Packaging is related to visual aesthetics because attractive, distinctive product pack-
aging is typically used to attract customers and to identify product brands. But there 
is a broader importance for careful design of packaging. Packaging provides physical 
protection against mechanical shock, vibration, and extreme temperatures in shipping 
and storage. Different packaging is required for liquids, gases and powders than for 
solid objects. Large mechanical equipment, such as jet engines, requires special pack-
aging which is often reusable. 
A shipping package provides information about the recipient, tracking informa-
tion, instructions regarding hazardous materials, and disposal. Many types of packag-
ing provide security against tampering, pilfering, and theft. Transport packaging can 
vary in size from a steel shipping container to a package directed to an individual 
consumer.
With the increasing use of plastics in packaging, for example, plastic shrink-
wrapped pallets, environmentally safe disposal can be a problem since plastics do 
not degrade in a landfi ll. More traditional packaging materials like cardboard and 
wood crates and barrels are better environmentally, and they can be recycled or used 
as fuel. A general rule regarding package design is that packages should be made as 
inexpensively as possible consistent with providing the needed level of protection and 
security. With certain types of package contents, for example, hazardous materials 
and medicine, the packaging standards are proscribed by law. For more information 
on packaging and packaging design, see K. L. Yam, The Wiley Encyclopedia of Pack-
aging, 3rd ed., 2009.
8.10
LIFE-CYCLE DESIGN 
The worldwide concern over global warming coupled with concerns over energy sup-
ply and stability have moved design for the environment (DFE) to a top consideration 
in design for all types of engineering systems and consumer products. Greater con-
cern for the environment places emphasis on life-cycle design in the PDP. Life-cycle 
design emphasizes giving attention in embodiment design to those issues that impact 
a long, useful service life. Life-cycle design is not the same thing as product life cycle 
which refers to the length of time a product remains in production before it is replaced 
by a better or competing design. Life-cycle design also refers to those aspects of de-
sign that are needed to get the product in the hands of its user, to keep it functioning 

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
369
8
while in service, and to dispose of it in an environmentally friendly way. The major 
issues of life-cycle design are: 
 
● Design for packaging and shipping (Sec. 8.9.5)
 
● Design for serviceability and maintenance (Sec. 8.9.4)
 
● Design for testability
 
● Design for disposal
Design for disposal is an important issue in design for the environment (see 
Chapter 10). However, in a world of fi nite natural resources, any design modifi cations 
that can keep a product in service will benefi t the environment in the long run because 
the product will not have to be disposed of, and therefore will not consume additional 
natural resources for its replacement. The following design strategies can be used to 
extend a product’s useful life. 
 
● Design for durability: Durability is the amount of use one gets from a product be-
fore it breaks down and replacement is preferred to repair. Durability depends on 
the skill of the designer in understanding service conditions, analyzing stresses and 
strains, and in selecting materials that minimize degradation over time due to cor-
rosion or wear.
 
● Design for reliability: Reliability refers to interruptions in usage during service. It 
is a more technical performance characteristic than durability and is measured by 
the probability that a product will neither malfunction nor fail within a specifi ed 
time period. See Chap.14 for details.
 
● Create an adaptable design: A modular design allows for continual replacement or 
improvement of its various functions.
 
● Repair: Concern for future repair in design can greatly facilitate the replacing of 
nonfunctioning components. While not always economical, there are instances 
where it pays to design-in sensors to tell the operator when it is time to replace parts 
before they fail.
 
● Remanufacture: Worn parts are restored to like-new condition.
 
● Reuse: Find another use for the product after it has been retired from its original 
service. The reuse of inkjet cartridges is a common example.
8.11
PROTOTYPING AND TESTING
We are nearing the end of the embodiment design phase. The product architecture 
has been decided, we have confi gured the components, determined the dimensions 
and tolerances on the features, and carried out parametric design on several critical-
to-quality parts and assemblies. Careful decisions have been made on the selection of 
materials and manufacturing processes using DFM, DFA, and DFE. The design has 
been checked for possible failure modes using FMEA, the reliability of several critical 
subsystems has been discussed with suppliers, and the experts in human factors de-
sign have given their approval. Design for quality and robustness concepts have been 

370 
engineering design 
8
employed in decisions on several critical parameters. Preliminary cost estimates look 
as if we will come under the target cost.
So, what is left yet undone? We need to assure ourselves that the product will re-
ally function the way it is expected to work. This is the role of the prototype.
Prototypes are physical models of the product that are tested in some way to 
validate the design decisions that have been made up to that point in the design pro-
cess. As will be discussed in the next section, prototypes come in various forms and 
are used in different ways throughout the design process. A prototype is a physical 
model of the product, as opposed to a computer model (CAD model) of the product 
or other simulation of the design. Much attention has been given to computer model-
ing because it often provides insights faster and with less cost than building and test-
ing a physical model or prototype. Also, using fi nite element analysis or some other 
CAE tool can provide technical answers that may not be available any other way. 
Both prototypes and computer models are valuable tools in carrying out the design 
process.
8.11.1 Prototype and Model Testing Throughout the Design Process
Up to this point we have not given much attention to how models and prototypes are 
used throughout the design process. We will start the discussion at the very begin-
ning of the product development process, Phase Zero, where marketing and technical 
people are working to understand customer interest and need for a new product, and 
move all the way down to the point where the product is about to be introduced to the 
marketplace.
 
● Phase Zero: Product Concept Model. A full-scale or reduced-scale model of a new 
product is made to look like the fi nal product. This often is prepared by technical 
designers and industrial designers working collaboratively. Emphasis is on appear-
ance to gage customer reaction to a possible new product. For example, a defense 
contractor trying to stir up interest in a new fi ghter plane would make up glitzy 
models and pass them around to the generals and politicians.
 
● Conceptual Design: Proof-of-Concept Prototype. This is a physical model to show 
whether the concept performs the functions that satisfy the customer’s needs and 
corresponding engineering specifi cations. There may have been a succession of 
proof-of-concept models, some physical and others rough sketches, that serve as 
learning tools until reaching the fi nal proof-of-concept prototype. No attempt is 
made to make the proof-of-concept model look like the product as far as size, ma-
terials, or manufacturing methods are concerned. The emphasis is on showing that 
the concept will deliver the needed functions. It is sometimes known as a “string 
and chewing gum” model.
 
● Embodiment Design: Alpha-Prototype Testing. The end of the embodiment design 
phase is usually capped off by testing product prototypes. These are called alpha-
prototypes because while the parts are made to the fi nal design drawings with the 
same materials as the product, they are not made using the same manufacturing 
processes as the production-run parts. For example, parts that might be made as 

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
371
8
castings or forgings in the production run will be machined from plates or bar stock 
because the tooling for the production parts is still being designed.
Embodiment design makes frequent use of computer-aided engineering (CAE) 
tools for various design tasks. Sizing of parts might require fi nite element analysis 
to fi nd the stresses in a complex part, or the designer might use a fatigue design 
package to size a shaft, or use tolerance stackup design software.
 
● Detail Design: Beta-Prototype Testing. This involves full-size functional part 
or product testing using the materials and processes that will be used in produc-
tion. This is a proof-of-process prototype. Often customers are enlisted to help run 
these tests. The results of the beta-prototype tests are used to make any remaining 
changes in the product, complete the production planning, and try out the produc-
tion tooling.
 
● Manufacturing: Preproduction Prototype Testing. This represents the fi rst several 
thousand of units of production from the actual production line using the assigned 
production workers. Therefore, the output from the line represents the product that 
will shortly be shipped and sold to the customer. The tests on these products are 
made to verify and document the quality of the design and production and  assembly 
processes.
There is a trade-off between the number of prototypes that will be built for a prod-
uct design and tested and the cost and length of the product development cycle. Proto-
types help to verify the product but they have a high cost in money and time. As a result, 
there is a strong trend, particularly in large companies, to replace physical prototypes 
with computer models (virtual prototypes) because simulation is cheaper and faster. The 
opposing position, taken by many experienced engineers, is that computer modeling has 
been taken too far too fast, and that carefully planned and executed simulated service 
tests, and full-sized tests under extreme conditions should not be abandoned.
One place where physical models should not be completely replaced by computer 
modeling is in the early stages of conceptual design.1 Here the goal is to gain insight 
about a design decision by physically building a quick-and-dirty physical model from 
common construction materials without waiting for a model shop to do the work for 
you. A hands-on approach where the designers actively build many simple prototypes 
is highly recommended as the best way to understand and advance the concept devel-
opment activity. The approach has been called “just build it” by the highly successful 
product design fi rm IDEO. Others call this the design-build-test-cycle.2
8.11.2 Building Prototypes
It is highly recommended that the design team build its own physical models leading 
up to the proof-of-concept prototype. Product concept models, on the other hand, are 
often carefully crafted to have great visual appeal. These are traditionally made by 
1. H. W. Stoll, Product Design Methods and Practices, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1999, pp. 134–35.
2. D. G. Ullman, 4th ed., p. 217.

372 
engineering design 
8
fi rms specializing in this market or by industrial designers who are part of the design 
team. Computer modeling is rapidly overtaking the physical model, which by its na-
ture is static, for this application. A 3-D computer model can show cutaway views of 
the product as well as dynamic animations, all on a DVD that can be easily produced 
in quantity. Nevertheless, an attractive physical model still has status appeal with im-
portant customers.
Models for alpha-prototype testing are typically made in the model shop, a 
small machine shop staffed with expert craftsmen and equipped with computer-
controlled machine tools and other precision machine tools. To be effective it is im-
portant to use CAD software that interfaces well with the numerically controlled 
(NC) machine tools, and it is important that the shop personnel be well trained in its 
use. Most of the time required to make a prototype by NC machining is consumed not 
by metal cutting but in process planning and NC programming. Recent developments 
have reduced the time needed for these operations so that NC machining is becoming 
competitive with rapid prototyping methods for the simpler geometries. Beta-proto-
type models and preproduction test prototypes are made by the manufacturing depart-
ment using the actual materials and processes in which the product will be produced. 
8.11.3 Rapid Prototyping
Rapid prototyping (RP) is a technology that produces prototypes directly from 
 computer-aided design (CAD) models in a fraction of the time required to make them 
by machining or molding methods.1 Another name for RP is solid freeform fabrica-
tion. RP is used for producing the fi nal proof-of-concept model and is used extensively 
in embodiment design to check form, fi t, and function. The earliest applications of 
RP were as appearance models, but as dimensional control approached ± 0.005 inches 
in RP objects they began to be used for issues of fi t and assembly. RP objects are 
often used to check the function of kinematic motion, but they are not generally strong 
enough to be used as prototypes where strength issues are important.
The steps in rapid prototyping are shown in Fig. 8.32.
 
● Create a CAD model: Any RP process starts with a three-dimensional CAD model, 
which can be considered a virtual prototype of the part. The only requirement on 
the model for using a RP process is that the model must be a fully closed volume. 
Thus, if we were to pour water into the model it would not leak.
 
● Convert the CAD model to the STL fi le format. In this format the surfaces of the 
component are converted to very small, triangular facets by a process called tes-
sellation. When taken together, this network of triangles represents a polyhedral 
approximation of the surfaces of the component. CAD software has the capability 
to convert a CAD fi le to STL.
 
● Slice the STL fi le into thin layers. The tessellated STL fi le is moved to the RP ma-
chine, and its controlling software slices the model into many thin layers. This is 
required because most RP processes build up the solid body layer by layer. For 
1. R. Noorani, Rapid Prototyping: Principles and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2006.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
373
8
example, if a part is to be 2 inches high, and each layer is 0.005 inches thick, it re-
quires the addition of material by a buildup of 400 layers. Thus, most RP processes 
are slow, taking hours to build out a part. They gain speed over numerically con-
trolled machining by virtue of the fact that NC machining often takes many more 
hours of process planning and computer programming before metal cutting can start.
 
● Make the prototype: Once the sliced computer model is in the computer of the RP 
machine it runs without much attention until the part is completely built up.
 
● Postprocessing: All objects removed from RP machines need processing. This con-
sists of cleaning, removal of any support structures, and light sanding of the sur-
faces to remove the edges from the layering process. Depending on the material 
used in the RP process, the object may need curing, sintering, or infi ltration of a 
polymer to give it strength.
Note that the time to make a RP model may take from 8 to 24 hours, so the term 
rapid may be something of a misnomer. However, the time from detail drawing to proto-
type is typically shorter than if the part was made in a model shop due to issues of sched-
uling and programming the machine tools. Also, RP processes are able to produce very 
complex shapes in one step, although typically they are made from a plastic, not a metal.
8.11.4 RP Processes
There are a number of RP processes currently in use. They differ chiefl y in whether 
they are liquid, solid, or powder-based systems, and whether they are capable of work-
ing with polymers, metals, or ceramics.
FIGURE 8.32
Steps in the rapid prototyping process. 
(From R. Noorani, Rapid Prototyping, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2006, p. 37. Used with permission.)
Creation of
Solid Model
Conversion to
STL File
Rapid Processing
 
a. Model validity and
 
 
repair
 
b. Slicing
Postprocessing
a. Cleaning
b. Post Curing
c. Finishing
Rapid Prototyping

374 
engineering design 
8
The fi rst commercial RP process was stereolithography (SL). This process uses 
a UV laser beam to build up layers of solid polymer by scanning on the surface of a 
bath of photosensitive polymer. Where the laser strikes the liquid polymer it rapidly 
polymerizes and forms a solid networked polymer. After the layer of liquid is scanned, 
the platform holding the bath is lowered one layer of thickness, and the process is re-
peated, layer after layer, until the prototype object has been built up, Fig. 8.33. The 
laser beam is controlled by the sliced STL fi le in the memory of the RP machine’s 
computer. The resulting prototype, Fig. 8.34, is much weaker than a metal prototype 
made by NC machining, but it has excellent dimensional control and a smooth surface 
fi nish. The promise shown by these early prototypes set off a search for other RP 
systems.
Selective laser sintering (SLS) was developed to use stronger, higher-melting- 
temperature materials than polymers in the RP process. The general layout of the 
process is shown in Fig. 8.33. In principle, any powder that can be fused together by 
sintering can be used. A thin layer of powder is spread and sintered by the passage 
of a high-energy laser beam. Then the platform is lowered, a new layer of powder 
is spread and sintered, and the process proceeds, layer by layer. The SLS process is 
mostly used with thermoset polymer particles, or metal particles coated with plastic to 
facilitate bonding.
Laminated object modeling (LOM) is an older method that continues to have use-
ful applications because of the simplicity of the equipment that is needed. Thin layers 
of paper, polymer, or thin sheet steel that are cut with a NC knife or laser are glued 
together to form a laminate. After fabrication, preparation of the edges is required. 
All RP machines have defi nite size limitations, but LOM is most suitable for making 
prototypes of large components.
Fused-deposition modeling (FDM) is an example of several liquid-state deposi-
tion processes used to make prototypes. A continuous fi lament of thermoplastic poly-
mer is heated and extruded through a nozzle, the movement of which is computer 
Laser
beam
Vat
Liquid
polymer
Support
Elevator
FIGURE 8.33
Rapid prototyping by stereolithography (SL). Note the supports needed for overhanging parts.  
(After Schey.)

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
375
8
controlled along three axes. The polymer leaves the tip of the nozzle at just above the 
melting temperature of the polymer and rapidly solidifi es when it strikes the previous 
layer. With proper control the extruded bead bonds to the previous layer. Strong and 
tough engineered polymers like ABS and polycarbonate can be used in the FDM pro-
cess, and this produces prototypes with better mechanical properties than those made 
by stereolithography.
Three-dimensional printing (3DP) is a RP process that is based on the principle 
of the inkjet printer.1 A thin layer of metal, ceramic, or polymer powder is spread over 
a part-build bed. Using inkjet printing technology, fi ne droplets of a binder material 
are deposited on the powder in the two-dimensional geometry defi ned by the digital 
slice of the three-dimensional part. The inkjet is under computer control as in the 
other RP processes described previously. The droplets agglomerate powder particles, 
bonding them together into a primitive volume element, or voxel. The binder droplets 
also bond voxels together within the plane and to the plane below it. Once a layer is 
deposited, the powder bed and part are lowered and a new layer of powder is spread 
out and the binder is applied by the jet. This layer-by-layer process is repeated until 
the part is completed and removed from the powder bed.
FIGURE 8.34
Examples of student-made prototypes. Top: Injection-molded part. Left: Paper prototype made 
by laminated object modeling. Right: Plastic prototype made by fused deposition modeling. 
(Courtesy of David Morgan.)
1. E. Sachs, et al., “Three Dimensional Printing,” ASME Jnl. of Engineering for Industry, vol. 114, 1992, 
pp. 481–88.

376 
engineering design 
8
1. R. Noorani, op. cit., Chap. 8.
Since no mechanical interlocking of particles occurs in this process, the part is 
fragile and must be carefully removed from the powder bed. The as-printed density 
is 40 to 60 percent of a fully dense part. The part is then heat treated to drive off 
the binder and sinter the particles to improve strength and reduce the porosity, as is 
typical in powder metallurgy. This results in appreciable shrinkage, which must be 
allowed for in the design. A common practice is to fi ll the void space with a metal 
whose melting point is lower than the base metal (infi ltration). One example is stain-
less steel that is infi ltrated with 90Cu-10Sn bronze.
Figure 8.34 shows some rapid prototypes made by students. At the top (in black) 
is the original injection-molded part. The right end of this part was modifi ed to pro-
vide a more leak-proof connection with another part. Below are two RPs. The one 
on the left was made by laminated object modeling using layers of paper. Note the 
roughness and lack of edge detail compared with the RP on the right, which was made 
with fused deposition of plastic. The ability to make the prototypes allowed for actual 
laboratory testing to determine the functionality of the new design.
The success of rapid prototyping has led to extensions into actual component 
manufacturing. The most common application is using RP to make patterns for molds 
for metal casting or polymer molding.1 Often the delay in procuring molds is a major 
holdup in the product development process. The use of RP speeds this up, and also al-
lows the opportunity for several iterations of mold design within the PDP schedule. A 
casting process starts with a pattern of the part to be made to make the shaped cavity 
that the fl uid cast material will fi ll. Usually this is made from wood, plastic, or metal. 
Making the pattern can be a time-consuming process. With RP a pattern can be made 
in a day or two. Also, using the additive layered methods of RP allows the formation 
of patterns with undercuts, overhangs, or internal channels, features that would be im-
possible to make or would be excessively costly by conventional machining.
8.11.5 Testing
In Sec. 8.11.1 we discussed the sequence of prototypes that are typically used in the 
product development process. These prototype tests are used to verify the design deci-
sions that are made along the way to launching a product or installing an engineered 
system. The marketplace validates the acceptability for a consumer product, while for 
many other types of engineered products there is a set of prescribed acceptance tests. 
For example, most military equipment and systems are governed by contracts that 
stipulate specifi c test requirements.
One of the important documents that is developed at the start of a major design 
program is the test plan. The test plan gives a description of the types of tests to be 
performed, when the test will be made in the design process, and the cost of the tests. 
It should be part of the PDS. All managers and engineers should be informed of the 
test plan because this is an important pacing activity for the design project.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
377
8
There are many kinds of tests that may be needed in a design project. Some ex-
amples are:
 
● Testing of design prototypes, as discussed in Sec. 8.11.1.
 
● Modeling and simulations. See Sec. 7.4.
 
● Testing for all mechanical and electrical modes of failure. See Chap. 14.
 
● Specialized tests on seals, or for thermal shock, vibration, acceleration, or moisture 
resistance, as design dictates.
 
● Accelerated life testing. Evaluating the useful life of the critical-to-quality 
components.
 
● Testing at the environmental limits. Testing at specifi cation extremes of tempera-
ture, pressure, humidity, etc.
 
● Human engineering and repair test. Evaluate all human interfaces with actual us-
ers. Check maintenance procedures and support equipment in a user environment.
 
● Safety and risk test. Determine likelihood of injury to users and prospect of prod-
uct liability litigation. Check for compliance with safety codes and standards in all 
countries where product will be sold.
 
● Built-in test and diagnostics. Evaluate the capability and quality of built-in test, 
self-diagnosis, and self-maintenance systems.
 
● Manufacturing supplier qualifi cation. Determine the capability of suppliers with 
regard to quality, on-time delivery, and cost.
 
● Packaging. Evaluate the ability of the packaging to protect the product.
There are two general reasons for conducting a test.1 The fi rst is to establish that the 
design meets some specifi cation or contractual requirement (verifi cation). For exam-
ple, the motor must deliver a torque of 50 ft-lb at a speed of 1000 rpm with a tempera-
ture rise not to exceed 70 °F above room temperature. This is a test that is conducted 
with the expectation of a success. If the motor does not meet the requirement, then 
you must redesign the motor. Most of the kinds of tests listed above are of this type.
The other broad category of tests are planned to generate failures. Most tests of 
materials carry out the test to a point of failure. Likewise, tests of subsystems and 
products should be designed to overstress the product until it fails. In this way, we 
learn about the actual failure modes and gain insight into the weaknesses of the de-
sign. The most economical way to do this is with accelerated testing. This type of 
testing uses test conditions that are more severe than those expected to be encountered 
in service. A common way to do this is with step testing, in which the level of the test 
is progressively increased by increments until failure occurs. Accelerated testing is 
the most economical form of testing. The times to failure will be orders of magnitude 
shorter than tests at the worst expected service conditions. 
Accelerated testing is used in the following way to improve a design. At the out-
set, determine what types of failure would be expected from the service conditions. 
The QFD and FMEA analyses will be helpful. Start testing at the design maximum, 
ramping up in steps until failure occurs. Using failure analysis methods, Chap. 14, 
1. P. O’Connor, Test Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2001.

378 
engineering design 
8
determine the cause of failure and take action to strengthen the design so it can with-
stand more severe test conditions. Continue the step testing process until another fail-
ure occurs. Repeat the process until all transient and permanent failure modes have 
been eliminated, within limits of cost and practicability.
8.11.6 Statistical Design of Testing
In the discussion to this point it has been implied that the testing is carried out in such 
a way that only one design parameter is varied. However, we may have two or more 
parameters, such as stress, temperature, and rate of loading, which are critical and for 
which we would like to devise a test plan that considers their joint testing in the most 
economical way. The discipline of statistics has provided us with the tools to do just that 
in the subject called Design of Experiments (DoE). The most important benefi t from 
statistically designed experiments is that more information per experiment will be ob-
tained than with unplanned experimentation. A second benefi t is that statistical design 
results in an organized approach to the collection and analysis of information. Conclu-
sions from statistically designed experiments very often are evident without extensive 
statistical analysis, whereas with a haphazard approach the results often are diffi cult to 
extract from the experiment even after detailed statistical analysis. Still another advan-
tage of statistically planned testing is the credibility that is given to the conclusions of 
an experimental program when the variability and sources of experimental error are 
made clear by statistical analysis. Finally, an important benefi t of statistical design is 
the ability to confi rm and quantify interactions between experimental variables.
Figure 8.35 shows the various ways that two parameters (factors) x1 and x2 can 
vary to give a joint response y. In this case the response y is the yield strength of an 
alloy as it is infl uenced by two factors, temperature x1 and aging time x2. In Fig. 8.35a 
the two factors have no effect on the response. In Fig. 8.35b only temperature x1 has an 
effect on y. In Fig. 8.35c both temperature and time infl uence yield strength, but they 
vary in the same way, indicating no interaction between the two factors. However, in 
Fig. 8.35d at different values of temperature x1 the effect of aging on the yield strength 
y with time x2 is different, indicating an interaction between the two factors x1 and x2. 
Interactions between factors are determined by varying factors simultaneously under 
statistical control rather than one at a time.
There are three classes of statistically designed experiments.1
 
● Factorial designs are experiments in which all levels of each factor in an experi-
ment are combined with all levels of all other factors. This results in a drastic re-
duction in the number of tests that need to be run at the expense of loss of some 
information about interaction between factors.
 
● Blocking designs use techniques to remove the effect of background variables from 
the experimental error. The most common designs are the randomized block plan 
and the balanced incomplete block.
1. G. E. P. Box, W. G. Hunter, and J. S. Hunter, Statistics for Experimenters, John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, 1978; D. C. Montgomery, Design and Analysis of Experiments, 7th ed., John Wiley & Sons, 
Hoboken, NJ, 2009. (Available online at knovel.com) 1996.

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
379
8
 
● Response surface designs are used to determine the empirical relation between the 
factors (independent variables) and the response (performance variable). The com-
posite design and rotatable designs are frequently used for this purpose.
Design of Experiments is facilitated by the use of many statistical design computer 
programs currently on the market. However, unless one is skilled in DoE it is advis-
able that a statistician be consulted during the development of the testing plan to be 
sure that you are getting the most unbiased information possible for the money that 
you can spend in testing. Today’s engineers need a rudimentary understanding of DoE 
principles to make effective use of this software.
8.12
DESIGN FOR X (DFX)
A successful design must satisfy many requirements other than functionality, appear-
ance, and cost. Reliability has been recognized as a needed attribute for many years. 
As more attention was focused on improving the design process, effort has been given 
to improving many other “ilities” such as manufacturability, maintainability, testabil-
ity, and serviceability. As more life-cycle issues came under study, the terminology to 
describe a design methodology became known as Design for X, where X represents 
FIGURE 8.35
Different behavior of response y as a function of the parameters x1 and x2. (a) No effect of x1 
and x2 on y. (b) Main effect of x1 on y. No effect of x2 on y. (c) Effect of x1 and x2 on y but no 
x1 – x2 interaction. (d) Main effects of x1 and x2. Interaction between x1 and x2.
x1
y
x1
x2
x2
x2
x2
x2
y
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
x1
x1
x2
y
y
y
y
d
c
b
a
d
d
d
c
c
c
b
b
b
a
a
a

380 
engineering design 
8
1. G. Q. Huang (ed.), Design for X: Concurrent Engineering Imperatives, Chapman & Hall, New York, 
1996.
a performance measure of design, as in Design for Manufacture (DFM), Design for 
Assembly (DFA), or Design for the Environment (DFE).
The development of the DFX methodologies was accelerated by the growing em-
phasis on concurrent engineering.1 You will recall from Sec. 2.4.4 that concurrent en-
gineering involves cross-functional teams, parallel design, and vendor partnering. It 
also emphasizes consideration of all aspects of the product life cycle from the outset 
of the product design effort. The ability to do this has been greatly facilitated by the 
creation and use of computer software design tools. These DFX tools are sometimes 
referred to as concurrent engineering tools.
DFM and DFA were the fi rst two topics that received widespread attention in the 
1980s as companies were implementing concurrent engineering strategies as a way 
to improve product development success while reducing development cycle time. As 
the success of this approach grew, so did the number of “Xs” that were considered 
during the product development process. Today, design improvement goals are often 
labeled, “Design for X,” where the X can range from a general consideration such as 
 sustainability of the environment, to process planning, to design for patent infringe-
ment avoidance. Design for X topics apply in many places throughout the product 
development process, but they tend to be focused on embodiment design in the sub-
system design and integration steps.
The steps in implementing a DFX strategy are:
 
● Determine the issue (X) targeted for consideration.
 
● Determine where to place your focus: the product as a whole, an individual compo-
nent, a subassembly, or a process plan.
 
● Identify methods for measuring the X characteristics, and techniques to improve 
them. These techniques may include mathematical or experimental methods, com-
puter modeling, or a set of heuristics.
 
● The DFX strategy is implemented by insisting the product development team focus 
on the X and by using parametric measurements and improvement techniques as 
early in the design process as possible.
Some of the DFX topics have been included in this chapter. Much of the rest of 
this text explains the DFX issues in greater detail. Also included are many other de-
sign issues not usually encompassed under the DFX rubric. The following list directs 
the reader to information on a variety of design issues throughout the text.
Issue
Location
Cost estimation of the product
Chaps. 16, 17
Design for X
 Assembly
Chap. 13
 Environment
Chap. 10
 Manufacture
Chap. 13

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
381
8
8.13
SUMMARY
Embodiment design is the phase in the design process where the design concept is 
invested with physical form. It is the stage where the 4Fs of design (function, form, 
fi t, and fi nish) gain major attention. It is the stage where most analysis takes place to 
determine the physical shape and confi guration of the components that make up the 
system. In accordance with a growing trend in the design community, we have divided 
embodiment design into three parts:
 
● Establishment of the product architecture: Involves arranging the functional ele-
ments of the product into physical units. A basic consideration is how much modu-
larity or integration should be provided to the design.
 
● Confi guration design: Involves establishing the shape and general dimensions of the 
components. Preliminary selection of materials and manufacturing processes. De-
sign for manufacturability principles are applied to minimize manufacturing cost.
 
● Parametric design: Greater refi nement takes place to set critical design variables to 
enhance the robustness of the design. This involves optimizing critical dimensions 
and the setting of tolerances.
By the conclusion of embodiment design a full-scale working prototype of the 
product will be constructed and tested. This is a working model, technically and visu-
ally complete, that is used to confi rm that the design meets all customer requirements 
and performance criteria.
 Quality
Chap. 15
 Reliability
Chap. 14
 Safety
Chap. 14
 Serviceability
Sec. 8.9.4
 Tolerances
Sec. 8.7
Failure modes and effect analysis
Sec. 14.5
Human factors design
Sec. 8.9
Industrial design
Sec. 8.8
Legal and regulatory issues
Chap. 18
Life-cycle cost
Secs. 8.10, 17.15
Materials selection
Chap. 11
Mistake-proofi ng
Sec. 13.8
Product liability
Chap. 18
Robust design
Chap. 15
Standardization in design and manufacturing
Sec. 13.7
Testing
Sec. 8.11.1
User-friendly design
Sec. 8.9

382 
engineering design 
8
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Accelerated testing 
Industrial design 
Refi ning (in confi guration design)
Assembly 
Interference fi t 
Self-help
Clearance fi t 
Life-cycle design 
Special-purpose component
Confi guration design 
Module 
Stackup
Design for X 
Overconstrained part 
Standard assembly
Design of Experiments (DOE) 
Parametric design 
Standard part
Feature control frame 
Patching 
Subassembly
Force transmission 
Preliminary design 
Tolerance
A successful design requires considering a large number of factors. It is in the
embodiment phase of design that studies are made to satisfy these requirements. The
physical appearance of the design, often called industrial design, affects the sales of 
consumer products. Human factors design determines the way that a human interfaces
with and uses the design. This, too, often affects sales. Sometimes, it affects safety.
Increasingly the acceptance of a product by the public is determined by whether the
product is designed to be environmentally friendly. Governments, through regulation,
also promote environmental design.
More issues remain to be considered in the rest of this text. A number of these
are contained within the rubric DFX, such as design for assembly and design for 
manufacturability.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Embodiment Design
Avallone, E. A. and T. Baumeister, eds., Marks’ Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engi-
neers, 11th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2007. (Available online at knovel.com.)
Dixon, J. R., and C. Poli: Engineering Design and Design for Manufacturing, Field Stone Pub-
lishers, Conway, MA, 1995, Part III.
Hatamura, Y.: The Practice of Machine Design, Oxford University Press, New York, 1999.
Pahl, G., W. Beitz, J. Feldhausen, and K. H. Grote: Engineering Design: A Systematic Ap-
proach, 3d ed., Springer, New York, 2007.
Pope, J. E. ed., Rules of Thumb for Mechanical Engineers, Elsevier, 1997. (A place to fi nd prac-
tical design methods and calculations, written by experienced practicing engineers on such 
topics as drive motors, pumps and compressors, seals, bearings, gears, piping, stress analy-
sis, fi nite element analysis, and engineering materials. Available online at knovel.com.)
Skakoon, J. G.: The Elements of Mechanical Design, ASME Press, New York, 2008.
Stoll, H. W.: Product Design Methods and Practices, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1999.
Young , W. C. and R. G. Budynas, Roark’s Formulas for Stress and Strain, 7th ed., McGraw-
Hill, New York, 2001. (Available online at knovel.com.)

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
383
8
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
 8.1 Look around your environment to fi nd some common consumer products. Identify 
which are primarily modular, integral, or mixed product architecture.
 8.2 The standard fi ngernail clipper is an excellent illustration of the integral style of product 
architecture. The clipper system consists of four individual components: lever (A), pin 
(B), upper clipper arm (C), and lower clipper arm (D). Sketch a fi ngernail clipper, label 
its four components, and describe the functionality provided by each component.
 8.3 Design a new fi ngernail clipper with totally modular product architecture. Make a 
sketch and label the function provided by each part. Compare the number of parts in 
this design with the original standard nail clipper.
 8.4 Examine the various confi guration designs for the right-angle bracket shown in Fig. 8.6. 
Make a sketch and label it to show the following forms or features: (a) solid form, (b) a 
rib feature, (c) a weld, (d) a cut-out feature, (e) webs.
 8.5 A structure with redundant load paths is shown below. The force F causes the structure 
F
to elongate by an amount δL
δ . Because the cross sections of the tie rods are not the same, 
their stiffness k
P
L
= δP
δ
will be different. Show that the load will divide itself in propor-
tion to the stiffness of the load path.
F
L
F
 8.6 Design the ladle hooks to be used with the transfer ladle for a steel-melting furnace. 
The hook should be able to lift a maximum weight of 150 tons. The hook should be 
 compatible with the interfaces shown for the ladle in the following sketch. The hook eye 
should receive an 8-inch-diameter pin for attaching to the crane.
10'
15" diameter
3'
1'
12'

384 
engineering design 
8
 8.7
Make a three-dimensional freehand sketch of the part shown in Fig. 8.19.
 8.8
Find the missing dimension AB and its tolerance.
12
18
60  2
A
B
1.00
0.68
1
0
20
18
 8.9
In Example 8.1, start with Point B and go clockwise around the circuit to fi nd the gap at 
the wall and its tolerance.
8.10 Using Fig. 8.21, the dimension and tolerance on the inner diameter of the bearing (part A)
is 30 0.00
0.20
£
−
+
and for the shaft (part B) it is
30 0.25
0.35
£
+
+
. Determine the clearance and tolerance 
of the assembly. Make a sketch of the assembly.
8.11 What is the minimum distance from the holes at each end of the following part?
1.000
2× ∅.010 @ LMC Tolerance z
T
ones
2× ∅ 1.375–1.390
∅ 010
A
L
BC
B
6.000–6.020
2.000–2.020
C
4.000
1.000
8.12 Consider the leftmost hole in Fig. 8.19. If the tolerance on location of the hole is ± 2 mm,
(a) 
 What is the tolerance zone if the normal dimensioning system (non-GD&T) is 
applied?
(b)  What would the tolerance zone be if GD&T is applied?

 
chapter 8: Embodiment Design 
385
8
(c) 
 Sketch the tolerance zone for (a) and (b).
(d)  Write the feature control frame for (b) and discuss its advantages over the normal 
dimensional system.
8.13 Starting with Example 8.3, construct a table that shows how the tolerance zone on the 
position of the hole changes with the diameter of the hole if the hole is specifi ed at 
the maximum material condition (MMC). Start at the MMC for the hole and change the 
hole size in units of 0.020 inches until it reaches the LMC. Hint: Determine the virtual 
condition of the hole, which is the MMC hole diameter minus the MMC positional 
tolerance.
8.14 Take photographs of consumer products, or tear pictures out of old magazines, to build 
a display of industrial designs that appeal to you, and designs that you feel need im-
provement. Be able to defend your decisions on the basis of aesthetic values.
8.15 Consider the design of a power belt sander for woodworking. (a) What functions of the 
tool depend on human use? (b) One of the features a user of this tool wants is light 
weight to reduce arm fatigue during prolonged use. Other than reducing the actual 
weight, how can the designer of this tool reduce arm fatigue for the user?
8.16 Look at the website http://www.baddesigns.com/examples.html for examples of poor 
user-friendly designs. Then, from your everyday environment, identify fi ve other ex-
amples. How would you change these designs to be more user-friendly?
8.17 Diesel-powered trucks are a target for conversion to natural gas. Dig deeper into this 
subject to fi nd out what has happened to bring this about.

9
 9 
 DETAIL DESIGN  
 9.1 
 INTRODUCTION 
 We have come to  detail design , the last of the three phases into which we have divided 
the design process. The boundary between embodiment design and detail design has 
become blurred and shifted forward in time by the emphasis on reducing the product 
development cycle time by the use of concurrent engineering methods (Design for X), 
enabled by computer-aided engineering (CAE). In many engineering organizations it 
is no longer correct to say that detail design is the phase of design where all of the di-
mensions, tolerances, and details are fi nalized. Nonetheless, detail design is the phase 
where  all of the details are brought together, all decisions are fi nalized,  and a deci-
sion is made by management to release the design for production. 
 Figure 9.1 shows the stages of design by which we have organized this book. The 
numbers of the Chaps. 8 through 17 have been superimposed in order to show you where 
in the process this knowledge is generally applied. Detail design is the lowest level in 
the hierarchy of design abstraction. It is a very specifi c and concrete activity. Many deci-
sions have been made to get to this point. Most of these decisions are fundamental to the 
designed product and to change them now would be costly in time and effort. Poor detail 
design can ruin a brilliant design concept and lead to manufacturing defects, high costs, 
and poor reliability in service. The reverse is not true. A brilliant detail design will not 
rescue a poor conceptual design. Thus, as the name implies, detail design 1  is mainly con-
cerned with confi rming details and supplying missing ones to ensure that a proven and 
tested design can be manufactured into a quality and cost-effective product. An equally 
 1. Here detail is used as a noun. The team pulls together and confi rms all details. Some writers have 
mistakenly called this stage  detailed design , implying it is more like the embodiment design stage. This 
is not true, especially in the current business environment. 
386

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
387
9
important task of detail design is communicating these decisions and data to the parts of 
the business organization that will carry on the product development process.  
 9.2 
 ACTIVITIES AND DECISIONS IN DETAIL DESIGN 
 Figure 9.2 shows the tasks to be completed as a result of activities in the detail design 
phase. These steps are the culmination of the decision made at the end of Phase 0, 
product planning (see Fig. 2.1), to allocate capital funding to proceed with the prod-
uct development program. Below the dashed line in Fig. 9.2 are the main activities 
involved in the product development process that must be completed by other depart-
ments in the company once the design information is transmitted to them; see Sec. 9.5. 
The activities in the detail design phase are as follows: 
 Make/Buy Decision 
 Even before the design of all components is completed and the drawings fi nalized, 
meetings are held on deciding whether to make a component in-house or to buy it 
Define
problem
Problem statement
Benchmarking
Product dissection
House of Quality
PDS
Gather
information
Conceptual design
Internet
Patents
Technical articles
Trade journals
Consultants
Concept
generation
Creativity methods
Brainstorming
Functional models
Decomposition
Systematic design
methods
Evaluate &
select concept
Decision making
Selection criteria
Pugh chart
Decision matrix
AHP
Product
architecture
Arrangement of
physical elements
Modularity
Configuration
design
Preliminary
selection of
materials and
manufacturing
processes
Modeling
Sizing of parts
Parametric
design
Robust design
Set tolerances
DFM, DFA, DFE
Tolerances
Chap. 8 Embodiment design
Chap. 9 Detail design
Chap. 10 Sustainability and design
               for the environment
Chap. 11 Materials selection
Chap. 12 Design with materials
Chap. 13 DFM
Chap. 14 Reliability/safety
Chap. 15 Robust design
Chap. 17 Cost evaluation
Detail
design
Engineering
drawings
Final design review
Finalize PDS
Embodiment design
8
10
11
12
8
13
14
15
17
11
12
9
 FIGURE 9.1 
 Steps in the design process, showing where Chaps. 8 through 17 are chiefl y applied. 

388 
engineering design 
9
from an external supplier. This decision will be made chiefl y on the basis of cost and 
manufacturing capacity, with due consideration given to issues of quality and reliabil-
ity of delivery of components. Sometimes the decision to manufacture a critical com-
ponent in-house is based solely on the need to protect trade secrets concerned with a 
critical manufacturing process. An important reason for making this decision early is 
so you can bring the supplier into the design effort as an extended team member. 
 Complete the Selection and Sizing of Components 
 While most of the selection and sizing of components occurs in embodiment design, 
especially for those components with parameters deemed to be critical-to-quality, 
some components may not yet have been selected or designed. These may be standard 
components that will be purchased from external suppliers or routine standard parts 
like fasteners. Or, there may be a critical component for which you have been waiting 
for test data or FEA analysis results. Regardless of the reason, it is necessary to com-
plete these activities before the design can be complete.    
 If the product design is at all complex, it most likely will be necessary to impose 
a  design freeze  at some point prior to completion. This means that beyond a certain 
point in time no changes to the design will be permitted unless they go through a for-
mal review by a design control board. This is necessary to prevent the human tendency 
to continually make slight improvements, which unless controlled by some external 
To Conceptual and
Embodiment Design
PRODUCT
DEVELOPMENT
Make/buy decision
Complete the selection and sizing of components
Complete engineering drawings
Complete the bill of materials
Revise the product design specification
Complete verification prototype testing
Prepare final cost estimate
Prepare design project report
Final design project review
Release design to manufacturing
DETAIL
DESIGN
Process planning
Develop production control plan
Design tools and fixtures
Develop quality assurance plan
Negotiate with suppliers
Develop detailed marketing plan
Develop distribution plan
Write user manual
Decide on warranty
Develop maintenance plan
Develop plan for customer service
Develop plan for retirement from service
Manufacturing production acceptance test
PRODUCT LAUNCH
 FIGURE 9.2 
 Chief activities and deliverables of detail design. Listed below the dashed line are activities 
that extend beyond detail design until product launch. 

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
389
9
means results in the job never actually being completed. With a design freeze, only 
those last-minute changes that truly affect performance, safety, or cost are approved. 
 Complete Engineering Drawings 
 A major task in the detail design phase is to complete the engineering drawings. As 
each component, subassembly, and assembly is designed, it is documented completely 
with drawings (see Sec. 9.3.1). Drawings of individual parts are usually called  detail 
drawings . These show the geometric features, dimensions, and tolerances of the parts. 
Sometimes special instructions for processing the part in manufacture, like heat treat-
ing or fi nishing steps, are included on the drawing. Assembly drawings show how the 
parts are put together to create the product or system. 
 Complete the Bill of Materials 
 The bill of materials (BOM) or parts list is a list of each individual component in the 
product, Sec. 9.3.2. It is used in planning for manufacture and in determining the best 
estimate of product cost. 
 Revise the Product Design Specifi cation 
 When the Product Design Specifi cation was introduced in Sec. 3.7 it was empha-
sized that the PDS is a “living document” that changes as the design team gains more 
knowledge about the design of the product. In detail design the PDS should be up-
dated to include all current requirements that the design must meet. 
 We need to distinguish between the part specifi cation and the product design 
specifi cation. For individual parts the drawing and the specifi cation are often the same 
document. When a part specifi cation is issued it contains information on the technical 
performance of the part, its dimensions, test requirements, materials requirements, 
reliability requirement, design life, packaging requirement, and marking for shipment. 
The part specifi cation should be suffi ciently detailed to avoid confusion as to what is 
expected from the supplier. 
 Complete Verifi cation Prototype Testing 
 Once the design is fi nalized, a beta-prototype is built and verifi cation tested to ensure 
that the design meets the PDS and that it is safe and reliable. Recall from Sec. 8.11.1 
that beta-prototypes are made with the same materials and manufacturing processes 
as the product but not necessarily from the actual production line. Later, before prod-
uct launch, actual products from the production line will be tested. Depending on the 
complexity of the product, the verifi cation testing may simply be to run the product 
during an expected duty cycle and under overload conditions, or it may be a series of 
statistically planned tests.  

390 
engineering design 
9
 Final Cost Estimate 
 The detail drawings allow the determination of fi nal cost estimates, since knowl-
edge of the material, the dimensions, tolerances, and fi nish of each part are needed 
to determine manufacturing cost. To make these calculations a bill of materials (see 
Sec. 9.3.2) is utilized. Cost analysis also needs specifi c information about the par-
ticular machines and process steps that will be used to make each part. Note that cost 
estimates will have been made at each step of the product design process with succes-
sively smaller margins for error. 
 Prepare Design Project Report 
 A design project report usually is written at the conclusion of a project to describe 
the tasks undertaken and to discuss the design in detail. This is a vital document for 
passing on design know-how to a subsequent design team engaged in a product rede-
sign project. Also, a design project report may be an important document if the prod-
uct becomes involved in either product liability or patent litigation. Suggestions for 
preparing a design project report are given in Sec. 9.3.3. 
 Final Design Review 
 Many formal meetings or reviews will have preceded the fi nal design review. These 
include an initial product concept meeting to begin the establishment of the PDS, a 
review at the end of conceptual design to decide whether to proceed with full-scale 
product development, and a review after embodiment design to decide whether to 
move into detail design. The latter may take the form of detailed partial reviews 
(meetings) to decide important issues like design for manufacturing, quality issues, 
reliability, safety, or preliminary cost estimates. However, the fi nal design review is 
the most structured and comprehensive of the reviews. 
 The fi nal design review results in a decision by management on whether the prod-
uct design is ready for production, and the major fi nancial commitment that this en-
tails. Section 9.4 discusses the fi nal design review. 
 Release Design to Manufacturing 
 The release of the product design to manufacturing ends the main activity of the design 
personnel on that product. The release may be done unconditionally, or under pressure 
to introduce a new product it may be done conditionally. In the latter case, manufac-
turing moves ahead to develop tooling while design works on an accelerated schedule 
to fi x some design defi ciencies. The increasing use of the concurrent engineering ap-
proach to minimize the product development time blurs the boundary between detail 
design and manufacturing. It is common to release the design to manufacturing in two 
or three “waves,” with those designs that have the longest lead time for designing and 
making tooling being released fi rst. 

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
391
9
 If the product is being managed by a project manager in a heavyweight matrix 
organization, such as that discussed in Sec. 2.4.3, this manager continues with the 
project as it passes from design to manufacturing and on to product launch. Also, de-
sign input does not necessarily stop once manufacturing takes over, for their technical 
expertise is needed in such areas as quality assurance, warranty issues, and deciding 
on maintenance requirements. 
 The activities shown in Fig. 9.2 below the dotted line occur after detail design. They 
are necessary to complete the product development process and are discussed in Sec. 9.5.  
 9.3 
 COMMUNICATING DESIGN AND MANUFACTURING INFORMATION 
 A design project generates a very large amount of data. A typical automobile has about 
10,000 parts, each containing as many as 10 geometric features. Also, for every geometric 
feature on a mechanical part that must be manufactured, there are about 1000 geometric 
features related to the manufacturing equipment and support apparatus, such as fi xtures. 
CAD representation of parts has become commonplace, and this permits the transfer of 
design drawings via the Internet from design centers to tool makers or manufacturing 
plants anywhere in the world. Design data consists of engineering drawings made for 
various purposes, design specifi cations, bills of material, fi nal design reports, progress 
reports, engineering analyses, engineering change notices, results from prototype tests, 
minutes of design reviews, and patent applications. However, the interoperability and 
exchange among this broad range of design databases is far from optimum. “There is 
no common data architecture that can hold and exchange technical information such as 
part shapes, bills of materials, product confi gurations, functional requirements, physical 
behavior, and much else that is required for deep exploitation of virtual manufacturing.” 1 
Regardless of the sophistication of computer-based design, drawing, and planning tools, 
engineers will always need to communicate in the written and spoken word.
 9.3.1 Engineering Drawings 
 The historical goal of detail design has been to produce drawings that contain the infor-
mation needed to manufacture the product. These drawing should be so complete that 
they leave no room for misinterpretation. The information on a detail drawing includes:   
 
● Standard views of orthogonal projection—top, front, side views 
 
● Auxiliary views such as sections, enlarged views, or isometric views that aid in 
visualizing the component and clarifying the details 
 
● Dimensions—presented according to the GD&T standard ANSI Y14.5M 
 
●  Tolerances 
 
● Material specifi cation, and any special processing instructions 
 
●  Manufacturing details, such as parting line location, draft angle, surface fi nish 
1. Retooling Manufacturing: Bridging Design, Materials, and Production, National Academies Press, 
Washington, DC, 2004, p. 10.

9
392
 FIGURE 9.3 
 A detail design drawing of a lever. 

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
393
9
 Sometimes a specifi cation sheet replaces the notes on the drawing and accompanies it. 
Figure 9.3 is an example of a detail drawing for a lever. Note the use of GD&T dimen-
sions and tolerances. If the design is developed digitally in a CAD system, then the 
digital model becomes the governing authority for the component defi nition.   
 Two other common types of engineering drawings are the layout drawing and the 
assembly drawing . Design layouts  show the spatial relationships of all components in 
the assembled product (the system). The design layout is developed fully in the prod-
uct architecture step of embodiment design. It serves to visualize the functioning of 
the product and to ensure that there is physical space for all of the components. 
 Assembly drawings  are created in detail design as tools for passing design intent 
to the production department, as well as the user. They show how the part is related 
in space and connected to other parts of the assembly. Dimensional information in 
assembly drawings is limited to that necessary for the assembly. Reference is made to 
the detail drawing number of each part for full information on dimensions and toler-
ances. Figure 9.4 is an exploded assembly drawing of a speed reducer. 
 When a detail drawing is fi nished, it must be checked to ensure that the drawing 
correctly portrays the function and fi t of the design. 1  Checking should be performed by 
 1.  G .  Vrsek , “ Documenting and Communicating the Design ,”  ASM Handbook,   vol. 20,  ASM 
 International, Materials Park, OH ,  1998 ,  pp. 222–30 . 
FIGURE 9.4
Exploded assembly drawing for a speed reducer.

394 
engineering design 
9
someone not initially involved with the project who can bring a fresh but experienced 
perspective. Since design is an iterative process, it is important to record the history 
of the project and the changes that are made along the way. This should be done in 
the title block and revision column of the drawing. A formalized drawing release pro-
cess must be in place so that everyone who needs to know is informed about design 
changes. An advantage of using a digital model of design parts is that if changes are 
only made there, then everyone who can access the model has up-to-date information. 
 An important issue in detail design is managing the volume of information cre-
ated, controlling versions, and assuring retrievability of the information. Product data 
management (PDM) software provides a link between product design and manufac-
turing. It provides control of design databases (CAD models, drawings, BOM, etc.) in 
terms of check-in and check-out of the data to multi-users, carrying out engineering 
design changes, and control of the release of all versions of component and assembly 
designs. Because data security is provided by the PDM system, it is possible to make 
the design data available electronically to all authorized users along the product devel-
opment chain. Most CAD software has a built-in PDM functionality. 
 9.3.2 Bill of Materials 
 The bill of materials (BOM) or the parts list is a list of each individual component 
in the product. As Fig. 9.5 shows, it lists the part description, quantity needed for a 
complete assembly, part number, the source of the part, and purchase order number 
if outsourced to a supplier. This version of the bill of materials also lists the name of 
the engineer responsible for the detail design of each part, and the name of the project 
engineer who is responsible for tracking the parts through manufacture and assembly. 
 FIGURE 9.5 
 An example of a bill of materials. ( ASM Handbook, vol. 20, p. 228, ASM International. Used 
with permission.) 

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
395
9
 The bill of materials has many uses. It is essential for determining the cost of 
the product. A bill of materials will be started early in the embodiment design phase, 
when the product architecture has been established, as a way of checking whether 
the product costs are in line with that called for in the PDS. The bill of materials will 
be fi nalized in the detail design phase and will be used in the detailed cost analysis. 
The bill of materials is vital for tracking the parts during manufacture and assembly. 
It is an important archival document for the design that needs to be preserved and be 
available for retrieval.   
 9.3.3 Written Documents 
Novice design engineers often are surprised at how much time is spent in writing 
tasks connected with a design project. Design is a complicated process with many 
stakeholders. There are many groups who provide input to the design process and  
many groups who participate in decision-making during the process. Often a current 
decision can only be made after reviewing work done earlier in the design process. 
Members of a design team on a complicated project may need to refresh their memo-
ries about work done at a prior stage in the process just to move into new stages. The 
importance of creating an accessible and correct collection of information on all as-
pects of the design process cannot be over emphasized.
The critical need for precise and formal documentation drives all design engi-
neers to become effective at writing technical documents. Written documents create a 
lasting record of the author’s work. Rightly or wrongly the quality of the documenta-
tion gives a lasting impression of the quality of the work and of the skill of the writer.
Design engineers prepare both informal and formal documents as part of their 
daily routines. Informal documentation includes e-mail messages, and brief memo-
randa and daily entries in a design journal. Formal written documentation usually 
takes the form of letters, formal technical reports (e.g., progress reports, laboratory 
reports, process descriptions), technical papers, and proposals.
Electronic Mail
No form of communication has grown so rapidly as electronic mail (e-mail). Well 
over eight trillion e-mail messages are sent each year. Electronic mail is invaluable for 
scheduling meetings, communicating between engineers who are continents apart, com-
municating with the offi ce while on a trip, confi rming decisions made and action items, 
keeping up with the activities of professional societies, to name a few common uses.
It is important to use e-mail appropriately. E-mail cannot take the place of a 
face-to-face meeting or a telephone call. You cannot assume that the recipient has 
read an e-mail, so it is not appropriate to use e-mail when you need assurance that a 
message is received by a particular time.
The following are guidelines to professional e-mail writing.
 
● For formal business correspondence, write as you would in a business letter. Use 
proper capitalization, spelling and sentence structure.
 
● Use informative and brief Subject lines in all your messages.
 
● Keep your messages short.

396 
engineering design 
9
 
● Compress any attachments that are large and refrain from sending them to a col-
league without advance warning.
 
● Do not use emoticons or other informal visuals better suited for instant messaging 
or text messaging in personal messages.
 
● In addition to an informal signature use a formal signature block that includes the 
same contact information one would have on a business card.
 
● Delete unnecessary or repetitive information in a response to a sender when you are 
including their original message in your reply.
 
● Include relevant detail when you are responding to a sender without including their 
original message in your reply.
E-mail is instant and personal so there is a tendency to treat it differently from 
other written communication. Users often treat e-mail with the informality of a tele-
phone call. People feel free to write and send things they would never put in a business 
letter. E-mail seems to free people from their normal inhibitions. It is easy to “reply” to 
a message without thinking about the consequences. There are many documented in-
stances of two business friends “having fun” in their e-mail exchange, only to discover 
to their embarrassment that the message inadvertently was given mass circulation. It is 
important to remember that e-mails can be saved and retrieved just like newspapers.
Naturally, there are many online sources for etiquette in using online commu-
nication technology. Most technical writing manuals include sections on e-mail 
composition. A good mindset for e-mail writing is to expect to lose control over the 
dissemination or reproduction of any information you include in an e-mail message,  
so compose e-mails thoughtfully.
Memorandum Reports
The memorandum report (a.k.a. a memo) usually is written to a specifi c per-
son or group of persons concerning a specifi c topic with which both the writer and 
recipient(s) are familiar. A memorandum is a letter written to a colleague or group of 
colleagues within the same organization. A memo is transmitted to the recipient by in-
ternal means (not the U.S. Postal Service). A memorandum report is an effective way 
to communicate the same information to an entire business unit or all members of the 
same group. Since a memo is distributed within an organization, it does not require 
an individual address for each recipient. Memos are appropriate for reporting on a trip 
you took to observe a competitor’s new product; the disclosure of a new idea you have 
for an improved product; or disseminating minutes of a meeting of the design team.
Memorandum reports are short (one to three pages). The purpose in writing a 
memorandum report is to get a concise report to interested parties as quickly as pos-
sible. The main emphasis is on results, discussion, and conclusions with a minimum of 
details unless, of course, those details are critical to the analysis of the data.
The Design Notebook
Unfortunately, there is not a strong tradition of recording the decisions made dur-
ing design and capturing the broad picture of design intent so that the knowledge 
is not lost with the designer, and so that novices can learn from it. The place where 
this information most often is found is the design notebook. It should be an 8 by 
11-inch bound notebook (not spiral bound), preferably with a hard cover. It should be 
the repository for all of your planning (including plans that were not carried out), all 

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
397
9
analytical calculations, all records of experimental data, all references to sources of 
information, and all signifi cant thinking about your project.
Information should be entered directly into the notebook, not recopied from rough 
drafts. However, you should organize the information you enter in the notebook. Use 
main headings and subheadings; label key facts and ideas; liberally cross-reference 
your material; and keep an index at the front of the book to aid in your organization. 
Pages should be numbered consecutively. About once a week, review what you have 
done and write a summary of your progress that emphasizes the high points. When-
ever you do anything that may seem the least bit patentable, have your notebook read 
and witnessed by a knowledgeable colleague.
The following are good rules 1 for keeping a design notebook.
 
● Keep an index at the front of the book.
 
● Entries should be made in ink and, of course, must be legible.
 
● Make your entries at the time you do the work. Include favorable and unfavorable 
results and things not fully understood at the time. If you make errors, just cross 
them out. Do not erase, and never tear a page out of the notebook.
 
● All data must be in their original primary form (strip charts, oscilloscope pictures, 
photomicrographs, etc), not after recalculation or transformation.
 
● Rough graphs should be drawn directly in the notebook, but more carefully pre-
pared plots on graph paper also should be made and entered in the book.
 
● Give complete references to books, journals, reports, patents and any other sources 
of information.
A good engineering design notebook is one from which, several years after the project 
is completed, critical decisions will be apparent, and the reasons for the actions taken 
will be backed up by facts. It should be possible to show where every fi gure, statement 
and conclusion of the published report of the project can be substantiated by original 
entries in the design notebook.
Formal written documentation done by design engineers is of two basic types. 
Engineers write letters to persons outside their organization using the standard busi-
ness guidelines. These are available in any text on writing. Engineers also must write 
technical reports. The defi nition of technical writing is that it is concise and precise, 
written for a specialty audience, and relies on visual and written data and analysis of 
results. The purpose of engineering writing is to present information, not to entertain 
or dazzle them with fl owery language. Therefore, the information should be easy to 
fi nd within the written document. Always when writing your report, keep in mind the 
busy reader who has limited time. A design project report is a standard technical report 
that is written at the conclusion of a project. It describes the tasks undertaken and dis-
cusses the design in detail. It is an important category of the formal technical report.
Formal Technical Reports
A formal technical report usually is written at the end of a project. Generally, it 
is a complete, stand-alone document aimed at persons having widely diverse back-
grounds. Therefore, much more detail is required than for the memorandum report.
1. Adapted from T. T. Woodson, “Engineering Design,” Appendix F, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1966.

398 
engineering design 
9
The outline of a typical professional report 1 might be:
 
● Cover letter (letter of transmittal): The cover letter is provided so that persons who 
might receive the report without prior notifi cation will have some introduction to it. 
 
● Title page: The title page includes names, affi liations, and addresses of the authors.
 
● Executive summary (containing conclusions): The summary is generally less than a 
page in length and contains three paragraphs. The fi rst briefl y describes the objec-
tive of the study and the problems studied. Paragraph two describes your solution to 
the problem. The last paragraph addresses its importance to the business in terms 
of cost savings, improved quality, or new business opportunities.
 
● Table of contents, including list of fi gures and tables.
 
● Introduction: The introduction contains the pertinent technical facts that might be 
unknown to the reader but will be used in the report.
 
● Technical issue sections (analysis or experimental procedures, pertinent results, 
discussion of results):
 
❍ The experimental procedure section is usually included to indicate how the data 
were obtained and to describe any nonstandard methods or techniques that were 
employed.
 
❍ The results section describes the results of the study and includes relevant data 
analysis. Any experimental error allowances are included here.
 
❍ The discussion section presents data analysis analyzing the data to make a spe-
cifi c point, develops the data into some more meaningful form, or relates the 
data to theory described in the introduction.
 
● Conclusions: The conclusion section states in as concise a form as possible the con-
clusions that can be drawn from the study. In general, this section is the culmina-
tion of the work and the report.
 
● References: References support statements in the report and lead the reader to more 
in-depth information about a topic.
 
● Appendixes: Appendixes are used for mathematical developments, sample calcula-
tions, etc., that are not directly associated with the subject of the report and that, if 
placed in the main body of the report, would seriously impede the logical fl ow of 
thought. Final equations developed in the appendixes are then placed in the body of 
the report with reference to the appendix in which they were developed.
9.3.4 Common Challenges in Technical Writing
The following suggestions are presented as a guide to writing and an aid in avoid-
ing some of the most common mistakes. You also should avail yourself of one of the 
popular guides to English grammar and style.2
1. The contribution of Professor Richard W. Heckel for much of the material in this section is 
acknowledged.
2. W. Strunk and E. B. White, “The Elements of Style,” 4th ed., Allyn & Bacon, Needham Heights, MA, 
2000; S. W. Baker, “The Practical Stylist,” 8th ed., Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1997.

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
399
9
Tense
The choice of the tense of verbs is often confusing. The following simple rules are 
usually employed by experienced writers:
 
● Past tense: Use to describe work completed or in general to past events. “Hardness 
readings were taken on all specimens.”
 
● Present tense: Use in reference to items and ideas in the report itself. “It is clear 
from the data in Figure 4 that the motor speed is not easily controlled” or “The 
group recommends that the experiment be repeated” (present opinion).
 
● Future tense: Use in making prediction from the data that will be applicable in the 
future. “The market data given in Table II indicate that the sales for the new prod-
uct line will continue to increase in the next ten years.”
References
References are usually placed at the end of the written text. Those to the technical 
literature (described as readily available on subscription and included in most library 
collections) are made by author and journal reference (often with the title of article 
omitted) as shown by the following example. There is no single universally accepted 
format for references. Each publishing organization has a preferred style for referenc-
ing material. Examples are given below.
 
● Technical Journal Article: C. O. Smith, Transactions of the ASME, Journal of 
Mechanical Design, 1980, vol. 102, pp. 787–792.
 
● Book: Thomas T. Woodson: “Introduction to Engineering Design,” pp. 321–346. 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1966.
 
● A private communication: J. J. Doe, XYZ Company, Altoona, PA, unpublished 
research, 2004.
 
● Internal reports: J. J. Doe, Report No. 642, XYZ Company, Altoona, PA, February 
2001. 
Many engineering journals use the style guidelines for referencing developed by 
the IEEE.1
  9.3.5 Meetings 
 The business world is full of meetings that are held to exchange information and plan 
on a variety of levels and subjects. Most of these involve some kind of prepared oral 
presentation; see Sec. 9.3.6. At the lowest level of formality in this hierarchy is the 
 design team meeting . Those present are focused on a common goal and have a gener-
ally common background. The purpose of the meeting is to share the progress that 
has been made, identify problems, and hopefully, fi nd help and support in solving the 
problems. This is a group discussion, with an agenda and probably some visual aids, 
but the presentation is informal and not rehearsed. Detailed tips for effectively hold-
ing this type of meeting were given in Sec. 4.5. 
1. IEEE Editorial Style Manual [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee.org/documents/stylemanual.pdf

400 
engineering design 
9
 Next up in the meeting hierarchy would be a  design briefi ng  or design review. 
The size and diversity of the audience would depend on the importance of the project. 
It could vary from 10 to 50 people and include company managers and executives. A 
design briefi ng for high-level management must be short and to the point. Such people 
are very busy and not at all interested in the technical details that engineers love to talk 
about. A presentation of this type requires extensive preparation and practice. Usually 
you will have only 5 to 10 minutes to get your point across to the top executive. If you 
are speaking to an audience of technical managers, they will be more interested in the 
important technical details, but don’t forget also to cover information on schedule and 
costs. Generally, they will give you 15 to 30 minutes to get your points across. 
 A presentation similar to the design briefi ng on technical details is a talk before 
a professional or technical society. Here you will generally have 15 to 20 minutes to 
make your presentation before an audience of 30 to 100 people. Speaking at this kind 
of venue, whether at a national or local meeting, can be an important step in develop-
ing your career and in gaining professional reputation. 
 9.3.6 Oral Presentations 
 Impressions and reputations (favorable or unfavorable) are made most quickly by audi-
ence reaction to an oral presentation. There are a number of situations in which you 
will be called upon to give a talk. Oral communication has several special characteris-
tics: quick feedback by questions and dialogue; impact of personal enthusiasm; impact 
of visual aids; and the important infl uence of tone, emphasis, and gesture. A skilled 
speaker in close contact with an audience can communicate far more effectively than 
the cold, distant, easily evaded written word. On the other hand, the organization and 
logic of presentation must be of a higher order for oral than for written communication. 
The listener to an oral communication has no opportunity to reread a page to clarify 
a point. Many opportunities for “noise” exist in oral communication. The preparation 
and delivery of the speaker, the environment of the meeting room, and the quality of 
the visual aids all contribute to the effi ciency of the oral communication process. 
 The Design Briefi ng 
 The purpose of your talk may be to present the results of the past three months 
of work by a 10-person design team, or it may be to present some new ideas on 
 computer-aided design to an audience of upper management who are questioning if 
their large investment in CAD has paid off. Whatever the reason, you should know the 
purpose of your talk and have a good idea of who will be attending your presentation. 
This information is vital if you are to prepare an effective talk. 
 The most appropriate type of delivery for most business-oriented talks is an 
 extemporaneous-prepared talk . All the points in the talk are thought out and planned 
in detail. However, the delivery is based on a written outline, or alternatively, the text 
of the talk is completely written but the talk is delivered from an outline prepared 
from the text. This type of presentation establishes a closer, more natural contact with 
the audience that is much more believable than if the talk is read by the speaker. 
 Develop the material in your talk in terms of the interest of the audience. Organize 
it on a thought-by-thought rather than a word-by-word basis. Write your conclusions 

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
401
9
fi rst. That will make it easier to sort through all the material you have and to select 
only the pieces of information that support the conclusions. If your talk is aimed at 
selling an idea, list all of your idea’s strengths and weaknesses. That will help you 
counter arguments against adopting your idea. 
 The opening few minutes of your talk are vital in establishing whether you will 
get the audience’s attention. You need to “bring them up to speed” by explaining the 
reason for your presentation. Include enough background that they can follow the 
main body of your presentation, which should be carefully planned. Stay well within 
the time allotted for the talk so there is an opportunity for questions. Include humor-
ous stories and jokes in your talk only if you are very good at telling them. Also, avoid 
specialized technical jargon in your talk. Before ending your presentation, summarize 
your main points and conclusions. The audience should have no confusion as to the 
message you wanted to deliver. 
 Visual aids are an important part of any technical presentation; good ones can 
increase the audience retention of your ideas by 50 percent. The type of visual aid to 
use depends upon the nature of the talk and the audience. For a small informal meet-
ing of up to 10 or 12 people, handouts of an outline, data, and charts usually are effec-
tive. Transparencies used with an overhead projector or PowerPoint slides with digital 
projection are good for groups from 10 to 200 people. Slides are the preferred visual 
aids for large audiences.  
 The usual reason a technical talk is poor is lack of preparation. It is a rare person 
who can give an outstanding talk without practicing it. Once you have prepared the 
talk, the fi rst stage is individual practice. Give the talk out loud in an empty room to fi x 
the thoughts in your mind and check the timing. You may want to memorize the intro-
ductory and concluding remarks. If at all possible, videotape your individual practice. 
The dry run is a dress rehearsal before a small audience. If possible, hold the dry run 
in the same room where you will give the talk. Use the same visual aids that you will 
use in your talk. The purpose of the dry run is to help you work out any problems in 
delivery, organization, or timing. There should be a critique following the dry run, and 
the talk should be reworked and repeated as many times as are necessary to do it right. 
 When delivering the talk, if you are not formally introduced, you should give your 
name and the names of any other team members. This information also should be on 
your fi rst slide. You should speak loudly enough to be easily heard. For a large group, 
that will require the use of a microphone. Work hard to project a calm, confi dent de-
livery, but don’t come on in an overly aggressive style that will arouse adversarial ten-
dencies in your audience. Avoid annoying mannerisms like rattling the change in your 
pocket and pacing up and down the platform. Whenever possible, avoid talking in the 
dark. The audience might well go to sleep or, at worst, sneak out. Maintaining eye con-
tact with the audience is an important part of the feedback in the communication loop. 
 The questions that follow a talk are an important part of the oral communication pro-
cess; they show that the audience is interested and has been listening. If at all possible, do 
not allow interruptions to your talk for questions. If the “big boss” interrupts with a ques-
tion, compliment him for his perceptiveness and explain that the point will be covered 
in a few moments. Never apologize for the inadequacy of your results. Let a questioner 
complete the questions before breaking in with an answer. Avoid being argumentative or 
letting the questioner see that you think the question is stupid. Do not prolong the ques-
tion period unnecessarily. When the questions slack off, adjourn the meeting.  

402 
engineering design 
9
 9.4 
 FINAL DESIGN REVIEW 
 The fi nal design review should be conducted when the detail drawings are complete 
and ready for release to manufacturing. In most cases beta-prototype testing will 
have been completed. The purpose of the fi nal design review is to compare the design 
against the most updated version of the product design specifi cation (PDS) and a 
design review checklist, and to decide whether the design is ready for production. 
 The general conditions under which design reviews are held were discussed in 
Sec. 1.8. Since this is the last review before design release, a complete complement of 
personnel should be in attendance. This would include design specialists not associ-
ated with the project to constructively review that the design meets all requirements of 
the PDS. Other experts review the design for reliability and safety, quality assurance, 
fi eld service engineering, and purchasing. Marketing people or the customer’s repre-
sentatives will be present. Manufacturing personnel will be in strong attendance, es-
pecially plant operating management responsible for producing the design, and DFM 
experts. Other experts, who might be called in, depending upon circumstances, are 
representatives from legal, patents, human factors, or R & D. Supplier representation 
is often desirable. The intent is to have a group comprised of people with different 
expertise, interests, and agendas. The chairperson of the fi nal design review will be 
an important corporate offi cial like the VP of engineering, the director of product 
development, or an experienced engineering manager, depending on the importance 
of the product. 
 An effective design review consists of three elements:  1  (1) input documents, (2) an 
effective meeting process, and (3) an appropriate output. 
 9.4.1 Input Documents 
 The input for the review consists of documents such as the PDS, the QFD analysis, key 
technical analyses like FEA and CFD, FMEAs, the quality plan, including robustness 
analysis, the testing plan and results of the verifi cation tests, the detail and assembly 
drawings, the product specifi cations, and cost projections. This documentation can be 
voluminous, and it is not all covered in the fi nal review. Important elements will have 
been reviewed previously, and they will be certifi ed as satisfactory at the fi nal review. 
Another important input to the meeting is the selection of the people who will attend 
the review. They must be authorized to make decisions about the design and have the 
ability and responsibility to take corrective action. 
 Everyone attending the design review must receive a package of information well 
before the meeting. An ideal way to conduct a review is to hold a briefi ng session at 
least 10 days before the formal review. Members of the design team will make pre-
sentations to review the PDS and design review checklist to ensure that the review 
 1.   K .  Sater-Black and  N .  Iverson ,  Mechanical Engineering, March  1994 ,  pp. 89–92 . 

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
403
9
team has a common understanding of the design requirements. Then an overview 
of the design is given, describing how the contents of the design review information 
package relate to the design. Finally, members of the design review team will be as-
signed questions from the design checklist for special concentration. This is an in-
formational meeting. Criticism of the design is reserved for the formal design review 
meeting. 
 9.4.2 Review Meeting Process 
 The design review meeting should be formally structured with a well-planned agenda. 
The fi nal design review is more of an audit in contrast to the earlier reviews, which 
are more multifunctional problem-solving sessions. The meeting is structured so that 
it results in a documented assessment of the design. The review uses a checklist of 
items that need to be considered. Each item is discussed and it is decided whether it 
passes the review. The drawings, simulations, test results, FMEAs, and other elements 
are used to support the evaluation. Sometimes a 1–5 scale is used to rate each require-
ment, but in a fi nal review an “up or down” decision needs to be made. Any items 
that do not pass the review are tagged as action items with the name of the individual 
responsible for corrective action. Figure 9.6 shows an abbreviated checklist for a fi nal 
design review. A new checklist should be developed for each new product. While the 
checklist in Fig. 9.6 is not exhaustive, it is illustrative of the many details that need to 
be considered in the fi nal design review.  
 The design review builds a paper trail of meeting minutes, the decisions or ratings 
for each design requirement, and a clear action plan of what will be done by whom 
and by when to fi x any defi ciencies in the design. This is important documentation to 
be used in any future product liability or patent litigation, and for guidance when the 
time comes for a product redesign. 
 9.4.3 Output from Review 
 The output from the design review is a decision as to whether the product is ready to 
release to the manufacturing department. Sometimes the decision to proceed is tenta-
tive, with several open issues that need to be resolved, but in the judgment of manage-
ment the fi xes can be made before product launch. 
 9.5 
 DESIGN AND BUSINESS ACTIVITIES BEYOND DETAIL DESIGN 
 Figure 9.2 shows a number of activities that must be carried out after the end of the 
detail design phase in order to launch a product. In this section we briefl y discuss each 
activity from the viewpoint of the engineering information that must be supplied to 
each of these business functions. These activities are divided into two groups: techni-
cal (manufacturing or design) and business (marketing or purchasing). 

404 
engineering design 
9
Technical activities 
 
●  Process planning: Decisions on what manufacturing processes and process steps 
are needed to make parts that will be made in-house must be taken before a cost 
estimate can be made for the fi nal design review. Additional process planning 
1. Overall requirements—does it meet:
 
Customer requirements
 
Product design specification
 
Applicable industry and governmental standards
2. Functional requirements—does it meet:
 
Mechanical, electrical, thermal loads
 
Size and weight
 
Mechanical strength
 
Projected life
3. Environmental requirements—does it meet:
 
Temperature extremes, in operation and storage
 
Extremes of humidity
 
Extremes of vibration
 
Shock
 
Foreign material contamination
 
Corrosion
 
Outdoor exposure extremes (ultraviolet radiation, rain, hail, wind, sand)
4. Manufacturing requirements—does it meet:
 
Use of standard components and subassemblies
 
Tolerances consistent with processes and equipment
 
Materials well defined and consistent with performance requirements
 
Materials minimize material inventory
 
Have critical control parameters been identified?
 
Manufacturing processes use existing equipment
5. Operational requirements
 
Is it easy to install in the field?
 
Are items requiring frequent maintenance easily accessible?
 
Has serviceperson safety been considered?
 
Have human factors been adequately considered in design?
 
Are servicing instructions clear? Are they derived from FMEA or FTA?
6. Reliability requirements
 
Have hazards been adequately investigated?
 
Have failure modes been investigated and documented?
 
Has a thorough safety analysis been conducted?
 
Have life integrity tests been completed successfully?
 
Has derating been employed in critical components?
7. Cost requirements
 
Does the product meet the cost target?
 
Have cost comparisons been made with competitive products?
 
Have service warranty costs been quantified and minimized?
 
Has value engineering analysis been made for possible cost reduction?
8. Other requirements
 
Have critical components been optimized for robustness?
 
Has a search been conducted to avoid patent infringement?
 
Has prompt action been taken to apply for possible patent protection?
 
Does the product appearance represent the technical quality and cost of the product?
 
Has the product development process been adequately documented for defense in possible product
 
    liability action?
 
Does the product comply with applicable laws and agency requirements?
 FIGURE 9.6 
 Typical items on a fi nal design review checklist. 

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
405
9
fi nalizes these decisions and makes adjustments between make-buy determina-
tions. This requires detail drawings with fi nal dimensions and tolerances. 
 
●  Develop production control plan: Production control is concerned with routing, 
scheduling, dispatching, and expediting the fl ow of components, subassemblies, and 
assemblies for a product within a manufacturing plant in an orderly and  effi cient 
manner. This requires information on the BOM and the process plan for each part. 
One popular way of doing this today is just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing. With JIT 
a company minimizes inventory by receiving parts and subassemblies in small lots 
just as they are needed on the production fl oor. With this method of manufacturing 
the supplier is an extension of the production line. JIT manufacturing obviously 
requires close and harmonious relations with the supplier companies. The supplier 
must be reliable, ethical, and capable of delivering quality parts. 
 
●  Designing of tooling and fi xtures: Tooling applies the forces to shape or cut the 
parts, and fi xtures hold the parts for ease of assembly. In a concurrent engineering 
strategy of design, both of these fi rst two activities would start in detail design be-
fore the fi nal design review. 
 
●  Develop quality assurance plan: This plan describes how statistical process control 
will be used to ensure the quality of the product. This requires information on CTQs, 
FMEAs, and results of prototype testing that has been carried out to that point.  
 
●  Develop maintenance plan: Any specifi c maintenance will be prescribed by the de-
sign team. The extent of this varies greatly depending on the product. For large, 
expensive products like aircraft engines and land-based gas turbines the manufac-
turers usually perform the maintenance and overhaul functions. This can prove to 
be a very profi table business over the long expected life of such equipment. 
 
●  Develop plan for retirement from service: As discussed in Chap. 10, it is the respon-
sibility of the design team to develop a safe and environmentally friendly way to 
retire the product after it has completed its useful life. 
 
●  Manufacturing production acceptance test: This testing of products produced from the 
actual production line is carried out in conjunction with members of the design team.
 Business activities 
 
●  Negotiate with suppliers: Manufacturing in conjunction with purchasing decides 
which components or assemblies should be outsourced from the plant, the make/
buy decision. Purchasing then negotiates with suppliers using complete specifi ca-
tions and drawings for the components.  
 
●  Develop distribution plan: A general idea about the distribution system for the product 
will be part of the original marketing plan that started the product development process. 
Now marketing/sales will develop a detailed plan for warehouses, supply points, and 
ways of shipping the product. The design team will provide any needed information 
about possible damage to the product in shipping or with regard to product shelf life.  
 
●  Write the user manual: Generally, this is the responsibility of marketing, with 
needed technical input from the design team. 
 
●  Decide on warranty: Marketing makes decisions about the warranty on a product 
because this is a customer-related issue. Input is obtained from the design team 
about expected durability and reliability of the product. 

406 
engineering design 
9
 
●  Develop a plan for customer service: Again, marketing is responsible for this activ-
ity because it is customer related. They either develop a network of dealers who do 
maintenance, as with automobiles, or develop one or more repair depots to which the 
customer sends the product for repair. Customer service supplies design with infor-
mation on the nature of product failures or weaknesses for consideration in product 
redesign. If a serious weakness is uncovered, then a design fi x will be called for. 
 Just as successful testing of a qualifi cation prototype ends the design phase of 
product development, the successful testing of the pilot runs from manufacturing ends 
the product development process. The proven ability to manufacture the product to 
specifi cation and within cost budget makes possible the product launch in which the 
product is released to the general public or shipped to the customer. Often the product 
development team is kept in place for about six months after launch to take care of the 
inevitable “bugs” that will appear in a new product. 
 9.6 
 FACILITATING DESIGN AND MANUFACTURING
 WITH COMPUTER-BASED METHODS 
 Engineering design is a complex process that produces large quantities of data and in-
formation. Moreover, we have seen that there is a strong imperative to reduce the prod-
uct design cycle time, improve the quality of the product, and decrease manufacturing 
cost. Computer-aided engineering (CAE) has had an important and growing infl uence 
on these goals. Clearly the ability to make computer models and carry out computer-
based simulation has greatly increased our ability to effi ciently size parts and improve 
their durability. The ability to design for robustness (Chap. 15) has increased the qual-
ity of what we design. But it is in detail design, and beyond, where everything comes 
together, that CAE has the greatest economic impact. Detail design traditionally has 
involved the greatest commitment of personnel of the three phases of design because 
there is such a great volume of work to do. CAE has signifi cantly reduced the drafting 
task of preparing engineering drawings. The ability to make changes quickly in a CAD 
system has saved countless hours of redrawing details. Similarly, the ability to store 
standard details in a CAD system for retrieval when needed saves much drafting labor. 
 Many companies have a product line that is generic but requires engineering de-
cisions to tailor the product to the customer’s needs. For example, a manufacturer of 
industrial fans will change the motor speed, propeller pitch, and structural supports 
depending on the required fl ow rate, static pressure, and duct size. Typically this re-
quires standard engineering calculations and drawings and a bill of materials (BOM) 
in order to produce a quote to the customer. Using conventional methods this might 
require a two-week turnaround, but using modern integrated CAD software that au-
tomates the computation, drawing, and BOM generation, the quote can be developed 
in one day. 1 
1. T. Dring, Machine Design, Sept. 26, 1994, pp. 59–64.

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
407
9
 CAD has evolved rapidly to include capabilities such as 3-D solid modeling per-
formed on desktop workstations and integrated with such powerful CAE tools as fi -
nite element analysis (FEA) and computational fl uid dynamics (CFD). Collaborative 
design, where different engineers located anywhere in the world can contribute to 
a common CAD design, is being practiced routinely, and virtual reality, where the 
viewer becomes an active part of the design model, is within the capability of any 
design offi ce. In addition, CAD modeling places rapid prototyping within the reach of 
any design offi ce.  
 9.6.1 Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) 
 Product lifecycle management  (PLM) refers to a set of computer-based tools that has 
been developed to assist a company to more effectively perform the product design 
and manufacturing functions from conceptual design to product retirement; see 
Figs. 9.1 and 9.2. The software provides complete integration of the engineering work-
fl ow from start to fi nish of product design. 
 There are three major subsystems to PLM. 
 
●  Product data management (PDM) software provides a link between product design 
and manufacturing. It provides control of design databases (CAD models, draw-
ings, BOM, etc.) in terms of check-in and check-out of the data to multiple users, 
carrying out engineering design changes, and control of the release of all versions 
of component and assembly designs. Because data security is provided by the PDM 
system, it is possible to make the design data available electronically to all autho-
rized users along the product development chain. Most CAD software has a built-in 
PDM functionality. 
 
●  Manufacturing process management  (MPM) bridges the gap between product de-
sign and production control. It includes such technologies as computer-aided pro-
cess planning (CAPP), computer-aided manufacturing (NC machining and direct 
numerical control), and computer-aided quality assurance (FMEA, SPC, and toler-
ance stackup analysis). It also includes production planning and inventory control 
using  materials requirements planning software (MRP and MRP II).  
 
●  Customer relationship management  (CRM) software provides integrated support 
to marketing, sales, and the customer service functions. It provides automation of 
the basic customer contact needs in these functional areas, but it also provides ana-
lytical capabilities for the data collected from customers to provide information on 
such issues as market segmentation, measures of customer satisfaction, and degree 
of customer retention. 
  While PLM systems are specifi cally designed to increase the effectiveness of 
the product design process,  enterprise resource planning  (ERP) systems are aimed 
at integrating the basic business processes of an organization. Originally ERP dealt 
with manufacturing issues like order entry, purchasing execution, inventory man-
agement, and MRP. Today the scope of ERP is very broad and includes every as-
pect of the business enterprise. This includes human resources, payroll, accounting, 
fi nancial management, and supply chain management. 

408 
engineering design 
9
 9.7 
SUMMARY 
 Detail design is the phase of the design process where all of the details are brought to-
gether, decisions fi nalized, and a decision is made by management whether to release the 
design for production. The fi rst task of detail design is to complete confi guration and para-
metric design and to develop the engineering drawings. These documents, together with 
the design specifi cations, should contain the information to unambiguously manufacture 
the product. Any drawings, calculations, and decisions not completed in the embodiment 
design phase need to be made. Often in order to complete all these myriad details it is 
necessary to impose a design freeze. Once a freeze has been imposed, no changes can be 
made to the design unless they have been approved by a formal design control authority. 
 The detail design phase also involves verifi cation testing of a prototype, the gen-
eration of a bill of materials (BOM) from the assembly drawings, a fi nal cost estimate, 
and decisions on whether to make each part in-house or to obtain it from an outside 
supplier. These activities are greatly facilitated by the use of CAD tools. 
 Detail design ends when the design is reviewed and accepted by a formal design 
review process. The review consists of comparing the design documentation (draw-
ings, analyses, simulations, test results, HOQ, FMEAs, etc.) against a checklist of de-
sign requirements. 
 While detail design is the end of the design process, it is not the end of the product 
development process. Some of the tasks that must be completed before product launch 
are process planning, design of tooling, negotiating with suppliers, developing a quality 
assurance plan, marketing plan, distribution plan, customer service plan, maintenance 
plan, and a plan for retirement of the product from service. Product launch depends on 
the fi rst batch of product from the production line passing a manufacturing prototype 
acceptance test. Product lifecycle management (PLM) software increasingly is being 
used in carrying out the many tasks needed to achieve a timely product launch. 
 The engineering design process, and in particular the detail design phase, requires 
considerable skill and effort in communication on the part of design team members. 
For both written and oral communication the most important rules for success are 
(1) understand your audience, and (2) practice, practice, practice. In writing a techni-
cal report this means understanding the various audiences that will read the report, 
and organizing it accordingly. It also means working the original draft into a polished 
communication by the hard work of several rewrites. In making an oral presentation 
it means understanding your audience and organizing the talk accordingly. It also 
requires the hard work of practice until you have mastered the talk. 
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Assembly drawing
Design freeze
Layout drawing
Bill of materials
Design review
MPM software
Collaborative design
Detail drawing
Memorandum report
CRM software
ERP software
PDM software
Design briefi ng
Exploded assembly
PLM software

 
chapter 9: Detail Design 
409
9
  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Detail Design 
 AT&T:  Moving a Design into Production,  McGraw-Hill, New York ,  1993 . 
 Detail Design,  The Institution of Mechanical Engineers, London ,  1975 . 
 Hales ,  C . and  S .  Gooch :  Managing Engineering Design,  Springer, New York ,  2004 . 
 Vrsek ,  G .: “Documenting and Communicating the Design”  ASM Handbook, vol. 20:  Materi-
als Selection and Design,  pp. 222–30 ,  ASM International, Materials Park, OH ,  1997 . 
Written Communication 
 Brusaw ,  C. T . (ed.):  Handbook of Technical Writing,  5th ed.,  St. Martin’s Press, New York , 
 1997 . 
 Eisenberg .  A .:  A Beginner’s Guide to Technical Communication,   McGraw-Hill, New York , 
 1997 . 
 Ellis ,  R .:  Communication for Engineers: Bridge the Gap,  John Wiley & Sons, New York ,  1997 . 
Finkelstein, L.: Pocket Book of Technical Writing for Engineers and Scientists, 3d ed., 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2006.
 McMurrey ,  D ., and  D. F .  Beer :  A Guide to Writing as an Engineer,  2d ed.,  John Wiley & Sons, 
New York ,  2004 . 
Oral Communication 
 Goldberg ,  D. E .:  Life Skills and Leadership for Engineers,  Chap. 3,  McGraw-Hill, New York , 
 1995 . 
 Hoff ,  R . :  I Can See You Naked: A Fearless Guide to Making Great Presentations,  Simon & 
Schuster, New York ,  1992 . 
 Wilder ,  L .:  Talk Your Way to Success,   Eastside Publishers, New York ,  1991 . 
 PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES 
 9.1 
Examine the detail drawings for a product designed by a nearby manufacturing com-
pany. Be sure you can identify the actual shape, dimensions, and tolerances. What other 
information is contained in the drawing? 
 9.2 
Look at an automotive mechanics manual. Identify a subassembly like a fuel-injection 
system or a front suspension. From the assembly drawings, write up a bill of materials. 
9.3 
It is important for an OEM to maintain a strong positive relationship with its suppliers. 
A key to achieving this is in understanding the goals that the supplier has for its busi-
ness and aligning your organization with them. Make a list of four goals that would be 
typical for a supplier in a manufacturing industry.
9.4 
The past 10 years have seen a growing trend for manufacturing operations to be moved 
off shore from the United States to Asian countries. Prepare a list of pros and cons con-
cerning the off-shoring issue.

410 
engineering design 
9
 9.5 
Visualize the impact of CAE in a world that is even more electronically connected than 
it is today. How might the practice of detail design change? 
 9.6 
Prepare a fi nal design review checklist for your design project. 
 9.7 
Carefully read a technical paper from a journal in your fi eld of interest and comment 
on whether it conforms with the outline for technical reports discussed in Sec. 9.3.3. If 
there are major differences, explain the reasons for these. 
9.8  
Write a memorandum to your supervisor justifying your project being three weeks late 
and asking for an extension. 
 9.9 
Prepare a PowerPoint presentation for the fi rst design review of your team project. 
 9.10 Prepare a poster for the fi nal presentation for your design project. A poster is a large 
visual display, with a series of graphics, containing text, mounted on a large sheet of 
poster board. The display should be self-contained, such that a technical person will be 
able to understand what you did. 

10
411
10
DESIGN FOR SUSTAINABILITY 
AND THE ENVIRONMENT
The ecosystem of planet Earth is human-dominated. The standard of living of hu-
mans is due, in large part, to their ability to develop technology to dominate the eco-
system. Rather than adapting to the earth’s environment, humans have found ways to 
alter their immediate environment for their own needs. So signifi cant is the human 
alteration of the planet that some scientists declare present times to represent a new 
geological era: the Anthropocene era, also known as the age of the human.1
Today’s designers and engineers are expected to move beyond design for recy-
clability (an end-of-life strategy), beyond design for the environment (a life-cycle 
objective), to design for sustainability—an all encompassing paradigm that reaches 
outside of physical behavior and beyond the physical life cycle. Sustainability impacts 
a product’s complete supply chain and radiates from supply chain links into the social 
fabric of everyday life. Sustainable development can be generally defi ned as economic 
growth done in a way that is compatible with the environment.2
This chapter introduces the topic of sustainability after providing comments on 
its precursor, the environmental movement. Sustainability is defi ned by the report of 
a United Nations Commission in Sec. 10.2. How companies respond to being viewed 
through the lens of sustainability is introduced in Sec. 10.3. The remainder of the chap-
ter presents the change that has occurred in engineering design methods moving from 
an emphasis on environmental concerns to an emphasis on sustainability concerns.
10.1
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MOVEMENT
This section will provide the briefest of introductions to the language of the environ-
mental movement in order to contrast the scope of sustainability and follow some of 
its core principles. Understanding relies on precise defi nitions of terms, particularly 
1. B. R. Allenby, The Theory and Practice of Sustainable Engineering, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ, 2011.
2. M. R. Chertow, The IPAT Equation and Its Variants,” Journal of Industrial Ecology, October 2000, 
vol. 4, 4:13–29.

412 
engineering design 
10
when branching into new fi elds of study; the defi nitions given in this section are from 
the Biology-Online Dictionary.1 An ecosystem is “a system that includes all living 
organisms in an area as well as its physical environment (including the local atmo-
sphere) functioning together as a unit.” All ecosystems on the earth combine into what 
is known as the biosphere. Earth’s biosphere is the part of the planet that can support 
life and includes the earth’s crust, atmosphere, and water layers as well. 
10.1.1 Ecosystems and Balance
Ecosystems can be modeled in engineering terms as control volumes with defi ned 
physical boundaries enclosing living organisms, natural elements (i.e., portion of 
the earth’s surface and crust, air, water), people, and man-made structures. Ongoing 
ecosystems must achieve a balance among all the exchanges of energy and material 
among its inhabitants; these exchanges are made possible by signals passed between 
them. Members of an ecosystem can be modeled as a set of function structures inter-
acting with each other and their environment by exchanging fl ows of energy, material 
and signals (see Sec. 6.5). Ecosystem ecology is the study of these fl ows. 
An ecosystem survives as long as the resources within it are adequate to sup-
port the living systems it holds. The resources may be supplied from other members 
inside the system, from the outside, or restored through some cyclic action of the sys-
tem itself. The earth supplies essential resources for plants and animals through sun-
light and three natural cycles: carbon, nitrogen, and water. Disruption of these inputs 
causes imbalance in the ecosystems, which will ultimately impact the survivability of 
its inhabitants.
Basic biological ecosystems maintain balance by adhering to canons developed 
through evolution.2
1. Use waste as a resource
2. Diversify and cooperate to fully use the habitat
3. Gather and use energy effi ciently
4. Optimize rather than maximize
5. Use material sparingly
6. Don’t foul nests
7. Don’t draw down resources
8. Remain in balance with the biosphere
9. Run on information
10. Shop locally
Canon 4 may seem odd to designers. In this case, optimize implies making decisions 
based on optimizing the outcome of the ecosystem as a whole, rather than maximiz-
ing the outcome of one particular member. Absent from the list of principles for bal-
ancing biological ecosystems is the action of inhabitants to restore resources. That 
role can only be fi lled by human inhabitants of an ecosystem.
1. Biology-Online.org, http://www.biology-online.org/dictionary.
2. J. M. Benyus, Biomimicry, Morrow, New York, 1997.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
413
10
10.1.2 United States Environmental Movement
Throughout history there have been cases of naturalists, scientists, social workers, 
and politicians who have publicized issues of sanitation and improper waste handling, 
conservation of natural resources (e.g., President Theodore Roosevelt), and pollution. 
However, efforts to alleviate problems associated with these issues usually came only 
after their impact severely affected the populous. Rachel Carson’s book Silent Spring,1 
published in 1962, is credited with raising awareness about beginning the environ-
mental movement in the United States. Silent Spring documented the negative impact 
of pesticides, particularly DDT, on the environment. The title of the book projects the 
vision of a spring without the sound of birds.
The Environmental Protection Agency (www.epa.gov) was consolidated from 
smaller governmental units into one agency by President Richard Nixon in 1970. The 
EPA is endowed with the authority to write and enforce regulations based on legis-
lation. Several landmark pieces of environmental legislation were passed in the late 
1960s and 1970s. The EPA website includes descriptions of all of the laws and regu-
lations created to protect human health and the environment. Most readers will be 
familiar with a popular and voluntary program for encouraging energy effi ciency in 
consumer goods—Energy Star (www.energystar.gov). There is a rich literature base 
on the environmental movement in the United States2 and around the world.3
10.1.3 Measures of Environmental Impact
Today there are both public and private organizations with goals of preserving and 
improving the environment for human habitation. These groups range in scale from 
the local level to the national level and on to the international level. Environmental 
Science and Environmental Engineering degree programs exist to train students in 
history, science, policy, and design to mitigate environmental problems. 
Interdisciplinary sciences for the study of environmental issues are fl ourishing. 
A key concept in environmental science is the quantifi cation of the impact of humans 
and technology on the environment. A simple equation was developed in the 1970s to 
model the interaction of population with the environment.4 The factors in the equation 
are environmental impact (I ), population (P ), affl uence5 (A), and technology (T). The 
resulting IPAT equation is shown in Eq. (10.1). 
 
I = P × A × T 
(10.1)
1. R. Carson, Silent Spring, Houghton Miffl in, Boston, 1962.
2. See for example: P. Shabecoff, A Fierce Green Fire: The American Environmental Movement, Hill 
and Wang, New York, 1993.
3. See for example: R. Guha, Environmentalism: A Global History, Oxford University Press, New 
Delhi, 2000.
4. M. R. Chertow, “The IPAT Equation and Its Variants,” Journal of Industrial Ecology, 2000, 4:9, pp. 13–29.
5. Affl uence means a fl ow or supply of something. In the IPAT equation it usually means a measure of 
value on a per capita basis.

414 
engineering design 
10
This equation is a model to indicate the infl uence of each of the terms on the 
others. Allenby’s interpretation of the IPAT equation for the environment is given by 
Eq. (10.2).
Overall Environmental Impact
population
resource use
person
environmental impact
unit of resource use
=
×
×
 
 
(10.2)
Technology (T) is used to represent the infl uence that man-made systems can have 
on environmental impact. Strategies for reducing the overall environmental impact 
can be interpreted directly from Eq. (10.2). They are: (1) reduce population or slow its 
growth; (2) reduce the resource use per person; and (3) reduce the impact per unit of 
resource. Designers and engineers will naturally focus on developing technology that 
will reduce the T in the equation.
The carbon footprint is another popular metric for measuring environmental 
impact. Merriam-Webster gives the following defi nition:
Carbon footprint—the amount of greenhouse gases and specifi cally carbon dioxide 
emitted by something (as a person’s activities or a product’s manufacture and trans-
port) during a given period.1
The term “carbon footprint” was introduced in 1999 but is now in common usage. 
In 2007 carbon footprint labels began appearing on some goods in Great Britain.2 
The process to measure the carbon footprint is complex, and boundaries must be set 
on how far back along the supply chain the calculation should be taken. The Inter-
national Standards Organization is preparing a standard for carbon footprinting that 
is expected in 2012 (ISO 14067). One benefi t of undergoing the carbon footprint de-
termination process is the focus it brings to the environmental impact of each step of 
production. 
It is no accident that the most popular metric for environmental impact is based 
on CO2 emissions. Carbon dioxide is the most prevalent greenhouse gas after water 
vapor and has the most harmful impact of the other greenhouse gases (GHG). Carbon 
dioxide is generated by the combustion of fossil fuels—linking it directly to the 
behavior of the human inhabitants of the biosphere. The fact that climate change (for-
merly known as global warming) is a result of human habitation has been accepted 
into our culture. 
10.1.4 Interaction of Energy Use with the Environment
Modern society has been built with a dependence on fossil fuels: coal, oil, and natural 
gas. The combustion of fossil fuels produces CO2, the chief constituent of greenhouse 
gas. Not only is there a concern over the long-term supply of fossil fuels, and their 
1. www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary, accessed July 27, 2011.
2. “Following the Footprints,” The Economist Technical Quarterly, June 4, 2011, pp. 14–18.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
415
10
spiraling cost, but there is a growing recognition of the need to reduce dependence on 
fossil fuels because of their impact on the environment. 
There are also economic concerns about the stability of our energy supply (spe-
cifi cally oil). The increase in environmental awareness in the 1970s coincided with the 
fi rst serious shock to the U.S. oil supply: the 1973 oil crisis. In response to U.S. support 
for Israel, Arab members of OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) 
and Tunisia, Syria, and Egypt declared an embargo on oil exports to the United States, 
Japan, Great Britain, Canada and the Netherlands and reduced their production. The 
embargo lasted from October of 1973 to mid-March of 1974. At the end of the period 
the price of oil in the United States was $12 per barrel, about four times the price less 
than an year earlier and the risk of dependence on imported oil became clear.1 The 1973 
oil crisis was the fi rst in a series of politically-motivated disruptions of the oil supply. 
Disruptions and price volatility can also be caused by natural disasters like Hurricane 
Katrina (2005) and technical disasters like the Deepwater Horizon oil spill (2010). 
At the time of the writing of this book, oil prices are hovering around $100 per 
barrel, and the United States is still heavily dependent on oil imports. Both environ-
mental and economic concerns have placed a great emphasis on the development of re-
newable energy sources such as agriculture-based fuel sources (biofuels), solar power, 
wind power, and tidal power. Many believed nuclear power would undergo a major 
revival once the waste fuel storage problem was clarifi ed. Nuclear power does not pro-
duce greenhouse gases. However, the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster (March 11, 
2011) brought the potential risks inherent with nuclear reactors to the forefront of the 
public psyche. The nuclear plant failures were the result of the 2011 Tˉohoku 9.0 earth-
quake and subsequent tsunami. The future of nuclear power is therefore clouded.
10.1.5 Behavior Changes Started by the U.S. Environmental Movement 
The environmental movement has already produced great impact on changing atti-
tudes and behaviors of citizens, governments, and businesses. Environmental science 
principles are now engrained in the education system and taught to children in K–12 
classrooms. Elementary school children learn about GHG, threats to the ozone layer, 
and that some aerosol sprays are not good for the planet. The habit of recycling house-
hold trash was born out of the environmental movement. 
Most U.S. citizens view recycling as separating their waste into different streams 
as it comes out of their homes and businesses.2 The EPA tracks the generation of solid 
waste and how it is handled using a mass balance methodology based on data from a va-
riety of sources including suppliers, industry associations, municipal governments, and 
other agencies (e.g., U.S. Census Bureau and Department of Commerce). Figure 10.1 dis-
plays a breakdown of the handling of material solid waste throughout the United States 
in 2009. The actions of local governments and adaptation by waste collection businesses 
have resulted in the creation of 9000 recycling programs (reported in 2009). According 
1. R. Mabro, “On the Security of Oil Supplies, Oil Weapons, Oil Nationalism and All That,” OPEC 
Energy Review, March 2008, vol. 32:1, pp. 1–12. 
2. The United States has a history of recycling metals from their experiences in WWII.

416 
engineering design 
10
to the 2009 fi gures from the EPA, about 12 percent of the municipal solid waste (MSW) 
consists of containers and packaging (i.e., 29.5M out of 243M tons). Nearly one-half of 
the packaging MSW (or 47.8 percent) is recovered through the recycling process. The 
2009 percentage recycled packaging by container material type were: 66.2 percent steel, 
62.4 percent paperboard, 51 percent aluminum cans, 37.5 percent aluminum, 31 percent 
glass, 22 percent wood, and 14 percent plastic. Section 10.4 will introduce how this 
stream of recycled waste becomes resources available to industries for their needs. 
U.S. government regulations continue to motivate businesses to modify produc-
tion methods to reduce the creation of harmful emissions into the air, the wastewater, 
and the solid waste. In many areas of environmental regulation the European Union 
(EU) has moved more aggressively than the United States. Because of world trade this 
has required many U.S. companies to adopt EU regulations. Engineers and designers 
respond to these incentives by creating technology to reduce air, water, and solid waste 
pollution. Section 10.5 discusses Design for the Environment (DfE) strategies for creat-
ing products that align with the established goals of the environmental movement.
10.2
SUSTAINABILTY
To sustain means to continue on into the future, usually without signifi cant change. 
Sustainability is a term that has come into popular culture as a characteristic of na-
tional fi scal policy, personal budgetary policy, and environmental policy. A formal 
FIGURE 10.1
2009 Data on disposition of municipal solid waste (MSW) in the United States. (The sizes of 
the boxes in the fi gure do not represent the values of the categories.)1 
Recycling
61.3M Tons
(25.2%)
Public
Composting
20.8M
(8.6%)
Materials Recovery
82M Tons (33.8%)
INCLUDES:
Municipal Solid Waste
243M Tons
Combustion
with Energy
Recovery
29M
(11.9%)
Discards:
131.9M
(54.3 %)
Landfills
Combustion
Other
34.2M Containers & Packaging
29.5% Containers & packaging
22.0% Nondurable Goods
  19.2% Durable Goods
14.1% Food Scraps
13.7% Yard Trimmings
 1.5% Other
Size
Number
8.2M Durable Goods
18.9M Nondurable Goods
1 “Municipal Solid Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United States: Facts and Figures 
for 2009,” EPA-530-F-010-012, U.S. EPA, December 2010, www.epa.gov/wastes.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
417
10
defi nition of sustainable development (used interchangeably with sustainability in 
much of the literature) was established by a report titled, “Our Common Future,” from 
the United Nations World Commission on Environment and Economic Development 
(WCED).1 The report states: “Sustainable development is development that meets the 
needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs.”2 This is a statement of social equity for future generations. The 
statement’s language is clear, but the true meaning and interpretation requires elabo-
ration in order to extract operational principles. 
10.2.1 WCED Report on Sustainability 
In 1983 the UN General Assembly created the WCED to examine economic and envi-
ronmental conditions in order to recommend strategies for managing global resources 
and preserving the environment to meet the needs of the rapidly expanding popula-
tion. This commission was chaired by Gro Harlem Brundtland; its report, known also 
as the “Brundtland Report,” was issued in 1987.
The WCED Report described characteristics of activities that would meet the def-
inition of sustainable and, by extension, contribute to sustainable development. Criti-
cal objectives for environment and development policies that follow from the concept 
of sustainable development include: 
 
● Revive growth in an economic sense—particularly in developing countries where 
increases in population represent unused human capacity.
 
● Change the quality of growth—Sustainable development “. . . requires a change in 
the content of growth, to make it less material- and energy-intensive and more equi-
table in its impact.”3 Any activities undertaken for economic growth must weigh ex-
pected fi nancial gain against the impact on the environment and human population.
 
● Meet essential needs for jobs, food, energy, water, and sanitation—This objec-
tive is a restatement of Maslow’s most basic human needs (see Chap. 6) with the 
addition of jobs as an enabling condition. The WCED report further states that 
“overriding priority should be given” to meeting needs of the world’s poor. 
 
● Ensure a sustainable level of population—Every ecosystem has an intrinsic limit 
on the size of the population it can support. 
 
● Conserve and enhance the resource base—The earth has a set of fi nite resources 
(e.g., potable water, fossil fuels, and minerals). The earth also has renewable re-
sources (e.g., forests) and, to some extent, unlimited resources (e.g., sunlight, air, 
and water). Some resources can be reused, but there may be temporary degradation 
of the resource until the ecosystem can restore it. The best way to conserve the re-
source base is to reduce per-capita consumption. 
1. The World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common Future, Oxford University 
Press, 1987.
2. The World Commission, op. cit., paragraph 1.
3. The World Commission, op. cit., paragraph 35.

418 
engineering design 
10
 
● Reorient technology and manage risk—The technology that defi nes the Anthro-
pocene age must be focused on solving problems of sustainability. It has been 
acknowledged that technology in the developed world has caused many of the sus-
tainability problems. New attitudes, technology, and infrastructure are being used 
in the developed world to promote sustainability. The currently developing coun-
tries are not always economically able or willing to adopt the newer, sustainable  
technologies. Finally there are a large number of underdeveloped countries who 
lack the resources (social and environmental) to move in the direction of sustain-
ability. Thus, the most economically vulnerable peoples of the world are most at 
risk from environmental hazards. 
 
● Merge environment and economics in decision making—This objective is a direct 
instruction to decision-makers. The environmental objectives included in decision-
making are typically assessed over a local or regional impact area rather than the 
global scale required for sustainability. The WCED report declares that economic 
and ecological goals are not naturally in opposition. However, the decision-making 
process must be able to articulate and quantify the impacts of alternatives on a 
vastly broader spectrum of objectives than required at the product level.
The themes of sustainability emerging from the WCED report can seem in-
timidating and unrealistic to countries established on market-based economies and 
equality of opportunity as opposed to equality of outcome. The guidelines appear 
to support the belief that sustainability will only be achieved by equalizing resource 
consumption on a global basis and that the level of equilibrium will be below the re-
source consumption currently enjoyed by several industrialized nations, a group the 
largest of which is the United States. Another potentially unsettling aspect of the sus-
tainability movement to some in industrialized countries is that it is driven by policy 
makers outside of their own sphere of political infl uence. 
10.2.2 Twenty Years After the WCED Report on Sustainability 
The 2011 public debate on legislation to raise the U.S. national debt ceiling limit of-
fers an example of the concept of sustainability and potential resistance to it. The 
U.S. national debt accumulated due to annual budget shortfalls increasingly due to 
the expanding costs of benefi ts for the elderly, unemployed, and disabled. Many fi scal 
conservatives labeled the level of government spending as unsustainable and sought 
to reduce it rather than raise the debt ceiling. Many liberals held that revenues to the 
U.S. government should be increased to support continued government spending on 
benefi ts programs by raising taxes on individuals who were “rich,” thereby redistrib-
uting income. Proponents of tax increases argued that fairness directed the govern-
ment to require more money from citizens (who had more than they needed) to raise 
the quality of life for others. The conservative position of self-reliance on individual 
economic responsibility stood in stark contrast to the liberal position of social equity 
enforced by a governing authority. 
Writers of the 1987 WCED Report gave a sense of urgency to the need for adop-
tion of recommended sustainable development guidelines. More than 20 years have 
passed since that time, and indicators mentioned later have not changed signifi cantly. 

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
419
10
However, globalization and global scale thinking are much more common. In addition, 
changes in means and modes of communication (i.e., the Internet, social networking, 
mobile devices) have served to raise awareness of disparities in socioeconomic status 
for people at both ends of the spectrum. Changes in indicators of global sustainability 
are as follows:1
 
● Population growth rate is now 1.2 percent rather than 1.7 percent (yet will still 
exceed estimates of the maximum population capacity)
 
● Malnutrition has increased
 
● HIV/AIDS cases have increased from 10M to 40M
 
● CO2 atmospheric concentration has increased from 325 ppm to 385 ppm at an 
accelerating rate
On balance, the changes cited indicate that the importance of personal health to sus-
tainability should be emphasized more than in the previous report. 
10.2.3 Measures of Sustainability
Sustainability requires metrics that incorporate a more holistic assessment of the state 
of the population than the environmental metrics of Sec. 10.1.3. That equation serves 
more as a model for understanding than a formula for calculation. Allenby revises the 
former metric, Eq. (10.2), into a sustainability impact equation2 as shown below.
 
Sustainability Impact
population
quality of life
person
sustainability load
quality of life unit
=
×
×
 (10.3)
There are two changes. The affl uence term has been broadened from a consumption 
measure (e.g., resources per capita) to a more expansive term “quality of life.” This 
revision further emphasizes the social nature of sustainability. Allenby makes clear 
that high quality of life requires reasonable levels of living conditions (formerly called 
out as environment), health, and personal economy. Since the affl uence term has ex-
panded it puts additional importance on using technology to make the sustainability 
load (the second change) as small as possible in order to accommodate the difference. 
The WCED Report has stimulated a great deal of discourse on development 
across the globe. The rhetoric and reality of the discourse, the increasing awareness of 
resource limitations, and anxiety over climate change are all acting together to shape 
a new world view. Globalization is the reality. Socioeconomic imbalance is evident. 
Quality of life disparities are apparent. In this context sustainability represents a para-
digm shift with an impact that will be more far-reaching than even the environmental 
movement. 
1. A. J. McMichael, “Population, Human Resources, Health, and the Environment: Getting the Balance 
Right,” Environment, 2008, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 48–59. 
2. B. R. Allenby, The Theory and Practice of Sustainable Engineering, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ, 2011, p. 55.

420 
engineering design 
10
10.3
CHALLENGES OF SUSTAINABILITY FOR BUSINESS
Protection of the earth’s environment is high on the value scale of most citizens of the 
world’s developed countries. Investment fi rms now offer options of stocks and mu-
tual funds of companies that meet thresholds of corporate social responsibility (CSR). 
Measures used to categorize fi rms based on corporate social responsibility include 
(but are not limited to): environmental performance based on impact reports of toxins 
and emission releases, regulatory compliance violations, and organization processes 
in place (e.g., environmental managements systems).1 
Most corporations realize that it is in their best interest to take a strong pro-
environment approach to their business. Publically traded corporations include corpo-
rate environmental goals and sustainability statements on their websites and in their 
annual reports.2 Some provide additional detail on sustainability efforts. For example, 
General Electric provides an annual citizenship report.3 
Being pro-environment can have repercussions for the bottom line. Consider a 
simple example of the creation of a new product with recycled content.
E X A M P L E 10 .1
Typical letter-sized paper purchased for use in copiers is of 20 lb. weight and has a brightness 
rating of 92, according to U.S. standards (100–104 Euro Bright scale). The online retail price 
for one case (5000 sheets) of Staples® brand paper meeting these specifi cations in July 2011 
was $39.99 for nonrecycled Staples Copy Paper.4 Costs for cases of recycled paper meet-
ing the same specifi cations were $45.99 for Staples 30% Recycled Copy Paper and $55.99 
for Staples 100% Recycled Copy Paper (this paper had a brightness rating of 90 U.S.). The 
100% recycled paper product displays the FSC logo of the Forest Stewardship Council, an in-
ternational nonprofi t organization championing forest management (including consumption) 
aligned with sustainability objectives.5 This example illustrates the impact that design for 
sustainability policies can have on a product’s quality and cost. Describing the reasons why 
adding recycled content to paper increases its cost is left for a homework assignment.
Example 10.1 illustrates the counter-intuitive pricing reality for recycled paper. It 
costs more than regular paper. The economic success of recycled paper relies on cus-
tomers choosing to pay a premium to support use of recycled content. However, not 
all recycled products will be more expensive than their counterparts. Companies must 
develop sophisticated decision-making strategies to predict accordingly. Companies 
must also continue to develop improved processes to reduce the cost of including re-
cycled content in goods.
Businesses operating in the United States necessarily adhere to all legislation, in-
cluding the growing body of environmental regulations. Companies with global markets 
must also meet regulations in the countries of their markets. This may mean creating 
product variants for different markets. Many corporations have an Environment Health 
1. M. Delmas and V. D. Blass, “Measuring Environmental Performance: The Trade-Offs of Sustainabil-
ity Ratings,” Business Strategy and the Environment, 2010, vol. 19, 245–260.
2. “Sustainability,” Stanley Black & Decker, 2011, www.stanleyblackanddecker.com.
3. “Sustainable Growth: GE 2010 Citizenship Report,” July 24, 2011, www.gecitizenship.com.
4. Prices found online at www.staples.com on July 23, 2011.
5. “Forest Stewardship Council,” www.fsc.org.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
421
10
and Safety (EHS) unit that monitors environmental regulations in relevant locations 
and develops strategies for dealing with differences in laws between countries. These 
groups must also review legislation developing in other countries that is likely to infl u-
ence the United States in the future. 
The sustainable development paradigm provides a new set of challenges to businesses 
by asserting that they are now accountable for three impacts of their actions—environ-
mental, social, and economic—on the population. If a corporation’s actions would result 
in improvement on all three fronts at the same time, sustainable development would be 
easy. However, corporate actions routinely are taken for the overall economic benefi t of 
their owners after taking into account primarily economic and performance trade-offs.1 
The majority of sustainable development decision-making scenarios will include 
some negative movement in one of the environment, economic, or social objectives. The 
state of the Cape Wind, wind-power farm provides an example of the diffi cult trade-offs 
to businesses (and governments) when implementing sustainable development projects.
E X A M P L E 10 . 2 The Cape Wind™ Project
Cape Wind is the name for the fi rst off-coast wind farm proposed in the United States. 
Cape Wind is planned to comprise 130 wind turbines, covering about 24 acres on Horse-
shoe Shoal, a shallow portion of the Nantucket Sound. The wind turbine towers will be 
about 258 feet high with base diameters of 16 feet. The propeller tips will reach 440 feet 
from the water level. The farm will be built for maximum energy production of about 
450 MW with an average of nearly 170 MW. This would offset the use of 113 million 
gallons of oil each year. The overall cost: $2.5 billion.
Massachusetts and federal government agencies have given approval and permits for 
the project and the infrastructure required for Cape Wind’s development and use. Readers 
are referred to Wikipedia2 and eCape3 websites for information on the battles waged dur-
ing the development process. Some environmentalists have opposed Cape Wind because 
of the projected negative impact on fi sh, fi shing, real estate, and tourism. 
Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., a well-known environmental attorney, wrote a Wall Street 
Journal opinion page4 calling the project a “rip-off,” as it will result in an estimated 
cost to consumers of $ 0.25 per kilowatt hour (kwh) when hydropower is available from 
Quebec producers at $0.06 kwh. Kennedy claims that a Massachusetts energy company, 
NSTAR, is being pressured to agree to buy power from Cape Wind in order to meet state 
regulations that utilities obtain 3.5 percent of their power from green sources. The eCape 
website provides many rebuttals to the Kennedy editorial. One reports that the Massachu-
setts Department of Public Utilities estimates the impact of Cape Wind product to average 
consumers would be $1.25 per month. Another is from the American Wind Energy As-
sociation (AWEA) Blog5 in which the writer implies that the need to develop wind power 
sources outweighs other economic considerations.
1. R. B. Pojasek, “Sustainability: The Three Responsibilities,” Environmental Quality Management, 
Spring 2010, pp. 87–94.
2. Cape Wind, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cape_Wind.
3. “Cape Wind: Energy for Life,” eCape, Inc., http://www.capewind.org, accessed July 30, 2011. (Note: 
It seems that the website company eCape, Inc. is affi liated with Cape Wind Associates, LLC, the com-
pany that set up the joint business venture.)
4. Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., “Nantucket’s Wind Power Rip-Off”, Wall Street Journal, Opinion Section, 
July 18, 2011. Retrieved from http://www.wsj.com.
5. T. Gray, “Why Cape Wind? Investing in America’s Energy Future Not Just Canada’s,” Into the Wind, 
posted July 20, 2011, http://www.awea.org/blog.

422 
engineering design 
10
Example 10.2 illustrates the complexities of corporations moving forward on even the 
most seemingly advantageous sustainable development actions.
The intent of the WCED report would mean that the benefi ts of a project like 
Cape Wind would include more quantifi able outcomes. Outcomes would include the 
economic impacts to those receiving power from the facility, the result of jobs it would 
create, and estimates of any losses in tourism or property values by the change in the 
view. Ideally, the changes in quality of life for all those affected by the project would 
be included. However, the concepts are too new and too ambiguous for a consensus 
defi nition to exist. The search for a way to quantify the impact a company has on all 
sustainability outcomes  has made some progress.
The term triple bottom line (TBL) was fi rst used by John Elkington in 1994.1 
It is an accounting-like term to model the impacts of the three objectives of sus-
tainability: economics and environmental and social improvement.2 It is common 
to regard the TBL as a tool to measure impact on profi ts, planet, and people. Elk-
ington’s contention was that businesses should keep three separate balance sheets, 
one for each set of stakeholders impacted by its actions. At the time it was intro-
duced, the TBL is not intended to be used to literally combine and sum impacts 
on profi ts, planet, and people. It is likely that implementations of the TBL will 
begin with a tool called a balanced scorecard, a way of assessing performance to-
ward targets on objectives on non-commensurate scales. General Electric is one of 
the early adopters of the balanced scorecard approach to monitoring progress on 
non-fi nancial targets. GE’s 2010 Citizenship Report includes an EHS Performance 
Against Commitments Table (p. 37), in which one row reads as follows:
2010 Commitment: “Continue long-term GHG and energy use reduction trend and 
drive to the following goals: 50% improvement in energy intensity by 2015.” 
Progress: “GE continued to make progress on these goals; GHGs were reduced by 
24% and energy intensity improved by 33% from the 2004 baselines.” 
2011 Commitment: “Implement an ecomagination scorecard for GE’s internal envi-
ronmental footprint against which activities that drive the goals will be measured.” 
This example provides an indication of how General Electric articulates their corporate 
goals on environmental issues in a format that makes a statement about sustainability.
10.4
END-OF-LIFE PRODUCT TRANSFORMATIONS
Essentially, all products, devices and systems that will degrade throughout their 
lifetime until they are no longer useful should be rendered into a form that supports 
sustainability. Putting nonworking items into a landfi ll is the least desirable outcome. 
Ashby puts it succinctly: “When stuff is useful, we show it respect and call it material. 
1. J. Elkington, Cannibals with Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century Business, Capstone, 1997.
2. “Triple Bottom Line,” The Economist, November 17, 2009.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
423
10
When the same stuff ceases to be useful, we lose respect for it and call it waste.”1 
There are limited options for handling the waste of products that an end-user no 
longer wants. The options are reuse, remanufacture, recycle, combustion, or landfi ll 
(Figure 10.2).
10.4.1 Reuse 
Reuse means identifying a new end-user who sees value in the product as it exists at 
the time of the original user’s plan of disposal. Allenby calls this point in a product 
life cycle the “end of fi rst life.” There is a challenge to getting the two parties together. 
Proponents of capitalism point out that markets emerge when there is a clear demand 
for the used product and a means for the buyer (fi rst user) and seller (next user) to 
communicate and exchange the product for cash or other goods. 
Planned meetings for people to exchange goods used to be called, in some areas, 
swap meets. These events were scheduled in advance to allow exchangers to meet 
face-to-face to negotiate the transaction. Today there are more venues for the sale of 
used goods, either by the fi rst-owner or by an intermediary. They include garage sales, 
rummage sales (usually organized by volunteer members of a nonprofi t organization), 
and retail stores supported by donations and run by charitable or philanthropic orga-
nizations (e.g., Goodwill Industries International and Habitat for Humanity operate 
stores for the sales of donated used goods). 
FIGURE 10.2 
Options for transformation at product end of life. 
Remanufacture
Combustion
End of Life
Reuse
Recycle
Landfill
Energy
Generation
1. M. F. Ashby, Materials and the Environment: Eco-Informed Material Choice, Elsevier, Boston, 2009, 
p. 65.

424 
engineering design 
10
The Internet has provided for the expansion of the sales of used goods by organi-
zations and individuals. One of the most successful web-based organizations for used 
goods is eBay®. The eBay Inc. corporation was founded in 1995 to create a global 
market to effi ciently connect buyers and sellers to promote sustainable commerce.1 
Online booksellers also provide an avenue for the reuse of books by giving customers 
an option to purchase used copies of books from authorized sellers. 
Parts of an existing product can also be reused. This fi rst requires the disassembly 
of the disposed device and then the identifi cation of a next user. In the case of parts 
reuse, it is more common for the process to be initiated by a third party who obtains 
the discarded device from the fi rst owner. Reuse is common in the case of rebuilt 
automotive parts like alternators and carburetors. Construction materials like bricks, 
hardwood fl ooring, and wooden trim pieces can be sometimes recovered from home 
remodeling or demolition sites.
10.4.2 Remanufacturing
An alternative to recycling is remanufacturing. Remanufacturing is the refurbishing 
of an existing system by restoring it to near new condition. This process can be lim-
ited to the cleaning and replacement of worn parts (refurbishing) or the harvesting of 
key subassemblies for placement into new parts. Remanufacturing saves energy by 
reducing the need for the processing of raw materials into new products. 
The refi lling of inkjet cartridges is a common example of remanufacturing. Offi ce 
supply companies call this practice of returning the empty cartridges “recycling,” but 
the process is a reconditioning of the product so that it can be restored to its original 
use. In this instance, end-users are surrendering their property (empty or near-empty 
printer ink cartridge). There are drawbacks to the remanufacturing process from the 
producer’s point of view: (1) it can cut into the new product market share and (2) the 
quality of the remanufactured product may be lower than that of the original product. 
The latter concern may deter the OEM from engaging in remanufacturing, leaving the 
market open for third-parties. In other cases, OEM fi rms do remanufacture their own 
used goods such as copiers and printers, and some larger engineered products like 
diesel engines and construction equipment.
10.4.3 Recycling 
Recycling is the recovery from the waste stream, products or goods that can be used in 
the raw materials stream to make the same or similar material. Recycling is the end-of-
life strategy that is best suited for deriving profi t from the waste stream. The benefi ts of 
materials recycling are the contribution to the supply of materials, with corresponding 
reduction in the consumption of natural resources, and the reduction in the volume of 
solid waste. Moreover, recycling contributes to environmental improvement through 
1. “Who We Are,” eBay Inc., http://www.ebayinc.com.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
425
10
the amount of energy saved by producing the material from recycled (secondary) mate-
rial rather than primary sources (ore or chemical feedstock). Recycling requires energy, 
with its accompanying gas emissions, but recycle energy is small compared with the 
original energy required to make the material. For example, recycled aluminum re-
quires only 5 percent of the energy required to produce it from ore. Between 10 to 15 
percent of the total energy used in the United States is devoted to the production of 
steel, aluminum, plastics, or paper. Since most of this energy is generated from fossil 
fuels, the reduction of carbon dioxide and particulate emissions due to recycling is ap-
preciable. Recycling of materials also directly reduces pollution. For example, the use 
of steel scrap in making steel bypasses the blast furnace at a considerable economic 
benefi t. Bypassing the blast furnace in processing also eliminates the heavy pollution 
associated with coke making.
The steps in recycling a material are (1) collection and transport, (2) separation, 
and (3) identifi cation and sorting.1
Collection and Transport 
Collection for recycling is determined by the location in the material cycle where 
the discarded material is found. Home scrap is residual material from primary mate-
rial production, such as cropped material from ingots or sheared edges from plates, 
which can be returned directly to the production process. Essentially all home scrap 
is recycled. Prompt industrial scrap or new scrap is that generated during the man-
ufacture of products, for example, compressed bundles of lathe turnings or stamp-
ing discard from sheets. This type of scrap is sold directly in large quantities by the 
manufacturing plant to the material producer. Old scrap is scrap generated from a 
product which has completed its useful life, such as a scrapped automobile or refrig-
erator. These products are collected and processed in a scrap yard and sold to material 
producers. The collection of recycled material from consumers can be a more diffi cult 
proposition because the material is widely distributed. Materials can be economically 
recycled only if an effective collection system can be established, as with alumi-
num cans. Collection methods include curbside pickup, buy-back centers (for some 
containers), and resource recovery centers where solid waste is sorted for recyclables 
and the waste is burned for energy. 
Separation 
Separation of economically profi table recyclable material from scrap typically 
follows one of two paths. In the fi rst path, selective dismantling takes place. Toxic 
materials like engine oil are removed, and high-value materials like gold and copper 
are removed and segregated. Dismantling leads naturally to sorting of materials into 
like categories. In the second path, the product is subjected to multiple high-energy 
impacts to shred it into small, irregular pieces. For example, automobile hulks are 
routinely processed by shredding. Shredding creates a material form that assists in 
separation. Ferrous material can be removed with large magnets, leaving behind de-
bris that must be disposed of, sometimes by incineration.
1. “Design for Recycling and Life Cycle Analysis,” Metals Handbook, Desk Edition, 2d ed., ASM Inter-
national, Materials Park, OH, 1998, pp. 1196–99.

426 
engineering design 
10
Identifi cation and Sorting
The economic value of recycling is largely dependent on the degree to which materials 
can be identifi ed and sorted into categories. Material that has been produced by recycling 
is generally called secondary material. The addition of secondary material to virgin mate-
rial in melting or molding can degrade the properties of the resultant material if the chemi-
cal composition of the secondary material is not carefully controlled. For example, in steel 
more than 0.20 percent copper or 0.06 percent tin cause cracking in hot working. There 
is concern about buildup of these tramp elements as steel is recycled, sometimes multiple 
times. Thus, the price of metal scrap depends on its freedom from tramp elements, which 
is determined by the effectiveness of the identifi cation and separation process. 
Degradation of plastics from secondary materials is more critical than in met-
als, since it is often diffi cult to ensure that different types of polymers are not mixed 
together. Only thermoplastic polymers can be recycled. Often, recycled material is 
used for a less critical application than its original use. There is an intensive effort to 
improve the recycling of plastics, and it is claimed that under the best of conditions 
engineered plastics can be recycled three or four times without losing more than 5 to 
10 percent of their original strength. 
Other materials that may not be recycled economically are zinc-coated steel (gal-
vanized), ceramic materials (except glass), and parts with glued identifi cation labels 
made from a different material than the part. Composite materials consisting of mix-
tures of glass and polymer represent an extreme problem in recycling.
Metals are identifi ed by chemical spot testing or by magnetic or fl uorescence 
analysis. Different grades of steel can be identifi ed by looking at the sparks produced 
by a grinding wheel. Identifi cation of plastics is more diffi cult. Fortunately, most man-
ufacturers have adopted the practice of molding or casting a standard Society for the 
Plastic Industry identifi cation symbol into the surface of plastic parts. This consists of 
a triangle having a number in the middle to identify the type of plastic.1 Much effort is 
being given to developing devices that can identify the chemical composition of plas-
tic parts at rates of more than 100 pieces per second, much like a bar-code scanner.
Ferrous metals are separated from other materials by magnetic separation. For non-
ferrous metals, plastics, and glass, separation is achieved by using such methods as vibra-
tory sieving, air classifi cation, and wet fl otation. However, much hand sorting also is used. 
After sorting, the recycled material is sold to a secondary materials producer. Metals are 
remelted into ingots; plastics are ground and processed into pellets. These are then intro-
duced into the materials stream by selling the recycled material to parts manufacturers.
10.4.4 Energy Recovery Through Combustion
Incineration reduces the volume of solid waste that needs to go to the landfi ll by burn-
ing the combustible organic material. The combustion converts the retained energy of 
the solid waste into heat, which can be used to generate steam and thus electricity. The 
volume of solid waste is reduced by 50 to 95 percent depending on the effectiveness of 
1. The following is the identifi cation scheme: 1, polyethylene; 2, high-density polyethylene; 3, vinyl; 
4, low-density polyethylene; 5, polypropylene; 6, polystyrene; 7, other. This coding scheme has been 
extended to show a wider range of polymers and polymer blends. See Ashby, pp. 79–81.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
427
10
the sorting process. The products of the incineration process are ash (the noncombus-
tible inorganic waste), fl ue gases, and heat.
A modern municipal incineration plant employs considerable technology in order 
to perform its function without causing objectionable pollution. The combustion pro-
cess must be capable of handling a large fl ow of solid waste and produce controlled 
high temperatures. The fl ue gas contains signifi cant amounts of fi ne particulates in the 
form of heavy metals, dioxins, furans, SO2, CO2, and HCl. Thus, it is vital to control 
the fl ue gases by means of temperature control, particle fi ltration, and gas scrubbers.
10.4.5 Landfi ll
A landfi ll1 is not a trash dump. A landfi ll is an airtight, lined (usually with polymer 
sheeting), structured, containment making for a permanent underground burial site 
for compacted solid waste. The waste is set into the ground and isolated from the ele-
ments (e.g., air, rain, groundwater, and animals) so that it can remain in its original 
form and decompose very slowly.2 Landfi lls literally fi ll in space to create more land 
surface. Some landfi lls are enclosed in a clay liner that serves to separate the waste 
more thoroughly from its physical surroundings.
The two challenges to maintaining a landfi ll are controlling leaching and meth-
ane gas. The penetration of some water into a landfi ll is inevitable. As water moves 
through the waste, it is contaminated by organic material, metals, and products of the 
slow decomposition to create a mixture of water and leachate. Landfi lls are built with 
systems to direct leachate drainage into a collection pond where the contaminated wa-
ter can be treated. If leachate breaks through a spot in a landfi ll, that area is patched. 
The trash in a landfi ll will decompose in an anaerobic process. This creates a mixture 
of gases that is composed of about 50 percent methane and 50 percent carbon dioxide (both 
greenhouse gases). These gases must be released through a piping system. In the United 
States, solid waste landfi lls rank third in the source of human-related methane gas emissions. 
The gases produced by a landfi ll (LFGs) can be used as an energy source.3 There 
are methods to use LFG in combustion as a fuel for producing electricity and running 
some heavy equipment. Methane is the major component of liquid natural gas and can 
be recovered from the LFG for separate use. Naturally, LFGs require processing in 
preparation for their use, and the combustion will produce some pollution. Converting 
LFGs to fuel or heat requires conditions that make it economically feasible, but when 
those conditions are met landfi lls become renewable energy sources.
10.5
ROLE OF MATERIAL SELECTION IN DESIGN FOR ENVIRONMENT
Material selection has a unique role in Design for Environment tools, practices, and 
methods. Design for Environment methods are those that bring the consideration 
of the entire life cycle of the product into the earliest stages of the design process. 
1. C. Freudenrich, “How Landfi lls Work,” 2008, http://science.howstuffworks.com.
2. A composting site is designed to decompose its waste quickly. This is the opposite of a landfi ll.
3. “Landfi ll Methane Outreach Program,” U.S. EPA, July 25, 2011, http://www.epa.gov/lmop/basic-info.

428 
engineering design 
10
The material of which a product is made greatly infl uences the impact of a product 
on the environment in terms of natural resource use and impact and end-of-life 
options.
10.5.1 Material Life Cycle
Materials have a life cycle that begins before the products in which they are used (see 
Fig. 1.7). A material’s life cycle begins with its removal from the earth and subsequent 
refi ning and shaping into stocks of engineering materials. These materials are further 
processed into fi nal products and put into service. Once the products are retired from 
service the materials must be disposed of in an environmentally safe manner. 
Designers can use their knowledge of materials and selection methods (see Chaps. 11 
and 12) to make decisions as to which materials to use for a design once the major details 
of the design are known. Example 10.3 provides an example of this process.
E X A M P L E 10 . 3 
A number of federal laws have mandated radical changes in automotive design includ-
ing the material used for gas tanks. First is the act mandating Corporate Average Fuel 
Economy, which creates an incentive for weight reduction to increase gas mileage. 
Next are the Alternative Motor Fuels Act of 1988 and the Clear Air Act Amendments 
of 1990 requiring that auto makers prepare gas tanks for the wider use of alternative-
fuels to reduce oil imports and to increase the use of U.S. sourced renewable fuels such 
as ethanol. Finally, the EPA has introduced fuel-permeation standards that challenge 
the designs and materials traditionally used in automotive fuel tanks. Terne-coated 
steel (8 percent tin-lead coating) has been the traditional material selection for auto-
motive gas tanks. Tests have shown that neither painted nor bare terne-coated steel 
will resist the corrosive effects of alcohol for the 10-year expected life of the fuel 
tank.1 In the selection of a material for an automotive fuel tank, the following factors 
are most important: manufacturability, cost, weight, corrosion resistance, permeability 
resistance, and recyclability. Another critical factor is safety and the ability to meet 
crash requirements.
Two new competing materials have emerged to replace terne steel: electro-coated 
zinc-nickel steel sheet and high-density polyethylene (HDPE). The steel sheet is painted 
on both sides with an aluminum-rich epoxy. The epoxy is needed to provide exterior 
protection from road-induced corrosion. Stainless steel performs admirably for this ap-
plication but at nearly fi ve times the cost of terne steel. HDPE is readily formed by blow-
molding it into the necessary shape, and it has long-term structural stability, but it will 
not meet the permeability requirement. Two approaches have been used to overcome this 
problem. The fi rst is multilayer technology, in which an inner layer of HDPE is adhesively 
joined to a barrier layer of polyamide. The second approach is a barrier to permeability 
that involves treating the HDPE with fl uorine.
The fi rst step in arriving at a material selection decision is to make a competitive 
analysis, laying out the advantages and disadvantages of each candidate. 
1. P. J. Alvarado, “Steel vs. Plastics: The Competition for Light-Vehicle Fuel Tanks,” JOM, July 1996, 
pp. 22–25.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
429
10
The next step would be to use one of the matrix methods discussed in Chapter 7 to arrive 
at the decision. Two of the Big Three automobile producers are changing to some variant 
of the Zn-Ni coated steel. The other is going with HDPE fuel tanks. The fact that there 
is not a clearly superior choice demonstrates the complexity of selection decisions in the 
modern day when there often are so many competing issues. 
10.5.2 Selection of Eco-Effi cient Materials
Metallic and ceramic materials originate from minerals (ores) obtained from the 
earth, which are refi ned using energy. Polymers are made from fossil fuel feedstock, 
chiefl y petroleum and natural gas, and require energy to turn them into engineering 
plastics.
We can divide the product life-cycle into fi ve phases: (1) material production, 
(2) part manufacture, (3) transport between phases, (4) service in use, and (5) disposal. 
Energy is consumed at each phase in this cycle, and some emissions are produced 
(heat, liquids, solid wastes, and gases, chiefl y CO2). Generally one of these phases 
consumes the preponderance of the lifetime energy use. With the aluminum bever-
age can it is the refi ning of aluminum from the bauxite ore (phase 1). With a transport 
plane it is the jet fuel used in service (phase 4). 
Materials selection plays a major role in each of the phases of product life cycle.
1. Material production: reduce mass of material and choose material with low 
eco-indicators.
2. Part manufacture: select a process with low energy requirement and CO2 footprint.
3. Transportation: low mass reduces energy consumption. 
Material Option
Advantages
Disadvantages
Terne-coated steel
Low cost at high volume 
Modest material cost
Meets permeability requirement
Poor shape fl exibility
Poor corrosion protection from 
alcohol fuels
Lead-containing coating gives prob-
lems with recycling or disposal
Electrocoated 
Zn-Ni steel
Low cost at high volumes
Effective corrosion protection
Meets material cost 
Meets permeability requirement
Poor weldability
Low shape fl exibility
Stainless steel
High corrosion resistance
Recyclable
Meets permeability requirements
High cost at all volumes,
Low formability
Poor weldability
HDPE (high-density 
polyethylene)
Good shape fl exibility
Low tooling costs at low volumes
Low weight
Good corrosion resistance
High tooling costs at high volumes
High material cost
Fails permeability and recyclability 
requirements.
Multilayer and 
barrier HDPE
Same as HDPE
Meets permeability requirement
Compared to HDPE
Higher tooling costs at high volume
Higher material cost
Hard to recycle

430 
engineering design 
10
4. Service in use: thermal and electrical losses are often important and are material 
dependent. Low mass is important in dynamic products, for example, automobiles.
5. Disposal: High recyclability is a strong benefi t and toxins must not be produced 
during combustion or recycling processes.
Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA). A life-cycle assessment (LCA) is the ideal way to 
assess alternatives in design for environment issues and the broader set of sustainability 
issues in design. An LCA determines all of the resource consumption and emissions 
involved with a product, and then assesses the impacts in terms of such categories as po-
tential for global warming, ozone depletion, acidifi cation of streams and rivers, human 
toxicity, and so on. Creating an LCA is a resource-intensive activity in terms of data 
collection and interpretation, requiring real expertise in the fi eld for meaningful results.1 
Life-cycle assessment proceeds in three stages:
1. Inventory analysis: The fl ows of energy and materials to and from the product dur-
ing its life are determined quantitatively.
2. Impact analysis: All potential environmental consequences of the fl ows catalogued 
above are considered.
3. Improvement analysis: Results of steps 1 and 2 are translated into specifi c actions 
that reduce the impact of the product or the process on the environment.
LCA is always preferred when making engineering decisions on existing products or 
on a larger scale  (e.g., factory remodeling). However, LCA is not well suited for mak-
ing decisions in the time frame needed in product-focused engineering design. As a 
result, efforts have been made to fi nd simple eco-indicators that could serve as useful 
surrogates for a LCA.
A widely used factor in material selection in design is the embodied energy, 
sometimes called the production energy. This is the energy per unit mass consumed in 
making the material from its ores or feedstock. Values of embodied energy and CO2 
footprint, along with energies and footprints involved in manufacturing and recycling 
are given for 47 commonly used materials by Ashby.2
A second key eco-indicator is the carbon footprint. This is actually a measure 
of the carbon dioxide, CO2, in kg of gas produced per kg of material. Carbon dioxide 
is chosen because of its great importance in global warming and climate change. By 
multiplying the footprint by the annual world production we can rank the four worst 
contributors of CO2 from material production.3 They are: (1) steel, (2) aluminum, 
(3) cement, and (4) paper and cardboard. 
A number of methods and tools have been proposed for simplifying the LCA.4 One 
of the more useful and less complicated of these is the eco-audit method by Ashby.5 An 
eco-audit is a scaled-down, simplifi ed calculation to estimate environmental impact. 
1. T. E. Graedel and B. R. Allenby, Design for Environment, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 1996.
2. M. F. Ashby, op. cit., Chapter 12.
3. M. F. Ashby, Materials and the Environment, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2009, p. 118.
4. K. Ramani, D. Ramanujan, W. Z. Bernstein, F. Zhao, J. Sutherland, C. Handwerker, J-K. Choi, 
H. Kim, and D. Thurston, “Integrated Sustainable Life Cycle Design: A Review,” Journal of Mechanical 
Design, September 2010, vol. 132, 091004.
5. M. F. Ashby, op. cit., Chapter 7.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
431
10
Each of the fi ve phases of product life-cycle is evaluated for energy requirements and 
CO2 production. 
In the stage of manufacturing the parts, eco-indicators are those specifi c to the 
manufacturing process under study. In the transport phase, energy consumed in trans-
portation is multiplied by the mass of the product. In the service-in-use phase, a simple 
engineering model is constructed for the major energy consuming activities and their 
corresponding emissions. In the disposal phase, if the product is remanufactured or re-
cycled there will be a negative value for the eco-indicator. A more extensive collection 
of eco-properties can be found in the software CES EduPackTM from Granta Design. 
The use of this software facilitates the preparation of eco-audits.
10.6
TOOLS TO AID DESIGN FOR THE 
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABILITY
State-of-the art engineering design practice has been broadened to consider the prod-
uct as it will exist throughout its entire life-cycle. Sustainability forces designers to 
consider a product as having a fi rst life-cycle and then being retired in such as way 
so that the used components or material can be transformed into new products. The 
proliferation of Design for X guidelines (see Sec. 8.12) is a well-known phenomenon. 
No one resource can provide a defi nitive list of the guidelines, especially in a fi eld as 
broad as Design for Sustainability and its subset Design for Environment.1 Figure 10.3 
provides a schematic diagram showing the relationship between sustainability and the 
major Design for X topics of this section. Several strategies are included in this sec-
tion and references are given for many others.
10.6.1 Design for Life Cycle
Design for the Life Cycle emphasizes in embodiment design those issues that impact 
a long, useful service life of the product. It also means designing for eventual replace-
ment or disposal. Design modifi cations that can keep a product in service will benefi t 
the environment in the long run because the product will not have to be disposed 
of, and will not consume additional natural resources to be replaced. The following 
life-cycle design strategies can be used to protect the environment and increase a 
product’s sustainability.
 
● Minimize emissions and waste in the manufacturing process. Examine all of the 
ways that the product negatively impacts the environment and eliminate or mini-
mize them using design. A polluting product is a defective product. 
 
● Substitute recyclable materials where possible, and use design for disassembly 
guidelines to improve chances for recycling. 
 
● Increase the useful life of the product, thereby prolonging the time when new ma-
terial and energy resources need to be committed to a replacement of the product. 
The useful life may be limited by degraded performance due to wear and corrosion, 
1. M. Kutz, ed., Environmentally Conscious Mechanical Design, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2007.

432 
engineering design 
10
damage (either accidental or because of improper use), or environmental degradation. 
Other reasons to terminate the useful life not related to life-cycle issues are techno-
logical obsolescence (something better has come along) or styling obsolescence. 
There are a variety of design strategies to extend a product’s useful life appearing 
in later sections of this text. A list locating the material can be found in Sec. 8.12. 
Design for reliability (Chap. 14), durability (Chap. 14), and serviceability (Chap. 8) are 
among them.
10.6.2 Design for Sustainability During Conceptual Design
New products need to meet the sustainability criteria as much as possible given the 
state of technology, regulation, and business policy of the company. Design tools 
and methods are being proposed to meet these criteria. It will be some time before 
a defi nitive set of principles can be consolidated from the infl ux of new design aids. 
Table 10.1 is a set of proposed guidelines for design that would meet the environmen-
tal objectives of sustainability as described by the Brundtland Report in Sec. 10.2. 
Many new methods for sustainable design are adaptations of existing methods (e.g., 
design for analogy1).
FIGURE 10.3
Conceptual diagram of relationship of Design for Sustainability and other Design for X topics.
D
e
s
i
g
n
 
f
o
r
 
S
u
s
t
a
i
n
a
b
il
it
y
Design for the
Environment
Quality of Life for
Stakeholders
Material
Selection for
Sustainability
Design for
Recycling
Design for
Assembly
Design for Re-
manufacturing
Design
for Dis-
assembly
1. D. P. Fitzgerald, J. W. Herrmann and L. C. Schmidt, “A Conceptual Design Tool for Resolving Con-
fl icts Between Product Functionality and Environmental Impact,” Journal of Mechanical Design, 2010, 
vol. 132, 091006.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
433
10
10.6.3 Design Guidelines Applying to Embodiment Design
1. Design for the minimal use of materials and energy. First, achieve minimum 
weight without affecting quality, performance, and cost. Automotive manufactur-
ers have made it a long-term goal to achieve greater fuel economy and have done 
so with weight reduction (often by substitution of materials). Second, reduce waste 
of all types: scrap in manufacture, defective components in assembly, damaged 
goods in shipping. Thus, good design for quality practice will invariably result in a 
reduction in material consumption. Third, look hard at the design and use of pack-
aging. Recognize changes in polymer packaging materials that allow for the recov-
ery, recycling, and reuse of packaging materials. The substitution of cardboard for 
Styrofoam in fast food packaging is a common example. Look for ways to design 
shipping containers so they can be reused.
2. Design for Disassembly. Remanufacture, reuse, and recycling require the ability 
to economically remove the most valuable components when the product reaches 
the end of its useful life. 
 
●Minimize the number of adhesive and welded joints when it makes sense 
 
●Use removable fasteners and those that are not prone to breakage (i.e. avoid snap fi ts)
 
●Increase the corrosion resistance of fasteners
3. Design for Maintainability. Most products need to be opened to be maintained. 
Thus, maintainability guidelines include the previous category of Design for Dis-
assembly and Design for Serviceability (Sec.  8.9.4).
10.6.4 Design Guidelines Applying to End-of-Life Transformations
Engineers design products and systems for a certain behavior during their useful life. 
Design for the Environment or Green Design, or eco-design, or design for sustain-
ability requires designing a product or system for a particular behavior at the end of 
TABLE 10.1
Suggested Sustainability Design Guidelines for Conceptual Design 
Proposed Design Guideline
Sample Products
1. Minimize quantity of resource use by 
optimizing its rate and duration
• Tankless water heaters (heat water as it is 
demanded)
• Low-fl ow (or time-limited) shower heads
2. Incorporate automatic or manual tuning 
capabilities
• Clothes dryers with moisture sensors
• Multi-fl ush toilets
• Programmable thermostats
3. Use feedback mechanism to inform end-user 
of current status of process
• Temperature probes with readouts in ovens 
4. Create separate modules for behaviors with 
confl icting requirements 
• Hybrid electric vehicles 
Adapted from C. Telenko and C. C. Seepersad, “A Methodology for Identifying Environmentally Conscious Guide-
lines for Product Design,” Journal of Mechanical Design, vol. 132, 2010, 091009. 

434 
engineering design 
10
its useful life. These design approaches are not necessarily aligned with performance, 
which requires the design team to have expertise in the planned transformation of the 
product at the end of its fi rst useful life (Sec. 10.4). 
1. Design for Remanufacturing. One challenge to remanufacturing is that the original 
product was not designed with this goal in mind. Not every product is a good can-
didate for remanufacturing. An MIT group studied 25 products and found that the 
energy used to remanufacture them was typically less than to create new products, as 
expected. Yet the remanufactured products were likely to be less effi cient in energy 
use than new products or their replacement versions. In about half of the cases stud-
ied, there were no net energy savings; in the other half the savings were minimal.1 
Characteristics of products that are good candidates for remanufacturing in-
clude the following:2
 
●Technology that will be relevant (stable) for 7 to 10 years
 
●Product redesign cycle of 1 to 4 years
 
●Rate of return for remanufacture at 15 percent or more (an option some compa-
nies employ)
 
●50 to 75 percent of parts to be remanufactured
 
●Modular architecture with good separation of materials into different modules
Guidelines to employ while originally designing a product that may be re-
manufactured are as follows:
 
●Increase damage resistance throughout life cycle
 
●Make location of wear detectable
 
●Use components that can be assembled by commonly available tools 
 
●Eliminate part features that can collect dirt and debris 
Unfortunately, some of these guidelines are contrary to guidelines for good 
Design for Assembly (see Sec. 13.6), and a trade-off decision is necessary. 
2. Design for Recycling. There are several steps that the designer can follow to en-
hance the recyclability of a product. 
 
●Make it easier to disassemble the product and thus enhance the yield of the 
separation step 
 
●Minimize the number of different materials in the product to simplify the iden-
tifi cation and sorting issue
 
●Choose materials that are compatible and do not require separation before recy-
cling (e.g., a bronze bushing embedded in a steel part will cause severe process-
ing diffi culty during hot working recycled steel) 
1. “When is it worth remanufacturing?” Advanced Materials and Processes, July 2011, p. 14.
2. P. Zwokinski and D. Brissaud, “Remanufacturing Strategies to Support Product Design and Rede-
sign,” Journal of Engineering Design, vol. 19, no. 4, August 2008, pp. 321–355; B. Bras, “Design for Re-
manufacturing Processes,” in M. Kutz, ed., Environmentally Conscious Mechanical Design, John Wiley 
& Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2007.

 
chapter 10: Design for Sustainability and the Environment 
435
10
 
●Identify the material that the part is made from right on the part. Use the identi-
fi cation symbols for plastics.
Applying these guidelines can require serious trade-offs. Minimizing the number 
of materials in the original product may require a compromise in performance 
from the use of a material with less-than-optimum properties. A clad metal sheet 
or chromium-plated metal provides the desired attractive surface at a reasonable 
cost, yet it cannot be readily recycled. In the past, decisions of this type would be 
made exclusively on the basis of cost. 
3. Design for waste recovery and reuse in processing. The waste associated with 
a product can be a small fraction of the waste generated by the processes that 
produced the product. Be alert to ways of reducing process waste. Avoid the use 
of hazardous or undesirable materials. Keep current on changes in government 
regulations and lists of hazardous materials. For example, avoid the use of CFC 
refrigerants, use aqueous solvents for cleaning instead of chlorinated solvents, and 
use biodegradable materials whenever possible.
10.7
SUMMARY
The question arises, What is the impact of sustainability on the average design 
engineer? The answer depends on the type of business in which the engineer is 
employed. If it is an industry that is heavily impacted by governmental regulations 
like oil production, chemicals, or automobiles, then regulations that are intended 
to protect the environment or safety of the public already strongly infl uence prod-
ucts design or manufacturing operations. If it is in the business of energy produc-
tion, there is no question that major changes will take place as fossil fuels become 
depleted and global warming becomes more widely recognized as a threat to life 
on our planet. These will present major challenges and opportunities for design 
engineers. Many other businesses recognize the importance of sustainability and 
view it as an opportunity to differentiate their products as green products. Thus, 
the design engineer can be assured that sustainability, and its engineering em-
bodiment, design for the environment, will be of increasing importance into the 
future.
It is generally believed that improvement of the environment is the joint responsi-
bility of all citizens in partnership with business and government. Government plays 
a crucial role, usually through regulation, to ensure that all businesses share equitably 
in the cost of an improved environment. Since these increased product costs often 
are passed on to the customer, it is the responsibility of government to use the tool of 
regulation prudently and wisely. Here the technical community can play an impor-
tant role by providing fair and timely technical input to government. Finally, many 
visionaries see a future world based on sustainable development in which the world’s 
resources will no longer be depleted because the rate of resource consumption will be 
balanced by the rate of resource regeneration.

436 
engineering design 
10
BIBLIOGRAPHY
“20 Years: Into Our Common Future,” Environment, 50(1), 46–59, 2008.
Allenby, B. R: The Theory and Practice of Sustainable Engineering, Prentice Hall, Upper 
Saddle River, NJ, 2011.
Ashby, M. F.: Materials and the Environment: Eco-Informed Material Choice, Elsevier, 
Boston, 2009.
Azapagic, A. and P. Slobodan: Sustainable Development in Practice: Case Studies for 
Engineers and Scientists, 2d ed, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 2011.
de Steiguer, J. E.: The Origins of Modern Environmental Thought, University of Arizona 
Press, Tucson, 2006.
Graedel, T. E. and B. R. Allenby: Design for Environment, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 1996.
Kates, R. W., T. M. Parris, and A. A. Leiserowitz: “What Is Sustainable Development?,” 
Environment, 47(3), 8–21, 2005.
Kutz, M. ed.: Environmentally Conscious Mechanical Design, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, 
NJ, 2007.
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
10.1 Count the number of light bulbs in your residence. Calculate the power use for one day. 
What is the power difference between using incandescent and fl uorescent bulbs in your 
residence for one year? Where can you safely dispose of the fl uorescent bulbs? 
10.2 Example 10.1 gives the current cost for standard size and quality copy paper with vary-
ing levels of recycled material content. Do further research to see what differences in 
the production of the paper lead to the cost differences. 
10.3 Write an essay answering the question, Is Walmart’s business practice of locating in 
small communities a good example of sustainable development?
10.4 There has been a major shift toward outsourcing manufacturing from the United States 
to foreign countries. One unintended consequence of this situation is the appearance 
of counterfeit parts. This has occurred in both electrical components and mechanical 
parts. Find an example of this phenomenon and write a brief essay.
10.5 Use the concept of a force fi eld diagram (Chap. 4) to show the main factors that help and 
hinder the reduction of the use of energy in product development. (Hint: A “help” would 
be miniaturization; a hindrance would be increasing world wealth.)
10.6 Enthusiastic environmentalists often take the position that in the interest of saving the 
world, products should be designed to be as durable as possible, with major emphasis on 
modularity so that worn parts can be easily replaced. Discuss the advantages and disad-
vantages of this approach to design for the environment.
Carbon footprint
Ecosystem
Embodied energy
Environmental impact
IPAT
Life-cycle assessment
Municipal solid waste
Recycling
Remanufacturing
Reuse
Sustainability
Triple bottom line
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS

11
437
11
MATERIALS SELECTION 
11.1
INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides a comprehensive treatment of the selection of materials for 
manufacturing the design. Chapter 12 presents some advanced topics in the me-
chanical behavior of materials that are relevant to design but not generally taught in 
mechanics of materials courses. The discussion assumes the reader has a working 
knowledge of the mechanical behavior of materials. Additional topics dealing with 
making products and parts from materials are considered in Chap. 13, Design for 
Manufacturing.
Materials and the manufacturing processes that convert them into useful parts 
underlie all of engineering design. There are over 100,000 engineering materials to 
choose from. The typical design engineer should have ready access to information on 
30 to 60 materials, depending on the range of applications he or she deals with.
The recognition of the importance of materials selection in design has increased 
in recent years. Concurrent engineering practices have brought materials special-
ists into the design process at an earlier stage. The importance given to quality and 
cost aspects of manufacturing in present-day product design has emphasized the fact 
that materials and manufacturing are closely linked in determining fi nal product 
performance. Moreover, the pressures of global competition have increased the level 
of automation in manufacturing to the point where material costs often comprise 
60 percent or more of the cost of a product. Finally, the extensive activity in materials 
science worldwide has created a variety of new materials and focused our attention 
on the competition between six broad classes of materials: metals, polymers, elasto-
mers, ceramics, composites, and electronic materials. Thus, the range of materials 
available to the engineer is much broader than ever before. This presents the oppor-
tunity for innovation in design by utilizing these materials to provide greater perfor-
mance at lower cost. Achieving these benefi ts requires a rational process for materials 
selection.
11

438 
engineering design 
11
11.1.1 Relation of Materials Selection to Design
An incorrectly chosen material can lead not only to part failure but also to excessive 
life-cycle cost. Selecting the best material for a part involves more than choosing both 
a material that has the properties to provide the necessary performance in service and 
the processing methods used to create the fi nished part (Fig. 11.1). A poorly chosen 
material can add to manufacturing cost. Properties of the material can be enhanced 
or diminished by processing, and that may affect the service performance of the part. 
Chapter 13 focuses on the relationship between materials processing and manufactur-
ing and design.
Faced with the large number of combinations of materials and processes from 
which to choose, the materials selection task can only be done effectively by applying 
simplifi cation and systemization. As design proceeds from concept design, to con-
fi guration and parametric design (embodiment design), and to detail design, the ma-
terial and process selection becomes more detailed. 1 At the concept level of design, 
essentially all materials and processes are considered in broad detail. The materials 
selection charts and methodology developed by Ashby 2 are highly appropriate at this 
stage (see Sec. 11.3). The task is to determine whether each design concept will be 
made from metal, plastics, ceramic, composite, or wood, and to narrow it to a group 
of materials within that material family. The required precision of property data is 
rather low. Note that if an innovative choice of material is to be made it must be done 
Materials
Properties
Availability
Cost
Processing
Equipment selection
Influence on properties
Cost
Design
Service conditions
Function
Cost
FIGURE 11.1
Interrelations of design, materials, and processing to produce a product.
1. M. F. Ashby, Met. Mat. Trans., 1995, vol. 26A, pp. 3057–3064.
2. M. F. Ashby, Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 4th ed., Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Oxford, UK, 2010.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
439
11
at the conceptual design phase because later in the design process too many decisions 
have been made to allow for a radical change. The emphasis at the embodiment phase 
of design is on determining the shape and size of a part using engineering analysis. 
The designer will have decided on a class of materials and processes, such as a range 
of aluminum alloys, wrought and cast. The material properties must be known to a 
greater level of precision. At the parametric design step the alternatives will have nar-
rowed to a single material and only a few manufacturing processes. Here the emphasis 
will be on deciding on critical tolerances, optimizing for robust design (see Chap. 15), 
and selecting the best manufacturing process using quality engineering and cost mod-
eling methodologies. Depending on the importance of the part, materials properties 
may need to be known to a high level of precision. This may require the development 
of a detailed database based on an extensive materials testing program. Thus, material 
and process selection is a progressive process of narrowing from a large universe of 
possibilities to a specifi c material and process.
11.1.2 General Criteria for Selection
Materials are selected on the basis of four general criteria:
 
● Performance characteristics (properties)
 
● Processing (manufacturing) characteristics
 
● Environmental profi le
 
● Business considerations
Selection on the basis of performance characteristics is the process of matching 
values of the properties of the material with the requirements and constraints imposed 
by the design. Most of this chapter and Chap. 12 deal with this issue.
Selection on the basis of processing characteristics means fi nding the process that 
will form the material into the required shape with a minimum of defects at the least 
cost. Chapter 13 is devoted exclusively to this topic.
Selection on the basis of an environmental profi le is focused on predicting the 
impact of the material throughout its life cycle on the environment. Environmental 
considerations are growing in importance because of greater societal awareness and 
governmental regulation caused by concerns with global warming and the role that 
energy production and use play in it. These issues have been raised in Chap. 10.
The chief business consideration that affects materials selection is the cost of the 
part that is made from the material. This includes both the purchase cost of the mate-
rial and the cost to process it into a part. A more exact basis for selection is life-cycle 
cost, which includes the cost of replacing failed parts and the cost of disposing of the 
material at the end of its useful life. Issues concerning cost of materials are considered 
in Sec. 11.5. Chapter 13 presents information on estimating costs as an aid in select-
ing the best manufacturing process. Chapter 17 deals with cost evaluation in further 
detail.
In Sec. 11.2 we will consider the important issue in materials selection of iden-
tifying the appropriate material properties that allow the prediction of failure-free 
functioning of the component. The equally important task of identifying a process 

440 
engineering design 
11
to manufacture the part with the material is discussed in Chap. 13. While these are 
important considerations, they are not the only issues in materials selection. The fol-
lowing business issues must also be considered. Failure to get a positive response in 
any of these areas can disqualify a material from selection.
1. Availability
a. Are there multiple sources of supply?
b. What is the likelihood of availability in the future?
c. Is the material available in the forms needed (tubes, wide sheet, etc.)?
2. Size limitations and tolerances on available material shapes and forms, e.g., sheet 
thickness or tube wall concentricity
3. Excessive variability in properties
4. Low environmental impact, including ability to recycle the material
5. Cost. Materials selection comes down to buying properties at the best available 
price.
11.2
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS OF MATERIALS
The performance requirements of a material usually are expressed in terms of physi-
cal, mechanical, thermal, electrical, or chemical properties. Material properties are 
the link between the basic structure and composition of the material and the service 
performance of the part (Fig. 11.2). The performance requirements follow from the 
function of a part. For example, the function of a connecting rod in an IC engine is to 
connect the piston to the crank shaft. The performance requirement is that it should 
deliver the required power without failing during the useful life of the engine. The 
essential material properties are tensile yield strength and fatigue strength along with 
suffi cient resistance to the operating environment that these properties do not degrade 
during service.
Materials science predicts how to improve the properties of materials by under-
standing how to control their structure. Structure can vary from atomic dimensions to 
dimensions of several millimeters. The chief methods of altering structure are through 
composition control (alloying), heat treatment, and controlling the processing of the 
Material
properties
Materials
science
Structure
Atomic bonding
Crystal structure
Defect structure
Microstructure
Macrostructure
Materials
engineering
Service
performance
Stresses
Corrosion
Temperature
Radiation
Vibration
FIGURE 11.2
Material properties, the link between structure and performance.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
441
11
material. A general background in the way structure determines the properties of solid 
materials usually is obtained from a course in materials science or fundamentals of en-
gineering materials. 1 The materials engineer specializes in linking properties to design 
through a deep understanding of material properties and the processing of materials.
Since structure determines properties, everything about materials is structure. 
The term structure has different meanings as we change the scale of observation. To 
materials scientists, structure describes the way atoms and larger confi gurations of 
atoms arrange themselves, but to the design engineer structure refers to the form of 
a component and how the forces are applied to it. At the atomic level, materials sci-
entists are concerned with basic forces between atoms, which determine the density, 
inherent strength, and Young’s modulus. Moving upward in scale, they deal with the 
way the atoms arrange themselves in space, that is, the crystal structure. Crystal type 
and lattice structure determine the slip plane geometry and ease of plastic deforma-
tion. Superimposed on the crystal structure is the defect structure or the imperfec-
tions in the perfect three-dimensional atomic pattern. For example, are there lattice 
points where atoms are missing (vacancies), or are there missing or extra planes of 
atoms  (dislocations)? All of these deviations from perfect atomic periodicity can be 
 studied with sophisticated tools like an electron microscope. The defect structure 
greatly infl uences the properties of materials. At a higher scale of observation, such as 
that seen through an optical microscope, we observe the microstructure features such 
as grain size and the number and distribution of individual crystal phases. Finally, 
with a low-power microscope, we may observe porosity, cracks, seams, inclusions, 
and other gross features of the macrostructure.
11.2.1 Classifi cation of Materials
We can divide materials into metals, ceramics, and polymers. Further division leads 
to the categories of elastomers, glasses, and composites. Finally, there are the tech-
nologically important classes of optical, magnetic, and semiconductor materials. An 
engineering material is a material that is used to fulfi ll some technical functional 
 requirement, as opposed to being used just for decoration. Those materials that are 
typically used to resist forces or deformations in engineering structures are called 
structural materials. Other materials are used primarily for their electrical, semicon-
ductor, or magnetic properties. 
Engineering materials usually are not made up of a single element or one type 
of molecule. Many elements are added together in a metal to form an alloy with spe-
cially tailored properties. For example, pure iron (Fe) is rarely used in the elemental 
1. W. D. Callister, Materials Science and Engineering, 8th ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2010; 
J. F. Shackelford, Introduction to Materials Science for Engineers, 7th ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ; 2009; W.E. Smith and J. Hashemi, Foundation of Materials Science and Engineering, 
5th ed, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2010; M. Ashby, H. Shercliff, and D. Cebon, Materials: Engineering 
Science, Processing, and Design, 2nd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2009; T. H. Courtney, 
“Fundamental Structure-Property Relationships in Engineering Materials,” ASM Handbook, vol. 20, 
pp. 336–356.

442 
engineering design 
11
state, but when it is alloyed with small amounts of carbon to form steel its strength 
is improved markedly. This is brought about by the formation throughout the solid 
of strong intermetallic iron carbide Fe3C particles. The degree of strengthening in-
creases with the amount of iron carbide, which increases with the carbon content. 
However, an overriding infl uence is the distribution and size of the carbide particles 
in the iron matrix. The distribution is controlled by such processing operations as 
the hot rolling or forging of the steel, or by its thermal treatment such as quenching 
or annealing. Thus, there are a great variety of properties that can be obtained in a 
given class of alloys. The same applies to polymers, where the mechanical proper-
ties depend upon the types of chemical groups that make up the polymer chain, how 
they are arranged along the chain, and the average length of the chain (molecular 
weight). 
Thus, there is a material classifi cation hierarchy, 1 starting with the Materials 
Kingdom (all materials) → Family (metals, polymers, etc.) → Class (for metals: 
steels, aluminum alloys, copper alloys, etc.) → Subclass (for steels: plain carbon, low-
alloy, heat treatable, etc.) → Member (a particular alloy or polymer grade). A member 
of a particular family, class, and subclass of materials has a particular set of attributes 
that we call its material properties. The classifi cation does not stop here, because for 
most materials the mechanical properties depend upon the mechanical (plastic defor-
mation) or thermal treatment it has last been given. For example, the yield strength 
and toughness of AISI 4340 steel will depend strongly on the tempering temperature 
to which it has been subjected after oil quenching from an elevated temperature.
Figure 11.3 shows a selection of engineering materials commonly used in struc-
tural applications. Information on the general properties and applications for these 
materials can be found in your materials science text and any one of a number of 
specialized sources. 2
11.2.2 Properties of Materials
The performance or functional capabilities of a material are usually given by a de-
fi nable and measurable set of material properties. The fi rst task in materials selec-
tion is to determine which material properties are relevant to the application. We 
look for material properties that are easy and inexpensive to measure, are reproduc-
ible, and are associated with a material behavior that is well defi ned and related to 
the way the material performs in service. For reasons of technological convenience 
we often measure something other than the most fundamental material property. 
For example, the elastic limit measures the fi rst signifi cant deviation from elastic 
1. M. F. Ashby, Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 4th ed., Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Oxford, UK, 2011.
2. K. G. Budinski and M. K. Budinski, Engineering Materials, 9th ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ, 2010; P. L. Mangonon, The Principles of Materials Selection in Design, Prentice Hall, Up-
per Saddle River, NJ, 1999; Metals Handbook, Desk Edition, 2nd ed., ASM International, Materials 
Park, OH, 1998; Engineered Materials Handbook, Desk Edition, ASM International, Materials Park, 
OH, 1995.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
443
11
behavior, but it is tedious to measure, so we substitute the easier and more reproduc-
ible 0.2% offset yield strength. That, however, requires a carefully machined test 
specimen, so the yield stress may be approximated by the exceedingly inexpensive 
hardness test.
A fi rst step in classifying material properties is to divide them into structure-
insensitive properties and structure-sensitive properties, Table 11.1. Both types of 
properties depend on the atomic binding energy and arrangement and packing of 
the atoms in the solid, but the structure-sensitive properties also depend strongly on 
the number, size, and distribution of the imperfections (dislocations, solute atoms, 
grain boundaries, inclusions, etc.) in the solid. Except for modulus of elasticity and 
corrosion rate in this table, all of the structure-insensitive properties are classifi ed 
as physical properties. All of the properties listed as structure sensitive are me-
chanical properties; that is, they measure the response of the material to some kind 
of force.
FAMILY
CLASS
SUBCLASS
MEMBER
Steels
 Plain carbon steel
  AISI 1020
  AISI 1040
 Alloy steels
  AISI 4140
  AISI 4340
  AISI 8620
 Tool steels
  O1 Oil hardening
  H11 Hot work tool steel
  M42 High-speed steel
 Cast irons
  Gray iron, class 20
  Ductile cast iron
 Stainless steel
  AISI 304
  AISI 316
  AISI 440C
 Aluminum Alloys
  3003
  6061
  7075
  380
 Copper Alloys
  ETP copper-C1100
  Yellow brass-C36000
 High-Performance Nonferrous Alloys
  Inconel 600 - Ni-Cr alloy
  Stellite - Co-Cr-W alloy
  Ti-6Al-4V
Commodity Thermoplastics
 
Polyethylene (PE)
 
Polystyrene (PS)
 
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
Engineering Thermoplastics
 
Nylon 6/6
 
ABS
 
Polycarbonate (PC)
 
Polyurethane(PUR)
Thermosets-Highly Crosslinked
 
Alkyds
 
Epoxies
 
Phenolics
 
Polyesters
Elastomers
 
Rubbers
 
Silicone resins
Carbides, Oxides, Nitrides
 
Alumina, Al2O3
 
Silicon carbide, SiC
 
Silicon nitride, Si3N4
 
Toughened zirconia, ZrO 2
Cemented Carbides
 
WC-6% Co
Carbon
 
Carbon fibers
 
Graphite
Building Materials
 
Bricks
 
Concrete
Glass
Wood
Fiber-Relnforced
Carbon fiber-polymer matrix
Glass fiber-polymer matrix
Laminated Composite
KINGDOM OF ENGINEERING MATERIALS
COMPOSITES
CERAMICS
POLYMERS
METALS
FIGURE 11.3
Commonly used engineering materials for structural applications.

444 
engineering design 
11
Mechanical Properties
We know from a course in mechanics of materials or from the spring design ex-
ample in Sec. 8.6.1 that the design of mechanical components is based on the stress 
level not exceeding some limit based on the expected mode of failure. Alternatively, 
we design for keeping the defl ection or distortion below some limit. In ductile metals 
and polymers (those materials with about greater than 10% elongation at fracture), 
the failure mode is gross plastic deformation (loss of elastic behavior). For metals the 
appropriate material property is the yield strength, s0, based on a 0.2% permanent de-
formation in the tension test. In Fig. 11.4 the offset line is drawn parallel to the linear 
elastic part of the curve at a strain offset of 0.002. For ductile thermoplastics the yield 
strength offset is usually taken at a larger strain of 0.01.
For brittle materials such as ceramics, the most common strength measurement 
is the modulus of rupture, sr, the tensile stress at which fracture occurs in bending a 
fl at beam. Strength values obtained this way are about 30 percent higher than those 
TABLE 11.1
A Short List of Material Properties
Structure-Insensitive Properties
Structure-Sensitive Properties
Melting point, Tm
Strength, sf, where f denotes a failure mode
Glass transition temperature, for polymers, Tg
Ductility
Density, r
Fracture toughness, KIc
Porosity
Fatigue properties
Modulus of elasticity, E
Damping capacity, h
Coeffi cient of linear thermal expansion, a
Creep
Thermal conductivity, k
Impact or shock loading resistance
Specifi c heat, cp
Hardness
Corrosion rate
Wear rate or corrosion rate
Conventional strain, e
Average stress
Offset
yield
strength
Tensile
strength
Strain to fracture
Uniform strain
Fracture
stress
FIGURE 11.4
A typical stress-strain curve for a ductile metal.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
445
11
measured in direct tension, but they are more consistent values. In fi ber-reinforced 
composite materials, yielding is typically taken at a 0.5% deviation from linear elastic 
behavior. Composites with fi bers are weaker in compression than in tension because 
the fi bers buckle. Fiber-reinforced composites are also highly anisotropic; that is, the 
properties vary considerably with orientation of the loading direction to the fi bers.
 
● Ultimate tensile strength, su, is the maximum tensile stress that a material can with-
stand in the tension test, measured by load divided by the original area of the speci-
men. While it has little fundamental relevance to design, it is a simple property to mea-
sure in a tension test since it requires no extensometer to measure strain. Therefore, 
it is often reported and correlated with other properties as a surrogate for the overall 
strength of a material. For brittle materials it is the same as their fracture strength, but 
for ductile materials it is larger by a factor of 1.3 to 3 because of strain-hardening.
 
● Modulus of elasticity (Young’s modulus), E, is the slope of the stress-versus-strain 
curve where it initially shows linear behavior, Fig. 11.4. A material with a high E is 
stiffer than a material with a lower E and resists deformation by bending or twisting 
to a greater extent.
 
● Ductility is the opposite of strength. It is the ability of a material to plastically de-
form before it fractures. It is usually measured by the percent elongation of a gage 
length inscribed on the test section of a tension test specimen or by the reduction in 
area of the tensile specimen at fracture.
 
● Fracture toughness, KIc, is a measure of the resistance of a material to the propaga-
tion of a crack within it. The use of this important engineering property in design is 
presented in Sec. 12.2. Other less sophisticated ways of measuring the tendency for 
brittle fracture are the Charpy V-notch impact test and using other notched speci-
mens loaded in tension.
 
● Fatigue properties measure the ability of a material to resist many cycles of 
 alternating stress. Fatigue failure, in all of its variations (high-cycle, low-cycle, and 
corrosion fatigue) is the number one cause of mechanical failure. See Sec. 12.3 for 
more information.
 
● Damping capacity is the ability of a material to dissipate vibrational energy by inter-
nal friction, converting the mechanical energy into heat. It is measured by the loss co-
effi cient, h, which expresses the fractional energy dissipated in a stress-strain cycle.
 
● Creep is the time-dependent strain that occurs under constant stress or load in ma-
terials at temperatures greater than half of their melting point. 
 
● Impact resistance is the ability of a material to withstand sudden shock or impact 
forces without fracturing. It is measured by the Charpy impact test or various kinds 
of drop tests. A material with high impact resistance is said to have high toughness.
 
● Hardness is a measure of the resistance of the material to surface indentation. It 
is determined by pressing a pointed diamond or steel ball into the surface under a 
known load. 1 Hardness is usually measured on arbitrary scales using the Rockwell, 
Brinell, or Vickers hardness tests. Hardness is a surrogate for yield stress. As a 
rough approximation, the higher the hardness number, the greater the yield stress. 
1. ASM Handbook, vol. 8, Mechanical Testing and Evaluation, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 
2000, pp. 198–287.

446 
engineering design 
11
Hardness measurements are used extensively as a quality control test because they are 
quick and easy to make and the test can be made directly on the fi nished component.
 
● Wear rate is the rate of material removal from two sliding surfaces in contact. 
Wear, an important failure mode in mechanical systems, is considered in Sec. 12.5.
Table 11.2 gives an overview of the most common types of failure modes that are 
likely to be encountered in various service environments. To identify the appropriate 
mode for designing a part, fi rst decide whether the loading is static, repeated (cyclic), 
or dynamic (impact). Then decide whether the stress state is primarily tension, com-
pression, or shear, and whether the operating temperature is well above or below room 
temperature. This will narrow down the types of failure mechanisms or modes, but in 
general it will not lead to a single type of failure mode. This will require consultation 
with a materials expert, or some further study by the design team. 1
The mechanical property that is most associated with each mode of failure is 
given in the rightmost column of Table 11.2. However, the service conditions met by 
materials in general are often more complex than the test conditions used to measure 
material properties. The stress level is not likely to be a constant value; instead, it 
is apt to fl uctuate with time in a random way. Or the service condition consists of a 
complex superposition of environments, such as a fl uctuating stress (fatigue) at high 
temperature (creep) in a highly oxidizing atmosphere (corrosion). For these extreme 
service conditions, specialized simulation tests are developed to “screen materials.” 
Finally, the best candidate materials must be evaluated in prototype tests or fi eld trials 
to evaluate their performance under actual service conditions.
Table 11.3 gives typical room temperature mechanical properties for several en-
gineering materials selected from Fig. 11.3. Examination of the properties allows us 
to learn something about how the processing, and thus the structure of the material, 
affects the mechanical properties.
First look at the values for elastic modulus, E, over the range of materials shown 
in Table 11.3. E varies greatly from 89 × 106 psi for tungsten carbide particles held 
together with a cobalt binder, a cemented carbide composite, to 1.4 × 102 psi for a sili-
cone elastomer. Elastic modulus depends on the forces between atoms, and this very 
large range in E refl ects the strong covalent bonding in the ceramic carbide and the 
very weak bonding of van der Waals forces in the polymeric elastomer. 
Next, turn your attention to the values of yield strength, hardness, and elongation. 
The properties of the plain carbon steels, 1020 and 1040, well illustrate the infl uence 
of microstructure. As the carbon content is increased from 0.2% carbon to 0.4%, the 
amount of hard carbide particles in the soft iron (ferrite) matrix of the steel increases. 
The yield strength increases and the elongation decreases as dislocations fi nd it more 
diffi cult to move through the ferrite grains. The same effect is observed in the alloy 
steel 4340, which is heated to the austenite region of the Fe-C phase diagram and 
then quenched rapidly to form the strong but brittle martensite phase. Tempering the 
1. G. E. Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1986; N. E. Dowling, Mechan-
ical Behavior of Materials, 3rd ed., Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2007; ASM Hand-
book, vol. 8, Mechanical Testing and Evaluation, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2000; ASM 
Handbook, vol. 11, Failure Analysis and Prevention, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2002.

11
TABLE 11.2
Guide for Selection of Material Based on Possible Failure Modes, Types of Loads, Stresses, and Operating Temperature
Types of Loading
Types of Stress
Operating 
Temperatures
Failure Mechanisms Static Repeated Impact Tension Compression
Shear
Low
Room
High
Criteria Generally Useful for Selection of 
Material
Brittle fracture
X
X
X
X 
. . .
. . .
X
X
. . .
Charpy V-notch transition temperature. Notch 
toughness KIc toughness measurements
Ductile fracture(a)
X
. . .
. . .
X
. . .
X
. . .
X
X
Tensile strength. Shearing yield strength
High-cycle fatigue(b)
. . .
X
. . .
X
. . .
X
X
X
X
Fatigue strength for expected life, with typical 
stress raisers present
Low-cycle fatigue
. . .
X
. . .
X
. . .
X
X
X
X
Static ductility available and the peak cyclic 
plastic strain expected at stress raisers during 
prescribed life
Corrosion fatigue
. . .
X
. . .
X
. . .
X
. . .
X
X
Corrosion-fatigue strength for the metal and 
contaminant and for similar time(c)
Buckling
X
. . .
X
. . .
X
. . .
X
X
X
Modulus of elasticity and compressive yield 
strength
Gross yielding(a)
X
. . .
. . .
X
X
X
X
X
X
Yield strength
Creep
X
. . .
. . .
X
X
X
. . .
. . .
X
Creep rate of sustained stress-rupture strength 
for the temperature and expected life(c)
Caustic or hydrogen 
embrittlement
X
. . .
. . .
X
. . .
. . .
. . .
X
X
Stability under simultaneous stress and hydro-
gen or other chemical environment(c)
Stress corrosion 
cracking
X
. . .
. . .
X
. . .
X
. . .
X
X
Residual or imposed stress and corro-
sion resistance to the environment. KISCC 
measurements(c)
KIc, plane-strain fracture toughness; KISCC, threshold stress intensity to produce stress-corrosion cracking. (a) Applies to ductile metals only. (b) Millions of cycles. (c) Items 
strongly dependent on elapsed time.
Source: B. A. Miller, “Materials Selection for Failure Prevention,” Failure Analysis and Prevention, ASM Handbook, vol. 11, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2002, p. 35.
447

11
448
TABLE 11.3
Typical Room Temperature Mechanical Properties of Selected Materials
Material 
Class
Class Member
Heat Treatment 
or Condition
Elastic 
Modulus 
106 (psi)
Yield 
Strength 
103 (psi)
Elonga-
tion %
Hardness
Steels
1020
Annealed
30.0
42.8
36
HB111
1040
Annealed
30.0
51.3
30
HB149
4340
Annealed
30.0
68.5
22
HB217
4340
Q&temper 1200 F
30.0
124.0
19
HB280
4340
Q&temper 800 F
30.0
135.0
13
HB336
4340
Q&temper 400 F
30.0
204.0
9
HB482
Cast iron
Gray iron, class 20
As cast
10.0
14.0
0
HB156
Ductile cast iron
ASTM A395
24.4
40.0
18
HB160
Aluminum
6061
Annealed
10.0
8.0
30
HB30
6061
T4 
10.0
21.0
25
HB65
6061
T6
10.0
40.0
17
HB95
7075
T6
10.4
73.0
11
HB150
A380
As die cast
10.3
23
3
HB80
Thermoplastic 
polymers
Polyethylene 
(LDPE)
Low density
0.025
1.3
100
HRR10
Polyethylene 
(HDPE)
High density
0.133
2.6
170
HRR40
Polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC)
Rigid
0.350
5.9
40
ABS
Medium impact
0.302
5.0
5
HRR110
Nylon 6/6
unfi lled
0.251
8.0
15
HRR120
Nylon 6/6
30% glass fi ber
1.35
23.8
2
Polycarbonate (PC)
Low viscosity
0.336
8.5
110
HRM65
Thermosets
Epoxy resin
Unfi lled
0.400
5.2
3
Polyester
Cast
0.359
4.8
2
Elastomers
Butadiene
Unfi lled
0.400
4.0
1.5
Silicone
1.4 × 10–4
0.35
450
Ceramics
Alumina
Pressed & sintered
55.0
71.2
0
Silicon nitride
Hot pressed
50.7
55.0
0
WC + 6% Co
Hot pressed
89.0
260
0
Concrete
Portland cement
2.17
0.14
0
Composites
Wood
Pine—with the 
grain
1.22
5.38
2
Wood
Pine—across grain
0.11
0.28
1.3
Epoxy matrix-glass 
fi ber
Longitudinal—
parallel to fi ber
6.90
246
3.5
Epoxy-glass fi ber
Transverse to fi ber
1.84
9.0
0.5
Hardness: HB Brinell test; HR Rockwell hardness test; HRR Rockwell test using R scale; HRM Rockwell test using 
M scale. Metals data taken from Metals Handbook, Desk Edition, 2nd ed., ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 
1998. Other data were taken from the Cambridge Engineering Selector software, Granta Design, Cambridge, UK. 
Where a range of values is given, only the lowest value was used.
psi = lb/in2 = 6895 Pa = 6895 N/m2
103(psi) = ksi = kip/in.2 = 6.895 MPa = 6.895 MN/m2 = 6.895 N/mm2

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
449
11
quenched steel causes the martensite to break down into a dispersion of fi ne carbide 
particles. The higher the tempering temperature, the larger is the particle size and 
the greater the average distance between them, which means that dislocations can 
move more easily. Thus, yield strength and hardness decrease with increasing tem-
pering temperature, and elongation (ductility) varies inversely with yield strength. 
Note that elastic modulus does not vary with these changes in carbon content and heat 
 treatment, because it is a structure-insensitive property that depends only on atomic 
bonding forces. This discussion illustrates the way that materials engineers can sig-
nifi cantly alter the structure of materials to change their properties.
While viewing Table 11.3 it is instructive to examine how yield strength and ductil-
ity vary between families of materials. Ceramics are very strong because their complex 
crystal structures make it diffi cult for plastic deformation by dislocation motion (slip) to 
occur. Unfortunately, this also means that they are very brittle, and they cannot practi-
cally be used as monolithic structural materials in machine components. Polymers are 
very weak compared with metals, and they are subject to creep at or near room tem-
perature. Nevertheless, because of many attractive attributes polymers are increasingly 
fi nding applications in consumer and engineered products. The special precautions that 
must be taken in designing with plastics (polymers) are discussed in Sec. 12.6.
Composite materials are hybrids that combine the best properties from two fami-
lies of materials. The most common composites combine high modulus glass or carbon 
(graphite) fi bers with a polymer matrix to improve both its modulus and its strength. 
Composite materials have reached such a high state of development that a large por-
tion of Boeing’s latest airliner is being made from polymer-based composites. How-
ever, as shown in Table 11.3, fi ber-reinforced composite (FRP) materials exhibit much 
different properties when tested parallel (longitudinal direction) to the fi ber, or at 90º 
(transverse) to the fi ber. This type of anisotropy in mechanical properties is present in 
all materials, but it is extreme with FRP composites. To compensate for this, sheets of 
composite material are stacked up in different orientations of fi ber to create laminates, 
much as with plywood. Because of the anisotropy of properties, design with compos-
ite materials requires special methods not generally covered in design courses. 1
11.2.3 Specifi cation of Materials
The material properties required in a part usually are formalized through specifi ca-
tions. Sometimes this is done by listing the material designation, AISI 4140 steel—for 
example, on the detail drawing of the part, along with processing instructions, such as 
the heat treatment temperatures and times. In this case the designer depends on gener-
ally accepted specifi cations established through organizations such as the Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE), ASTM, or ISO to give the requirements on chemical 
composition, grain size, surface fi nish, and other material descriptors. 
Often companies fi nd that using common standards, which are “consensus stan-
dards” agreeable to a wide sector of a material producing industry, do not provide 
the material quality they need for particularly sensitive manufacturing operations. For 
1. ASM Handbook, vol. 21, Composites, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2001.

450 
engineering design 
11
example, they may learn through a painful series of failures in production that the 
chemical limits on a minor element in a material must be held to a tighter tolerance 
range on chemical composition if they are to get an acceptable yield for a critical 
spot-welded part. The company will then issue their own specifi cation for the mate-
rial, which legally requires the supplier to supply material within a narrower range of 
chemistry. If the company is a large purchaser of the material, its supplier will gener-
ally accept the business and deliver material to the company specifi cation, but if it is 
only a small customer the company will have to pay a “quality premium” for material 
made to its tighter specifi cations. The designer must make a trade-off between the 
cost of scrapped parts in production and the cost for the premium grade material.
11.2.4 Ashby Charts
Ashby 1 has created materials selection charts that are very useful in comparing a 
large number of materials during conceptual design. These charts are based on a large 
computerized material property database. 2 A typical chart is shown in Figure 11.5. It 
displays the elastic modulus of polymers, metals, ceramics, and composites plotted 
against density. Note that the elastic modulus of solid materials spans seven decades, 
from foam polymers to hard ceramics. Note how the classes of materials group into 
common regions with ceramics and metals in the upper right, polymers in the middle, 
and cellular materials such as polymer foams and cork in the lower left. While it is 
diffi cult to discern small differences in the location of materials in crowded sections 
of the chart, when we use the computer program this is no longer a problem.
In the lower right corner of the Ashby chart in Fig. 11.5 are dotted lines of various 
slopes. Depending on the type of loading, different slopes are appropriate to use. This 
will become clearer after reading Sec. 11.7. If we need to fi nd the lightest tie rod loaded 
in axial tension to resist elongation, the line E/r = Constant would be chosen. Starting 
at the lower right corner of the chart, move a straightedge up toward the opposite cor-
ner parallel to this slope. At any instant, all materials lying on the straightedge would 
be equal candidates for selection, while all those lying below the straightedge would 
have been discarded. All those above the straightedge would be superior candidates.
E X A M P L E 11 .1
Move up four of the dotted lines in Fig. 11.5 to E = 10−1 GPa. We have exceeded the prop-
erties of most of the polymers and lead alloys, but zinc-based alloys and graphite fi ber–
reinforced polymers (GFRP) are on the line. Steels, titanium, and aluminum alloys lie 
above the line, and close examination of the chart shows that titanium alloys are the best 
selection. However, using actual numbers, the ratio E/r for plain carbon steel/aluminum 
alloy/titanium alloy is 104.9/105.5/105.9. This shows that to withstand a given elastic de-
formation the titanium alloy would be the lightest tie rod. However, the difference is so 
small that the much less expensive plain carbon steel would be selected. Note that E/r for 
Al2O3 is 353. Why wouldn’t this be the chosen material?
2. Cambridge Engineering Selector, Granta Design, www.grantadesign.com.
1. M. F. Ashby, Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 4th ed., Butterworth-Heineman, Oxford, UK, 
2011.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
451
11
11.3
THE MATERIALS SELECTION PROCESS
Material choices will always be governed by material properties and manufacturing 
issues. However, the material selection process for a new product development differs 
slightly from the process for material substitution in an existing design. Each process 
is outlined in this section.
Materials Selection for a New Product or New Design
In this situation the materials selection steps are:
1. Defi ne the functions that the design must perform and translate these into required 
materials properties such as stiffness, strength, and corrosion resistance, and such 
business factors as the cost and availability of the material. 
2. Defi ne the manufacturing parameters, such as the number of parts to be produced, 
the size and complexity of the part, its required tolerance and surface fi nish, gen-
eral quality level, and overall manufacturability of the material.
PE
PP
PS
Leather
PA
PMMA
Wood
GFRP
Mg alloys
Glass
Composites
Young’s modulus - Density
1000
100
10
1
101
102
0.01
0.1
Young’s modulus, E (GPa)
1
10
103
104
AI alloys CFRP
Technical
ceramics
B4C
SI3N4
SIC
AI2O3
Steels
TI alloys
Ni alloys
WC
W alloys
Cu alloys
Metals
Lead alloys
E1/2
E1/3
ρ
ρ
E
ρ
Zinc alloys
Concrete
Epoorn
PEEK
Polyester
PET
PC
PTFE
EVA
Cork
Foams
Natural materials
Rigid polymer
foams
Isoprene
Neoprene
Butyl
rubber
Flexible polymer
foams
Silicone
elastomers
Polyurethane
Guidelines for
minimum mass
design
Polymers and
elastomers
Density,   (Mg/m3)
ρ
FIGURE 11.5
Ashby materials selection chart: Elastic modulus versus density. (From M. F. Ashby, 
Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 3rd ed., p. 51, Copyright Elsevier, 2005. Used 
with permission.)

452 
engineering design 
11
3. Compare the needed properties and parameters against a large materials property 
database (most likely computerized) to select a few materials that look promising 
for the application. In this initial review process it is helpful to establish several 
screening properties. A screening property is any material property for which an 
absolute lower (or upper) limit can be established. No trade-off beyond this limit 
is allowable. It is a go/no-go situation. The idea of the screening step in materials 
selection is to ask the question: “Should this material be evaluated further for this 
application?” Generally, this is done in the conceptual design phase of the design 
process.
4. Investigate the candidate materials in more detail, particularly for trade-offs in 
product performance, cost, fabricability, and availability in the grades and sizes 
needed for the application. Material property tests and computer modeling are 
often done in this step. The objective is to narrow the material selection down to 
a single material and to determine a small number of possible manufacturing pro-
cesses. This step is generally done in the embodiment design phase.
5. Develop design data and/or a design specifi cation. Design data properties are the 
properties of the selected material in its manufactured state that must be known 
with suffi cient confi dence to permit the part to function with a specifi ed level of 
reliability. Step 4 results in the selection of a single material for the design and a 
suggested process for manufacturing the part. In most cases this results in estab-
lishing the minimum properties by defi ning the material with a generic material 
standard such as ASTM, SAE, ANSI, or a MIL spec. The extent to which step 5 is 
pursued depends on the nature of the application. In many product areas, service 
conditions are not severe, and commercial specifi cations such as those provided by 
ASTM may be used without adopting an extensive testing program. In other ap-
plications, such as the aerospace and nuclear areas, it may be necessary to conduct 
an extensive testing program to develop design data that are statistically reliable.
Materials Substitution in an Existing Design
In this situation the following steps pertain:
1. Characterize the currently used material in terms of performance, manufacturing 
requirements, and cost.
2. Determine which properties must be improved for enhanced product function. 
Often failure analysis reports play a critical role in this step (see Sec. 14.6).
3. Search for alternative materials and/or manufacturing routes. Use the idea of 
screening properties to good advantage.
4. Compile a short list of materials and processing routes, and use these to estimate 
the costs of manufactured parts. Use the methods discussed in Sec. 13.9 or the 
method of value analysis in Sec. 17.13.
5. Evaluate the results of step 4 and make a recommendation for a replacement mate-
rial. Defi ne the critical properties with specifi cations or testing, as in step 5 of the 
previous section.
It generally is not possible to realize the full potential of a new material unless the 
product is redesigned to exploit both the properties and the manufacturing characteristics 

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
453
11
of the material. In other words, a simple substitution of a new material without chang-
ing the design rarely provides optimum utilization of the material. Most often the crux 
of materials selection is not that one material competes against another; rather, it is that 
the processes associated with the production or fabrication of one material compete with 
the processes associated with the other. For example, the pressure die casting of a zinc-
based alloy may compete with the injection molding of a polymer. Or a steel forging 
may be replaced by sheet metal because of improvements in laser welding sheet-metal 
components into an engineering part. Thus materials selection is not complete until the 
issues discussed in Chap. 13 are fully considered.
11.3.1 Two Different Approaches to Materials Selection
There are two approaches 1 to settling on the material-process combination for a part. 
In the material-fi rst approach, the designer begins by selecting a material class and 
narrowing it down as described previously. Then manufacturing processes consistent 
with the selected material are considered and evaluated. Chief among the factors to 
consider are production volume and information about the size, shape, and complexity 
of the part. With the process-fi rst approach, the designer begins by selecting the man-
ufacturing process, guided by the same factors. Then materials consistent with the se-
lected process are considered and evaluated, guided by the performance requirements 
of the part. Both approaches end up at the same decision point. Most design engineers 
and materials engineers instinctively use the materials-fi rst approach, since it is the 
method taught in strength of materials and machine design courses. Manufacturing 
engineers and those heavily involved with process engineering naturally gravitate 
toward the other approach.
11.3.2 Materials Selection in Embodiment Design
A more comprehensive materials selection process than is done in conceptual design 
is carried out in the embodiment design phase using the process shown in Fig. 11.6. 
At the beginning there are parallel materials selection and component design paths to 
follow. The input to the material selection process is a small set of tentative materials 
chosen in conceptual design based on the Ashby charts and sources of data described 
in Sec. 11.4. At the same time in the confi guration design step of embodiment design, 
a tentative component design is developed that satisfi es the functional requirements, 
and, using the material properties, an approximate stress analysis is carried out to 
calculate stresses and stress concentrations. The two paths merge in an examination of 
whether the best material, fabricated into the component by its expected manufactur-
ing process, can bear the loads, moments, and torques that the component is expected 
1. J. R. Dixon and C. Poli, Engineering Design and Design for Manufacturing, Field Stone Publishers, 
Conway, MA, 1995.

454 
engineering design 
11
MATERIAL
SELECTION
Tentative Choice
of Materials
Collect Materials Data
Cost
Density
Elastic properties
Yield strength, hardness
Ductility
Fracture toughness
Fatigue strength
Thermal conductivity
Thermal expansion coef.
Specific heat
Thermal shock resistance
Creep parameters
Oxidation behavior
Corrosion
Fabricability
Preliminary Material & Process
Selection
Information
sufficient to
reach feasible
solution
Yes
No
Detailed Specification & Design
Choice of material
Detailed stress analysis & component design
Final Choice of Production Method
Quality assurance, detailed costing
Reconsider material choice & design if necessary
COMPONENT
DESIGN
Modeling
&
simulation
prototype
Tentative Component Design
Meet functional requirements
Approx. Stress Analysis
Forces, torques
Bending moments
Buckling loads
Stress concentrations
Fatigue stresses
Contact stresses
Allowable deflections
Fracture toughness
Environmental constraints
  Temperature
  Corrosion
FIGURE 11.6
Steps in materials selection at the embodiment and detail design phases.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
455
11
to withstand. Often the information is inadequate to make this decision with confi -
dence and fi nite element modeling or some other computer-aided predictive tool is 
used to gain the needed knowledge. Alternatively, a prototype component is made and 
subjected to testing. Sometimes it becomes clear that the initial selections of materials 
are just inadequate, and the process iterates back to the top and the selection process 
starts over.
Before making a fi nal material selection based on screening and ranking, as dis-
cussed in Secs. 11.6 through 11.9, it is important to determine that your selection does 
not result in any unpleasant surprises. This requires getting documentation about the 
material concerning such issues as failure analysis, case studies about its use, possible 
corrosion issues, prices, availability in needed sizes, and so on. This information gen-
erally is not available in databases. The information sources discussed in Sec. 11.4 , as 
well as contacts with suppliers, should prove helpful.
When the material-process selection is deemed adequate for the design, the 
choice passes to a detailed specifi cation of the material and the design. This is the 
parametric design step discussed in Chap. 8. In this design step, an attempt should be 
made to optimize the critical dimensions and tolerances to achieve a component that 
is robust to its service environment, using an approach such as the Taguchi robust de-
sign methodology (see Chap. 15). The next step is to fi nalize the choice of the produc-
tion method. This is based chiefl y on a detailed calculation of the cost to manufacture 
the  component (Chaps. 13 and 17). The material cost and the inherent workability and 
formability of the material, to reduce scrapped parts, are a major part of this deter-
mination. Another important consideration is the quality of the manufactured com-
ponent, again strongly infl uenced by the choice of material. Still other considerations 
are the heat treatment, surface fi nishing, and joining operations that will be required.
A shortcut approach to materials selection that is often used is to select a mate-
rial based on a component that has been used before in a similar application. This 
imitative approach results in a quick decision but it may not lead to a superior design 
if the service conditions are slightly different from those of the previous application, 
or if improvements in materials or the cost of manufacturing with the materials have 
changed from the date of the previous application. As an aid in starting the materi-
als selection process, a listing of materials commonly used in various components is 
given in Appendix D.
11.4
SOURCES OF INFORMATION ON MATERIAL PROPERTIES
Most practicing engineers develop a fi le (paper or electronic) of trade literature, tech-
nical articles, and company reports. Material property data comprise an important 
part of this personal data system. In addition, many large corporations and govern-
ment agencies develop their own compendiums of data on materials properties.
The purpose of this section is to provide a guide to material property data that 
are readily available in the published technical literature. There are several factors to 
have clearly in mind when using property data in handbooks and other open-literature 
sources. Usually a single value is given for a property, and it must be assumed that the 

456 
engineering design 
11
value is “typical.” When scatter or variability of results is considerable, the fact may 
be indicated in a table of property values by a range of values (i.e., the largest and 
smallest values) or be shown graphically by scatter bands. Unfortunately, it is rare to 
fi nd property data presented in a proper statistical manner by a mean value and the 
standard deviation. Obviously, for critical applications in which reliability is of great 
importance, it is necessary to determine the frequency distribution of both the mate-
rial property and the parameter that describes the service behavior. Figure 11.7 shows 
that when the two frequency distributions overlap, there will be a statistically predict-
able number of failures. For more on variability of material properties see Sec. 14.2.3.
It is important to realize that a new material cannot be used in a design unless the 
engineer has access to reliable material properties and cost data. This is a major rea-
son why the tried and true materials are used repeatedly for designs even though bet-
ter performance could be achieved with advanced materials. At the start of the design 
process, low-precision but all-inclusive data is needed. 
At the end of the design process, data is needed for only a single material, but it 
must be accurate and very detailed. Following is information on some widely avail-
able sources of information on materials properties. A signifi cant start has been made 
in developing computerized materials databases, and in converting handbook data to 
CD-ROM for easier searching and retrieval.
11.4.1 Conceptual Design
Metals Handbook Desk Edition, 2nd ed., ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 
1998. A compact compilation of metals, alloys, and processes.
Engineered Materials Handbook Desk Edition, ASM International, Materials 
Park, OH, 1995. A compact compilation of data for ceramics, polymers, and 
composite materials.
M. F. Ashby, Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 4th ed., Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2011. Extensive discussion of Ashby charts and ma-
terials selection, along with tables of property data suitable for screening at 
Service
conditions
Frequency
Property
Failure
Material
property
FIGURE 11.7
Overlapping distributions of material property and service requirement.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
457
11
conceptual design level. Appendix D in this text provides 25 pages on sources 
of material property data.
Cambridge Materials Selector, CES 06, Granta Design Ltd., Cambridge, UK. 
This software implements the Ashby materials selection scheme and provides 
data on 3000 materials. http://www.granta.com.uk.
K. G. Budinski and M. K. Budinski, Engineering Materials: Properties and Se-
lection, 9th ed., Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2010. Broad-
based, practically oriented.
11.4.2 Embodiment Design
At this phase of design, decisions are being made on the layout and sizes of parts 
and components. The design calculations require materials properties for a member 
of a subclass of materials but specifi c to a particular heat treatment or manufactur-
ing process. These data are typically found in handbooks and computer databases, 
and in data sheets published by trade associations of materials producers. The fol-
lowing is a list of handbooks commonly found in engineering libraries. The series of 
handbooks published by ASM International, Materials Park, OH, are by far the most 
complete and authoritative for metals and alloys. They also are available online and 
from knovel.com.
Metals
ASM Handbook, Vol. 1, Properties and Selection: Irons, Steels, and High-
Performance Alloys, ASM International, 1990.
ASM Handbook, Vol. 2, Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and 
Special-Purpose Alloys, ASM International, 1991.
SAE Handbook, Part 1, “Materials, Parts, and Components,” Society of Auto-
motive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, published annually. Similar but different 
European design allowables are available from ESDU as ESDU 00932.
MMPDS-04: Metallic Materials Properties Development and Standardization. 
This is the successor to MIL-HDBK-5, the preeminent source of design al-
lowables for aerospace materials. Published by Battelle Memorial Institute 
under license from U.S. Federal Aviation Administration. Internet access to 
MIL-HDBK-5 is provided at http://www.barringer1.com/mil.html.
Woldman’s Engineering Alloys, 9th ed., L. Frick (ed.), ASM International, 2000. 
References on approximately 56,000 alloys. Use this to track down information 
on an alloy if you know only the trade name. Available in electronic form.
Ceramics
ASM Engineered Materials Handbook, Vol. 4, Ceramics and Glasses, ASM 
International, 1991.
R. Morrell, Handbook of Properties of Technical and Engineering Ceramics, 
HMSO, London, Part 1, 1985, Part 2, 1987.

458 
engineering design 
11
C. A. Harper, ed., Handbook of Ceramics, Glasses, and Diamonds, McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 2001.
R. W. Cahn, P. Hassen, and E. J. Kramer, eds., Materials Science and Technology, 
Vol. 11, Structure and Properties of Ceramics, Weinheim, New York, 1994.
Polymers
ASM Engineered Materials Handbook, Vol. 2, Engineered Plastics, ASM Inter-
national, 1988.
ASM Engineered Materials Handbook, Vol. 3, Adhesives and Sealants, ASM 
International, 1990.
A. B. Strong, Plastics: Materials and Processing, 3rd ed., Pearson Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2006.
J. M. Margolis, ed., Engineering Plastics Handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York, 
2006.
Dominic V. Rosato, Donald V. Rosato, and Marlene G. Rosato, Plastics Design 
Handbook, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 2001.
Composites
ASM Handbook, Vol. 21, Composites, ASM International, 2001.
“Polymers and Composite Materials for Aerospace Vehicle Structures,” MILHDBK-17, 
U.S. Department of Defense.
P. K. Mallick, ed., Composites Engineering Handbook, Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1997.
S. T. Peters, ed., Handbook of Composites, 2nd ed., Chapman & Hall, New York, 
1995.
Electronic Materials
C. A. Harper, ed., Handbook of Materials and Processes for Electronics, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1970.
Electronic Materials Handbook, Vol. 1, Packaging, ASM International, 1989.
Springer Handbook of Electronic and Photonic Materials, Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, 2006.
Thermal Properties
Thermophysical Properties of High Temperature Solid Materials, Vols. 1 to 9,
Y. S. Touloukian (ed.), Macmillan, New York, 1967.
Chemical Properties
ASM Handbook, Vol. 13A, Corrosion: Fundamentals, Testing, and Protection, 
ASM International, 2003.
ASM Handbook, Vol. 13B, Corrosion: Materials, ASM International, 2005.
ASM Handbook, Vol. 13C, Corrosion: Environment and Industries, ASM Inter-
national, 2006.
R. Winston Revie, ed., Uhlig’s Corrosion Handbook, 2nd ed., John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 2000.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
459
11
Internet
Many sites provide Internet information on materials and materials properties. 
Most of those with useful data are subscription-only sites. Sites that provide some free 
information are:
www.matdata.net: Provides direct link to ASM International handbooks and met-
als databases, as well as Granta Design databases. Most of these are subscrip-
tion services, but this site will provide locations in the 22 volumes of ASM 
handbooks for data on specifi c materials. Most engineering libraries will have 
these handbooks.
www.matweb.com: Provides 80,000 material data sheets for free. Registered 
viewers can make searches for materials for free. For more advanced searches 
a subscription is required.
www.campusplastics.com: The “Computer Aided Materials Preselection by Uni-
form Standards” is a database of polymers properties sponsored by a network 
of worldwide plastic resin producers. In order to provide comparability between 
the data of different suppliers, each participant is required to use a uniform 
standard for the generation of the data. Use of the database is free.
www.custompartnet.com: Provides a diverse property database for a wide spec-
trum of metals and plastics.
11.4.3 Detail Design
At the detail design phase, very precise data are required. These are best found in data 
sheets issued by materials suppliers or by conducting materials testing within the or-
ganization. This is particularly true for polymers, whose properties vary considerably 
depending upon how they are manufactured. For all materials for critical parts, tests 
on the actual material from which they will be made are a requirement.
There is a wide range of material information that may be needed in detail design. 
This goes beyond just material properties to include information on manufacturability, 
including fi nal surface fi nish and tolerances, cost, the experience in using the material 
in other applications (failure reports), availability of the sizes and forms needed 
(sheet, plate, wire, etc.), and issues of repeatability of properties and quality assur-
ance. Two often-overlooked factors are whether the manufacturing process will pro-
duce different properties in different directions in the part, and whether the part will 
contain a detrimental state of residual stress after manufacture. These and other issues 
that infl uence the cost of the manufactured part are considered in detail in Chap. 13.
Many databases include disclaimer statements about not using the data for 
design. This is just another manifestation of our litigious society. Actually, most 
data is presented in good faith and can be used for screening  purposes. However, 
if there are questions about the type of test used to measure the property, or if the 
range of given values is large (particularly important with polymers), the material 
supplier should be contacted before making a fi nal decision. The data presented in 
this text is believed to be realistic, but it is for educational purposes and should not 
be used for fi nal designs.

460 
engineering design 
11
11.5
COST OF MATERIALS
Ultimately the material-process decision on a particular design will come down to a 
trade-off between performance and cost. There is a continuous spectrum of applica-
tions, varying from those where performance is paramount (aerospace and defense are 
good examples) to those where cost clearly predominates (household appliances and 
low-end consumer electronics are typical examples). In the latter type of application 
the manufacturer does not have to provide the highest level of performance that is 
technically feasible. Rather, the manufacturer must provide a value-to-cost ratio that 
is no worse, and preferably better, than the competition. By value we mean the extent 
to which the performance criteria appropriate to the application are satisfi ed. Cost is 
what must be paid to achieve that level of value.
11.5.1 Cost of Materials
Cost is such an overpowering consideration in many materials selection situations that 
we need to give this factor additional attention. The basic cost of a material depends 
upon (1) scarcity, as determined by either the concentration of the metal in the ore 
or the cost of the feedstock for making a polymer, (2) the cost and amount of energy 
required to process the material, and (3) the basic supply and demand for the material. 
In general, large-volume-usage materials like stone and cement have very low prices, 
while rare materials, like industrial diamonds, have very high prices. Figure  11.8 
shows the range of price for some common engineering materials.
As is true of any commodity, as more work is invested in the processing of a ma-
terial, the cost increases. Table 11.4 shows how the relative price of various steel prod-
ucts increases with further processing steps. Improvement in properties, like yield 
strength, beyond those of the basic material are produced by changes in structure 
brought about by compositional changes and additional processing steps. For  example, 
increases in the strength of steel are achieved by expensive alloy additions such as 
nickel, by heat treatment such as quenching and tempering, or by vacuum treatment 
of the liquid steel to remove gaseous impurities. However, the cost of an alloy may not 
simply be the weighted average of the cost of the constituent elements that make up 
the alloy. Often, a high percentage of the cost of an alloy is due to the need to control 
one or more impurities to very low levels. That could mean extra refi ning steps or the 
use of expensive high-purity raw materials.
Because most engineering materials are produced from nonrenewable resources, 
mineral ores or oil and natural gas, there is a continuous upward trend of cost over 
time. As commodities, materials fl uctuate in price due to temporary over- or under-
supply. Over the long term the cost of materials has risen at a rate about 10 percent 
greater than the costs of goods and services in general. Therefore, conservation in the 
use of materials is increasingly important. 
It is diffi cult to get current prices for materials from published sources. Sev-
eral sites are available on the Internet, but only on a subscription basis. Two sources 

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
461
11
useful for student design projects are the Cambridge Engineering Selector software 
and  www.custompartnet.com. To compensate for the change in the prices of materials 
over time, costs are often normalized relative to a common inexpensive material such 
as a steel  reinforcing bar or a plain carbon steel plate.
$0.10
$1
$10
Dollars/Kilogram
$100
$1,000
Graphite/Epoxy
Fiberglass/Epoxy
Oak
Douglas Fir/Pine
Graphite (Graphitezed Carbon)
Alumina Ceramic
Polystyrene (PS)
Polypropylene (PP)
Nylon 6/6
Polycarbonate (PC)
ABS
Magnesium AZ91D
Titanium 6-4
#110 Copper Alloy
70/30 Brass
7075 Aluminum
6061 Aluminum
3003 or 5005 Aluminum
2024 Aluminum
Gray Cast Iron
01 Tool Steel
S316 Stainless Steel
S304 Stainless Steel
4340 Steel
4140 Steel
1040 Steel
1020 Steel
FIGURE 11.8
Price ranges for different materials purchased in bulk at 2007 prices. (From K.T. Ulrich and 
S. D. Eppinger, Product Design and Development, 4th ed. 2008.)

462 
engineering design 
11
11.5.2 Cost Structure of Materials
The cost structure for pricing many engineering materials is quite complex, and true 
prices can be obtained only through quotations from vendors. Reference sources typi-
cally give only the nominal or baseline price. The actual price depends upon a va-
riety of price extras in addition to the base price (very much as when a new car is 
purchased). The actual situation varies from material to material, but the situation 
for steel products is a good illustration.1 Price extras are assessed for any changes 
from standard chemical composition, for vacuum melting or degassing, special sizes 
or shapes, tighter tolerances on size, heat treatment or surface preparation, and so on.
From this listing of price extras we can see how inadvertent choices by the designer 
can signifi cantly infl uence material cost. Standard chemical compositions should be used 
whenever possible, and the number of alloy grades should be standardized to reduce 
the cost of stocking many grades of steel. Manufacturers whose production rates do not 
justify purchasing in large quantity should try to limit their material use to grades that 
are stocked by local steel service centers. Special section sizes and tolerances should be 
avoided unless a detailed economic analysis shows that the cost extras are really justifi ed.
11.6
OVERVIEW OF METHODS OF MATERIALS SELECTION
There is no single method of materials selection that has evolved to a position of 
prominence. This is partly due to the complexity of the comparisons and trade-offs 
that must be made. Often the properties we are comparing cannot be placed on com-
parable terms so that a clear decision can be made.
A variety of approaches to materials selection are followed by designers and mate-
rials engineers. A common path is to critically examine the service of existing designs 
in environments similar to the one of the new design. Information on service failures 
can be very helpful. The results of accelerated laboratory screening tests or short-
time experience with a pilot plant can also provide valuable input. Often a minimum 
TABLE 11.4
Relative Prices of Various Steel Products
Product
Price Relative to Pig Iron
Pig iron 
1.0
Billets, blooms, and slabs
1.4
Hot-rolled carbon steel bars
2.3
Cold-fi nished carbon steel bars
4.0
Hot-rolled carbon steel plate
3.2
Hot-rolled sheet
2.6
Cold-rolled sheet
3.3
Galvanized sheet
3.7
1. R. F. Kern and M. E. Suess, Steel Selection, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1979.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
463
11
innovation path is followed and the material is selected on the basis of what worked
before or what is used in the competitor’s product. Appendix D gives suggestions.
Some of the more common and more analytical methods of materials selection are:
1. Performance indices (11.7)
2. Decision matrices (11.8)
Pugh selection method (11.8.1)
Weighted property index (11.8.2)
3. Computer-aided databases (11.9)
These materials selection methods are especially useful for making the fi nal selection 
of a material in the embodiment design phase.
A rational way to select materials is by using a material performance index
(Sec. 11.7). This is an important adjunct to the use of the Ashby selection charts dur-
ing the initial screening in the conceptual design phase and as a design framework for 
comparing the behavior of materials in different applications.
Various types of decision matrices were introduced in Chap. 7 to evaluate design
concepts. These can be used to good advantage to select materials when it is neces-
sary to satisfy more than one performance requirement. The weighted property index, 
considered in Sec. 7.6, has been the most commonly used method.
With the growing access to computer-aided materials databases, more engineers are 
fi nding the materials they need with a computerized search. Section 11.9 discusses this 
popular method of materials selection and suggests some cautions that should be observed.
Another rational way to select materials is to determine the way in which ac-
tual parts, or parts similar to a new design, fail in service. Then, on the basis of that 
knowledge, materials that are unlikely to fail are selected. The general methodology 
of failure analysis is considered in Chap. 14.
Regardless of how well a material has been characterized and how defi nitive the per-
formance requirements and the PDP schedule are, there will always be a degree of uncer-
tainty about the ability of the material to perform. For high-performance systems where
the consequences of failure can be very severe, material selection based on risk analysis 
can be very important. Some of the ideas of risk analysis are discussed in Chap. 14.
11.7
MATERIAL PERFORMANCE INDICES
A material performance index is a group of material properties that governs some 
aspect of the performance of a component. 1 If the performance index is maximized,
it gives the best solution to the design requirement. Consider the tubular frame of a
bicycle. 2 The design requirement calls for a light, strong tubular beam of fi xed outer 
diameter. Its function is to carry bending moments. The objective is to minimize the 
mass m of the frame. The mass per unit length m/L can expressed by
L
m
L
t
2π
ρ
rt
=
(11.1)
1. M. F. Ashby, Acta Met., 1989, vol. 37, p. 1273.
2. M. F. Ashby, Met. Mat. Trans., 1995, vol. 26A, pp. 3057–64.

464 
engineering design 
11
where r is the outer tube radius,
r
t is the wall thickness, and 
t
r is the density of the ma-
r
terial from which it is made. Equation (11.1) is the objective function, the quantity to
be minimized. This optimization must be done subject to several constraints. The fi rst 
constraint is that the tube strength must be suffi cient so it will not fail. Failure could
occur by buckling, brittle fracture, plastic collapse, or fatigue caused by repeated cy-
clic loads. If fatigue is the likely cause, then the cyclic bending moment Mb
M the tube 
can withstand with infi nite life is
M
I
r
b
e
σ
=
(11.2)
where se
s the endurance limit in fatigue loading and I = πr3t is the second moment 
t
of inertia for a thin-walled tube. The second constraint is that r is fi xed. However,
r
the wall thickness of the tube is free, and this should be chosen so that it will just 
support Mb
M . Substituting Eq. (11.2) into Eq. (11.1) gives the mass per unit length in 
terms of the design parameters and material properties.
m
M L
r
M
L
r
2
(2
)
b
e
b
e
ρ
σ
ρ
σ
=
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
=
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(11.3)
In Eq. (11.3) m is a performance metric for the design element, the bicycle tubular 
beam. The smaller the mass of a part, the less its cost and the lower the energy ex-
pended in pedaling the bike. Equation (11.3) has been written in the second form to
illustrate a general feature of performance metrics, P.P
P
functional
f
requirements
g
t
p
material proper
r
tie
r
s
) (
)
geometric param
r
etersr ,(
)]  (11.4)
In this example, the functional requirement is to resist a certain bending moment, but in
other problems it could be to resist a compressive buckling force, or to transmit a certain
heat fl ux. The geometric parameters in this example are L and 
L
r. The third component of 
r
Eq. (11.3) is a ratio of material parameters, density, and fatigue endurance limit. We see
that to reduce m this ratio should be as small as possible. This is the material index, M.
M
Generally, the three components of the performance metric are separable func-
tions, so Eq. (11.4) can be written as
P
f F
f G
f
(F
(G
(
)
M
1
2
f F
ff
(F
3f
f (F
1f (F
(11.5)
Thus, the choice of material to optimize P is not dependent on the values for function 
F or geometry 
F
G, and a search for the best material can be carried out without the
need for the details of F or 
F
G, provided that the material index has the proper form for 
the function and geometry.
11.7.1 Material Performance Index
Equation (11.3) indicates that best performance is achieved when mass is low. This 
requires in the search for best materials that those with low values of the index M be 
M

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
465
11
selected. However, it is usual practice to select materials with the largest values of the 
index, which is often called the materials performance index,1 M1, where M1 = 1/M
/ .
M
However, the form of the material performance index depends on the functional 
requirements and the geometry. Table 11.5 gives a short list of material performance 
indices for different types of loading and for several thermally related design objec-
tives. Ashby gives a much more detailed listing. 2
E X A M P L E 11 . 2 Selection of Materials for Automobile Cooling Fans 3
Problem Statement/ Selection of Design Space
The radiator cooling fan in automobiles has typically been driven by a belt from 
the main drive shaft of the engine. Sudden acceleration of the engine causes high bend-
ing moments and centrifugal forces on the fan blades. On several occasions blades have 
broken, causing serious injury to mechanics working on the engine. Find a better material 
than the sheet steel used in the blades.
Boundaries of the Problem
The redesign will be limited to the selection of a cost-effective material that has 
more resistance to the propagation of small cracks than the current material.
TABLE 11.5
Material Performance Indices
Design Objective: Minimum Weight for 
Different Shapes and Loadings
To Maximize 
Strength
To Maximize
Stiffness
Bar in tension: load, stiffness, length are fi xed; section
area is variable
sfs /r/
E/
E r/
Torsion bar: torque, stiffness, length are fi xed; section area is 
variable
/
f
2/3
σ
ρ
/
f
2/3
G1/2/r/
Beam in bending: loaded with external forces or self-weight; 
stiffness, length fi xed; section area free
/
f
2/3
σ
ρ
/
f
2/3
E1/2/r/
Plate in bending: loaded by external forces or self-weight; stiffness, 
length, width fi xed; thickness free
/
f
1/2
σ
ρ
/
f
1/2
E1/3/r/
Cylindrical vessel with internal pressure: elastic distortion, 
pressure, and radius fi xed; wall thickness free
sf 
s /r/
E/
E r/
Other design objectives, as stated below
Thermal insulation: minimize heat fl ux at steady state; thickness
given
1/k
Thermal insulation: minimum temperature after specifi ed time;
thickness given
Cp
C r/
r k
Minimize thermal distortion
k/k a
Maximize thermal shock resistance
sf 
s /E
/ a
a f
a = failure strength (yield or fracture stress as appropriate to problem); E = Young’s modulus; G = shear modulus;
r = density; Cp
C = specifi c heat capacity; a = thermal expansion coeffi cient; k = thermal conductivity.
1. The materials performance index is always such that the ratio is greater than unity.
2. M. F. Ashby, Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 4th ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 
UK, 2011, Appendix C, pp. 559–564.
3. M. F. Ashby and D. Cebon, Case Studies in Materials Selection, Granta Design Ltd, Cambridge, UK, 1996.

466 
engineering design 
11
Available Information
Published Ashby charts and the database of material properties available in the CES
software will be used.
Physical Laws/Assumptions
Basic mechanics of materials relationships will be used. It is assumed that the radius
of the fan is determined by the needed fl ow rate of air, so the size of the fan hub and
blade remain the same for all design options. It also is assumed that all fan blades will be
damaged by impact of road debris, so that some blades will contain small cracks or other 
defects. Therefore, the basic material property controlling service performance is fracture
toughness, KIc
K ; see Sec. 12.2.
Construct the Model for the Material Performance Index
Figure 11.9 shows a sketch of the fan hub with blades attached. The centrifugal force is
F
ma
A R
[ (
)](
)
R
2
ρ
ω
AcR
(
)](
ma
(11.6)
where r is the density, 
r
A is the cross-sectional area of a blade, c is the fraction of the
radius that is blade, not hub, and R is the total radius to the centerline of the fan shaft. w2
w R
is the angular acceleration. The likely place for the blade to fail is at the root location. The
stress at this location is
F
A
c
R
2
2
R
σ
ρ
A
c ω
 
(11.7)
We have assumed that the most likely cause of blade failure is the initiation of a
crack where the blade meets the hub, either by road debris damage or from a manufac-
turing defect, which propagates at some point into a fast-moving, brittle fracture type of 
crack. Therefore, the critical value of stress is controlled by the fracture toughness of 
the blade material, Sec. 12.2. Fracture toughness is given by K
a
Ic
c ,
σ
π
where ac is
the critical crack length that causes fracture and KIc
K is the material property plane strain 
AVERAGE
BLADE SECTION A
R
FIGURE 11.9
Sketch of the fan blades and hub.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
467
11
fracture toughness. Thus, a safe condition exists when stress due to centrifugal force is
less than that required to propagate a crack to failure.
c
R
K
a
Ic
c
2
2
R
ρω
π
≤
(11.8)
We are trying to prevent the blade from failing when the fan overspeeds. Equation 
(11.7) shows that the centrifugal stress is proportional to the square of the angular veloc-
ity, so an appropriate performance metric is w. Therefore,
R
K
c
Ic
1
1
1/2
1/2
ω
π
ρ
a
c R
c
≤
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
1
⎠
⎟⎟⎠
⎟
⎛
⎝
⎜⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟⎠
⎟⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
1
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
(11.9)
R and c are fi xed parameters. Critical crack length, ac varies somewhat with material,
but can be considered a fi xed parameter if we defi ne it as the smallest crack that can be 
detected by a nondestructive inspection technique such as eddy current testing. Thus, the 
materials performance index is (KIc
K /r/ )1/2. But when comparing a group of materials we
can simply use KIc
K /r/ , since the ranking will be the same. In this case we did not need to 
take the reciprocal of M because the ratio is greater than 1.
M
Analysis
In this situation the fi rst step in analysis consists of searching material property da-
tabases. For initial screening, the Ashby chart shown in Fig. 11.10 provides useful in-
formation. We note that the chart is plotted to a log-log scale in order to accommodate 
Short fibre GRFP
Fracture Toughness (MPa m^1/2)
Density (Mg/m^3)
PVC
PC
HDPE
Spruce
Nylon
PP
PI
Mg Alloys
Materials
for Fans
AI Alloys
Tl Alloys
Cast Irons
Fibe:Fame OMS
MFA 22 April 85
Generic 2.D+DB
100
10
1
0.1
0.1
0.5
1
5
10
M1
Rigid foams
FIGURE 11.10
Chart of fracture toughness versus density. (From Cebon and Ashby. Used with permission of 
Granta Design, Inc.)

468 
engineering design 
11
the wide range of property values. The material performance index is M
KIc
1
ρ
=
. Taking
logarithms of both sides of the equation gives logKIc
K = logρ + log M1, which is a straight 
line with a slope of unity. All materials on the line in Fig. 11.10 have the same values of 
material performance index. We see that cast iron, nylon, and high-density polyethylene
(HDPE) are possible candidates. Moving the line further toward the top-left corner would
suggest that an aluminum or magnesium casting alloy might be a candidate.
As pointed out earlier in this chapter, the ultimate decision on material will depend
on a trade-off between performance and cost. Most likely the blades will be made by a
casting process if a metal and a molding process if a polymer.
The cost of a blade is given by Cb = Cm
C ρ
m V, where
V
Cm
C  is the material cost in $/lb, 
density is lb/in.3, and volume is in cu. in. However, the volume of material is essentially
determined by R, which is set by the required fl ow rate of air, so V is not a variable in this
V
cost determination. From a cost viewpoint, the best material has the lowest value of Cm
C ρ
m .
Note that this cost discussion has considered only the cost of material. Since all materials
are suitable for use in either casting or injection molding processes, it is assumed that the
manufacturing costs would be equivalent across all candidate materials. More detailed
analysis would require the methods discussed in Chap. 13.
To introduce cost into the material performance index, we divide M1 by Cm
C to give 
M2
M = KIc
K /Cm
C ρ
m .
Typical values of material properties and material costs were obtained from the CES
database. The results are shown in Table 11.6. Based on the main performance criterion, 
an aluminum casting alloy is the best material for the fan blade. A possible concern is
whether it can be cast in the thin sections required for a blade with suitable control of 
dimensions, warping, and surface fi nish. Injection molded nylon with 30% chopped glass 
fi ber is tied for second place on a cost- property basis with a magnesium casting alloy.
Validation
Clearly, extensive prototype testing will be required whatever the fi nal decision on
material may be.
In this section we have shown how the material index, M, in Eq. (11.5) can be 
used to improve the performance metric, P, through the optimal selection of materials 
P
using the materials performance index. Since the three terms in Eq. (11.5) are multi-
plied to determine P,P changes in geometry as well as material properties can be used 
to enhance performance. We know from mechanics of materials that better stiffness 
can be achieved in a beam if it is in the shape of an I-section compared with a square 
TABLE 11.6
Analysis of Candidate Materials
Material
KIc ksi in.
ρ, lb/in.3
Cm, $/lb 
M1 = KIc/ρ
Cmρ
M2 = KIc/Cmρ
Nodular cast iron
20
0.260
0.90
76.9
0.234
85.5
Aluminum casting alloy
21
0.098
0.60
214
0.059
355
Magnesium casting alloy
12
0.065
1.70
184
0.111
108
HDPE—unfi lled
1.7
0.035
0.55
48
0.019
89.5
HDPE—with 30% glass fi ber
3
0.043
1.00
69
0.043
69.7
Nylon 6/6—with 30% glass
9
0.046
1.80
195
0.083
108

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
469
11
cross-section. This leads to the concept of shape factor as another way of improving 
the load, torque, or buckling capacity of structural members.1 For further details see 
Shape Factor in the website for this text, www.mhhe.com/dieter.
11.7.2 Material Selection for Eco-Attributes
The material performance index can be extended to consider the environmental issues 
covered in Chap. 10.2 The following stages of the materials cycle must be considered: (1) 
material production, (2) product manufacture, (3) product use, and (4) product disposal.
Energy and Emissions Associated with Material Production
The greatest amount of environmental damage is done in producing a material. 
Most of the energy used in this process is obtained from fossil fuels: oil, gas, and 
coal. In many cases the fuel is part of the production process, in other cases it is fi rst 
converted to electricity that is used in production. The pollution produced during ma-
terial production takes the form of undesirable gas emissions, chiefl y CO2, NOx, SOx, 
and CH4. For each kilogram of aluminum produced from fossil fuels there is created
12 kg of CO2, 40 g of NOx, and 90 g of SOx. Also, individual processes may create 
toxic wastes and particulates that should be treated at the production site.
The fossil-fuel energy required to make one kilogram of material is called its pro-
duction energy. Table 11.7 lists some typical values of production energy, Hp, as well 
as data on the production of CO2 per kg of material produced.
Energy and Emissions Associated with Product Manufacture
The energy involved in manufacturing the product is at least an order of  magnitude 
smaller than that required for producing the material. The energy for metal deforma-
tion processes like rolling or forging are typically in the range 0.01 to 1 MJ/kg. Polymer 
molding processes are 1 to 4 MJ/kg, while metal casting processes are 0.4 to 4 MJ/kg. 
While saving energy in manufacturing is important, of greater concern ecologically is 
eliminating any toxic wastes and polluted discharges created in manufacturing.
Energy Associated with Product Use
The energy consumed in product use is determined by the mechanical, thermal, 
and electrical effi ciencies achieved by the design of the product. Fuel effi ciency in a 
motor vehicle is achieved chiefl y by reducing the mass of the vehicle, along with im-
proving mechanical effi ciency of the transmission and minimizing aerodynamic losses.
Energy and Environmental Issues in Product Disposal
It is important to realize that some of the energy used in producing a material is 
stored in the material and can be reused in the recycling or disposal process. Wood 
and paper products can be burned in an incinerator and energy recovered. While some 
energy is required for recycling, it is much less than Hp. Recycled aluminum requires 
much less energy to melt it than is required to extract it from its ore.
2. M. F. Ashby, op. cit., Chap. 16.
1. M. F. Ashby, op. cit., Chap. 11.

470 
engineering design 
11
Important information to know when selecting an environmentally responsible
material is:
● Is there an economically viable recycling market for the material? This can be de-
termined by checking websites for recycled materials, and by determining the frac-
tion of the market for the material that is made from recycled materials.
● It is important to know how readily the material can be added to virgin material
without deleterious effects on properties. This is true recycling. Some materials can
only be recycled into lower-grade materials.
● Some materials can be disposed of by biodegradation in landfi lls, while the bulk 
of materials that are not recycled go into landfi lls. However, some materials like 
lead, cadmium, and some of the heavy metals are toxic, especially in fi nely divided
form, and must be disposed of by methods used for hazardous materials.
Material Performance Indices
Some of these environmental issues can be readily incorporated into the material
performance index. Suppose we wanted to select a material with minimum produc-
tion energy to provide a given stiffness to a beam. We know from Sec. 11.7.1 that the
minimum mass beam would be given by the largest value of M = E1/2/r/
from among
r
the candidate materials. To also accommodate production energy in this decision the
material performance index would be written as
M
E
H p
=
1 2
/
ρ  
(11.10)
TABLE 11.7
Values for Production Energy and Amount of CO2 Produced
Material
Production Energy (Hp) 
MJ/kg
CO2 Burden, 
[CO2] kg/kg
Low-carbon steels
22.4–24.8
1.9–2.1
Stainless steels
77.2–80.3
4.8–5.4
Aluminum alloys
184–203
11.6–12.8
Copper alloys
63.0–69.7
3.9–4.4
Titanium alloys
885–945 
41.7–59.5
Borosilicate glass
23.8–26.3
1.3–1.4
Porous brick
1.9–2.1
0.14–0.16
CFRP composites
259–286
21–23
PVC
63.5–70.2
1.85–2.04
Polyethylene (PE)
76.9–85
1.95–2.16
Nylons (PA)
102–113
4.0–4.41
From M.F. Ashby, Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 3rd ed. 
(Used with permission of Butterworth-Heinemann.)

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
471
11
and to select a material with minimum CO2 production for a beam of given bending 
strength
M
f
= [
]
σ
ρ
2 3
 
(11.11)
Production energy, Hp
H , or CO2 produced in smelting the material could be included in 
any of the material performance indices listed in Table 11.6. These terms are placed 
in the denominator because convention requires that high values of M determine the 
M
material selection.
11.8
MATERIALS SELECTION WITH DECISION MATRICES
In most applications it is necessary that a selected material satisfy more than one per-
formance requirement. In other words, compromise is needed in materials selection. 
We can separate the requirements into three groups: (1) go/no-go parameters, (2) non-
discriminating parameters, and (3) discriminating parameters. Go/no-go parameters
are those requirements that must meet a certain fi xed minimum value. Any merit in 
exceeding the fi xed value will not make up for a defi ciency in another parameter. 
Examples of go/no-go parameters are corrosion resistance or machinability. Nondis-
criminating parameters are requirements that must be met if the material is to be
used at all. Examples are availability or general level of ductility. Like the previous 
category, these parameters do not permit comparison or quantitative discrimination.
Discriminating parameters are those requirements to which quantitative values can
be assigned.
The decision matrix methods that were introduced in Chap. 7 are very useful in 
materials selection. They organize and clarify the selection task, provide a written 
record of the selection process (which can be useful in redesign), and improve the un-
derstanding of the relative merit among alternative solutions.
Three important factors in any formalized decision-making process are the alter-
natives, the criteria, and the relative weight of the criteria. In materials selection, each 
candidate material, or material-process pair, is an alternative. The selection criteria 
are the material properties or factors that are deemed essential to satisfy the func-
tional requirements. The weighting factors are the numerical representations of the 
relative importance of each criterion. As we saw in Chap. 7, it is usual practice to 
select the weighting factors so that their sum equals unity.
11.8.1 Pugh Selection Method
The Pugh concept selection method is the simplest decision method discussed in 
Chap. 7. This method involves qualitative comparison of each alternative to a refer-
ence or datum alternative, criterion by criterion. No go/no-go parameters should be
used as decision criteria. They have already been applied to screen out infeasible al-
ternatives. The Pugh concept selection method is useful in conceptual design because 

472 
engineering design 
11
it requires the least amount of detailed information. It is also useful in redesign, where 
the current material serves automatically as the datum.
E X A M P L E 11 . 3
The Pugh decision method is used to select a replacement material for a helical steel 
spring in a wind-up toy train. 1 The alternatives to the currently used ASTM A227 class I 
hard-drawn steel wire are the same material in a different design geometry, ASTM A228 
music spring-quality steel wire, and ASTM A229 class I steel wire, quenched and oil 
tempered. In the decision matrix that follows, if an alternative is judged better than the 
datum, it is given a+, if it is poorer it gets a–, and if it is about the same it is awarded an S, 
for “same.” 2 The +, –, and S responses are then totaled and discussed.
USE OF PUGH DECISION MATRIX FOR REDESIGN OF HELICAL SPRING
Alternative 1 
Present Material 
Hard-Drawn Steel 
ASTM A227
Alternative 2 
Hard-Drawn 
Steel Class I 
ASTM A227
Alternative 3 
Music Wire 
Quality Steel 
ASTM A228
Alternative 
4 Oil-
Tempered 
Steel Class I 
ASTM A229
Wire diameter, mm
1.4
1.2
1.12
1.18
Coil diameter, mm
19
18
18
18
Number of coils
16
12
12
12
Relative material cost
1
1
2.0
1.3
Tensile strength, MPa
1750
1750
2200
1850
Spring constant
D
−
−
−
Durability
A
S
+
+
Weight
T
+
+
+
Size
U
+
+
+
Fatigue resistance
M
−
+
S
Stored energy
−
+
+
Material cost (for one spring)
+
S
S
Manufacturing cost
S
+
−
Σ+
3
6
4
ΣS
2
1
2
Σ−
3
1
2
Both the music spring-quality steel wire and the oil-tempered steel wire are superior 
to the original material selection. The music wire is selected because it ranks highest in 
advantages over the current material, especially with regard to manufacturing cost. 
1. D. L. Bourell, “Decision Matrices in Materials Selection,” in ASM Handbook, vol. 20, Materials 
Selection and Design, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1997.
2. Note: Do not sum the + and – ratings as though they were +1 and –1 scores. This invalidates the selec-
tion method because it presumes all criteria have equal weight. They do not.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
473
11
11.8.2 Weighted Property Index
The weighted decision matrix that was introduced in Chap. 7 is well suited to mate-
rials selection with discriminating parameters. 1 In this method each material prop-
erty is assigned a certain weight depending on its importance to the required service 
performance. Techniques for assigning weighting factors are considered in Sec. 7.6. 
Since different properties are expressed in different ranges of values or units, the best 
procedure is to normalize these differences by using a scaling factor. Otherwise the 
property with the highest numerical value would have undue infl uence in the selec-
tion. Since different properties have widely different numerical values, each property 
must be so scaled that the largest value does not exceed 100.
βi
i =
i
= scaledprope
r
rt
e yt
numerir cal valu
a eof prope
r
rt
e yt i
i
larg
a est valueof under c
e
onsiderar tio
a
n100
(11.12)
With properties for which it is more desirable to have low values, such as density, cor-
rosion loss, cost, and electrical resistance, the scaled property is formulated as follows:
i
i
i
scaledproperty
lowest valueof underconsideration
numerical
r
valueof property
100
iβ =
=
i
scaledproperty
(11.13)
For properties that are not readily expressed in numerical values, like weldability and 
wear resistance, some kind of subjective rating is required. A common approach is to 
use a 5–point scale in which the property is rated excellent (5), very good (4), good
(3), fair (2), or poor (1). Then the scaled property would be excellent (100), very good 
(80), good (60), fair (40), or poor (20).
The weighted property index g is given by
g
w
i
i
w
bi
γ = Σ
 
(11.14)
where bib is summed over all the properties (criteria) and wi is the weighting factor for 
the i th property.
There are two ways to treat cost in this analysis. First, cost can be considered 
to be one of the properties, usually with a high weighting factor. Alternatively, the 
weighted property index can be divided by the cost of a unit mass or volume of mate-
rial. This approach places major emphasis on cost as a material selection criterion.
E X A M P L E 11 . 4
The material selection for a cryogenic storage vessel for liquefi ed natural gas is being 
evaluated on the basis of the following properties: (1) low-temperature fracture toughness, 
(2) low-cycle fatigue strength, (3) stiffness, (4) coeffi cient of thermal expansion (CTE), 
1. M. M. Farag, Materials Selection for Engineering Design, Prentice Hall Europe, London, 1997.

474 
engineering design 
11
and (5) cost. Since the tank will be insulated, thermal properties can be neglected in the 
selection process.
First determine the weighting factors for these properties using pairwise compari-
son. There are N = 5(5 − 1)/2 = 10 possible comparisons of pairs. For each comparison, 
decide which is the more important property (decision criterion). Assign a 1 to the more 
important property and a 0 to the other. In this example we decided that fracture tough-
ness is more important than each of the other properties, even cost, because a brittle 
fracture of a cryogenic tank would be disastrous. If a 1 goes in the (1)(2) position, then 
a 0 goes in the (2)(1) location, etc. In deciding between fatigue strength and stiffness, 
we decided that stiffness is more important, so a 0 goes in the (2)(3) and a 1 in the (3)
(2) box.
Pairwise Comparison of Properties
Property
1
2
3 
4
5
Row Total
Weighting 
Factor, wi
1. Fracture toughness
−
1
1
1
1
4
0.4
2. Fatigue strength
0
−
0
1
0
1
0.1
3. Stiffness
0
1
−
0
0
1
0.1
4. Thermal expansion
0
0
1
−
0
1
0.1
5. Cost
0
1
1
1
−
3
0.3
Totals
10
1.0
The pairwise comparison shows that out of the 10 choices made, the property frac-
ture toughness received four positive (1) decisions, so that its weighting factor w1 = 4/10 = 
0.4. In the same way, the values of w for the other four properties are w2 = 0.1; w3 = 0.1; 
w4 = 0.1; w5 = 0.3.
Using pairwise comparison to establish the weighting factors is quick, but it has two 
defi ciencies: (1) it is diffi cult to make a series of comparisons in a completely consistent 
way, and (2) each comparison is a binary decision (there are no degrees of difference). 
We have seen in Sec. 7.7 that AHP is a superior method for making this type of decision. 
When AHP was used in Example 11.4 to determine the weighting factors from fracture 
toughness to cost, the values were 0.45, 0.14, 0.07, 0.04, and 0.30.
The chart for selecting a material based on the weighted property index is shown 
in Table 11.8. Four candidate materials were identifi ed from the preliminary screening. 
Several go/no-go screening parameters are included. On further investigation it was found 
the aluminum alloy is not available in the required plate thickness, so that material was 
dropped from further consideration. The body of the table shows both the raw data and 
the data in scaled form. The β values for toughness, fatigue strength, and stiffness were 
determined from Eq. (11.12). The β values for thermal expansion and cost were deter-
mined from Eq. (11.13) because for these properties a smaller value ranks higher. Since no 
comparable fracture toughness data was available for the candidate materials, a relative 
scale 1 to 5 was used. The weighting factors developed in the previous table are given 
beside the listing for each of the properties.
The best material among these choices for the application is the 9 percent nickel 
steel, which has the largest value of weighted property index.

11
TABLE 11.8
Weighted Property Index Chart for Selection of Material for Cryogenic Storage
Go/No-Go Screening
Material
Corrosion
Weldability
Available 
in Thick 
Plate
Toughness (0.4)
Fatigue 
Strength (0.1)
Stiffness (0.1)
Thermal 
Expansion (0.1)
Cost (0.3)
Weighted 
Property 
Index
Rel. Scale
a
ksi
a
106 psi
a
μin/in °F
a
$/lb
a
f
304 stainless
S
S
S
5 
100
30
60
28.0
93
9.6
80
3.00
50
78.3
9% Ni steel
S
S
S
5
100
50
100
29.1
97
7.7
100
1.80
83
94.6
3% Ni steel
S
S
S
4
80
35
70
30.0
100
8.2
94
1.50
100
88.4
Aluminum alloy
S
S
U
S = satisfactory
U = unsatisfactory
Reixtive Scale 5 = excellent, 4 = very good
Sample calculation: 304 stainless steel: g = 0.4(100) + 0.1(60) + 0.1(93) + 0.1(80) + 0.3(50) = 78.3
475

476 
engineering design 
11
11.9
SELECTION WITH COMPUTER-AIDED DATABASES
The use of computer-aided tools allows the engineer to minimize the materials selec-
tion information overload. A computerized materials search can accomplish in min-
utes what may take hours or days by a manual search. Over 100 materials databases
are available worldwide. All materials property databases allow the user to search for 
a material match by comparing a number of property parameters, each of which can
be specifi ed as below, above, or within a stated range of values. Some databases have 
the ability to weight the importance of the various properties. The most advanced 
databases allow the materials property data to be transmitted directly to a design soft-
ware package, such as fi nite element analysis, so that the effect of changing material 
properties on the geometry and dimensions of a part can be directly observed on the
computer monitor.
Most existing databases provide numerical material properties as opposed to
qualitative rankings. Usually mechanical and corrosion properties are well covered,
with less extensive coverage of magnetic, electrical, and thermal properties. Since it is 
unlikely that any database will be suffi ciently comprehensive for a specifi c user, it is
vital that the search system be designed so that users may easily add their own data, 
and subsequently search, manipulate, and compare these values along with the entire
collection of data.
To compare different materials using a computerized database, it is useful to em-
ploy limits on properties. For example, if it is necessary to have a stiff, light material,
we would put a lower limit on Young’s modulus and an upper limit on density. After 
screening, the remaining materials are those whose properties are above the lower 
limits and below the upper limits
E X A M P L E 11 . 5
In selecting a material for a design at the conceptual design phase, we know that we need 
a material with a yield strength of at least 60,000 psi and with both good fatigue strength
and fracture toughness. The Cambridge Engineering Selector (CES), an extensive data-
base for about 3000 engineering materials, is a very useful source of information. 1 Enter-
ing the software in Select Mode, we click on “All bulk materials” and go to “Limit stage”
so we can set upper and lower limits, as desired. In the selection boxes we enter the fol-
lowing values:
General
Minimum
Maximum
 Density, lb/in.3
0.1
0.3
Mechanical
 Elastic limit, ksi
60
 Endurance limit, ksi
40 
 Fracture toughness, ksi in.
40
 Young’s modulus, 106 psi
10
30
1. Cambridge Engineering Selector, v. 4 from Granta Design Ltd., Cambridge, UK, 2006 www.grantadesign
.com.uk

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
477
11
These decisions reduced the possible selections from 2940 to 422, mostly steels and tita-
nium alloys. Next, setting a maximum value on price at 1.00 $/lb reduced the options to 
246 by eliminating all but the steels.
Introducing a maximum carbon content of 0.3% to minimize problems with cracking in ei-
ther welding or heat treatment reduced the selection to 78 steels—plain carbon, low-alloy steels, 
and stainless steels. Since the application did not require resistance to other than a normal room 
temperature oil mist environment, the stainless steels were eliminated by specifying a chro-
mium content not to exceed 0.5%. Now we are down to 18 plain carbon and low-alloy steels. 
The normalized AISI 4320 steel was selected because we wanted a material with better fatigue 
and fracture toughness properties than plain carbon steel, and being able to get these properties 
in the normalized condition, which means that no further heat treatment other than that given at 
the steel mill is necessary, was worth the small price differential. Moreover, we found that our 
local steel supply warehouse stocked this alloy grade in a convenient bar diameter.
By its very nature, a computerized database search uses screening properties in which 
upper or lower values of properties are employed. Once the search has narrowed the can-
didate materials it is important to use the decision methods discussed in Sec.11.8 to arrive 
at a fi nal material selection. In arriving at the  list of desired properties used to make the 
decision it is very useful to frame them  as material performance indices, Sec. 11.7.
11.10
DESIGN EXAMPLES
Engineered systems contain many components, and for each a material must be se-
lected. The automobile is our most familiar engineering system and one that exhibits 
major changes in the materials used for its construction. These trends in materials 
selection refl ect the great effort that is being made to decrease the fuel consumption of 
cars by downsizing the designs and adopting weight-saving materials. Prior to 1975, 
steel and cast iron comprised about 78 percent of the weight of a car, with aluminum 
and plastics each at slightly less than 5 percent. Today, ferrous materials comprise 
about 57 percent of the total weight, with plastics at about 20 percent and aluminum 
at about 8 percent. Aluminum is in an ongoing battle with steel to take over the struc-
tural frame and part of the sheet panels.
Complex and severe service conditions can be economically withstood only by 
combining several materials in a single component. The surface hardening of gears 
and other automotive components by carburizing or nitriding 1 is a good example. 
Here the high hardness, strength, and wear resistance of a high-carbon steel is pro-
duced in the surface layers of a ductile and tougher low-carbon steel.
E X A M P L E 11 . 6 Complex Materials System
Automobile manufacturers often use their high-end, high-performance cars as a test bed 
for the application of new materials and manufacturing processes. The Chevrolet Z06 
Corvette is a good example where increased performance in speed, acceleration, and 
fuel economy were achieved by major changes in materials.2 This was accomplished by 
1. Metals Handbook: Desk Edition, 2nd ed., “Case Hardening of Steel,” ASM International, 1998. 
pp. 982–1014.
2 D. A. Gerard, Advanced Materials and Processes, January 2008, pp. 30–33.

478 
engineering design 
11
signifi cant modifi cations to the body and powertrain architectures. The modifi cations 
included substantial reduction in vehicle mass, improvement of the mass distribution 
between front and rear of the vehicle, and incorporation of a newly designed high-
performance 7-liter small-block engine.
Structural Modifi cations
The standard Corvette had a steel space frame made mainly from stamped parts 
joined by welding. This frame was replaced by a structure of twenty-one 6063 aluminum 
alloy extrusions that were formed into special shapes by the hydroforming process.1 A key 
part of the frame is the 4.8 m long rail, weighing 24 kg, the largest hydroformed alumi-
num component in the world. Other components of the space frame include eight A356 
aluminum castings, a 6061 T6 extruded beam, and several 5754 aluminum stampings. 
The completed space frame is a 33 percent mass reduction over the steel frame.2
Since aluminum has an elastic modulus (E) only one-third that of steel, major rede-
sign was needed to achieve required vehicle stiffness. In addition, the cost of aluminum 
is about three times that of steel. Finite element analysis (FEA) was critical in making it 
possible to use aluminum alloys at an acceptable cost. A key design breakthrough made 
possible by using FEA was a reduction of the forces on the aluminum frame by transfer-
ring part of the load to a lightweight magnesium roof frame. Also, in designing the new 
aluminum frame, FEA facilitated the redistribution of weight from front to rear of the 
vehicle.
The Z06 is the fi rst vehicle in the industry to use a large magnesium diecast engine 
cradle, a 35 percent mass reduction over the previous aluminum cradle. This is a major 
structural member (10.5 kg) that not only supports the engine and front bumper beam, but 
also ties the ram rails together and acts as the mounting point for certain front suspension 
systems. Since the cradle interfaces with several dissimilar metals, it was important to 
solve potential issues with corrosion of dissimilar metals in contact, as well as joining of 
dissimilar metals. Since Mg has a lower density than Al, its use as an engine cradle was 
motivated by the design objective of moving mass toward the rear of the vehicle. Several 
other material changes were made to achieve the same goal. Polymer-carbon fi ber front 
fenders and wheel houses replaced metal components, and a fl oor pan consisting of a bal-
sawood core with a carbon fi ber skin replaced a metal pan.
LS 7 Engine
The LS 7 engine is a new high-performance internal combustion (IC) engine that 
delivers 505 hp and 7100 rpm while achieving a 24 mpg EPA highway rating. It is the fi rst 
500+ hp engine exempt from the gas guzzler tax in the United States. The new material 
and process innovations introduced in the engine are largely responsible for this result.
 
●A three-piece polymer composite manifold assembled by friction welding resulted in 
20 percent reduction in air fl ow restriction to deliver the higher airfl ow needed for the 
larger horsepower engine.
 
●The engine has CNC-ported cylinder heads that deliver the required high air fl ow. Cyl-
inder head porting refers to the process of modifying the profi le of the intake and ex-
haust ports of an engine to improve the quality and quantity of air fl ow. This is usually 
done with 5-axis CNC machining.3
1. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydroforming.
2. B. Deep, L. Decker, E. Moss, M. P. Kiley, R. Thomure, and J. Turczynski, SAE Technical Paper
2005-01-0465, Society of Automotive Engineers, 2005.
3. http://en.wikipedia/wiki/Cylinder_head_porting.

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
479
11
 
●The intake valves are Ti-6Al-2Sn-4Zr-2Mo, a high-strength, high-modulus, low-
density material. The lower valve mass allows a larger valve head, needed for a larger 
inlet area required for the airfl ow to achieve 505 hp. The lighter valve permits achiev-
ing 7100 rpm without overstressing.
 
●The exhaust valves are made from two stainless steel parts, friction-welded together. 
The upper stem is 422 stainless (12 Cr, 1Ni, 1 Mo, 1.2 W), while the lower hotter part 
of the valve, which includes the valve head, is made from a high temperature valve 
steel SAE J775. The upper valve stem is hollow and contains sodium (mp. 140ºC). The 
sodium serves as a heat transfer medium to carry heat from the hotter valve head to the 
stem, where it is dissipated by passing through the valve guides into the cylinder head.
 
●Other material technologies have further improved the powertrain. The aluminum pis-
ton is coated with an anti-seizure polymer to reduce friction and noise. A forged 4140 
steel crankshaft has replaced the cast crankshaft. This provides improved stiffness and 
is better able to handle the increased loads resulting from the higher engine speed. A 
forged Ti-6Al-4V alloy connecting rod replaced one made from steel. The combination 
of tensile strength, fatigue strength and stiffness results in a 30 percent reduction in 
weight.  As a consequence, the lighter titanium connecting rods produce lower loads on 
the rod ends and main bearings, thus allowing the bearings to be designed for minimal 
friction. A signifi cant increase in bearing life is expected.
 
●Finally, a major redesign of the exhaust manifold, employing CFD modeling, resulted 
in better airfl ow into the catalytic converter. Hydroforming permitted the stainless steel 
exhaust tubes to be made with a complex pattern of inside diameters, based on CFD, 
that controlled pumping losses and kept airfl ow restriction to a minimum.
E X A M P L E 11 .7 Material Substitution
This design example illustrates the common problem of substituting a new material for 
one that has been used for some time. It illustrates that material substitution should not be 
undertaken unless appropriate design changes are made. Also, it illustrates some of the 
practical steps that must be taken to ensure that the new material and design will perform 
adequately in service.
Aluminum alloys have been substituted for gray cast iron 1 in the external supporting 
parts of integral-horsepower induction motors (Fig. 11.11). The change in materials was 
FIGURE 11.11
Horizontal aluminum alloy motor. 
(Courtesy of General Electric Company.)
1. T. C. Johnson and W. R. Morton, IEEE Conference Record 76CH1 109-8-IA, Paper PCI-76-14, 
General Electric Company Report GER-3007.

480 
engineering design 
11
brought about by increasing cost and decreasing availability of gray-iron castings. There 
has been a substantial reduction in gray-iron foundries, partly because of increased costs 
resulting from the more stringent environmental pollution and safety regulations imposed 
in recent years by governmental agencies. The availability of aluminum castings has in-
creased owing to new technology to increase the quality of aluminum castings. Also, with 
aluminum castings there are fewer problems in operating an aluminum foundry, which 
operates at a much lower temperature than those required for cast iron.
There are a variety of aluminum casting alloys.1 Among the service requirements for 
this application, strength and corrosion resistance were paramount. The need to provide 
good corrosion resistance to water vapor introduced the requirement to limit the copper 
content to an amount just suffi cient to achieve the necessary strength. Actual alloy selec-
tion was dependent on the manufacturing processes used to make the part. That in turn 
depended chiefl y (see Chap. 13) on the shape and the required quantity of parts. Table 11.9 
gives details on the alloys selected for this application.
Since the motor frame and end-shield assemblies have been made successfully from 
gray cast iron for many years, a comparison of the mechanical properties of the alumi-
num alloys with cast iron is important (Table 11.10).
The strength properties for the aluminum alloys are approximately equal to or exceed 
those of gray cast iron. If the slightly lower yield strength for alloy 356 cannot be tolerated, 
it can be increased appreciably by a solution heat treatment and aging (T6 condition) at a 
slight penalty in cost and corrosion resistance. Since the yield and shear strength of the 
1. Metals Handbook: Desk Edition, 2nd ed., “Aluminum Foundry Products,” ASM International, 1998. 
pp. 484–96.
TABLE 11.9
Aluminum Alloys Used in External Parts of Motors
Composition
Part
Alloy
Cu
Mg
Si
Casting Process
Motor frame
356
0.2 max
0.35
7.0
Permanent mold
End shields 
356
0.2 max
0.35
7.0
Permanent mold
Fan casing
356
0.2 max
0.35
7.0
Permanent mold
Conduit box
360
0.6 max
0.50
9.5
Die casting
TABLE 11.10
Comparison of Typical Mechanical Properties
Material
Yield 
Strength, ksi
Ultimate Tensile 
Strength, ksi
Shear 
Strength, ksi
Elongation in 
2 in., percent
Gray cast iron
18
22
20 
0.5
Alloy 356 (as cast)
15
26
18
3.5
Alloy 360 (as cast)
25
26
45
3.5
Alloy 356-T61
28
38
5
(solution heat-treated 
and artifi cially aged)

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
481
11
aluminum alloys and gray cast iron are about equal, the section thickness of aluminum to 
withstand the loads would be the same. However, since the density of aluminum is about 
one-third that of cast iron, there will be appreciable weight saving. The complete alumi-
num motor frame is 40 percent lighter than the equivalent cast iron design.  Moreover, gray 
cast iron is essentially a brittle material, whereas the cast-aluminum alloys have enough 
malleability that bent cooling fi ns can be straightened without breaking them.
The aluminum alloys are inferior to cast iron in compressive strength. In aluminum, 
as with most alloys, the compressive strength is about equal to the tensile strength, but 
in cast iron the compressive strength is several times the tensile strength. That becomes 
important at bearing supports, where, if the load is unbalanced, the bearing can put an 
appreciable compressive load on the material surrounding and supporting it. That leads to 
excessive wear with an aluminum alloy end shield.
To minimize the problem, a steel insert ring is set into the aluminum alloy end shield 
when it is cast. The design eliminates any clearance fi t between the steel and aluminum, 
and the steel insert resists wear from the motion of the bearing just as the cast iron always 
did. The greater ease of casting aluminum alloys permits the use of cooling fi ns thinner 
and in greater number than in cast iron. Also, the thermal conductivity of aluminum is 
about three times greater than that of cast iron. Those factors result in more uniform 
temperature throughout the motor, and this results in longer life and higher reliability. 
Because of the higher thermal conductivity and larger surface area of cooling fi ns, less 
cooling air is needed. With the air requirements thus reduced, a smaller fan can be used, 
also resulting in a small reduction of noise.
The coeffi cient of expansion of aluminum is greater than that of cast iron, and that 
makes it easier to ensure a tight fi t of motor frame to the core. Only a moderate tempera-
ture rise is needed to expand the aluminum frame suffi ciently to insert the core, and on 
cooling the frame contracts to make a tight bond with the core. That results in a tighter 
fi t between the aluminum frame and the core and better heat transfer to the cooling fi ns. 
Complete design calculations need to be made when aluminum is substituted for cast iron 
to be sure that clearances and interferences from thermal expansion are proper.
Since a motor design that had many years of successful service was being changed 
in a major way, it was important to subject the redesigned motor to a variety of simulated 
service tests. The following were used:
 
●Vibration test
 
●Navy shock test (MIL-Std-901)
 
●Salt fog test (ASTM B 1 17-57T)
 
●Axial and transverse strength of end shield
 
●Strength of integral cast lifting lugs
 
●Tests for galvanic corrosion between aluminum alloy parts and steel bolts
This example illustrates the importance of considering design and manufacturing 
together in a material substitution situation.
11.11
SUMMARY
This chapter has shown that there are no magic formulas for materials selection. 
Rather, the solution of a materials selection problem is every bit as challenging as any 
other aspect of the design process and follows the same general approach of problem 

482 
engineering design 
11
solving and decision making. Successful materials selection depends on the answers 
to the following questions.
1. Have performance requirements and service environments been properly and com-
pletely defi ned?
2. Is there a good match between the performance requirements and the material 
properties used in evaluating the candidate materials?
3. Has the material’s properties and their modifi cation by subsequent manufacturing 
processes been fully considered?
4. Is the material available in the shapes and confi gurations required and at an ac-
ceptable price?
The steps in materials selection are:
1. Defi ne the functions that the design must perform and translate these into required 
materials properties, and to business factors such as cost and availability.
2. Defi ne the manufacturing parameters such as number of parts required, size 
and complexity of the part, tolerances, quality level, and fabricability of the 
material.
3. Compare the needed properties and process parameters with a large materials da-
tabase to select a few materials that look promising for the application. Use several 
screening properties to identify the candidate materials.
4. Investigate the candidate materials in greater detail, particularly in terms of 
trade-offs in performance, cost, and manufacturability. Make a fi nal selection of 
material.
5. Develop design data and a design specifi cation.
Materials selection can never be separated from the consideration of how the part 
will be manufactured. This large topic is covered in Chap. 13. The Ashby charts 
are very useful for screening a wide number of materials at the conceptual de-
sign stage, and should be employed with materials performance indices. Computer 
screening of materials databases is widely employed in embodiment design. Many 
of the evaluation methods that were introduced in Chap. 7 are readily applied to 
narrowing down the materials selection. The Pugh selection method and weighted 
decision matrix are most applicable. Failure analysis data (see Chap. 14) are an 
important input to materials selection when a design is modifi ed. Life-cycle issues 
should always be considered, especially those having to do with recycling and 
disposal of materials.
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Anisotropic property 
Defect structure 
Scaled property
ASTM 
Go-no go material property 
Secondary material
Composite material 
Material performance index 
Structure-sensitive property
Crystal structure 
Polymer 
Thermoplastic material
Damping capacity 
Recycling 
Weighted property index

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
483
11
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ashby, M. F.: Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 4th ed., Elsevier, Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2011.
“ASM Handbook,” vol. 20, Materials Selection and Design, ASM International, Materials 
Park, OH, 1997.
Budinski, K. G.: Engineering Materials: Properties and Selection, 8th ed., Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2010.
Charles, J. A., F. A. A. Crane, and J. A. G. Furness: Selection and Use of Engineering Materi-
als, 3rd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1997.
Farag, M. M.: Materials Selection for Engineering Design, Prentice-Hall, London, 1997.
Kern, R. F., and M. E. Suess: Steel Selection, John Wiley, New York, 1979.
Kurtz, M. ed.: Handbook of Materials Selection, John Wiley & Sons, 2002
Mangonon, P. L.: The Principles of Materials Selection for Engineering Design, Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1999.
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
 11.1 Think about why books are printed on paper. Suggest a number of alternative materi-
als that could be used. Under what conditions (costs, availability, etc.) would the alter-
native materials be most attractive?
 11.2 Consider a soft drink can as a materials system. List all the components in the system 
and consider alternative materials for each component.
 11.3 Which material property would you select as a guide in material selection if the chief 
performance characteristic of the component was: (a) strength in bending; (b) resis-
tance to twisting; (c) the ability of a sheet material to be stretched into a complex cur-
vature; (d) ability to resist fracture from cracks at low temperatures; (e) ability to resist 
shattering if dropped on the fl oor; (f) ability to resist alternating cycles of rapid heating 
and cooling?
 11.4 Rank-order the following materials for use as an automobile radiator: copper, stainless 
steel, brass, aluminum, ABS, galvanized steel.
 11.5 Select a tool material for thread-rolling mild-steel bolts. In your analysis of the prob-
lem you should consider the following points: (1) functional requirements of a good 
tool  material, (2) critical properties of a good tool material, (3) screening process for 
candidate materials, and (4) selection process.
 11.6 Table 11.3 gives a range of tensile properties for aluminum alloy 6061. Look up infor-
mation about this alloy and write a brief report about what processing steps are used 
to achieve these properties. Include a brief discussion of the structural changes in the 
material that are responsible for the change in tensile properties.
 11.7 Determine the material performance index for a light, stiff beam. The beam is simply 
supported with a concentrated load at midlength.

484 
engineering design 
11
 11.8
Determine the material performance indices for a connecting rod in a high-performance
engine for a racing car. The most likely failure modes are fatigue failure and buckling
at the critical section, where the thickness is b and the width is w. Use the CES soft-
ware to identify the most likely candidates in a material selection at the conceptual
design stage.
 11.9
Develop the materials performance index for an energy-storing fl ywheel. Consider the
fl ywheel as a solid disk of radius r and thickness
r
t rotating at an angular velocity
t
w.
The kinetic energy stored in the fl ywheel is:
U
J
t
1
2
1
2 2
2
2
1
2
ω
Jω
π ρ
ω
r t
2
=
Jω
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
where J is the polar moment of inertia
J
 
The quantity to be maximized is the kinetic energy per unit mass. The maximum cen-
trifugal stress in the spinning disk is:
v
r
3
8
max
2
2
ρ
8
σ max
ω 2
+
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
 
Compare a high-strength aluminum alloy and high-strength steel, along with compos-
ite materials, as candidate materials.  Discuss your results. Flywheels have been con-
sidered as a range extender in hybrid electric automobiles. Compare their capability
against the energy density of gasoline (about 20,000 kJ/kg).
11.10
Two materials are being considered for an application in which electrical conductivity
is important.
Material
Working Strength MN/m2
Electrical Conductance %
A
  500
50
B
1000
40
 
The weighting factor on strength is 3 and 10 for conductance. Which material is pre-
ferred based on the weighted property index?
11.11 An aircraft windshield is rated according to the following material characteristics. The
weighting factors are shown in parentheses.
 
Resistance to shattering (10) 
The candidate materials are:
 
Fabricability (2)
A
plate glass
 
Weight (8) 
B
PMMA
 
Scratch resistance (9) 
C
tempered glass
C
 
Thermal expansion (5)
D a special polymer laminate

 
chapter 11: Materials Selection 
485
11
 
The properties are evaluated by a panel of technical experts, and they are expressed as 
percentages of maximum achievable values.
Candidate Material
Property
A
B
C
D
Resistance to shattering
0
100
90
90
Fabricability
50
100
10
30
Weight
45
100
45
90
Scratch resistance
100
5
100
90
Thermal expansion
100
10
100
30
 
Use the weighted property index to select the best material.
11.12 The materials used in a product can importantly infl uence the aesthetic responses pro-
duced by the product. For example, metals give a cold feel because of their high thermal 
conductivity, while polymers feel warmer because of their much lower conductivity.
Complete the matrix (by adding more columns) for sight, touch, and hearing by 
fi lling in with descriptive attributes, and give example materials. Try to fi nd three or 
four additional attributes for each matrix.
Sight
Touch
Hearing
Optically clear
optical glass
Warm
copper
Muffl ed
plastic foam
Textured
plywood
Stiff
steel plate
Low-pitched
cinder block
11.13 A cantilever beam is loaded with force P at its free end to produce a defl ection 
δ = PL3/3EI. The beam has a circular cross section, I = π r 4/4. Develop a fi gure of merit 
for selecting a material that minimizes the weight of a beam for a given stiffness (P
( /
P δ ).
By using the following material properties, select the best material (a) on the basis of 
performance and (b) on the basis of cost and performance.
E
Material
GNm−2
ksi
Ρ1
Ρ Mgm−3
Approx. Cost, $/ton (1980)
Steel
200
29 × 103
7.8
450
Wood
9–16
1.7 × 103
0.4–0.8
450
Concrete
50
7.3 × 103
2.4–2.8
300
Aluminum
69
10 × 103
2.7
2,000
Carbon-fi ber-
reinforced plastic
(CFRP)
70–200
15 × 103
1.5–1.6
200,000
11.14 Select the most economical steel plate to construct a spherical pressure vessel in which 
to store gaseous nitrogen at a design pressure of 100 psi at ambient weather conditions
down to a minimum of −20°F. The pressure vessel has a radius of 138 in. Your selec-
tion should be based on the steels listed in the following table and expressed in terms 

486 
engineering design 
11
of cost per square foot of material. Use a value of 489 lb/ft3 for the density of steel 
(Add Table below Problem 11.13).
Pricing, ¢/lb (estimated 1997 prices)
ASTM 
spec.
Grade
Allowable 
stress, psi
Base
Special 
grade
Quality 
extra
Width 
extra
Testing
Heat-
treat
Total
A-36
12,650
29.1
0.40
—
3.0
—
—
32.5
A-285
C
13,750
29.1
4.00
—
3.0
—
—
36.1
A-442
60
15,000
29.1
—
4.0
4.0
0.70
—
37.8
A-533
B
20,000
40.0
15.60
3.20
6.2
0.70
18.2
83.9
A-157
B
28,750
40.0
11.70
3.20
8.2
3.00
18.2
84.3

487
12
DESIGN WITH MATERIALS
12.1
INTRODUCTION
This chapter deals with topics of material performance that are not usually covered in 
courses in strength of materials but with which the mechanical designer needs to be 
familiar. Specifi cally we consider the following topics:
 
● Design for Brittle Fracture (Sec. 12.2)
 
● Design for Fatigue Failure (Sec. 12.3)
 
● Design for Corrosion Resistance (Sec. 12.4)
 
● Design for Wear Resistance (Sec. 12.5)
 
● Designing with Plastics (Sec. 12.6)
While this chapter on materials in design is quite comprehensive, it does not 
consider all of the failure mechanisms that can occur. The most prominent omis-
sions when predicting design performance are high temperature creep and rupture,1 
oxidation,2 and a variety of embrittling mechanisms.3 The environmental conditions 
that cause these failure mechanisms occur less frequently in general engineering 
practice then those considered in the rest of this chapter, but if one is designing for 
high-temperature applications then they defi nitely need fi rst-order consideration. It is 
expected that the references given to broad review articles will provide an entrance to 
the needed information.
12
1. D. A. Woodford, “Design for High-Temperature Applications,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 573–88, 
ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1997.
2. J. L. Smialek, C. A. Barrett, and J. C. Schaeffer, “Design for Oxidation Resistance,” ASM Handbook, 
vol. 20, pp. 589–602, 1997.
3. G. H. Koch, “Stress-Corrosion Cracking and Hydrogen Embrittlement,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 19, 
pp. 483–506, 1997.

488 
engineering design 
12
12.2
DESIGN FOR BRITTLE FRACTURE
Brittle fracture is fracture that occurs with little accompanying plastic deformation 
and energy absorption. It generally starts at a small fl aw that occurs during manu-
facture or develops from fatigue or corrosion. The fl aw propagates slowly as a crack, 
often undetected, until it reaches a critical size depending on the loading conditions, 
at which it propagates rapidly as a catastrophic failure.
An important property of a material is toughness, the ability to absorb energy 
without failure. In a simple tension test loaded slowly, toughness is the area under the 
stress-strain curve. Notch toughness is the ability of a material to absorb energy in the 
presence of the complex stress state created by a notch. Conventionally, notch tough-
ness is measured with the Charpy V-notch impact test, which has been very useful in 
delineating the transition from ductile-to-brittle behavior in steels and other materials 
as the test temperature decreases. However, this test does not readily lend itself to 
quantitative analysis. An important advance in engineering knowledge has been the 
ability to predict the infl uence of cracks and cracklike defects on the brittle fracture of 
materials through the science of fracture mechanics.1 Fracture mechanics originated 
in the ideas of A. A. Griffi ths, who showed that the fracture strength of a brittle mate-
rial, like glass, is inversely proportional to the square root of the crack length. G. R. 
Irwin proposed that fracture occurs at a fracture stress, σf, corresponding to a critical 
value of crack-extension force, Gc, according to
 
EG
a
f
c
1/2
σ
π
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
(12.1)
where Gc is the crack extension force, in-lb/in.2
E is the modulus of elasticity of the material, lb/in.2
a is the length of the crack, inches
An important conceptualization was that the elastic stresses in the vicinity of a crack 
tip (Fig. 12.1a) could be expressed entirely by a stress fi eld parameter K called the 
stress intensity factor.
The equations for the stress fi eld at the end of the crack can be written
 
K
r
K
r
K
r
2
cos 2 1 sin 2 sin 3
5
2
cos 2 1 sin 2 sin 3
2
2
sin 2 cos 2 cos 3
2
x
y
xy
σ
π
θ
θ
θ
σ
π
θ
θ
θ
τ
π
θ
θ
θ
=
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
=
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
(12.2)
1. S. T. Rolfe and J. M. Barsom, Fracture and Fatigue Control in Structures, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1987; T. L. Anderson, Fracture Mechanics Fundamentals and Applications, 
3rd ed., Taylor &  Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 2005; R.J. Sanford, Principles of Fracture Mechanics, 
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2003; A. Shukia, Practical Fracture Mechanics in Design, 
2nd ed., Marcel Dekker, New York, 2002.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
489
12
Equations (12.2) show that the elastic normal and elastic shear stresses in the vicinity 
of the crack tip depend only on the radial distance from the tip r, the orientation u, 
and K. Thus, the magnitudes of these stresses at a given point are dependent com-
pletely on the stress intensity factor K. However, the value of K depends on the type 
of loading (tension, bending, torsion, etc.), the confi guration of the stressed body, and 
the mode of crack displacement. Figure 12.1b shows the three modes of fracture that 
have been identifi ed: Mode I (opening mode where the crack opens in the y direction 
and propagates in the x-z plane), mode II (shearing in the x direction), or type III (tear-
ing in the x-z plane). Mode I is caused by tension loading in the y direction while the 
other two modes are caused by shearing in different directions. Most brittle fracture 
problems in engineering are caused by tension stresses in Mode I crack propagation. 
At some critical stress state given by KIc a fl aw or crack in the material will suddenly 
propagate as a fast-moving brittle crack, according to Eq. (12.3).
For a crack of length 2a centered in an infi nitely wide thin plate subjected to a 
uniform tensile stress σ, the stress intensity factor K is given by
 
K
a
GE
σ
π
=
=
 
(12.3)
where K is in units of ksi in or
m
.
MPa
 and σ is the nominal stress based on the 
gross cross section. Values of K have been determined for a variety of situations by 
using the theory of elasticity, often combined with numerical methods and experimen-
tal techniques.1 For a given type of loading, Eq. (12.3) usually is written as
 
K
a
ασ
π
=
 
(12.4)
FIGURE 12.1
(a) Model for equations for stress at a point near a crack. (b) The basic modes of crack surface 
displacement.
W
y
t
r
z
x


2a
(a)
(b)
z
x
y
Mode I
Mode III
Mode II
1. G. G. Sih, Handbook of Stress Intensity Factors, Institute of Fracture and Solid Mechanics, Lehigh 
University, Bethlehem, PA, 1973; Y. Murakami et al., (eds.), Stress Intensity Factors Handbook, (2 vols.), 
Pergamon Press, New York, 1987; H. Tada, P. C. Paris, and G. R. Irwin, The Stress Analysis of Cracks 
Handbook, 3rd ed., ASME Press, New York, 2000; A. Liu, “Summary of Stress-Intensity Factors,” ASM 
Handbook, Vol. 19, Fatigue and Fracture, pp. 980–1000, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1996.

490 
engineering design 
12
where α is a parameter that depends on the specimen, crack geometry, and type of 
loading. For example, for a plate of width w containing a central through-thickness 
crack of length 2a (Fig. 12.1a),
 
K
w
a
a
w
a
tan
1/2
π
π
σ
π
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
(12.5)
Common geometries where fracture mechanics is often applied are:
 
● A crack in a sheet or a plate. This can be a through-thickness crack, a surface crack, 
or a crack embedded in the plate thickness. Each situation will result in a different 
relationship for α in Eq. (12.4).
 
● Similarly, changing the shape from plates to beams, solid or hollow cylinders, or a 
tapered lifting lug will result in a new relationship for α .
 
● Also, loading in bending, torsion, or point tension loading at the site of the crack  
will all result in very different relationships compared to the uniaxial uniform load-
ing applied at a far distance from the crack, shown in Fig. 12.1a. 
A readily available source of stress intensity factors is the chapter by A. Liu refer-
enced in the footnote on the previous page.
12.2.1 Plane Strain Fracture Toughness
Since the crack tip stresses can be described by the stress intensity factor K, a critical 
value of K can be used to defi ne the conditions that produce brittle fracture. The tests 
usually used subject the specimen to the crack opening mode of loading (Mode I) 
under a condition of plane strain at the crack front. The critical value of K that pro-
duces fracture is KIc, the plane-strain fracture toughness. The “I” in the subscript 
denotes a Mode I fracture. A great deal of engineering research has gone into stan-
dardizing tests for measuring fracture toughness.1 If ac is the critical crack length at 
which failure occurs, then
 
K
a
Ic
c
ασ
π
=
 
(12.6)
This is the same as Eq. (12.4), only now a = ac and K = KIc, the stress intensity factor 
required to trigger the fast-moving brittle fracture.
KIc is a basic material property called plane-strain fracture toughness or often 
called just fracture toughness. Some typical values are given in Table 12.1. Note the 
large difference in KIc values between the metallic alloys and the polymers and the ce-
ramic material silicon nitride. Also, note that the fracture toughness and yield strength 
1. J. D. Landes, “Fracture Toughness Testing,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 8, Mechanical Testing and Evalua-
tion, ASM International, 2000, pp. 576–85; The basic procedure for KIc testing is ASTM Standard E 399, 
“Standard Test Method for Plane Strain Fracture Toughness of Metallic Materials.”

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
491
12
vary inversely for the alloy steel and the aluminum alloys. This is a general relation-
ship: as yield strength increases, fracture toughness decreases. It is one of the major 
constraints in selecting materials for high-performance mechanical applications.
Although KIc is a basic material property, in the same sense as yield strength, it 
changes with important variables such as temperature and strain rate. The KIc of ma-
terials with a strong temperature and strain-rate dependence usually decreases with 
decreased temperature and increased strain rate. The KIc of a given alloy is strongly 
dependent on such variables as heat treatment, texture, melting practice, impurity 
level, and inclusion content.
Equation 12.6 contains the three design variables that must be considered in 
designing against fracture of a structural component—the fracture toughness, the 
 imposed stress, and the crack or fl aw size. Figure 12.2 shows the relationship between 
them. If KIc is known because the material has been selected, then it is possible to 
compute the maximum allowable stress to prevent brittle fracture for a given fl aw 
size. Generally the fl aw size is determined by actual measurement or by the small-
est detectable fl aw for the nondestructive inspection method that is available for use.1 
As Fig. 12.2 shows, the allowable stress in the presence of a crack of a given size is 
directly proportional to KIc, and the allowable crack size for a given stress is propor-
tional to the square of the fracture toughness. Therefore, increasing KIc has a much 
larger infl uence on allowable crack size than on allowable stress.
To obtain a proper value of KIc it must be measured under plane-strain condi-
tions to obtain a maximum constraint or material brittleness. Figure 12.3 shows 
TABLE 12.1
Some Typical Values of Plane-Strain Fracture Toughness 
at Room Temperature
KIc
Yield Strength
MPa m
ksi in.
MPa
ksi
Plain carbon steel AISI 1040
54.0
49.0
260
37.7
Alloy steel AISI 4340
 Tempered @ 500°F
50.0
45.5 
1500
217
 Tempered @ 800°F
87.4
80.0
1420
206
Aluminum alloy 2024-T3
44.0
40.0
345
50
Aluminum alloy 7075-T651
24.0
22.0
495
71
Nylon 6/6
3.0
2.7
50
7.3
Polycarbonate (PC)
2.2
2.0
62
9.0
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
3.0
2.2
42
6.0
Silicon nitride—hot pressed
5.0
4.5
800
116
1. Crack detection sensitivity can vary from 0.5 mm for magnetic particle methods to 0.1 mm for eddy 
current, acoustic emission, and liquid penetrant methods. ASM Handbook, Vol. 17, p. 211.

492 
engineering design 
12
FIGURE 12.2
Relation between fracture toughness and 
allowable stress and crack size.
Crack length a
Allowable stress,
=
KIc
High KIc
Low KIc

a

FIGURE 12.3
Effect of specimen thickness on fracture 
stress and mode of failure. Sketches depict 
appearance of fracture surface. Note the 
presence of shear lips.
Medium
Thick
B
Thin
Test
specimen
Thickness B
Mixed-mode
fracture
Plane-strain fracture
Fracture stress
Shear lips
how the measured fracture stress varies with specimen thickness B. A mixed-mode, 
ductile brittle fracture with 45° shear lips is obtained for thin specimens. Once the 
specimen has the critical thickness for the toughness of the material, the fracture 
surface is fl at and the fracture stress is constant with increasing specimen thickness. 
The minimum thickness to achieve plane-strain conditions and valid KIc measure-
ment is
 
B
K
2.5
Ic
y
2
σ
≥
⎛
⎝
⎜⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟⎟ 
(12.7)
where B is the section thickness and σy is the allowable design stress, typically the 
yield stress decreased by a factor of safety.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
493
12
E X A M P L E 1 2 .1
An aircraft skin panel that is part of a commercial airliner is to be made from aluminum 
alloy 7075-T651. During construction of the plane an inspector noted a 10 mm deep sur-
face crack along one of the long sheared edges of the panel. The panel is 20 cm wide, 
100 cm tall, and 50 mm thick. It is subjected to a 200 MPa tensile stress. From Table 12.1, 
the mechanical properties of the material are
KIc
y
24MPa m and the yieldstrength
495 MPa
σ
=
=
In analyzing the design for fracture, fi rst check to see whether the average stress is below 
the yield strength of the material.
Is σapplied ≤ σy? In this case, 200 MPa ≤ 495 MPa, but the crack could cause a stress 
concentration of approximately Kt = 2, so there may be some local yielding at the crack. 
However, the panel acts elastically overall.
The equation for single-edge crack in a plate loaded in tension is found on page 983 
of the chapter by Liu in ASM Handbook 17. The equation uses a different format from 
Eq. (12.4) by replacing α by ϕ as the geometric factor. 
a
w
sec
tan
0.752
2.02
0.37(1
sin )
1/2
3
ϕ
β
β
β
β
=
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟+
−
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
a
w
where
=
/ 2
β
π
(
)
Substituting a
w
a w
10 mm;
20 10
2000 mm; /
0.005wefind
1.122
2
=
=
×
=
=
ϕ
α
=
=
.
Now using Eq. (12.4) to calculate the stress intensity factor,
K
a
1.122
1.122 200
(0.010)
39.8 MPa m
σ
π
π
=
=
⎡⎣
⎤⎦=
Since K ≥ KIc, that is, 39.8 ≥ 24, the panel is expected to fail by a rapid brittle fracture, 
especially since at −50°F at high altitude the value of KIc is likely to be much lower than 
the room temperature value used here.
Solution
Switch to the lower-strength but tougher aluminum alloy 2024 with KIc
44MPa m.
=
 
For 2024 alloy the yield strength is 345 MPa. This is above the 200 MPa general applied 
stress, so gross section yielding will not occur. The greater ductility of this alloy will 
allow more local plastic deformation at the crack and blunt the crack so the stress concen-
tration will not be severe.
As a fi nal check we use Eq. (12.7) to see if the plane-strain condition holds for the panel.
B
KIc
y
2.5
2.5 44
345
0.041m
41mm
2
2
σ
≥
⎛
⎝
⎜⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟⎟=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
=
This says that the thickness of the panel must be greater than 41 mm to maintain the 
maximum constraint of the plane-strain condition. A panel with a thickness of 50 mm 
exceeds this condition.
Another way to look at the problem is to determine the critical crack size at which the 
crack would propagate to fracture at an average stress of 200 MPa. From Eq. (12.6), and 
using a value of α = 1.122, the critical crack length ac is 3.6 mm for the 7075 aluminum 

494 
engineering design 
12
alloy and 12.2 mm for the 2024 alloy. This means that a 7075 alloy sheet with a 10 mm 
long surface crack would fail in brittle fracture when the 200 MPa stress was applied 
because its critical crack size is less than 10 mm. However, a 10 mm crack will not cause 
fracture in the tougher 2024 alloy with a critical crack size of 12.2 mm.
12.2.2 Limitations on Fracture Mechanics
The fracture mechanics concept is strictly correct only for linear elastic materials 
(those materials in which no yielding occurs before fracture). Reviewing Eqs. (12.2) 
shows that as r approaches zero, the stress at the crack tip approaches infi nity. Thus, 
in all but the most brittle material, local yielding occurs at the crack tip and the elastic 
solution should be modifi ed to account for crack tip plasticity. However, if the plastic 
zone size, ry, at the crack tip is small relative to the local geometry, for example, if 
ry /t or ry /a ≤ 0.1, crack tip plasticity has little effect on the stress intensity factor. That 
limits the strict use of fracture mechanics to high-strength materials. Moreover, the 
width restriction to obtaining valid measurements of KIc, as described by Eq. (12.7), 
makes the use of linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM) impractical for low-
strength materials. The criteria for LEFM behavior is given by 1
 
a
w
a
h
K
,
,
4
y
2
π σ
(
)
−
= ≥
⎛
⎝
⎜⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟⎟ 
(12.8)
where a is the crack length, w is the specimen width, so (w − a) is the uncracked width 
and h is the distance from the top of the specimen to the crack. Each of these parameters 
must satisfy Eq. (12.8). Otherwise the situation too closely approaches gross yielding 
with the plastic zone extending to one of the boundaries of the specimen. A value of K 
determined beyond the applicability of LEFM underestimates the severity of the crack.
Considerable activity has gone into developing tests for measuring fracture toughness 
in materials that have too much ductility to permit the use of LEFM testing methods.2 
The best approach uses the J-integral, which is obtained by measurements of the load 
versus the displacement of the crack.3 These tests result in a valid measure of fracture 
toughness JIc which serves in the same way as KIc does for linear elastic materials.
12.3
DESIGN FOR FATIGUE FAILURE
Materials subjected to repetitive or fl uctuating stress cycles will fail at a stress 
much lower than that required to cause fracture on a single application of load. 
Failures occurring under conditions of fl uctuating stresses or strains are called 
1. N. E. Dowling, Mechanical Behavior of Materials, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 
1999, p. 333.
2. A. Saxena, Nonlinear Fracture Mechanics for Engineers, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1998.
3. ASTM Standard E 1820.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
495
12
fatigue failures.1 Fatigue accounts for the majority of mechanical failures in 
machinery.
A fatigue failure is a localized failure that starts in a limited region and propa-
gates with increasing cycles of stress or strain until the crack is so large that the part 
cannot withstand the applied load, and it fractures. Plastic deformation processes are 
involved in fatigue, but they are highly localized.2 Therefore, fatigue failure occurs 
without the warning of gross plastic deformation. Failure usually initiates at regions 
of local high stress or strain caused by abrupt changes in geometry (stress concen-
tration), temperature differentials, tensile residual stresses, or material imperfections. 
Much basic information has been obtained about the mechanism of fatigue failure, but 
at present the chief opportunities for preventing fatigue exist at the engineering design 
level. Fatigue prevention is achieved by proper choice of material, control of residual 
stress, and minimization of stress concentrations through careful design.
Basic fatigue data are presented in the S-N curve, a plot of stress,3 S, versus the 
number of cycles to failure, N. Figure 12.4 shows the two typical types of behavior. 
The curve for an aluminum alloy is characteristic of all materials except ferrous metals 
(steels). The S-N curve is chiefl y concerned with fatigue failure at high numbers of 
cycles (N > 105 cycles). Under these conditions the gross stress is elastic, although 
 fatigue failure results from highly localized plastic deformation. Figure 12.4 shows 
the number of cycles of stress that a material can withstand before failure increases 
1. L. Pook, Metal Fatigue: what it is, why it matters, Springer, 2007; S. Suresh, Fatigue of Materi-
als, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998; N. E. Dowling, Mechanical Behavior of 
Materials, 2nd ed., Chaps, 9, 10, 11, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1999; ASM Handbook, Vol. 19, 
Fatigue and Fracture, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1996.
2. ASM Handbook, Vol. 19, Fatigue and Fracture, pp. 63–109, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 
1996.
3. It is conventional to denote nominal stresses in fatigue by S rather than σ.
FIGURE 12.4
Typical fatigue S-N 
curves for ferrous and 
nonferrous metals.
Mild steel
Fatigue limit
Aluminum alloy
105
106
Number of cycles to failure, N
107
108
109
0
10
20
30
Calculated bending stress, 1000 psi
40
50
60

496 
engineering design 
12
with decreasing stress. For most materials, the S-N curve slopes continuously down-
ward toward increasing cycles of stress to failure with decreasing stress. At any stress 
level there is some large number of cycles that ultimately causes failure. This is called 
the fatigue strength. For steels in the absence of a corrosive environment, however, the 
S-N curve becomes horizontal at a certain limiting stress. Below that stress, called the 
fatigue limit or endurance limit, the steel can withstand an infi nite number of cycles.
12.3.1 Fatigue Parameters
Typical cycles of stress that produce fatigue failure are shown in Fig. 12.5. Figure 12.5a 
illustrates a completely reversed cycle of stress of sinusoidal form. This is the type of 
fatigue cycle for which most fatigue property data is obtained in laboratory testing.1 
It is found in service by a rotating shaft operating at constant speed without overloads. 
For this type of stress cycle the maximum and minimum stresses are equal. In keep-
ing with convention, the minimum stress is the lowest algebraic stress in the cycle. 
Tensile stress is considered positive, and compressive stress is negative. Figure 12.5b 
illustrates a repeated stress cycle in which the maximum stress σmax and minimum 
stress σmin are not equal. In this illustration they are both tension, but a repeated stress 
cycle could just as well contain maximum and minimum stresses of opposite signs or 
1. Common types of fatigue testing machines are described in many references in this section and in 
ASM Handbook, vol. 8, pp. 666–716, ASM International, 2000.
FIGURE 12.5
Typical fatigue stress cycles: (a) reversed stress; (b) repeated stress; (c) irregular or random 
stress cycle.
Cycles
 Compression
Stress
Stress
Tension 
0




(a)
a
r
max
f
m
z
min
Cycles
(c)
Cycles
(b)

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
497
12
both in compression. Figure 12.5c illustrates a complicated stress cycle that might be 
encountered in a part such as an aircraft wing, which is subjected to periodic unpre-
dictable overloads due to wind gusts.
A fl uctuating stress cycle can be considered to be made up of two components, a 
mean, or steady, stress, σm, and an alternating, or variable, stress, σa. We must also 
consider the range of stress, σr. As can be seen from Fig. 12.5b, the range of stress is 
the algebraic difference between the maximum and minimum stress in a cycle.
 
r
max
min
σ
σ
σ
=
−
 
(12.9)
The alternating stress, then, is one-half of the range of stress.
 
2
2
a
r
max
min
σ
σ
σ
σ
=
=
−
 
(12.10)
The mean stress is the algebraic mean of the maximum and minimum stress in the 
cycle.
 
2
m
max
min
σ
σ
σ
=
+
  
(12.11)
A convenient way to denote the fatigue cycle is with the stress ratio, R.
 
R
/
min
max
σ
σ
=
 
(12.12)
For a completely reversed stress cycle, σmax = −σmin, R = −1, and σm = 0. For a fully 
tensile repeated stress cycle with σmin = 0, R = 0. The infl uence of mean stress on the 
S-N diagram can be expressed by the Goodman equation.
 
1
a
e
m
uts
σ
σ
σ
σ
=
−
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥ 
(12.13)
where σe is the endurance limit in a fatigue test with a completely reversed stress 
cycle, and σuts is the ultimate tensile strength.
Fatigue is a complex material failure process. The fatigue performance of a com-
ponent depends on the following important engineering factors:
Stress Cycle
 
● Repeated or random applied stress
 
● Mean stress. Most fatigue test data has been obtained under completely repeated 
stress with a mean stress of zero. The safe alternating stress decreases with increas-
ing mean stress, as shown by Eq. (12.13).
 
● Combined stress state. See ASM Handbook, vol. 19, pp. 263–273.
 
● Stress concentration. Most fatigue cracks start at points of elevated stress. This is 
expressed by a stress concentration factor (for the geometry) and a notch sensitivity 
factor for the material’s sensitivity for stress concentrations.

498 
engineering design 
12
 
● Statistical variation in fatigue life and fatigue limit. There is more scatter in fatigue 
life than in any other mechanical property of materials. Often a probabilistic ap-
proach is needed. See ASM Handbook, vol. 19, pp. 295–313.
 
● Cumulative fatigue damage. The conventional fatigue test subjects a specimen to 
a fi xed amplitude of stress until the specimen fails. However, in practice there are 
many situations where the cyclic stress does not remain constant, but instead there 
are periods when the stress is either above or below some average design level. Tak-
ing into consideration irregular stress versus cycle issues is an important area of 
fatigue design for which additional concepts are needed.
 
● Fatigue failure can occur without externally applied forces from thermal gradients 
that vary with time so as to produce cyclic thermal stresses, that is, thermal fa-
tigue. Thermal stresses arise from the strain produced by thermal expansion and 
contraction.
Component or Specimen-Related Factors
 
● Size effect. The larger the section size of the part, the lower its fatigue properties. 
This is related to the higher probability of fi nding a critical crack-initiating fl aw in a 
larger volume of material.
 
● Surface fi nish. Most fatigue cracks start at the surface of a component. The 
smoother the surface roughness, the higher is the fatigue property.
 
● Residual stress. Residual stresses are locked-in stresses that are present in a part 
when it is not subjected to loads, and which add to the applied stresses when under 
load. The formation of a compressive residual distribution on the surface of a part is 
the most effective method of increasing fatigue performance. The best way of doing 
this is shot blasting or rolling of the surface to cause localized plastic deformation.
 
● Surface treatment. As noted above, surface treatments that increase the compres-
sive residual stresses at the surface are benefi cial. Increasing the surface hardness 
by carburizing or nitriding often improves the fatigue performance of steel parts. 
However, losing carbon from the surface of steel by poor heat treatment practice is 
detrimental to fatigue properties. See ASM Handbook, vol. 19, pp. 314–320.
Environmental Effects
 
● Corrosion fatigue. The simultaneous action of cyclic stress and chemical attack is 
known as corrosion fatigue. Corrosive attack without superimposed stress often 
produces pitting of metal surfaces. The pits act as notches and produce a reduc-
tion in fatigue strength. However, when corrosive attack occurs simultaneously 
with fatigue loading, a very pronounced reduction in fatigue properties results that 
is greater than that produced by prior corrosion of the surface. When corrosion 
and fatigue occur simultaneously, the chemical attack greatly accelerates the rate at 
which fatigue cracks propagate. Steels that have a fatigue limit when tested in air 
at room temperature show no indication of a fatigue limit in corrosion fatigue. See 
ASM Handbook, vol. 19, pp. 193–209.
 
● Fretting fatigue. Fretting is the surface damage that results when two surfaces in 
contact experience slight periodic relative motion. The phenomenon is more related 
to wear than to corrosion fatigue. However, it differs from wear by the facts that the 

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
499
12
relative velocity of the two surfaces is much lower than is usually encountered in 
wear and that since the two surfaces are never brought out of contact, there is no 
chance for the corrosion products to be removed. Fretting is frequently found on the 
surface of a shaft with a press-fi tted hub or bearing. Surface pitting and deteriora-
tion occur, usually accompanied by an oxide debris (reddish for steel and black for 
aluminum). Fatigue cracks often start in the damaged area. See ASM Handbook, 
vol. 19, pp. 321–330.
12.3.2 Information Sources on Design for Fatigue
There is a considerable literature on design methods to prevent fatigue failure. Most 
machine design texts devote a chapter to the subject. In addition, the following spe-
cialized texts add a great deal of detail.
Fatigue design for infi nite life is considered in:
R. C. Juvinall, Engineering Consideration of Stress, Strain, and Strength, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967. Chapters 11 to 16 cover fatigue design in con-
siderable detail.
L. Sors, Fatigue Design of Machine Components, Pergamon Press, New York, 
1971. Translated from the German, this presents a good summary of European 
fatigue design practice.
C. Ruiz and F. Koenigsberger, Design for Strength and Production, Gordon & 
Breach Science Publishers, New York, 1970. Pages 106 to 120 give a concise 
discussion of fatigue design procedures.
Detailed information on stress concentration factors and the design of machine 
details to minimize stress can be found in:
W. D. Pilkey and D. F. Pilkey, Peterson’s Stress Concentration Factors, 3rd ed., 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2008.
R. B. Heywood, Designing Against Fatigue of Metals, Reinhold, New York, 1967.
The most complete books on fatigue design, including the more modern work on 
strain-life design and damage-tolerant design, are:
R. I. Stephens, A. Fatem, R. R. Stephens, and H. O. Fuchs, Metal Fatigue in Engi-
neering, 2nd ed., John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2000.
Fatigue Design Handbook, 3rd ed., Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, 
PA, 1997.
E. Zahavi, Fatigue Design, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1996.
A useful website for fatigue data and helpful calculators is www.efatigue.com. 
This website also provides calculators for determining stress intensity factors (see 
Sec. 12.2).
There are several different fatigue design strategies that must be understood to put 
the vast collection of fatigue design literature into perspective. Discussed in order in 
the next three sections are Stress-life design, Strain-life design, and Damage-tolerance 
design.

500 
engineering design 
12
12.3.3 Stress-Life Design
Stress-life fatigue design is based on keeping the nominal stress below some value of 
fatigue strength, or more commonly below the endurance limit for steels. This is the 
oldest design methodology for fatigue and is found in most machine design texts.1 It 
starts with a value for the fatigue life or fatigue limit based on laboratory fatigue test 
results from smooth (unnotched) specimens and reduces (derates) the value of the fa-
tigue limit for all of the parameters described in Sec.12.3.1. Particularly important are 
the fatigue notch factor,2 size effect, mean stress, surface roughness, and correction 
for variable amplitude loading (see ASM Handbook Vol. 19, p. 110). For discussion 
of fatigue notch factor and an example of design using the stress-life strategy, see 
Example for Infi nite-Life Design under Chap. 12 at www.mhhe.com/dieter.
12.3.4 Strain-Life Design Strategy
Strain-life design based on failure at a fi nite number of cycles is based on strain-life 
curves. These are often called low-cycle fatigue curves because much of the data is 
obtained in less than 105 cycles. When fatigue occurs at a relatively low number of 
cycles, the stresses that produce failure often exceed the yield strength. Even when 
the gross stress remains elastic, the localized stress at a notch is inelastic. Under 
these conditions it is better to carry out fatigue tests under fi xed amplitude of strain 
(strain control) rather than fi xed amplitude of stress. Typically these tests are con-
ducted in push-pull tension. Figure 12.6 shows the stress-strain loop that is produced 
by strain control cycling. Note that for the fi rst hundred cycles or so the enclosed area 
of the cyclic stress-strain curve either increases (strain hardening) or decreases (strain 
softening) until it reaches a stable area as shown in Fig. 12.6. The strain amplitude is 
given by
 
2
2
2
a
e
p
ε
ε
ε
ε
= Δ
= Δ
+ Δ
 
(12.14)
where the total strain Δε is the sum of the elastic and plastic strains and the strain am-
plitude is one-half of the total strain.
A plot of the stress at the tip of the stress-strain loop (point B) for various strain am-
plitudes yields a cyclic true stress-strain curve. When stress vs. plastic strain are plotted 
on log-log coordinates this yields a straight line. The stress amplitude is given by 
 
k
2
2
p
n
σ
ε
Δ
= ′ Δ
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
′
 
(12.15)
1. For example, R.G. Budynas and J.K. Nisbett, Shigley’s Mechanical Engineering Design, 9th ed., 
pp. 286–348, McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
2. N. E. Dowling, Mechanical Behavior of Materials, 2nd ed., Chap. 10, Prentice-Hall, 1999; Y-L Lee, J. Pan, 
R. B. Hathaway, and M. E. Barkey, Fatigue Testing and Analysis, Chap. 4, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2005.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
501
12
where k is the cyclic strength coeffi cient (the intercept of the line at unit plastic strain) 
and n, the slope of the line, is the cyclic strain hardening exponent. Substituting into 
Eq. (12.14) from Eq. (12.15) gives
 
E
k
2
2
2
n
1/
ε
σ
σ
Δ
= Δ
+ Δ
′
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
′
 
(12.16)
Equation (12.16) allows the calculation of the cyclic stress-strain curve. Values of the 
material properties E, k and n are available in the literature.1
The strain-life curve plots the total strain amplitude versus the number of strain 
reversals to failure (one cycle equals 2 reversals), Fig 12.7. Note that the number of 
strain reversals equals twice the number of strain cycles. Both the elastic and plastic 
curves are approximated as straight lines. At small strains or long lives, the elastic 
strain predominates, and at large strains or short lives the plastic strain is predomi-
nant. The plastic curve has a negative slope of c and an intercept at 2N = 1. The elastic 
curve has a negative slope of b and an intercept of 
E
/
f
σ ′
. The equation for the elastic 
line is 
E
b
N
E
N
log
2
log
log 2
or
2
2
e
f
f
e
f
f
b
ε
σ
ε
σ
(
)
(
)
Δ
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
′
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟+
Δ
=
′
Similarly, the plastic line is given by 
N
2
2
p
f
f
c
ε
ε (
)
Δ
= ′
. But, from Eq. (12.14),
 
E
N
N
2
2
2
a
f
f
b
f
f
c
ε
ε
σ
ε
(
)
(
)
= Δ
=
′
+ ′
 
(12.17)
FIGURE 12.6
Typical cyclic stress-strain loop.
2
s
r
e
D
e
e
D
e
e
D
O
A
C
B
2
s
D
2
s
D
2
e
D
1. ASM Handbook, Vol. 19, pp. 963–79.

502 
engineering design 
12
The exponent b ranges from about −0.06 to −0.14 for different materials, and a typical 
value is −0.1. The exponent c ranges from about −0.5 to −0.7, and −0.6 is a representa-
tive value. The term εf, called the fatigue ductility coeffi cient, is approximately equal 
to the true fracture strain measured in the tension test. Likewise, the fatigue strength 
coeffi cient σf  is approximated by the true fracture stress.
An important use of the low-cycle fatigue approach is to predict the life to crack 
initiation at notches in machine parts where the nominal stresses are elastic but the 
local stresses and strain at the notch root are plastic. When there is plastic deforma-
tion, both a strain concentration Kε and a stress concentration Kσ must be considered. 
Neuber’s rule relates these by 
 
K
K K
f
1/2
(
)
=
σ
ε
 
(12.18)
where Kf is the fatigue notch factor.
The situation is described in Fig. 12.8, where ΔS and Δe, as shown in Fig. 12.8b, 
are the elastic stress and strain increments at a location remote from the notch and Δσ 
and Δε are the local stress and strain at the root of the notch.
K
S
K
e
and
σ
ε
= Δ
Δ
= Δ
Δ
σ
ε
K
S e
E
S
E
f
1/2
1/2
σ
ε
σ
ε
ε
= Δ
Δ
Δ Δ
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
= Δ
Δ
Δ Δ
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
and 
K
S eE
E
f
1/2
1/2
σ ε
(
)
(
)
Δ Δ
= Δ Δ
 
(12.19)
FIGURE 12.7
Typical strain-life curve for mild steel.
e
f
e9
f
s9
E
c
b
100
101
102
103
Reversals to failure, 2 Nf
log scale
Strain amplitude, D  /2
log scale
Plastic
Total = elastic and plastic
Elastic
2Nt
104
105
106
107

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
503
12
For nominally elastic loading, ΔS = ΔeE and
 
K
S
E
f
1/2
σ ε
(
)
Δ = Δ Δ
 
(12.20)
Thus, Eq. (12.20) allows stresses remotely measured from the notch to be used to 
predict stress and strain at the notch. Rearranging Eq. (12.20) gives
 
K
S
E
constant
f
2
σ ε
(
)
Δ Δ =
Δ
=
 
(12.21)
which is the equation of a rectangular hyperbola (Fig. 12.8c). If a nominal stress 
S1 is applied to the notched specimen (Fig. 12.8b), then the right side of Eq. (12.21) 
is known provided Kf is known. The cyclic stress-strain curve also is plotted in 
Fig. 12.8c (solid curve), and its intersection with Eq. (12.21) gives the local stress and 
strain at the notch root.
The use of Neuber’s analysis to fi nd the stress and strain at a notch in conjunc-
tion with the strain-life curve (Fig. 12.7) is a widely accepted approach to predicting 
the number of fatigue cycles to the initiation of a crack. The basic assumption is that 
the local fatigue response at the critical region, usually at a fl aw or geometric notch, 
is similar to the fatigue response of a small, smooth laboratory specimen subjected to 
the same cyclic strains and stresses as the critical region.
To use the prediction model it is necessary to
 
● Compute with FEA the local stresses and strains, including mean stress and stress 
range.
 
● Count the cycles and corresponding mean and range values of stress and strain.
 
● Nonzero mean cycles must be converted to equivalent completely reversed cycles.
 
● Have appropriate material properties to compute fatigue damage during each cycle.
 
● Sum the damage to give the prediction of the number of cycles to crack initiation.
FIGURE 12.8
Stress analysis at a notch using Neuber’s analysis.
P
P
(a)
(b)
S
S
S


S
K
(
)
E
=

S

e

e

(c)
2
1

 ε

ε
ε
ε

1
f

504 
engineering design 
12
Using this method in more complex design situations would require correcting 
the results for the presence of mean stress, and for treating less regular cycles of fa-
tigue stress.1 
Strain-life analysis has found broad acceptance in the automotive and aerospace 
industries for component design in the early stages of embodiment design. It allows 
reasonable prediction of fatigue life before components are available for actual fa-
tigue testing. This ability to predict results in a reduction in the number of design it-
erations and a speed-up in the PDP cycle. A number of computer programs are avail-
able to assist in this type of design analysis. See www.efatigue.com. See Example for 
Strain-Life Design under Chap.12 at www.mhhe.com/dieter.
12.3.5 Damage-Tolerant Design Strategy
Damage-tolerant design starts with the premise that the part contains a fatigue crack 
of known dimensions and geometry and predicts how many cycles of service are 
available before the crack will propagate to a catastrophic size that will cause failure, 
Np. Thus, the emphasis is on fatigue crack growth. Figure 12.9 shows the process of 
crack propagation from an initial crack of length a0 to a crack of critical fl aw size acr. 
The crack growth rate da/dN increases with the cycles of repeated load.
An important advance in fatigue design was the realization that the fatigue crack 
growth rate da/dN can be related to the range of the stress intensity factor; ΔK = 
Kmax − Kmin, for the fatigue cycle. Since the stress intensity factor K
a
ασ
π
=
 is un-
defi ned in compression, Kmin is taken as zero if σmin is compression in the fatigue cycle.
Figure 12.10 shows a typical plot of rate of crack growth versus ΔK. The typi-
cal curve is sigmoidal in shape with three distinct regions. Region I contains the 
threshold value ΔKth below which there is no observable crack growth. Below ΔKth, 
fatigue cracks behave as nonpropagating cracks. The threshold starts at crack propaga-
tion rates of around l0−8 in./cycle and at very low values of K, for example 8 ksi in. 
FIGURE 12.9
Process of fatigue crack propagation 
(schematic).
Fatigue life
Fatigue cycles, N
Crack length
acr
a0
da
dN
N f
1. Y-L Lee, J. Pan., R. Hathaway, and M. Barkey, Fatigue Testing and Analysis, Chap. 5, Elsevier, 
Boston, 2005.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
505
12
for stress. Region II exhibits essentially a linear relation between log da/dN and log K, 
which results in
 
da
dN
A
K
n
A
K
where
slopeof thecurveinregionII
coefficient found by extending the line to
1ksi in.
n
(
)
=
Δ
=
=
Δ
=
 
(12.22)
Region III is a region of rapid crack growth that is soon followed by fracture. 
The relation between fatigue crack growth ΔK and expressed by Eq. (12.22) ties 
together fatigue design1 and linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM). The elastic 
stress intensity factor is applicable to fatigue crack growth even in low-strength, high-
ductility materials because the K values needed to cause fatigue crack growth are 
very low and the plastic zone sizes at the tip are small enough to permit an LEFM 
approach. By correlating crack growth with stress intensity factor, it is possible to 
use data generated under constant-amplitude conditions with simple specimens for 
a broad range of design situations in which K can be calculated. When K is known 
for the component under relevant loading conditions, the fatigue crack growth life of 
the component can be obtained by integrating Eq. (12.22) between the limits of ini-
tial crack size and fi nal crack size. See Example for Damage-Tolerant Design under 
Chap.12 at www.mhhe.com/dieter.
12.3.6 Further Issues in Fatigue Life Prediction
The three preceding sections have illustrated the major approaches for dealing with 
fatigue failure in design. The presentation has been necessarily brief and basic. Using 
FIGURE 12.10
Schematic fatigue crack growth vs. 
ΔK curve.
da
dN log scale
K log scale
da
dN
n
= A (K)n
Kth
1. R. P. Wei, Trans. ASME, Ser. H., J. Eng. Materials Tech., vol. 100, pp. 113–20, 1978; A. F. Liu, 
Structural Life Assessment Methods, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1998.

506 
engineering design 
12
these design strategies most likely will require further study of topics such as:
 
● Accounting for geometric stress concentrations and stress gradients
 
● Making allowance for the presence of compressive residual stresses that are either 
purposely introduced to improve fatigue performance or harmful tensile residual 
stresses that are introduced by manufacturing processes
 
● Further consideration of the case when the mean stress is not zero
 
● Calculation for situations of two- or three-dimensional states of fatigue stresses
 
● Accounting for nonregular stress cycles, and for random cycles of stress.
The many references given in this section will be helpful in gaining this knowledge, 
while computer design software for fatigue will remove some of the drudgery inherent 
in these kinds of calculations.
Much progress has been made in designing for fatigue, especially through the merger 
of fracture mechanics and fatigue. Nevertheless, the interaction of many variables, which 
is typical of real fatigue situations, makes it inadvisable to depend on a design based 
solely on analysis. Full-scale prototype testing, often called simulated service testing, 
should be part of all critical designs for fatigue. The points of failure not recognized in 
design will be detected by these tests. Simulating the actual service loads requires great 
skill and experience. Often it is necessary to accelerate the test, but doing so may produce 
misleading results. For example, when time is compressed in that way, the full infl uence 
of corrosion or fretting is not measured, or the overload stress may appreciably alter the 
residual stresses. Also, it is common practice to eliminate many small load cycles from 
the load spectrum, but they may have an important infl uence in fatigue crack propagation.
12.4
DESIGN FOR CORROSION RESISTANCE
Failure of metal components by corrosion is as common as failure due to mechanical 
causes, such as brittle fracture and fatigue. The National Institute of Standards and 
Technology estimates that corrosion annually costs the United States $70 billion, of 
which at least $10 billion could be prevented by better selection of materials and design 
procedures. Although corrosion failures are minimized by proper materials selection 
and careful attention to control of metallurgical structure through heat treatment and 
processing, many corrosion-related failures can be minimized by proper understanding 
of the interrelation of the fundamental causes of corrosion and design details.1
12.4.1 Basic Forms of Corrosion
Corrosion of metals is driven by the basic thermodynamic force of a metal to return to 
the oxide or sulfi de form, but it is more related to the electrochemistry of the reactions of 
a metal in an electrolytic solution (electrolyte). There are eight basic forms of corrosion.2
1. V. P. Pludek, Design and Corrosion Control, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1977.
2. P. R. Roberge, Corrosion Engineering: Principles and Practice, McGraw-Hill, 2008.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
507
12
Uniform attack. The most common form of corrosion is uniform attack. It is char-
acterized by a chemical or electrochemical reaction of the material with its environ-
ment that proceeds uniformly over the entire exposed surface area. The metal becomes 
thinner, leading to eventual failure.
Galvanic corrosion. Galvanic corrosion occurs when two dissimilar metals are 
immersed in a corrosive or conductive solution creating an electrical potential dif-
ference between them. The less-resistant (anodic) metal is corroded relative to the 
cathodic metal. Table 12.2 gives a brief galvanic series for some commercial alloys 
immersed in seawater. In this table, for any two metals or alloys in contact in sea-
water, the metal that is more anodic (lower in the series) will be corroded. Note that 
the relative position in a galvanic series depends on the electrolytic environment as 
well as the metal’s surface chemistry (presence of passive surface fi lms).
 Use pairs of metals that are close together in the galvanic series to minimize 
galvanic corrosion and avoid situations in which a small anodic area of metal is 
connected to a larger surface area of more noble metal. If two metals far apart in the 
series must be used in contact, they should be electrically insulated from each other. 
Do not coat the anodic surface to protect it, because most coatings are susceptible 
to pinholes. The coated anode surface would corrode rapidly in contact with a large 
cathodic area. When a galvanic couple is unavoidable, consider utilizing a third metal 
that is anodic and sacrifi cial to both of the other metals.
TABLE 12.2
A Brief Galvanic Series for Commercial 
Metals and Alloys
Noble (cathodic)
Platinum
Gold
Titanium
Silver
316 stainless steel
304 stainless steel
410 stainless steel
Nickel 
Monel
Cupronickel
Cu-Sn bronze
Copper
Cast iron
Steel
Active (anodic)
Aluminum
Zinc
Magnesium

508 
engineering design 
12
Crevice corrosion. An intense localized corrosion frequently occurs within crev-
ices and other shielded areas on metal surfaces exposed to corrosive attack. This type 
of corrosion usually is associated with small volumes of stagnant liquid trapped in 
design features such as holes, gasket surfaces, lap joints, and crevices under bolt and 
rivet heads.
Pitting. Pitting is a form of extremely localized corrosive attack that produces holes 
in the metal. It is an especially insidious form of corrosion because it causes equipment 
to fail after exposure to only a small percentage of the designed-for weight loss.
Intergranular corrosion. Localized attack along the grain boundaries with only 
slight attack at the grain faces is called intergranular corrosion. It is especially com-
mon in austenitic stainless steel that has been sensitized by heating to the range 950 
to 1450°F. It can occur either during heat treatment for stress relief or during welding. 
When it occurs during welding it is known as weld decay.
Selective leaching. The removal of one element from a solid-solution alloy by 
corrosion processes is called selective leaching. The most common example of it is the 
selective removal of zinc from brass (dezincifi cation), but aluminum, iron, cobalt, and 
chromium also can be removed. When selective leaching occurs, the alloy is left in a 
weakened, porous condition.
Erosion-corrosion. Deterioration at an accelerated rate is caused by relative 
movement between a corrosive fl uid and a metal surface; it is called erosion corro-
sion. Generally the fl uid velocity is high and mechanical wear and abrasion may be 
involved, especially when the fl uid contains suspended solids. Erosion destroys pro-
tective surface fi lms and exacerbates chemical attack. Design plays an important role 
in erosion control by altering the form and features to reduce fl uid velocity, eliminat-
ing situations in which direct impingement occurs, and minimizing abrupt changes in 
the direction of fl ow. Some erosion situations are so aggressive that neither selection 
of a suitable material nor design can ameliorate the problem. Here the role of de-
sign is to provide for easy detection of damage and for quick replacement of damaged 
components.
A special kind of erosion-corrosion is cavitation, which arises from the formation 
and collapse of vapor bubbles near the metal surface. Rapid bubble collapse can pro-
duce shock waves that cause local deformation of the metal surface.
Another special form of erosion-corrosion is fretting corrosion. It occurs be-
tween two surfaces under load that are subjected to cycles of relative motion. Fretting 
produces breakdown of the surface into an oxide debris and results in surface pits and 
cracks that usually lead to fatigue cracks.
Stress-corrosion cracking. Cracking caused by the simultaneous action of a 
tensile stress and contact with a specifi c corrosive medium is called stress-corrosion 
cracking (SCC). The stress may be a result of applied loads or “locked-in” resid-
ual stress. Only specifi c combinations of alloys and chemical environments lead to 
stress-corrosion cracking. However, many occur commonly, such as aluminum alloys 

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
509
12
and seawater, copper alloys and ammonia, mild steel and caustic soda, and austenitic 
steel and salt water.1 Over 80 combinations of alloys and corrosive environments are 
known to cause stress-corrosion cracking. Design against stress-corrosion cracking 
involves selecting an alloy that is not susceptible to cracking in the service environ-
ment; but if that is not possible, then the stress level should be kept low. The concepts 
of fracture mechanics have been applied to designing against SCC.
12.4.2 Corrosion Prevention
Material Selection. Selecting a material with a low rate of corrosion in the en-
vironment of concern is the obvious fi rst step to preventing corrosion. In general, the 
more noble the metal the slower it will corrode (see Table 12.2). The brief discussion 
of the corrosion mechanisms in Sec. 12.4.1 provides some insight, but there is a vast 
literature on corrosion, much of it compiled in handbook form2 and in databases.3 
Metals are the most susceptible to corrosion. Plastics in general have much better cor-
rosion resistance. Some polymers absorb moisture, which causes swelling and degra-
dation of mechanical properties. 
While some aspects of material selection for corrosion are straightforward—
for example, avoiding materials that are attacked in the corrosive environment of 
interest or are subject to SCC in the environment—other aspects of corrosion can 
be quite subtle. Microscopic galvanic cells can be created in metallic alloys due to 
such things as microsegregation of alloying elements (especially at grain boundar-
ies), local cold-worked regions, or differences in galvanic potential between phases 
in multiphase alloys. The behavior of a material in a corrosive environment can 
be signifi cantly changed by seemingly small changes in the corrosive environment. 
Such change factors are temperature, the amount of dissolved oxygen, or impurities 
in the liquid.
Cathodic Protection. Cathodic protection reduces galvanic corrosion by supply-
ing electrons to the anodic metal that needs to be protected. This can be done by 
connecting the anodic metal to a sacrifi cial anode of an even more anodic potential, 
such as Mg or Zn. The sacrifi cial anode must be in close proximity to the protected 
metal. It will be gradually corroded away, so it must be replaced periodically. Alter-
natively, cathodic protection can be achieved by applying a DC voltage to the corro-
sion site that will oppose the one caused by the electrochemical reaction of galvanic 
corrosion.
1. G. H. Koch, ASM Handbook, Vol. 19, pp. 483–506, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1996.
2. ASM Handbooks, Vol. 13: Vol. 13A, Corrosion Fundamentals, Testing, and Protection; Vol. 13B, 
Corrosion: Materials (provides extensive data on corrosion performance of metals and nonmetals); 
Vol. 13C, Corrosion: Environments and Industries (focuses on corrosion in specifi c environments and in 
specifi c industries). The Cambridge Engineering Selector software is a good place to do a fi rst screen for 
corrosion properties.
3. For an excellent compilation of sources, see ASM Handbook, Vol. 13A, pp. 999–1001.

510 
engineering design 
12
Corrosion Inhibitors. Specifi c chemical compounds can be added to the cor-
rosive solution to reduce the diffusion of ions to the metal-electrolyte interface. In 
many cases the inhibitor forms an impervious, insulating fi lm covering either the an-
ode or cathode. The chromate salts added as inhibitors to radiator antifreeze are good 
 examples. Other inhibitors act as scavengers to reduce the amount of dissolved oxygen 
in the electrolyte.
Protective Coatings. A common way to minimize corrosion is to provide a pro-
tective coating to the metal to provide a barrier to the corrosive environment. Com-
mon examples are porcelain enamel, paint, and polymer coating. Electroplated metal 
coatings such as chromium are used both for corrosion protection and for decorative 
purposes. Grease, oil, and wax are used as temporary coatings during shipment or 
storage. The most common problem with coatings is incomplete coverage of the an-
ode, usually due to “pinholes” in the coating, or subsequent damage to the coating 
in service. This results in an unfavorable ratio of anode to cathode area, which then 
causes more rapid corrosion at the penetrated sites in the coating.
A special form of protective coating is the passive layer that forms on some metals 
in certain environments. Al2O3 forms on aluminum alloys subjected to the weather, 
and this can be improved by subjecting the aluminum to a high corrosion potential to 
form a thick and tough anodized layer. The excellent corrosion resistance of stainless 
steel is believed to be due to the formation of very thin but protective oxide layers.
Corrosion Prevention by Design
Some of the more obvious design rules for preventing corrosion failure have been 
discussed previously. The essential strategy is to prevent a corrosive solution from 
coming in contact with a vulnerable surface. Tanks and containers should be designed 
for easy draining and easy cleaning. Welded rather than riveted tanks will provide less 
opportunity for crevice corrosion. When possible, design to exclude air; if oxygen is 
eliminated, corrosion can often be reduced or prevented. Exceptions to that rule are 
titanium and stainless steel, which are more resistant to acids that contain oxidizers 
than to those that do not. 
 
● An important factor in the design of metal parts to resist corrosion is the ratio 
of the area of the anode to the cathode. To minimize corrosion of the anode, its 
surface area should be as large as possible in comparison with the surface area 
of the cathode. This will result in lower current density at the anode, and a lower 
corrosion rate. For example, in galvanized steel the zinc coating (anode–) on the 
steel (cathode) will give protection to the steel, even if the zinc is scratched to the 
bare steel, because the area of the anode remains much larger than the cathode. 
However, if the steel is protected by a copper cladding, according to Table 12.2 the 
copper would be cathodic to the steel, and the scratch would lead to a high current 
density in the steel, with accelerated corrosion.
 
● Great attention needs to be given to minimizing the ways that the electrolyte can 
come in contact with the metal. This can occur by direct immersion, by exposure 
to spray or mist, by alternate periods of wetting and drying, as when it rains, by 

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
511
12
contact with moist earth, or by humidity in the atmosphere. It is important that 
design details minimize crevices, and that pipes drain out all liquids so there is no 
residual liquid to cause corrosion. Unavoidable crevices should be sealed with an 
elastomeric material. Surfaces that are smooth collect less fl uid and corrode less 
than rough surfaces.
 
● Allow provisions in the design to clean equipment exposed to such things as mud, 
dirt, corrosive atmospheres, and salt spray. Combinations of corrosives with dirt or 
mud can cause galvanic action.
 
● The severity of corrosion increases exponentially with temperature. Steep tempera-
ture gradients and high fl uid velocities can also increase corrosion severity.
 
● Designing with a corrosion allowance is another strategy. In many situations, as in 
chemical plant design, it is more economical to select a material with poorer cor-
rosion resistance than a more expensive material with better corrosion resistance 
and to make the part with larger dimensions (corrosion allowance). The part is kept 
in service until a critical dimension, such as the wall thickness, has corroded to a 
predetermined limit, and then it is replaced. This design approach requires that the 
design provides for easy replacement, and that a rigorous inspection and mainte-
nance program is in effect.
Other examples of design details for corrosion prevention are given by Pludek1 
and Elliott.2
12.5
DESIGN AGAINST WEAR
Wear is mechanically induced surface damage that results in progressive removal of 
material. Wear usually results in a loss of weight and change of dimensions over time. 
In severe situations wear can result in fracture, usually from a surface-originated 
fatigue crack. Wear typically occurs when two solid materials are in close contact 
with each other, either in a sliding or rotational motion. The wear of a material is 
closely associated with the friction of the sliding surfaces, and its degree of damage 
is strongly infl uenced by the presence of a lubricant. For example, the wear rate for 
an unlubricated bearing can be 105 times greater than that of a properly lubricated 
bearing. The scientifi c study of friction, wear, and lubrication is known as tribology, 
and the mechanics analysis of wear problems is called contact mechanics. Wear, cor-
rosion, and fatigue are the largest contributors to the failure of machine components.
Wear is not a true material property. It is a characteristic of a tribological system 
consisting of the contacting materials, their geometrical parameters (shape, size, sur-
face roughness), their relative motion and the magnitude of the applied load during 
motion, the type of lubrication, and the environment.
1. V. R. Pludek, op. cit.
2. P. Elliott, “Design Details to Minimize Corrosion,” in Metals Handbook, Vol. 13A, Corrosion, 
pp. 910–28, ASM International, Metals Park, OH, 2003.

512 
engineering design 
12
12.5.1 Types of Wear
As in corrosion, there are many types of wear. In designing for wear it is fi rst impor-
tant to identify the main type of wear that is operative in a particular design. Often 
a given wear mechanism gives way to a different mechanism as wear progresses, or 
several mechanisms act together. There are four predominant situations where wear 
occurs:
 
● Adhesive wear occurs when two solid bodies are in contact and move relative to 
each other. The motion can be either sliding, rolling, or by impact.
 
● Abrasive wear occurs when hard particles slide or roll across a surface under 
pressure.
 
● Erosion is the loss of material from a solid surface due to the interaction of that sur-
face with a fl uid. The fl uid may be a multicomponent fl uid like steam, or a stream 
of solid particles.1
 
● Surface fatigue is a form of damage in which particles of metal are detached from 
a surface under cyclic stresses, causing pitting or spalling. The most common oc-
currences of surface fatigue are in rolling-contact systems2, as in gear teeth and 
bearings, and fretting fatigue where there is small-amplitude oscillating motion be-
tween the surfaces.3
In this section we limit the discussion to only adhesive and abrasive wear, the two 
most common types of wear.
Adhesive Wear
Adhesive wear is localized bonding between contacting solids leading to material 
transfer or loss. Figure 12.11 shows the two contacting surfaces at high magnifi cation. 
The surfaces meet at asperities, leading to high contact stresses and local bonding. 
As the surfaces slide across one another a bonded junction in Fig. 12.11a is torn away 
(b) by the shearing and forms a wear debris particle, Fig. 12.11c. This particle is lost 
from the surface, or alternatively, it may be transferred to the opposing surface. Either 
way, the integrity of the surface has been damaged. 
The degree of wear damage, as determined by visual or microscopic examina-
tion of the wear surface, is usually described as mild or severe. Mild adhesive wear 
would be characterized by microscopic scratches aligned with the direction of motion. 
Severe wear is usually called scoring or scuffi ng, where the surface shows defi nite 
roughening and patches of solid-phase welding. This is an indication of an unac-
ceptable wear rate. Extreme adhesive wear is called galling. The material actually 
fl ows up from the surface, eventually stopping the relative motion by seizure. When 
severe wear is observed it calls for immediate action, such as changing the material 
or modifying design parameters such as load or shape to achieve mild wear behavior. 
1. For more detail see ASM Handbook, Vol. 18, Friction, Lubrication, and Wear Technology, ASM, 
2002, pp. 199–235.
2. ASM Handbook, Vol. 18, pp. 257–62.
3. ASM Handbook, Vol. 18, pp. 242–56.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
513
12
Note that the transition from mild to severe wear behavior is often sharp as load, 
speed, or temperature is increased.
Abrasive Wear
Abrasive wear is caused by a hard, sharp particle imposed on and moving on a 
softer surface. Some abrasive wear is intentional. An example is the wear between an 
abrasive grinding wheel and a steel workpiece to produce a smooth, high-tolerance 
surface. This is an example of two-body abrasion. The most common form of abra-
sive wear is three-body abrasion, where hard and sharp particles, comprising the third 
body, are trapped between the contact surfaces.
Abrasive wear is usually divided into low-stress and high-stress abrasive wear. In 
low-stress wear, the particles plow wear scars like shallow furrows or scratches, but 
they do not fracture off chips. In high-stress abrasive wear the stress is suffi cient to 
cause the abrasive particles to fracture or crush, producing many sharp edges that re-
move material by plowing the surface into deep scratches. Generally, abrasive wear is 
accompanied by adhesive wear, but the presence of abrasive particles results in higher 
wear rates (volume of material removed per unit time).
12.5.2 Wear Models
Many models have been proposed for wear processes. The most general relationship 
expresses wear by the volume of wear debris created, V.
 
V
k FS
H
=
 
(12.23)
where V is the wear volume, mm3
k is a dimensionless proportionality constant, called the wear coeffi cient
F is the compressive normal force, N
S is the sliding distance, mm
H is the hardness1 of the softer member in contact, kg/mm2
FIGURE 12.11
Schematic description of the mechanism of adhesive wear.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Sheared asperity
Boldface arrows indicate
directions of sliding
Bonded junction
Sheared asperity
Wear-debris particle
1. Brinell, Vickers, and Knoop (microhardness) measurements are in kg/mm2. To convert to MPa mul-
tiply by 9.81.

514 
engineering design 
12
This model is applicable for both adhesion and abrasive wear. However, for the latter 
type of wear, Eq. (12.23) would be multiplied by a geometric term to account for the 
sharpness of the particles. Equation (12.23) shows that the wear volume is propor-
tional to the normal force and the sliding distance, or what is equivalent to the sliding 
velocity. The wear volume is inversely proportional to the hardness1 of the material 
that is undergoing wear. In general, the harder the wear surface the lower the wear. 
Typical materials used in wear applications are tempered-martensitic steels, steels 
surface hardened by carburizing, and cobalt alloys and ceramic materials applied as 
surface layers. Wear models are useful in designing against wear.2 However, the level 
of detail involved precludes further examples here.
12.5.3 Wear Prevention
Design guidelines used to minimize wear can be divided into analysis methods, de-
sign details of the product, the use of lubricants, and appropriate materials selection. 
Analysis Methods
● In identifying of the type of wear that can be expected, look carefully at the 
surface damage from wear failures from similar situations.3 Examine the wear 
surface with a scanning electron microscope. Microscopic examination of the 
wear debris, and spectrographic analysis of lubricants, which may contain wear 
debris, can shed light on the nature of the wear processes that are taking place.
● Modeling can provide much insight in design for wear mitigation.
Design Details
● The overall aim in designing against wear should be to minimize contact 
stresses. One way to achieve this is to add details that help maintain good 
alignment between contact surfaces.
● Rolling contact is preferred to sliding contact. Avoid designs that lead to fret-
ting motions. 
● When satisfactory wear life cannot be achieved by other means, use a sacrifi -
cial design where one contact element is softer than the other and is intended to 
be replaced periodically. 
● It is important to minimize the chance of buildup of abrasive particles in ma-
chines by giving proper attention to the design of oil fi lters, air cleaners, dust 
covers, and seals.
Lubrication
● The most general solution to excessive wear is lubrication. Lubrication pro-
vides a barrier between the contact surfaces that reduces both friction and wear. 
Lubricants are usually liquids, sometimes polymer solids, and rarely gases.
1. Hardness for metals is proportional to the yield strength, H
3
.
y
σ
≈
2. R. G. Bayer, “Design for Wear Resistance,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, 1997, pp. 604–14; R. G. Bayer, 
Engineering Design for Wear, 2nd ed., Marcel Dekker, New York, 2004.
3. “Surface Damage,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 18, pp. 176–183.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
515
12
● There are several regimes of lubrication: the most common are boundary lubri-
cation (each surface is covered by a chemically bonded fl uid that may not give 
continuous coverage) and elastohydrodynamic lubrication, in which the fric-
tion and fi lm thickness are determined by the elastic properties of the moving 
surfaces and the viscous properties of the lubricant.
● When a design depends on lubrication to control wear, a lubricant failure 
can be disastrous. Lubricant failure can occur because of chemical break-
down or contamination, change in properties due to excessive heat, or loss of 
lubricant.
Materials
● The higher the ratio of a material’s surface hardness to the elastic modulus, 
the greater its resistance to adhesive wear. Avoid unlubricated sliding between 
similar materials, especially metals.
● Sliding between a hard metal surface and a softer metal surface will produce 
more wear on both members than if both surfaces were hard. A hard steel 
(BHN 650) coupled with a soft steel (BHN 250) will not protect the hard mem-
ber from wear.
● The lowest metal-to-metal adhesive wear and resistance to galling is achieved 
with two hard surfaces (BHN > 650).
● Hard materials usually have low fracture toughness. An effective and eco-
nomical approach is to provide a high hardness layer on the surface of a lower- 
hardness material. Depending on the base material, this is achieved by diffu-
sion treatments, surface hardening (in steels), hard facing, and thermal spray 
coatings.1
● Diffusion treatments are usually applied to steels. The surface of low-carbon 
steel can be made hard and wear resistant by diffusing carbon atoms (carburiz-
ing) or nitrogen atoms (nitriding) into the surface of a part. These surface treat-
ment processes have been widely adopted in the automotive industry.
● Diffusion treatments require hours at high temperature for the diffusion of at-
oms to produce a case depth of 0.010–0.020 in. The change in surface com-
position leads to a minor change in dimensions. Steels can also be surface 
hardened by selective hardening in which only the outer surface of the part 
is heated into the austenitic range for hardening, and then rapidly quenched to 
produce a hard martensitic layer on a soft, tough core. For large parts, heating 
is accomplished by heating with a gas torch (fl ame hardening), while heating 
with an induction coil or laser beam is used for smaller parts and greater preci-
sion in control of the depth of the surface layer.
● Hardfacing is the application of surface coatings using welding techniques. 
Surface layers of 1/8 in. are common. Typical materials applied by hardfacing 
are tool steels, iron chromium alloys for resistance against high-stress abrasive 
wear, and cobalt-based alloys for applications involving galling.
1. ASM Handbook, Vol. 5, Surface Engineering, 1994.

516 
engineering design 
12
● Thermal spraying builds up a surface layer by melting the material into drop-
lets and depositing them on the surface at high velocity. The droplets cool very 
rapidly and form an interlocking layer of splats. Typical processes are fl ame 
spraying and plasma arc spraying. These can deposit all wear-resistant me-
tallic materials, and the higher-velocity spray processes can deposit ceramic 
materials such as chromium and aluminum oxide and tungsten carbide. Ther-
mal spray processes can also be used to build up and repair worn parts.
12.6
DESIGN WITH PLASTICS
Most mechanical design is taught with the implicit assumption that the part will be 
made from a metal. However, plastics are increasingly fi nding their way into design 
applications because of their light weight, attractive appearance, relative freedom from 
corrosion, and the ease with which many parts may be manufactured from polymers.
Polymers are suffi ciently different from metals to require special attention in 
design.1 With respect to mechanical properties, steel has about 100 times the Young’s 
modulus of a polymer and about 10 times the yield strength. Also, the strength proper-
ties of polymers are time-dependent at or near room temperature, which imposes a dif-
ferent way of looking at allowable strength limits. Polymers are 1/7th as dense as metals, 
but their thermal conductivity is 1/200th that of steel and their thermal expansion is 
seven times greater. These last two properties infl uence their processing (see Sec. 13.18). 
Therefore, these differences in properties must be allowed for in design with plastics.
12.6.1 Classifi cation of Plastics and Their Properties
The majority of plastics are synthetic materials characterized by having a carbon-
carbon backbone modifi ed by other organic side groups. Plastics are made up of tens 
of thousands of small molecular units (mers) that are polymerized into long-chain 
macromolecules, hence the scientifi c term polymers. Depending on composition and 
processing, polymer chains can take many confi gurations (coiled, cross-linked, crys-
talline) to change the polymer properties.2
Polymers are divided into two general classes: thermoplastics (TP) and thermo-
sets (TS). The difference between these two classes of plastics lies in the nature of 
1. “Engineering Plastics,” Engineered Materials Handbook, Vol. 2, ASM International, Materials Park, 
OH, 1988; M. L. Berins, ed., Plastics Engineering Handbook of the Society of Plastics Industry, 5th ed., 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1991; E. A. Muccio, Plastic Part Technology, ASM International, 
Materials Park, OH, 1991; Dominic V. Rosato, Donald V. Rosato, and Marles G. Rosato, Plastics Design 
Handbook, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 2001; G. Erhard, Designing with Plastics, Hanser 
Gardner Publications, Cincinnati, 2006.
2. A. B. Strong, Plastics: Materials and Processing, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1996;
G. Gruenwald, Plastics: How Structure Determines Properties, Hanser Publishers, New York, 1993; 
N. Mills, Plastics: Microstructure and Engineering Applications, 3rd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Woburn, MA, 2005.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
517
12
bonding and their response to increases in temperature. When a TP is heated to a 
suffi ciently high temperature it will become viscous and pliable. In this condition it 
can be formed into useful shapes and will retain these shapes when cooled to room 
temperature. If reheated to the same temperature, it again becomes viscous and then 
can be reshaped and retains the shape when cooled. When a TS polymer is heated, 
or a catalyst is added, covalent bonding occurs between the polymer chains, result-
ing in a rigid, cross-linked structure. This structure is “set in place,” so that if the TS 
is reheated from a cooled state it will not return to the fl uid viscous state but instead 
degrades and chars on continued heating.
Few polymers are used in their pure form. Copolymers are made by polymerizing 
two or more different mers so that the repeating unit in the polymer chain is not just a 
single mer. Think of these as polymer alloys. Styrene-acrylonitrile copolymer (SAN) 
and acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene copolymer (ABS) are common examples. Blends 
are combinations of polymers that are mechanically mixed. Blends do not depend on 
chemical bonding, like copolymers; instead they need chemical compatibilizer addi-
tions to keep the components of the blend from separating. Copolymers and blends are 
developed to improve upon one or more property of a polymer, like impact resistance, 
without degrading its other properties.
About three-quarters of the plastics sold are thermoplastics. Therefore, we will 
concentrate on this category of plastics. For commercial purposes TP plastics can be 
divided into commodity plastics and engineering plastics. Commodity plastics are gen-
erally used in low-load-bearing applications like packaging, house siding, water pipes, 
toys, and furniture. Polyethylene (PE), polystyrene (PS), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), and 
polypropylene (PP) are good examples. These plastics generally compete with glass, 
paper, and wood. Engineering TPs compete with metals, since they can be designed 
to carry signifi cant loads for a long period of time. Examples are polyoxymethylene or 
acetal (POM), polyamides or nylon (PA), polyamide-imide (PAl), polycarbonates (PC), 
polyethylene terephthalate (PET), and polyetheretherketones (PEEK).
Figure 12.12 compares the tensile stress-strain curve for polycarbonate with a 
soft mild steel and a high-carbon steel. We note that the level of strength is much 
lower and that yielding and fracture occur at much larger strains. The level of the 
stress-strain curve is strongly dependent on the strain rate (rate of loading). Increas-
ing the strain rate raises the curve and decreases the ductility. Table 12.3 lists some 
short-time mechanical properties of metals and plastics at room temperature. Because 
many polymers do not have a truly linear initial portion of the stress-strain curve, 
it may be diffi cult to specify a yield strength, so the tensile strength usually is re-
ported. Also, because of the initial curvature of the stress-strain curve, the modulus 
of elasticity is usually determined by the secant modulus.1 Some polymers are brittle 
at room temperature because their glass-transition temperature is above room tem-
perature. Brittleness is measured by the impact test. Note the marked improvement 
when glass fi bers are introduced. The data in Table 12.3 are aimed at illustrating the 
difference in properties between metals and polymers. They should not be used for 
1. The secant modulus is the slope of a line drawn from the origin of the stress-strain curve to a point on 
the curve determined by a designated strain, e.g., 2 percent.

518 
engineering design 
12
design  purposes. Moreover, it needs to be recognized that the mechanical properties 
of plastics are more subject than metals to variations due to blending and processing.
Tests other than the tensile and impact tests are frequently made on plastics and 
reported in the producer’s literature as an aid in selecting polymers. One is a fl exure 
test, in which the plastic is bent as a beam until it fractures.
A polymer’s heat resistance is measured by the heat-defl ection temperature 
(HDT). A plastic bar is bent under a low constant stress of 264 psi as the tempera-
ture of a surrounding oil bath is raised slowly from room temperature. The HDT is 
the temperature at which the sample shows a defl ection of 0.010 in. While useful in 
TABLE 12.3
Comparative Properties of Some Polymers and Metals
Material
Young’s Modulus, 
psi  10-6
Tensile 
Strength, ksi
Impact 
ft-lb/in.
Specifi c Gravity, 
g/cm3
Aluminum alloys
10
20–60 
2.7
Steel
30
40–200
7.9
Polyethylene
0.08–0.15
3–6
1–12
0.94
Polystyrene
0.35–0.60
5–9
0.2–0.5
1.1
Polycarbonate
0.31–0.35
8–10
12–16
1.2
Polyacetal
0.40–0.45
9–10
1.2–1.8
1.4
Polyester-glass reinforced
1.5–2.5
20–30
10–20
1.7
FIGURE 12.12
Comparison of engineering stress-strain curves for a thermoplastic polymer (polycarbonate) 
with 0.2% carbon mild steel and 0.8% carbon steel.
Yield
Yield point
Stress, ksi
Yield
Mild steel
Polycarbonate
0.8% C steel
0
0.05
20
40
60
80
0.10
0.15
Strain, in/in
0.20
0.25
0.30

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
519
12
ranking materials, such a test is of no value in predicting the structural performance 
of a plastic at a given temperature and stress.
Plastics do not corrode like metals because they are insulators, but they are sus-
ceptible to various types of environmental degradation. Some plastics are attacked by 
organic solvents and gasoline. Some are highly susceptible to the absorption of water 
vapor, which degrades mechanical properties and causes swelling. Many plastics are 
affected by sunlight, which causes cracking, fading of the color, or loss of transparency.
Many additives are compounded with the polymer to improve its properties. 
Fillers like wood fl our, silica fl our, or fi ne clay are sometimes added as extenders to 
decrease the volume of plastic resin used, and therefore the cost, without severely de-
grading properties. Chopped glass fi ber is commonly added to increase the stiffness 
and strength of plastics. Plasticizers are used to enhance fl exibility and melt fl ow dur-
ing processing. Flame retardants are added to reduce the fl ammability of plastics, but 
some of these are proving to be toxic. Colorants such as pigments and dyes are used 
to impart color. Ultraviolet light absorbers are used to stabilize the color and lengthen 
the life of the product when exposed to sunlight. Antistatic agents are used to reduce 
the buildup of electrostatic charges on an insulating plastic surface.
A category of plastics that is growing in importance as a material for engineered 
structures is plastic matrix composite materials. In these materials high-modulus, 
strong, but often brittle fi bers are embedded in a matrix of thermosetting plastic.1 The 
fi bers most often used are graphite or glass. Because of the high cost of materials and 
the complexity of fabrication, composite structures are used where a high premium 
is placed on lightweight, strong structures. Composite structures represent the ulti-
mate in materials design in that the structure is laid up layer upon layer. Because the 
strength and stiffness reside in the fi bers, and these are highly directional, great atten-
tion must be paid to directional properties in the design.
12.6.2 Design for Stiffness
Young’s modulus is much lower for plastics than metals, so resistance to defl ection 
(stiffness) is often a concern when using plastics. The stiffness of a structure is depen-
dent upon the elastic modulus of the material and the part geometry. For example, the 
maximum defl ection of a cantilever beam of length L, loaded with a concentrated load 
P at its end, is
 
PL
EI
I
bh
b
h
3
where
12 and isthebeamwidthand isitsthickness
max
3
3
δ
=
=
 (12.24)
Equation (12.24) shows that increasing the stiffness (i.e., reducing the defl ection) can 
be achieved by either increasing the elastic modulus E or increasing the moment of 
inertia I, or both. Table 12.3 shows that the addition of short glass fi bers to a nylon 
1. ASM Handbook, Vol. 21, Composites, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2001; D. Hull, An 
Introduction to Composite Materials, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1981; R. J. Diefendorf, 
“Design with Composites,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 648–65, 1997.

520 
engineering design 
12
molding polymer can increase the elastic modulus. The addition of long glass fi bers 
to an epoxy polymer matrix to make a composite material can increase the modulus 
much more, but at the complication of introducing extreme directionality (anisotropy) 
in properties. 
The second way to increase the stiffness of the cantilever beam is to increase the 
value of the moment of inertia, I. An obvious way to do this is to increase the value 
of the thickness h that appears in Eq. (12.24) raised to the third power. If a polymer 
has E = 300,000 psi and a metal E = 10,000,000 psi, the polymer beam will have to 
be more than three times thicker to have the same fl exural rigidity as the aluminum 
beam. This introduces problems in addition to the extra cost of the additional material 
that must be used. Polymers have low thermal conductivity, so there are issues in cool-
ing thick sections fast enough in production forming machines like injection molding. 
In fact, the limit on wall thickness is around 4 to 5 mm.
However, signifi cant increases in I can be achieved through modifi cation of the 
shape of the cross section to move material far away from the neutral axis. This is ex-
pressed by the shape factor. The structural elements usually employed for this purpose 
are ribs or corrugation, Fig. 12.13. While corrugated surfaces provide greater stiffness, 
for equal weight and thickness, by a factor of about 1.8, they usually are avoided for 
aesthetic reasons and for the fact that they result in higher mold costs than do ribs.1
In their simplest form, reinforcing ribs are beam-like structures.2 Generally they are 
placed inside of the part attached to the load-bearing surface and are oriented to run in 
the direction of maximum stress and defl ection. As shown in Fig. 12.14, they can run 
the full length of the part or stop part way. When they do not intersect a vertical wall 
they should be tapered down gradually to aid in polymer melt fl ow and to avoid stress 
concentration. A short rib used to support a wall is often called a gusset plate. The ribs 
should be tapered slightly (draft) to aid in ejection from the mold, and they should be 
designed with a generous radius where they attach to the plate to avoid stress concentra-
tion. See www.dsm.com/en_US/html/dep/ribsandprofi ledstructures.htm for information 
on design of ribs and corrugations. For greater detail see http://plastics.dupont.com/
plastics/pdfl it/americas/general/H76838.pdf.
FIGURE 12.13
Examples of structural stiffening elements.
Rib
Corrugation
1. G. Erhard, Designing with Plastics, Chap. 10, Hanser Gardner Publications, Cincinnati, OH, 2006.
2. For a methodology with which to determine the value of I, see R. A. Malloy, Plastic Part Design for 
Injection Molding, Hanser Gardner Publications, Cincinnati, OH, 1994, pp. 213–30. For more discussion 
of design issues in plastic parts (ribs, bosses, shrinkage, and warpage) see Design Guide at DSM Engi-
neering Plastics-Design.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
521
12
12.6.3 Time-Dependent Part Performance
The mechanical properties of plastics are viscoelastic.1 This means that they vary 
with time under load, the rate of loading, and the temperature. This material behav-
ior shows itself most prominently in the phenomena of creep and stress relaxation. 
Creep is the permanent deformation of a material over time, under constant load, 
and at constant temperature. Stress relaxation measures the decreasing stress re-
quired to cause a constant strain at a constant temperature. For example, the loos-
ening of a snap fi t with time, or the loosening of a self-tapping screw, is a result of 
stress relaxation.
The calculation of stress and strain from viscoelastic equations that describe the 
creep of plastics is an advanced topic. Nevertheless, design engineers have developed 
useful and simpler methods for designing with plastics. The procedure is as follows:
1. Determine the maximum service temperature and the time for which a constant 
load will be applied.
2. Calculate the maximum stress in the design using normal mechanics of material 
equations.
3. From a creep curve of strain versus time, fi nd the strain from the appropriate tem-
perature and stress.
4. Divide these values of strain into stress to determine an apparent creep modulus.
5. This creep modulus can be used in mechanics of materials equations to determine 
deformation or defl ection.
FIGURE 12.14
Typical rib designs used to increase the stiffness of an injection molded plate.
Ribs
Gusset plate
Partial
rib
Load  bearing surface
1. J. G. Williams, Stress Analysis of Polymers, 2nd ed., John Wiley-Halsted Press, New York, 1980; 
A.S. Wineman and K. R. Rajagopal, Mechanical Response of Polymers, Cambridge University Press, 
New York, 2000.

522 
engineering design 
12
E X A M P L E 1 2 . 2 Design for Creep of Plastics
A simple beam of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) reinforced with 30 volume percent of 
short glass fi bers is statically loaded with 10 lb in the middle of the beam. The beam is 
8 in. long, 1 in. thick, and has a moment of inertia of I = 0.0025 in.4 For a beam loaded at 
midspan the bending moment is 
M
PL
4
10
8
4
20 in-lb

=
=
=
The bending stress at the center of the beam at its outer fi ber is
Mc
I
20
0.5
0.0025
4000 psi
σ =
=
×
=
Figure 12.15 shows the fl exural creep curves (log-log plot) for 30 percent glass-fi lled GF 
PET. Since we are interested in long-term behavior, we look for the creep strain at 1000 h 
with the  environmental conditions of 4000 psi (27.6 MPa) and room temperature 73°F 
(23°C). This gives a strain of 0.7 percent or 0.007 in./in. Then the apparent modulus is 
E
4000
0.007
5.71 10 psi
a
5
σ
ε
=
=
=
×
For a simply supported beam the maximum defl ection under the load at midspan is
given by
PL
E I
48
10 8
48(5.71 10 )(0.0025)
0.075 in.
a
3
3
5
δ =
=
×
×
=
FIGURE 12.15
Creep curve in fl exure for 30 percent GF PET. (Engineered Materials Handbook, vol. 2,
p. 173, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1988. Used with permission.)
10
0.1
1
10
Strain, %
1
100
Time, h
65°C at 14 MPa
120°C at 14 MPa
23°C at 28 MPa
23°C at 70 MPa
120°C at 28 MPa
175°C at 28 MPa
1000

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
523
12
If the operating temperature is raised to 250°F (120°C) the creep strain at 1000 h is 
1.2 percent or 0.012 in./in. Ea changes to 3.33 × 105 and the defl ection under the load is 
0.13 in. This shows the strong sensitivity of creep in plastics to temperature.
The static elastic modulus obtained from a tension test for this material at room tem-
perature is 1.3 × 106 psi. If this value is used in the defl ection equation a value of 0.033 is 
obtained. Thus, ignoring the viscoelastic nature of polymers results in a severe underesti-
mation of defl ection.
12.7 
SUMMARY
This chapter provides an introduction to types of failure of materials not usually 
covered in any depth in courses in fundamentals of materials and mechanics of 
materials. The approach is at a rather elementary level and does not consider failure 
in situations of combined stress. Ample references are given to sources where stu-
dents can extend their knowledge. The excellent text by Norman Dowling should be 
particularly helpful, as will be the various volumes of the ASM Handbook that are 
referenced.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ASM Handbook, Vol. 19, Fatigue and Fracture, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 
1996.
ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, Materials Selection and Design, ASM International, Materials Park, 
OH, 1997.
Budynas, R. G., and J. K. Nisbett: Shigley’s Mechanical Engineering Design, 9th ed., McGrawHill, 
New York, 2011.
Derby, B., D. A. Hills, and C. Ruiz: Materials for Engineering: A Fundamental Design Ap-
proach, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1992.
Dieter, G. E.: Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1986.
Dowling, N. E.: Mechanical Behavior of Materials, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 2006.
Jones, D. R. H.: Engineering Materials 3: Materials Failure Analysis, Pergamon Press, 
 Oxford, 1993.
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Abrasive wear 
Endurance limit 
Notch sensitivity factor
Adhesive wear 
Failsafe design 
Plane-strain fracture toughness
Apparent modulus 
Fatigue failure 
Stress corrosion fracture
Creep failure 
Fracture mechanics 
Viscoelastic behavior
Damage tolerant design 
Low-cycle fatigue 
Wear

524 
engineering design 
12
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
12.1 Compare steels A and B for the construction of a pressure vessel measuring 30 in. 
inside diameter and 12 ft long. The pressure vessel must withstand an internal pressure 
of 5000 psi. Use a safety factor of 2 on the yield strength. For each steel, determine 
(a) critical fl aw size and (b) fl aw size for a leak-before-break condition. This is the situa-
tion where the crack penetrates the wall thickness before brittle fracture occurs.
Steel
Yield Strength, ksi
KIc, ksi in.
A
260
80
B
110
170
12.2 A high-strength steel has a yield strength of 100 ksi and a fracture toughness 150 ksi(in)1/2. 
By  the use of a certain nondestructive evaluation technique, the smallest-size fl aw 
that can be detected routinely is 0.3 in. Assume that the most dangerous crack geom-
etry in the structure  is a single-edge notch so that K
a
1.12
.
σ
π
=
 The structure is 
subjected to cyclic fatigue loading in which σmax = 45 ksi and σmin = 25 ksi. The crack 
growth rate for the steel is given by da/dN = 0.66 × 10−8(ΔK)2.25. Estimate the number of 
cycles of fatigue stress that the structure can withstand.
12.3 A 3-inch-diameter steel shaft is rotating under a steady bending load. The shaft is re-
duced in diameter at each end to fi t in the bearings, which gives a theoretical stress con-
centration factor at this radius of 1.7. The fatigue limit of the steel in a rotating beam test 
is 48,000 psi. Its fatigue notch sensitivity factor is 0.8. Since the fatigue limit is close to 
a 50 percent survivability value, we want to design this beam to a 99 percent reliability. 
What point in the beam will be the likely point for a failure, and what is the maximum 
allowable stress at that point?
12.4 A 1.50-inch-diameter steel bar is subjected to a cyclical axial load of Pmax = 75,000 lb 
in tension and 25,000 lb in compression. The fatigue limit (endurance limit) for a stress 
cycle with R = −1.0 is 75 ksi. The ultimate tensile strength is 158 ksi and the yield 
strength is 147 ksi.
(a)  Equation (12.13) expresses the relationship between alternating stress and the 
mean stress in fatigue known as the Goodman line. Plot Eq. (12.13) on coordinates 
of σa(y-axis) versus σm(x-axis) and label the critical points on this graph.
(b)  To what value would the endurance limit be reduced by the stress cycle given here?
12.5 A high-carbon steel is used to make a leaf spring for a truck. The service loads the 
truck will experience can be approximated by an alternating stress from a maximum 
load to a zero load in tension (R = 0). In the heat-treated condition the leaf spring has 
a fatigue limit of 380 MPa based on laboratory tests made under completely reversed 
fatigue loading. The surface fi nish of the leaf spring is expected to reduce this value by 
20 percent. The ultimate tensile strength of the steel is 1450 MPa. Before assembly the 
leaf spring is shotpeened to introduce a surface compressive residual stress that is esti-
mated to be 450 MPa. Find the maximum stress amplitude that the surface of the spring 
could be expected to withstand for an infi nite number of fatigue cycles.

 
chapter 12: Design with Materials 
525
12
12.6 A plastic beam (6 in. diameter) used to haul small loads into a loft extends 8 ft in the 
horizontal plane from the building. If the beam is made from glass-reinforced PET, how 
much would the beam defl ect on a 23°C day when hauling up a 900 lb load? 
12.7 Stress-corrosion failures that occur in the 304 and 316 stainless-steel recirculation pip-
ing have been a major problem with boiling-water nuclear reactors (BWR). What are 
the three conditions necessary for stress-corrosion cracking? Suggest remedies for the 
cracking.
12.8 What are the chief advantages and disadvantages of plastic gears? Discuss how material 
structure and processing are utilized to improve performance.

13
13
DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING
13.1
ROLE OF MANUFACTURING IN DESIGN
Producing the design is a critical link in the chain of events that starts with a creative 
idea and ends with a successful product in the marketplace. With modern technology 
the function of production no longer is a mundane activity. Rather, design, materials 
selection, and processing are inseparable, as shown in Fig. 11.1.
There is confusion of terminology concerning the engineering function called 
manufacturing. Materials engineers use the term materials processing to refer to the 
conversion of semifi nished products, like steel blooms or billets, into fi nished prod-
ucts, like cold-rolled sheet or hot-rolled bar. A mechanical, industrial, or manufactur-
ing engineer is more likely to refer to the conversion of the sheet into an automotive 
body panel as manufacturing. Processing is the more generic term, but manufacturing 
is the more common term. Production engineering is a term used in Europe to de-
scribe what we call manufacturing in the United States. We will use the term manu-
facturing in this text to refer to converting a design into a fi nished product.
The fi rst half of the 20th century saw the maturation of manufacturing opera-
tions in the western world. Increases in the scale and speed of operations brought 
about increases in productivity, and manufacturing costs dropped while wages and 
the standard of living rose. There was a great proliferation of available materials 
as basic substances were tailor-made to have selectively improved properties. One 
of the major achievements of this era was the development of the production line 
for mass-producing automobiles, appliances, and other consumer goods. Because of 
the preeminence in manufacturing that arose in the United States, there has been a 
recent tendency to take the manufacturing function for granted. Manufacturing has 
been downplayed in the education of engineers. Manufacturing positions in industry 
have been considered routine and not challenging, and as a result they have not at-
tracted their share of the most talented engineering graduates. Fortunately, this situ-
ation is improving as the rapid rise of manufacturing in Asia has threatened jobs for 
526

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
527
13
a large segment of the workforce in the western world. The nature and perception 
of manufacturing is being changed by increasing automation and computer-aided 
manufacturing.
A serious problem facing manufacturing companies has been the tendency to 
separate the design and manufacturing functions into different organizational units. 
Barriers between design and manufacturing decision making can inhibit the close 
interaction that the two engineering functions should have, as discussed previously 
under concurrent engineering (Sec. 2.4.4). When technology is sophisticated and 
fast-changing, a close partnership between the people in research, design, and manu-
facturing is very necessary.
That has been demonstrated best in the area of solid-state electronic devices. As 
semiconductor devices replaced vacuum tubes, it became apparent that design and 
processing could no longer be independent and separable functions. Design using 
vacuum-tube technology was essentially a linear process in which specialists in ma-
terials passed on their input to specialists in components who passed on their input to 
circuit designers who, in turn, communicated with system designers. With the advent 
of transistors, the materials, device construction, and circuit design functions became 
closely coupled. Then, with the microelectronics revolution of large-scale integrated 
circuits, the entire operation from materials to system design became interwoven, and 
manufacturing became inseparable from design. The result was a situation of rapid 
technical advance requiring engineers of great creativity, fl exibility, and breadth. The 
payoff in making the personal computer and workstations a reality has been huge. 
Never has productivity been enhanced as rapidly as during the microelectronics revo-
lution. This should serve as a model of the great payoff that can be achieved by closer 
integration of research, design, and manufacturing.
The need to break down barriers between design and manufacturing is widely 
recognized today and is accomplished by the use of concurrent engineering and the 
involvement of manufacturing engineers in product design and development teams. 
Also, focus on improving the link between manufacturing and design has increased 
emphasis on codifying a set of practices that designers should follow to make their 
designs easier to manufacture. This topic, design for manufacture (DFM), is an em-
phasis of this chapter.
13.2
MANUFACTURING FUNCTIONS
More conventional manufacturing is divided into the following functions: (1) process 
engineering, (2) tool engineering, (3) work standards, (4) plant engineering, and (5) 
administration and control. Process engineering is the development of a step-by-step 
sequence of operations for production. The overall product is subdivided into its com-
ponents and subassemblies, and the steps required to produce each component are 
arranged in logical sequence. An important part of process engineering is to specify 
the needed tooling. Vital parameters in process engineering are the rate of production 
and the cost of manufacturing a component. Tool engineering is concerned with the 
design of tools, jigs, fi xtures, and gages to produce the part. Jigs both hold the part 

528 
engineering design 
13
and guide the tool during manufacture, while fi xtures hold a part to be joined, assem-
bled, or machined. Tools do the machining or forming; gages determine whether the 
dimensions of the part are within specifi cation. Work standards are time values as-
sociated with each manufacturing operation that are used to determine standard costs 
to make the part. Other standards that need to be developed in manufacturing are tool 
standards and materials standards. Plant engineering is concerned with providing the 
plant facilities (space, utilities, transportation, storage, etc.) needed to carry out the 
manufacturing process. Administration and control deals with production planning, 
scheduling, and supervising to assure that materials, machines, tools, and people are 
available at the right time and in the quantities needed to produce the part.
Computer-automated machine tool systems, which include industrial robots and 
computer software for scheduling and inventory control, have demonstrated the abil-
ity to increase machine utilization time from an average of 5 percent to as much as 
90 percent. The introduction of computer-controlled machining centers that can per-
form many operations in a single machine greatly increases the productivity of the 
4
Process planning
group technology
process selection
process design
process parameters
tools and dies
parts programming
jigs and fixtures
quality control
5
Process R & D
process choice
optimization
modeling
environmental etc.
   considerations
6
Processing
parts manufacturing
sensing and corrective action
storing, moving, handling:
   materials
   parts
   tooling
   jigs and fixtures
assembly
7
CAD
CAM
Production control
routing
scheduling
production tracking
machine load monitoring
inventory:
   parts
   materials
   in-process
purchasing
receiving
maintenance
quality assurance
   standards
   inspection
   stat. proc. contr.
3
Production preparation
assembly drawings
part drawings
make/buy decisions
bill of materials
2
Product design
industrial design
mechanical
electrical
materials
product R & D
design
and
analysis
1
Sales (order processing)
Product concept
Market forecast
Market research
9
Customer
service
10
Recycling
Disposal
8
COMMON
DATABASE
FOR CIM
MRP
Shipping
inventory
invoicing
accounting
FIGURE 13.1
Spectrum of activities that are encompassed by manufacturing.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
529
13
machine tool. The computer-automated factory carries this one step further. All steps 
in parts manufacture are optimized with software systems and at least half of the ma-
chine tools will have the capability for multiple machining operations  with automatic 
parts handling between workstations. This automated factory differs from the stereo-
typical automobile assembly line in that it is a fl exible manufacturing system capable 
of producing a wide variety of parts under computer control. This broad-based effort 
throughout industry to link computers into all aspects of manufacturing is called 
computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM).
Figure 13.1 shows the broad spectrum of activities that are encompassed by man-
ufacturing. It begins in step 4, when design engineering turns the complete informa-
tion for the design over to the process planners. As mentioned earlier, many tasks of 
process planning are done concurrently with the detail design phase. Process selection 
and design of tooling are major functions in this step. Step 5 involves fi ne-tuning a 
process, often by computer modeling or optimization processes, to improve through-
put or improve yield (reduce defects) or decrease cost. Actual part manufacturing, 
step 6, involves production team training and motivation. In many instances a con-
siderable amount of materials handling is required. The many issues involved with 
step 7 are vital for an effective manufacturing operation. Finally, in step 8, the product 
is shipped and sold to the customer. Customer service, step 9, handles warranty and 
repair issues, and eventually the product is retired from service, hopefully by recy-
cling. The information gathered from customer service operations is fed back into the 
design of new products, step 2; the cycle is completed.
13.3
CLASSIFICATION OF MANUFACTURING PROCESSES
It is not an easy task to classify the tremendous variety of manufacturing processes. 
We start with the hierarchical classifi cation of business and industry shown in 
Fig. 13.2. The service industries consist of enterprises, such as education, banking, 
Business and industry
Producing industry
Service industry
Distribution industry
Discrete products
Raw materials
Continuous processing
Construction
Manufacturing
Batch manufacturing
Mass production
FIGURE 13.2
A simple hierarchical classifi cation of business and industry.

530 
engineering design 
13
insurance, communication, and health care that provide important services to modern 
society but do not create wealth by converting raw materials. The producing indus-
tries acquire raw materials (minerals, natural products, or fossil fuels) and process 
them, through the use of energy, machinery, and knowledge, into products that serve 
the needs of society. The distribution industries, such as merchandising and transpor-
tation, make those products available to the general public.
A characteristic of modern industrialized society is that an increasingly smaller 
percentage of the population produces the wealth that makes our affl uent society pos-
sible. Just as the 20th century saw the United States change from a predominantly 
agrarian society to a nation in which only 3 percent of the population works in ag-
riculture, so we have become a nation in which an ever-decreasing percentage of 
the workforce is engaged in manufacturing. In 1947 about 30 percent of the work-
force was in manufacturing; in 1980 it was about 22 percent. By the year 2004 about 
15 percent of U.S. workers were engaged in manufacturing and today the number is 
under 10 percent.
The producing industries can be divided conveniently into raw materials pro-
ducers (mining, petroleum, agriculture), producers of discrete products (autos, con-
sumer electronics, etc.), and industries engaged in continuous processing (gasoline, 
paper, steel, chemicals, etc.). Two major divisions of discrete products are construction 
(buildings, roads, bridges, etc.) and manufacturing. Under manufacturing we recog-
nize batch (low-volume) manufacturing and mass production as categories.
13.3.1 Types of Manufacturing Processes
A manufacturing process converts a material into a fi nished part or product. The 
changes that occur with respect to part geometry can also affect the internal micro-
structure and therefore the properties of the material. For example, a sheet of brass 
that is being drawn into the cylindrical shape of a cartridge case is also being hard-
ened and reduced in ductility by the process of dislocation glide on slip planes.
Recall from Chap. 6 that the functional decomposition of a design was described 
initially in terms of energy, material, and information fl ows. These same three factors 
are present in manufacturing. Thus, a manufacturing process requires an energy fl ow 
to cause the material fl ow that brings about changes in shape. The information fl ow, 
which consists of both shape and material property information, depends on the type 
of material, the process used—that is, whether mechanical, chemical, or thermal—
the characteristics of the tooling used, and the pattern of movement of the material 
relative to the tooling.
A natural division among the hundreds of manufacturing processes is whether 
the process is mass conserving or mass reducing. In a mass conserving process the 
mass of the starting material is approximately equal to the mass of the fi nal part. 
Most processes are of this type. A shape replication process is a mass conserving 
process in which the part replicates the information stored in the tooling by being 
forced to assume the shape of the surface of the tool cavity. Casting, injection mold-
ing, and closed-die forging are examples. In a mass reducing process, the mass of 

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
531
13
the starting material is greater than the mass of the fi nal part. Such processes are 
shape-generation processes because the part shape is produced by the relative motion 
between the tool and the workpiece. Material removal is caused by controlled frac-
ture, melting, or chemical reaction. A machining process, such as milling or drilling 
is an example of controlled fracture.
A different way of dividing manufacturing processes is to classify them into 
three broad families: (1) primary processes, (2) secondary processes, and (3) fi nishing 
processes.
 
● Primary processes take raw materials and create a shape. The chief categories 
are casting processes, polymer processing or molding processes, deformation pro-
cesses, and powder processes.
 
● Secondary processes modify shape by adding features such as keyways, screw 
threads, and grooves. Machining processes are the main type of secondary pro-
cesses. Other important categories are joining processes that fasten parts together, 
and heat treatment to change mechanical properties.
 
● Finishing processes produce the fi nal appearance and feel of a product by pro-
cesses such as coating, painting, or polishing.
The taxonomy structure used to classify materials in Sec. 11.2.1 can be applied 
to manufacturing processes. For example, the Family of Shaping Processes can be 
divided into the Classes of Casting, Polymer Molding, Deformation, and Powder pro-
cesses. The class Deformation Processes can, in turn, be broken into many Member 
processes such as rolling, drawing, cold forming, swaging, sheet metal forming, and 
spinning. Then, for each process we would need to determine Attributes or process 
characteristics (PC) such as its applicability to certain ranges of part size, the mini-
mum thickness that can be consistently produced by the process, the typical tolerance 
on dimensions and surface roughness produced by the process, and its economical 
batch size.
13.3.2 Brief Description of the Classes of Manufacturing Processes
This section provides further understanding of the major classes of manufacturing 
processes
1. Casting (solidifi cation) processes: Molten liquid is poured into a mold and solidi-
fi ed into a shape defi ned by the contours of the mold. The liquid fi lls the mold by 
fl owing under its own weight or with a modest pressure. Cast shapes are designed 
so the liquid fl ows to all parts of the mold cavity, and solidifi cation occurs progres-
sively so there are no trapped liquid pockets in a solidifi ed shell. This requires a 
low-viscosity liquid, so casting is usually done with metals and their alloys. The 
various casting processes, and their costs, differ chiefl y according to the expense 
and care used to prepare the mold. Great progress has been made using computer 
models to predict and control the fl ow and solidifi cation of the liquid material, 
thereby minimizing casting defects.

532 
engineering design 
13
2. Polymer processing (molding): The wide use of polymers has brought about the 
development of processes tailored to their high viscosity. In most of these processes 
a hot viscous polymer is either compressed or injected into a mold. The distinction 
between casting and molding is the viscosity of the material being worked. Molding 
can take such extreme forms as compression molding plastic pellets in a hot mold, 
or blowing a plastic tube into the shape of a milk bottle against a mold wall.
3. Deformation processes: A material, usually metal, is plastically deformed (hot or 
cold) to give it improved properties and change its shape. Deformation processes are 
also called metal-forming processes. Typical processes of this type are forging, roll-
ing, extrusion, and wire drawing. Sheet-metal forming is a special category in which 
the deformation occurs in a two-dimensional stress state instead of three dimensions.
4. Powder processing: This rapidly developing manufacturing area involves the con-
solidation of particles of metal, ceramics, or polymers by pressing and sintering, 
hot compaction, or plastic deformation. It also includes the processing of com-
posite materials. Powder metallurgy is used to make small parts with precision 
dimensions that require no machining or fi nishing. Powder processing is the best 
route for materials that cannot be cast or deformed, such as very high melting point 
metals and ceramics.
5. Material removal or cutting (machining) processes: Material is removed from a 
workpiece with a hard, sharp tool by a variety of methods such as turning, milling, 
grinding, and shaving. Material removal occurs by controlled fracture, produc-
ing chips. Machining is one of the oldest manufacturing processes, dating back to 
the invention of the power lathe early in the Industrial Revolution. Essentially any 
shape can be produced by a series of machining operations. Because a machining 
operation starts with a manufactured shape, such as bar stock, casting, or forging, 
it is classifi ed as a secondary process.
6. Joining processing: Included in joining processing are all categories of welding, 
brazing, soldering, diffusion bonding, riveting, bolting, and adhesive bonding. 
These operations attach the parts to one another. Fastening occurs in the assembly 
step of manufacturing.
7. Heat treatment and surface treatment: This category includes the improvement of 
mechanical properties by thermal heat treatment processes as well as the improve-
ment of surface properties by diffusion processes like carburizing and nitriding or 
by alternative means such as sprayed or hot-dip coatings, electroplating, and paint-
ing. The category also includes the cleaning of surfaces preparatory to surface 
treatment. This class of processes can be either secondary or fi nishing processes.
8. Assembly processes: In this, usually the fi nal step in manufacturing, a number of 
parts are brought together and combined into a subassembly or fi nished product.
13.3.3 Sources of Information on Manufacturing Processes
In this book we cannot describe the many processes used in modern manufacturing in 
detail. Table 13.1 lists several readily available texts that describe the behavior of the 
material, the machinery, and the tooling to present a good understanding of how each 
process works.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
533
13
TABLE 13.1
Basic Texts on Manufacturing Processes
J. T. Black and R. Kohser, DeGarmo’s Materials and Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed., John Wiley 
& Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2008.
M. P. Groover, Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing, 4th ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2010.
S. Kalpakjian and S. R. Schmid, Manufacturing Processes for Engineering Materials, 5th ed., Pearson 
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2008.
J. A. Schey, Introduction to Manufacturing Processes, 3d ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000.
Also, Section 7, Manufacturing Aspects of Design, in ASM Handbook Vol. 20 gives an overview of each 
major process from the viewpoint of the design engineer.
The most important reference sources giving information on industrial practices are Tool and Manu-
facturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., published in nine volumes by the Society of Manufactur-
ing Engineers, and various volumes of ASM Handbook published by ASM International devoted to 
specifi c manufacturing processes, see Table 13.5. In general, the ASM Handbooks have been updated 
more recently than the Manufacturing Engineers Handbooks. More books dealing with each of the 
eight classes of manufacturing processes are listed below.
Casting Processes
M. Blair and T. L. Stevens, eds., Steel Castings Handbook, 6th ed., ASM International, Materials Park, 
OH, 1995.
J. Campbell, Casting, 2nd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2004.
H. Fredriksson and U. Åkerlind, Material Processing During Casting, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 
UK, 2006.
Casting, ASM Handbook, Vol. 15, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2008.
Polymer Processing
E. A. Muccio, Plastics Processing Technology, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1994.
A. B. Strong, Plastics: Materials and Processing, 3d ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2006.
Plastics Parts Manufacturing, Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, Vol. 8, 4th ed., Society of 
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1995. 
J. F. Agassant, P. Avenas, J. Sergent, and P. J. Carreau, Polymer Processing: Principles and Modeling, 
Hanser Gardner Publications, Cincinnati, OH 1991.
Z. Tadmor and C. G. Gogas, Principles of Polymer Processing, 2nd ed., Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, 
NJ, 2006.
Deformation Processes
W. A. Backofen, Deformation Processing, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1972.
W. F. Hosfortd and R. M. Caddell, Metal Forming: Mechanics and Metallurgy, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1993.
E. Mielnik, Metalworking Science and Engineering, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991.
R. H. Wagoner and J-L Chenot, Metal Forming Analysis, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 
2001.
K. Lange, ed., Handbook of Metal Forming, Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1985.
R. Pearce, Sheet Metal Forming, Adam Hilger, Bristol, UK, 1991.
Metalworking: Bulk Forming, ASM Handbook, Vol. 14A, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2005.
Metalworking: Sheet Forming. ASM Handbook, Vol. 14B, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2006.
Z. Marciniak and J. L. Duncan, The Mechanics of Sheet Metal Forming, Edward Arnold, London, 1992.
(Continued)

534 
engineering design 
13
Powder Processing
R. M. German, Powder Metallurgy Science, Metal Powder Industries Federation, Princeton, NJ, 1985.
R. M. German, Powder Metallurgy of Iron and Steel, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998.
J. S. Reed, Introduction to the Principles of Powder Processing, 2nd ed., John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, 
NJ, 1995. 
ASM Handbook, Vol. 7, Powder Metal Technologies and Applications, ASM International, Materials 
Park, OH, 1998.
Powder Metallurgy Design Manual, 2nd ed., Metal Powder Industries Federation, Princeton, NJ, 1995.
Material Removal Processes
G. Boothroyd and W. W. Knight, Fundamentals of Machining and Machine Tools, 3d ed., Taylor & 
Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 2006.
E. M. Trent and P. K. Wright, Metal Cutting, 4th ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2000.
H. El-Hofy, Fundamentals of Machining Processes: Conventional and Nonconventional Processes, 
Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 2007.
S. Malkin, Grinding Technology: Theory and Applications, Ellis Horwood, New York, 1989.
M. C. Shaw, Metal Cutting Principles, 2nd ed., Oxford University Press, New York, 2004.
Machining, Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, Vol. 1, 4th ed., Society of Manufacturing 
Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1983.
ASM Handbook, Vol. 16, Machining, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1989.
Joining Processes
S. Kuo, Welding Metallurgy, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1987.
R. W. Messler, Joining of Materials and Structures, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2004.
Engineered Materials Handbook, Vol. 3, Adhesives and Sealants, ASM International, Materials Park, 
OH, 1990.
R. O. Parmley, ed., Standard Handbook for Fastening and Joining, 3d ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 
1997.
ASM Handbook, Vol. 6A, Welding Fundamentals and Processes, ASM International, Materials Park, 
OH, 2011.
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., American Welding Society, Miami, FL, 2001.
Heat Treatment and Surface Treatment
Heat Treating, ASM Handbook, Vol. 4, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1991.
ASM Handbook, Vol. 5, Surface Engineering, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1994.
Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, Vol. 3, Materials, Finishing, and Coating, 4th ed., 
Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1985.
Assembly Processes
G. Boothroyd, Assembly Automation and Product Design, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1992.
P. H. Joshi, Jigs and Fixtures Design Manual, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2003.
A. H. Redford and J. Chal, Design for Assembly, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1994.
Fundamentals of Tool Design, 5th ed., Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 2003.
Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, Vol. 9, Assembly Processes, 4th ed., Society of 
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1998.
TABLE 13.1
(continued)

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
535
13
1. G. Chryssolouris, Manufacturing Systems, 2nd ed., Springer, New York, 2006.
13.3.4 Types of Manufacturing Systems
There are four general types of manufacturing systems: job shop, batch, assembly 
line, and continuous fl ow.1 The characteristics of these production systems are listed 
in Table 13.2. The job shop is characterized by small batches of a large number of dif-
ferent part types every year. There is no regular work fl ow, so work-in-process must 
often wait in a queue for its turn on the machine. Hence, it is diffi cult to specify job 
shop capacity because it is highly dependent on the product mix. Batch fl ow, or de-
coupled fl ow line, is used when the product design is relatively stable and produced in 
periodic batches, but the volume for an individual product is not suffi cient to warrant 
the cost of specialized, dedicated equipment. Examples are the production of heavy 
equipment or ready-to-wear clothing. With assembly-line production, the equipment 
is laid out in the sequence of usage. The large number of assembly tasks is divided 
into small subsets to be performed at successive workstations. Examples are the pro-
duction of automobiles or consumer appliances. Finally, a continuous-fl ow process is 
the most specialized type. The equipment is highly specialized, laid out in a circuit, 
and usually automated. The material fl ows continuously from input to output. Exam-
ples are a gasoline refi nery or a paper mill.
A process is said to be mechanized when it is being carried out by powered ma-
chinery and not by hand. Nearly all manufacturing processes in developed countries 
TABLE 13.2 
Characteristics of Production Systems
 
Characteristic
Job Shop 
Batch Flow
Assembly Line
Continuous Flow
Equipment and Physical Layout
Batch size
Low (1–100 
units)
Moderate (100–
10,000 units)
Large (10,000–
millions/
year)
Large. Measured in 
tons, gals., etc.
Process fl ow
Few dominant 
fl ow patterns
Some fl ow patterns
Rigid fl ow 
patterns
Well defi ned and 
infl exible
Equipment
General-
purpose
Mixed
Specialized
Specialized
Setups
Frequent
Occasional
Few and costly
Rare and expensive
Process changes for 
new products
Incremental
Often incremental
Varies 
Often radical
Information and Control
Production informa-
tion requirements
High
Varies
Moderate
Low
Raw material 
inventory
Small
Moderate
Varies; frequent 
deliveries
Large
Work-in-process
Large
Moderate
Small
Very small

536 
engineering design 
13
are mechanized. A process is automated when the steps in the process, along with 
the movement of material and inspection of the parts, are automatically performed or 
controlled by self-operating devices. Automation involves mechanization plus sensing 
and controlling capabilities (programmable logic controllers and PCs). Hard automa-
tion is hard-linked and hard-wired, while fl exible automation includes the added capa-
bility of being reprogrammed to meet changing conditions.
13.4
MANUFACTURING PROCESS SELECTION
The factors that infl uence the selection of a process to make a part are:
 
● Quantity of parts required
 
● Complexity—shape, size, features
 
● Material
 
● Quality of part
 
● Cost to manufacture
 
● Availability, lead time, and delivery schedule
As emphasized in Chap. 11, there is a close interdependance between material selec-
tion and process selection.
The steps in selecting a manufacturing process are:
 
● Based on the part specifi cation, identify the material class, the required number 
of parts, and the size, shape, minimum thickness, surface fi nish, and tolerance on 
critical dimensions of the part. These constitute constraints on the selection of the 
process.
 
● Decide what the objective of the process selection process is. Generally, the objec-
tive is to minimize the cost of the manufactured part. However, it might be to maxi-
mize the quality of the part, or to minimize the time to make it.
 
● Using the identifi ed constraints, screen a large number of processes to eliminate 
the processes incapable of meeting them. This can be done using the information 
sources given in this chapter, or the screening charts found in M. F. Ashby, Mate-
rials Selection in Mechanical Design, 4th ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 
UK, 2011. The Cambridge Engineering Selector software from Granta Design Ltd., 
Cambridge, UK, 2010 greatly facilitates this process. It links material selection 
with possible processes and provides extensive data about each process. Figure 13.3 
shows an example of the information provided about a process.
 
● Having narrowed the possible processes to a smaller number, rank them based on man-
ufacturing cost. A quick ranking can be based on the economic batch size (Sec. 13.4.1), 
but a cost model is needed (Sec. 13.4.6) for making the fi nal decision. However, before 
making this decision it is important to seek supporting information from among the 
references given in Table 13.1 and elsewhere in this chapter. Look for case studies and 
examples of industry practice that will lend credibility and support your decision.
Each factor affecting the selection of a manufacturing process for a particular 
part is discussed in the following sections.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
537
13
FIGURE 13.3
Typical process data sheet from CES EduPack, 2006 Granta Design Limited, Cambridge, 
UK, 2006.
Nozzle
Cylinder
Heater
Physical Attributes
 Adjacent section ratio 
1 
 
2
 Aspect ratio 
1 
 
250
 Mass range 
0.02205 
 
55.12  
lb
 Minimum hole diameter 
0.02362 
 
 
 
in
 Minimum corner radius 
0.05906 
 
 
 
in
 Range of section thickness 
0.01575 
 
0.248  
in.
 Roughness 
7.874e-3 
 
0.06299 
mil
 Quality factor (110) 
1 
 
6
 Tolerance 
3.937e-3 
 
0.03937 
in.
Econonic Attributes
 Economic batch size (mass) 
1.102e4 
 
1.102e6 
Ib
 Economic batch size (units) 
1e4 
 
1e6
Cost Modelling
 Relative cost index (per unit) 
18.16 
 
113.3
 
 Capital cost 
3.77e4 
 
8.483e5 
USD
 Lead time 
4 
 
6 
 
week(s)
 Material utilization fraction 
0.6 
 
0.9
 Production rate (mass) 
66.14 
 
2205 
 
lb/hr
 Production rate (units) 
60 
 
3000 
 
/hr
 Tool life (mass) 
1.102e4 
 
1.102e6 
Ib
 Tool life (units) 
1e4 
 
1e6
Supporting Information
 Design guidelines
 Complex shapes are possible. Thick sections or large changes in section are not
 recommended. Small reentrant angles are possible.
 Technical nodes
 Most thermoplastics can be injection moulded. Some high melting point polymers (e.g.,
 PTFE) are not suitable. Thermoplastic based composites (short fibre and particulate filled)
 are also processed.
 Injection-moulded parts are generally thin-walled.
 Typical uses
 Extremely varied. Housings, containers, covers, knobs, tool handles, plumbing fittings,
 lenses, etc.
 The economics
 Tooling cost range covers small, simple to large, complex moulds. Production rate depends
 on complexity of component and number of mould cavities.
 The environment
 Thermoplastic sprues can be recycled. Extraction may be required for volatile fumes.
 Significant dust exposures may occur in the formulation of the resins. Thermostatic
 controller malfunctions can be extremely hazardous.
Process Schematic
Screw
Granular Polymer
Mould
Parameters: Material Cost = 4.309USD/lb, component Mass  2.205lb, Batch size  1000,
INJECTION MOLDING of thermoplastics is the equivalent of pressure die casting of
metals. Molten polymer is injected under high pressure into a cold steel mold. The polymer
solidifies under pressure and the molding is then ejected.
     Various types of injection molding machines exist, but the most common in use today is the
reciprocating screw machine (shown schematically). Capital and tooling costs are very high.
Production rate can be high, particularly for small moldings. Multicavity molds are often
used. The process is used almost exclusively for large-volume production. Prototype
moldings can be made using cheaper single-cavity molds of cheaper materials. Quality can
be high but may be traded off against production rate. The process may also be used with
thermosets and rubbers. Some modifications are required—this is dealt with separately.
Complex shapes are possible, though some features (e.g., undercuts, screw threads, inserts) 
may result in increased tooling costs.

538 
engineering design 
13
13.4.1 Quantity of Parts Required
Two important factors in the choice of processes are the total number of parts to be 
produced and the rate of production, in units per time period. All manufacturing pro-
cesses have a minimum number of pieces (volume) that must be made to justify their 
use. Some processes, like an automatic screw machine, are inherently high-volume 
processes, in that the setup time is long relative to the time needed to produce a single 
part. Others, like the hand layup of a fi berglass plastic boat, are low-volume processes. 
Here the setup time is minimal but the time to make a part is much longer.
The total volume of production often is insuffi cient to keep a production machine 
continuously occupied. As a result, production occurs in batches or lots representing a 
fraction of the number of parts needed for a year of product production. The batch size 
is infl uenced by the cost and inconvenience of setting up for a new production run on 
a particular machine, and by the cost of maintaining parts in inventory in a warehouse 
between production runs.
Figure 13.4 compares the cost of making an aluminum connecting rod by sand 
casting and die casting to illustrate the interplay between tooling and setup cost and 
quantity on process cost per part. Sand casting uses cheaper equipment and tooling, 
but it is more labor intensive to build the sand molds. Pressure die casting uses more 
costly equipment and expensive metal molds, but it is less labor intensive. The cost 
of material is the same in both processes. For a small number of parts the unit cost 
is higher for die casting, chiefl y because of the more expensive tooling. However, as 
these costs are shared with a larger number of parts, the unit cost is decreased, and 
FIGURE 13.4
The relative cost of casting a part versus the number of parts produced using the sand casting 
and die casting processes. (From M. F. Ashby, Materials Selection in Mechanical Design, 2nd ed., p. 278. 
 Copyright Elsevier, 1999. Used with permission.)
Die
104
103
102
10
1
0.1
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
Sand
Casting
150 mm
Casting
Relative Cost per Component
Labour
(Sand)
Labour (Die)
Material Cost, Cm
Number of Components

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
539
13
at about 3000 parts the die casting process has a lower unit cost. Note that the sand 
casting process leveled out at about 100 parts, maintaining a constant unit cost that is 
determined by the material cost plus the labor cost. The same thing happens for the 
die casting process, only here the labor cost is very low relative to the material cost.
The number of parts at which the unit cost of one process becomes lower than 
that of its competitors is called the economic batch size. The economic batch size for 
sand casting in this example is from 1 to 3600 parts, while that for die casting is 3600 
and beyond. The economic batch size is a good rough guide to the cost structure of 
a process. It is a useful screening parameter for differentiating among candidate pro-
cesses, as shown by Fig. 13.5. A more detailed cost model (Sec. 13.4.6) is then used to 
refi ne the ranking of the most promising process candidates.
The fl exibility of the process is related to the economic batch size. Flexibility in 
manufacturing is the ease with which a process can be adapted to produce different 
products or variations of the same product. It is greatly infl uenced by the time needed 
to change and set up tooling. At a time when product customization is increasingly 
important, this process attribute has gained importance.
E X A M P L E 1 3 .1
With the drive to reduce the weight of automobiles, there is strong interest in plastic 
bumpers. Such a bumper must have good rigidity to maintain dimensional limits, low- 
temperature impact resistance (for crashworthiness), and dimensional stability over the 
operating range of temperature.1 In addition, it must have the ability to be fi nished to 
FIGURE 13.5
Range of economic batch size for typical manufacturing processes. (From M. F. Ashby, Materials 
Selection in Mechanical Design, 3d ed., p. 205. Copyright Elsevier, 2005. Used with permission.)
Sand casting
Die casting
Investment casting
Low-pressure casting
Forging
Extrusion
Sheet forming
Powder methods
Electro-machining
Conventional machining
Injection molding
Blow molding
Compression molding
Rotational molding
Thermalforming
Polymer casting
Resin-transfer molding
Filament winding
Layup methods
Vacuum bag
Economic batch size (units)
10
102
103
104
105
106
107
1
Composite
shaping
Ceramic
shaping
Polymer
shaping
Metal shaping
1. L. Edwards and M. Endean, eds., Manufacturing with Materials, Butterworth, Boston, 1990.

540 
engineering design 
13
match the adjoining painted metal parts. With these critical-to-quality performance re-
quirements of chief importance, four polymeric materials were chosen from the large
number of engineering plastics.
●Polyester reinforced with chopped-glass fi ber to improve toughness
●Polyurethane with glass-fl ake fi ller to increase stiffness
●Rubber-modifi ed polypropylene to decrease the ductile-brittle transition to below 30°C
●A polymer blend of polyester and polycarbonate to combine the excellent solvent resis-
tance of the former with the high toughness of the latter.
Four polymer processes are under consideration for making the bumpers from these
polymers. Each works well with the engineered plastics chosen, but they vary greatly in
tooling costs and fl exibility.
Process
Mold Cost
Labor Input/Unit
Injection molding
$450,000
3 min = $1
Reaction injection molding
$90,000
6 min = $2
Compression molding
$55,000
6 min = $2
Contact molding
$20,000
1 h = $20
Then, the part cost is the sum of the mold cost per part plus the labor input, neglecting the
material cost, which is roughly the same for each.
Cost per Part
Process
1000 Parts
10,000 Parts
100,000 Parts
1,000,000 Parts
Injection molding
$451
$46
$5.50
$1.45
Reaction injection molding
$92
$11
$2.90
$2.09
Compression molding
$57
$7.50
$2.55
$2.06
Contact molding
$40
$22
$20.20
$20.02
Note how the unit part cost varies greatly with the quantity of parts required. The hand
layup process of contact molding is the least expensive for a low part volume, while the
low-cycle-time injection molding process excels at the highest part volume. Assuming
that the material cost for the bumper is $30 per part, we see how material cost represents
the largest fraction of the total cost as the part volume increases.
13.4.2 Shape and Feature Complexity
The complexity of a part refers to its shape and type and number of features that it 
contains. One way of expressing the complexity of a component is through its infor-
mation content I, expressed in number of digital bits of information. 
I
n
l
l
log2 Δ
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(13.1)

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
541
13
where n = number of dimensions of the component 
l
l
x
x
isthegeometricmeandimension
isthegeometricmeanof thetolerance
log ( )
log ( )
log (2)
n
n
1/
1/
2
10
10
(
)
l
l
l
l
. . .
n
1
2l
3
(
)
l
l
l
. . .
n
1
2l
3
l1
Δ =
l
l1
l
l . . .
3
=
Simple shapes contain only a few bits of information. Complex shapes, like integrated
circuits, contain very many. A cast engine block might have 103 bits of information,
but after machining the various features the complexity increases by both adding new
dimensions (n( ) and improving their precision (reducing
n
l
Δ ).
Most mechanical parts have a three-dimensional shape, although sheet metal fab-
rications are basically two-dimensional. Figure 13.6 shows a useful shape classifi ca-
tion system. In this schema a shape of uniform cross section is given a complexity
rating of 0.
The shape complexity increases from left to right in Fig. 13.6 with the addition of 
greater geometric complexity and added features, that is, greater information content.
FIGURE 13.6
A classifi cation system for basic shapes in design. (After J. A. Schey.)
Abbreviation
Uniform
cross section
0
Change at
end
1
Change at
center
2
Spatial
curve
3
Closed
one end
4
Closed
both ends
5
Transverse
element
6
Irregular
(complex)
7
R(ound)
B(ar)
S(ection, open)
SS(emiclosed)
T(ube)
F(lat)
Sp(herical)
U(ndercut)
Increasing spatial complexity

542 
engineering design 
13
Note that a small increase in information content can have major signifi cance in pro-
cess selection for making a part. Moving from the solid shape R0 (shape in column 0 
of the Round row) to the hollow shape T0 (shape in column 0 of the Tube row) adds 
only one additional dimension (the hole diameter), but the change excludes some pro-
cesses as the best choice for making the part or adds an additional operation step in 
other processes.
Manufacturing processes vary in their limitations for producing complex shapes. 
For example, there are many processes that do not allow the making of undercuts, 
shown in the bottom row in Fig. 13.6. Undercuts make it impossible to extract the part 
from the mold without complicated and expensive tooling. Other processes have limi-
tations on how thin the wall thickness can be, or require the part to have uniform wall 
thickness. Extrusion processes require a part that is axially symmetric. Powder metal-
lurgy cannot make parts with sharp corners or acute angles because the unsintered 
powder will crumble when transferring from the die. Lathe turning requires a part 
with cylindrical symmetry. Table 13.3 associates the shapes defi ned in Fig. 13.6 with 
the ability of various manufacturing processes to create them.
13.4.3 Size
Parts vary considerably in size. Because of the nature of the equipment used in a man-
ufacturing process, each process has a range of part sizes for which it is economical to 
use that process. Figure 13.7 shows this.
Note that machining processes (i.e., removal of metal by cutting) span the com-
plete range of sizes, and that machining, casting, and forging are able to produce the 
largest mass objects. However only a limited number of plants in the world can make 
very large parts. Therefore, to make very large products like aircraft, ships, and pres-
sure vessels, it is necessary to assemble them from many parts using joining methods 
such as welding and riveting.
A limiting geometric factor in process selection often is section thickness. 
Figure 13.8 displays capabilities for achieving thickness according to process. Gravity-
fed castings have a minimum wall thickness that they can produce due to surface ten-
sion and heat fl ow considerations. Thin sections may solidify before the rest of the 
casting, leaving internal voids. Minimum thickness can be extended by using pressure 
die casting. The availability of press tonnage and the occurrence of friction in metal 
deformation processes create a similar restriction on minimum section thickness. In 
injection molding there must be suffi cient time for the polymer to harden before it can 
be ejected from the molding machine. Because high production rates are desired, the 
slow rate of heat transfer of polymers severely limits the maximum thickness that can 
be obtained.
13.4.4 Infl uence of Material on Process Selection
Just as shape requirements limit the available selection of processes, the selection of a 
material also places certain restrictions on the available manufacturing processes. The 

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
543
13
TABLE 13.3
Ability of Manufacturing Processes to Produce Shapes in Fig. 13.6
Process
Capability for Producing Shapes
Casting processes
 Sand casting
Can make all shapes
 Plaster casting
Can make all shapes
 Investment casting
Can make all shapes
 Permanent mold
Can make all shapes except T3, T5; F5; U2, U4, U7
 Die casting
Same as permanent mold casting
Deformation processes
 Open-die forging
Best for R0 to R3; all B shapes; T1; F0; Sp6
 Hot impression die forging
Best for all R, B, and S shapes; T1, T2; Sp
 Hot extrusion
All 0 shapes
 Cold forging/cold extrusion
Same as hot die forging or extrusion
 Shape drawing
All 0 shapes
 Shape rolling
All 0 shapes
Sheet-metal working processes
 Blanking
F0 to F2; T7
 Bending
R3; B3; S0, S3, S7; T3; F3, F6,
 Stretching
F4; S7
 Deep drawing
T4; F4, F7
 Spinning
T1, T2, T4, T6; F4, F5
Polymer processes
 Extrusion
All 0 shapes
 Injection molding
Can make all shapes with proper coring
 Compression molding
All shapes except T3, T5, T6, F5, U4
 Sheet thermoforming
T4, F4, F7, S5
Powder metallurgy processes
 Cold press and sinter
All shapes except S3, T2, T3, T5, T6, F3, F5, all U shapes
 Hot isostatic pressing
All shapes except T5 and F5
 Powder injection molding
All shapes except T5, F5, U1, U4
 PM forging
Same shape restrictions as cold press and sinter
Machining processes
 Lathe turning
R0, R1, R2, R7; T0, T1, T2; Sp1, Sp6; U1, U2
 Drilling
T0, T6
 Milling
All B, S, SS shapes; F0 to F4; F6, F7, U7
 Grinding
Same as turning and milling
 Honing, lapping
R0 to R2; B0 to B2; B7; T0 to T2, T4 to T7; F0 to F2; Sp
Based on data from J.A. Schey, Introduction to Manufacturing Processes.

544 
engineering design 
13
FIGURE 13.8
Range of available section thickness provided by different processes. (From M. F. Ashby, Materials 
Selection in Mechanical Design, 3d ed., p. 200. Copyright Elsevier, 2005. Used with permission.)
Sand casting
Die casting
Investment casting
Low pressure casting
Forging
Extrusion
Sheet forming
Powder methods
Electro-machining
Conventional machining
Injection molding
Blow molding
Compression molding
Rotational molding
Thermal forming
Polymer casting
Resin-transfer molding
Filament winding
Layup methods
Vacuum bag
Section thickness (mm)
1
10
100
1000
0.1
Composite
shaping
Ceramic
shaping
Polymer
shaping
Metal shaping
FIGURE 13.7
Process selection chart. Process versus range of size (mass). (From M. F. Ashby, Materials Selection in 
Mechanical Design, 3d ed., p. 199. Copyright Elsevier, 2005. Used with permission.)
Sand casting
Die casting
Investment casting
Low pressure casting
Forging
Extrusion
Sheet forming
Powder methods
Electro-machining
Conventional machining
Injection molding
Blow molding
Compression molding
Rotational molding
Thermal forming
Polymer casting
Resin-transfer molding
Filament winding
Layup methods
Vacuum bag
Adhesives
Welding. metals
Welding. polymers
Fasteners
Mass (kg)
10 2
10 3
10
102
103
104
1
0.1
Composite
shaping
Joining
Ceramic
shaping
Polymer
shaping
Metal shaping

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
545
13
melting point of the material and its level of deformation resistance and ductility are 
the chief factors. The melting point of the material determines the casting processes 
that can be employed. Low-melting-point metals can be used with a wide number of 
casting processes, but as the melting point rises, problems with mold reaction and at-
mosphere contamination limit the available processes. Some materials, like ceramics, 
are too brittle for shape creation by deformation processes, while others are too reac-
tive to have good weldability.
Figure 13.9 shows a matrix laying out the manufacturing processes generally 
used with the most common classes of engineering materials. The table is further 
divided with respect to the quantity of parts needed for economical production. Use 
this matrix as a way to narrow down the possibilities to a manageable few processes 
for fi nal evaluation and selection. This table is part of the PRocess Information MAps 
(PRIMA) methodology for manufacturing process selection.1 
Steels, aluminum alloys, and other metallic alloys can be purchased in a variety of 
metallurgical conditions other than the annealed (soft) state. Examples are quenched 
and tempered steel bars, solution-treated and cold-worked and aged aluminum alloys, 
or cold-drawn and stress-relieved brass rods. It may be more economical to have the 
metallurgical strengthening produced in the workpiece by the material supplier than 
to heat-treat each part separately after it has been manufactured. 
When parts have very simple geometric shapes, as straight shafts and bolts have, 
the form in which the material is obtained and the method of manufacture are readily 
apparent. However, as the part becomes more complex in shape, it becomes possible 
to make it from several forms of material and by a variety of manufacturing meth-
ods. For example, a small gear may be machined from bar stock or, more economi-
cally, from a precision-forged gear blank. The selection of one of several alternatives 
is based on overall cost of a fi nished part (see Chap. 16 for details of cost evaluation). 
Generally, the production quantity is an important factor in cost comparisons, as was 
shown in Fig. 13.4. There will be a break-even point beyond which it is more eco-
nomical to invest in precision-forged preforms in order to produce a gear with a lower 
unit cost than to machine it from bar stock. As the production quantity increases, it 
becomes easier economically to justify a larger initial investment in tooling or special 
machinery to lower the unit cost.
13.4.5 Required Quality of the Part
The quality of the part is defi ned by three related sets of characteristics: (1) freedom 
from external and internal defects, (2) surface fi nish, and (3) dimensional accuracy 
and tolerance. To a high degree, the achievement of high quality in these areas is 
infl uenced by the workability or formability of the material.2 While different mate-
rials exhibit different workability in a given process, the same material may show 
different workability in different processes. For example, in deformation processing, 
1. K. G. Swift and J. D. Booker, Process Selection, 2nd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2003.
2. G. E. Dieter, H. A. Kuhn, and S. L. Semiatin, eds., Handbook of Workability and Process Design, 
ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2003.

13
546
FIGURE 13.9
PRIMA selection matrix showing which materials and processes are usually used together, based on common practice. (From K. G. Swift and J. D. 
Booker, Process Selection, 2nd ed., p. 23. Copyright Elsevier, 2003. Used with permission.)
LOW TO MEDIUM
1,000 TO 10,000
VERY LOW
1 TO 100 
LOW
100 TO 1,000
MEDIUM TO HIGH
10,000 TO 100,000
HIGH
100,000+
[1.5] [1.6]
[1.7] [4.M]
[1.5] [1.7]
[3.10] [4.M]
[5.1] [5.5]
[5.6]
[1.1] [1.5] [1.7]
[3.10] [4.M]
[5.1] [5.5]
[5.6] [5.7]
[1.6] [1.7] [3.7]
[3.10] [4.M]
[5.1] [5.5] [5.6]
MATERIAL
QUANTITY
IRONS
STEEL
(carbon)
STEEL
(tool, alloy)
STAINLESS
STEEL
COPPER
& ALLOYS
ALUMINIUM
& ALLOYS
MAGNESIUM
& ALLOYS
ZINC
& ALLOYS
TIN
& ALLOYS
PRECIOUS METALS
LEAD
& ALLOYS
NICKEL
& ALLOYS
TITANIUM
& ALLOYS
THERMOPLASTICS
THERMOSETS
FR COMPOSITES
REFRACTORY
 METALS
[1.5] [1.7]
[3.6] [4.M]
[5.1]
[1.5] [1.7]
[3.7] [3.10]
[4.M] [5.5]
[1.6] [1.7]
[3.10] [4.M]
[5.1][5.5]
[1.1] [1.7]
[3.10] [4.M]
[5.5]
[1.1] [1.7]
[3.10] [4.M]
[5.5]
[1.5] [1.7]
[3.10] [4.M]
[5.1] [5.5] [5.6]
[1.1] [1.6]
[3.7] [3.10]
[4.M] [5.1]
[5.5] [5.6] [5.7]
[1.1] [3.10]
[4.M] [5.5]
[2.5]
[2.7]
[2.5]
[3.7]
[2.2]
[2.6]
[5.7]
[1.5]
[5.1]
[5.5]
[5.6]
[5.7]
[1.1]
[5.7]
[5.7]
[5.5]
[1.2] [1.5]
[1.6] [1.7]
[4.M]
[5.3] [5.4]
[1.2] [1.6]
[1.7] [1.10]
[4.M] [5.1]
[5.3] [5.4] [5.5]
[1.1] [1.2] [1.7]
[4.M] [5.1]
[5.3] [5.4]
[5.5] [5.6] [5.7]
[1.2] [1.7]
[3.7] [3.10]
[4.M] [5.1]
[5.3] [5.4] [5.5]
[1.2] [1.3] [1.5]
[1.7] [1.8] [3.3]
[3.6] [4.M] [5.1]
[5.3] [5.4]
[1.2] [1.5] [1.7]
[1.8] [3.7] [3.10]
[4.M] [5.3]
[5.4] [5.5]
[1.6] [1.7]
[1.8] [3.10]
[4.M] [5.5]
[1.1] [1.7]
[1.8] [3.10]
[4.M] [5.5]
[1.1] [1.7]
[1.8] [3.10]
[4.M] [5.5]
[1.2] [1.5] [1.7]
[3.10] [4.M]
[5.1] [5.3]
[5.4] [5.5] [5.6]
[1.1] [1.6] [3.7]
[3.10] [4.M] [5.1]
[5.3] [5.4] [5.5]
[5.6] [5.7]
[1.1] [1.8]
[3.10] [4.M]
[5.5] 
[2.3]
[2.5]
[2.7]
[2.2]
[2.3]
[2.6]
[5.7]
[2.2]
[2.3]
[5.1]
[5.3]
[5.5]
[5.6]
[5.7]
[5.5]
[1.2] [1.3]
[1.5] [1.6]
[1.7] [3.11]
[4.A] [5.2]
[1.2] [1.3] [1.5]
[1.7] [3.1] [3.3]
[3.10] [3.11]
 [4.A] [5.2] [5.3]
[5.4] [5.5]
[1.2] [1.5] [1.7]
[3.1] [3.4] [3.11]
[4.A] [5.2] [5.3]
[5.4] [5.5]
[1.2] [1.5] [1.7]
[3.1] [3.2] [3.7]
[3.10] [3.11]
[4.A.] [5.2] [5.3]
[5.4] [6.0]
[1.2] [1.3] [1.5]
[1.8] [3.1] [3.2]
[3.10] [3.11] [4.A]
[5.2] [5.3] [5.4]
[1.2] [1.3] [1.4]
[1.5] [3.1] [3.3]
[3.7] [3.10] [3.11]
[4.A] [5.3] [5.4] [5.5]
[1.3] [1.5]
[1.8] [3.1]
[3.3] [3.4] [3.10]
[4.A] [5.5]
[1.2] [1.3] [1.5]
[1.7] [3.1] [3.2]
[3.11] [4.A] [5.1]
[5.3] [5.4] [5.5]
[3.10]
[3.1] [3.7]
[3.10] [3.11]
[4.A] [5.2]
[5.3] [5.4] [5.5]
[2.3]
[2.5]
[2.6]
[2.7]
[1.3] [1.8]
[3.3] [3.10]
[4.A] [5.5]
[1.3] [1.5]
[3.2] [3.10]
[1.3] [1.5]
[3.3] [3.10]
[2.2]
[2.3]
[2.4]
[2.1]
[2.2]
[2.3]
[5.2]
[5.3]
[5.4]
[5.5]
[5.5]
[1.0] [2.1] [3.3]
[3.4] [3.5]
[3.11] [3.12]
[4.A] [5.2] [5.5]
[1.2] [1.4] [1.8]
[3.1] [3.3]
[3.4] [3.5] [3.11]
[3.12] [4.A]
[1.2] [1.3] [1.4]
[1.8] [3.1] [3.3]
[3.4] [3.5] [3.11]
[3.12] [4.A] [5.5]
[1.3] [1.4]
[3.1] [3.3]
[3.4] [3.5]
[3.12] 4.A]
[2.1]
[2.3]
[2.6]
[2.7]
[2.8]
[1.2] [1.3]
[3.11] [4.A]
[3.1] [3.4] [3.5] 
[3.11] [3.12]
[4.A] [5.2]
[4.A]
[1.0] [3.1]
[1.9] [3.2]
[3.3] [4.A]
[3.3] [3.4]
[3.5] [3.11]
[3.12] [4.A]
[1.3] [1.4]
[3.3] [3.4]
[3.5] [3.12]
[4.A]
[1.3] [1.4]
[3.3] [3.4]
[3.12]
[1.3] [1.4]
[3.3] [3.4]
[3.8] [3.12]
[4.A]
[3.1] [3.3] [3.5]
[3.4] [3.11]
[3.12] [4.A]
[5.2] [5.5]
[3.1] [3.4] 
[3.11] [3.12]
[4.A] [5.2] [5.5]
[2.1]
[2.3]
[2.9]
[2.1]
[2.3]
[3.11]
[3.12]
[3.5]
[3.5]
[1.2] [1.3]
[3.11] [4.A]
[1.9] [3.1]
[3.2] [3.3]
[3.4] [3.5]
[3.12] [4.A]
[1.2] [1.M] [3.1]
[3.2] [3.3] [3.4]
[3.5] [3.7] [3.8]
[3.11] [3.12] [4.A]
[1.2] [1.3] [1.4]
[1.6] [3.1] [3.2]
[3.3] [3.4] [3.5]
[3.8] [3.12] [4.A]
[1.3] [1.4]
[3.1] [3.3] [3.4]
[3.8] [3.12] [4.A]
[1.4] [3.2]
[3.3] [3.4]
[3.5] [4.A]
[1.4] [3.3]
[3.4] [4.A]
[1.4] [3.2]
[3.3] [3.4]
[4.A]
[3.2] [3.3]
[4.A]
[4.A]
[3.5]
[2.1]
[2.6]
[2.8]
[2.1]
[2.3]
[2.4]
[2.9]
[3.7]
[3.11]
ALL QUANTITIES
[1.1] [1.6]
[3.6] [3.8]
[3.9] 5.5]
[1.1]
[1.1] [1.5]
[3.0] [3.0]
[3.0]
[1.6] [3.6]
[1.1] [1.6]
[3.6] [3.8] [3.9]
[1.1] [1.6]
[3.4] [3.5]
[3.6]
[1.1] [3.5]
[3.6] [3.8]
[3.6] [3.8]
[3.9]
[1.1] [1.6]
[3.4] [3.5]
[3.8]
[3.8] [3.9]
[5.5]
[1.5]
[1.6]
KEY TO MANUFACTURING PROCESS PRIMA SELECTION MATRIX:
CASTING PROCESSES
[1.1]  SAND CASTING
[1.2]  SHELL MOULDING
[1.3]  GRAVITY DIE CASTING
[1.4]  PRESSURE DIE CASTING
[1.5]  CENTRIFUGAL CASTING
[1.6]  INVESTMENT CASTING
[1.7]  CERAMIC MOULD CASTING
[1.8]  PLASTER MOULD CASTING
[1.9]  SQUEEZE CASTING
PLASTIC & COMPOSITE PROCESSING
[2.1]  INJECTION MOULDING
[2.2]  REACTION INJECTION MOULDING
[2.3]  COMPRESSION  MOULDING
[2.4]  TRANSFER MOULDING
[2.5]  VACUUM MOULDING 
[2.6]  BLOW MOULDING
[2.7]  ROTATIONAL MOULDING
[2.8]  CONTACT MOULDING
[2.9]  CONTINUOUS EXTRUSION (PLASTICS) 
FORMING PROCESSES
[3.1]    CLOSED DIE FORGING
[3.2]    ROLLING
[3.3]    DRAWING
[3.4]    COLD FORMING
[3.5]    COLD HEADING
[3.6]    SWAGING
[3.7]    SUPERPLASTIC FORMING
[3.8]    SHEET-METAL SHEARING
[3.9]    SHEET-METAL FORMING
[3.10]  SPINNING
[3.11]  POWDER METALLURGY
[3.12]  CONTINUOUS EXTRUSION
           (METALS)
MACHINING PROCESSES
[4.A]   AUTOMATIC MACHINING
[4.M]  MANUAL MACHINING
(THE ABOVE HEADINGS COVER A
BROAD RANGE OF MACHINING
PROCESSES AND LEVELS OF
CONTROL TECHNOLOGY. FOR 
MORE DETAIL, THE READER IS
REFERRED TO THE INDIVIDUAL
PROCESSES.)
NTM PROCESSES
[5.1]  ELECTRICAL DISCHARGE MACHINING (EDM)
[5.2]  ELECTROCHEMICAL MACHINING (ECM)
[5.3]  ELECTRON BEAM MACHINING (EBM)
[5.4]  LASER BEAM MACHINING (LBM)
[5.5]  CHEMICAL MACHINING (CM)
[5.6]  ULTRASONIC MACHINING (USM)
[5.7]  ABRASIVE JET MACHINING (AJM)
CERAMICS

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
547
13
the workability increases with the extent that the process provides a condition of hy-
drostatic compression. Thus, steel has greater workability in extrusion than in forg-
ing, and even less in drawing, because the hydrostatic component of the stress state 
decreases in the order of the processes listed. 
Defects
Defects may be internal to the part or concentrated mainly at the surface. Internal 
defects are such things as voids, porosity, cracks, or regions of different chemical-
composition (segregation). Surface defects can be surface cracks, rolled-in oxide, ex-
treme roughness, or surface discoloration or corrosion. The amount of material used 
to make the part should be just enough larger than the fi nal part to allow for removal 
of surface defects by machining or another surface conditioning method. Thus, extra 
material in a casting may be needed to permit machining the surface to a specifi ed 
fi nish, or a heat-treated steel part may be made oversized to allow for the removal of a 
decarburized layer.1 
Often the manufacturing process dictates the use of extra material, such as sprues 
and risers in castings and fl ash in forgings and moldings. At other times extra mate-
rial must be provided for purposes of handling, positioning, or testing the part. Even 
though extra material removal is costly, it usually is cheaper to purchase a slightly 
larger workpiece than to pay for a scrapped part.
Computer-based process modeling is being used effectively to investigate the de-
sign of tooling and the fl ow of material to minimize defect formation. Also, improved 
nondestructive inspection methods make more certain the detection of defects before 
a part is placed into service. Defects such as voids can often be eliminated by subject-
ing the part to a high hydrostatic pressure, such as 15,000 psi, at elevated temperature, 
in a process called hot-isostatic pressing (HIP).2 HIPing has been used effectively 
with investment casting to replace parts previously made by forging. 
Surface Finish
The surface fi nish of a part determines its appearance, affects the assembly of 
the part with other parts, and may infl uence its resistance to corrosion and wear. The 
surface roughness of a part must be specifi ed and controlled because of its infl uence 
on fatigue failure, friction and wear, and assembly with other parts.
No surface is smooth and fl at like the straight line we make on an engineering 
drawing. When viewed on a highly magnifi ed scale every surface is rough, as sketched 
in Fig. 13.10. Surface roughness is measured with a profi lometer, a precision instru-
ment that traverses a line (typically a travel of 1 mm) with a very fi ne-tipped stylus. 
Several parameters are used to describe the state of surface roughness.3 
1. For photographs and discussion of the formation of defects in deformation processing, see ASM 
Handbook, Vol. 11, Failure Analysis and Prevention, pp. 81–102, ASM International, Materials Park, 
OH, 2002.
2. H. V. Atkinson and B. A. Rickinson, Hot Isostatic Pressing, Adam Huger, Bristol, UK, 1991.
3. See Surface texture, ANSI Standard B46.1, ASME, 1985.

548 
engineering design 
13
Rt is the height measured from maximum peak to the deepest trough. It is not
t
the most commonly used measure of surface roughness, but it is an important 
value when roughness needs to be removed by polishing.
Ra is the arithmetic average based on the absolute value of the deviations from 
the mean surface line. The mean surface is drawn such that the area under the
peaks and valleys is equal. This measure of roughness is also called the center-
line average. 
R
y
y
y
n
a
n
=
+
+
y
+
+
1
2y
3
  
(13.2)
This measure of surface roughness is commonly used in industry. However, it 
is not particularly useful for evaluating bearing surfaces.1
Rq is the root-mean square of the deviations from the mean surface. 
R
y
y
y
y
n
q
n
=
+
+
+
y
y
y
⋅⋅⋅+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
1
2
2
2
3
2
2
+
+
1 2
/
(13.3)
Rq is sometimes given as an alternative to Ra because it gives more weight to the
higher peaks in the surface roughness. As an approximation, Rq / Ra ≈1.1.
Surface roughness is usually expressed in units of mm (micrometer or micron) or min
(microinch). 1 m
40 in and1 i
0 025 m = 25nm.
μ
μ
m = 40 i
μ
μ
in = 0.025 m
There are other important characteristics of a surface besides the roughness. Sur-
faces usually exhibit a directionality of scratches characteristic of the fi nishing pro-
cess. This is called surface lay. Surfaces may have a random lay, or an angular or 
circular pattern of marks. Another characteristic of the surface is its waviness, which 
occurs over a longer distance than the peaks and valleys of roughness. Allowable lim-
its on these surface characteristics are specifi ed on the engineering drawing by the
scheme shown in Fig. 13.11. The roughness cutoff length is used to separate the wavi-
ness from the roughness variations. The cutoff length is a specifi ed length over which
measurements are made of the surface roughness. A sampling length of 0.030 in. will
generally fi lter out wavinesss from the surface roughness.
1. N. Judge, Manufacturing Engineering, Oct. 2002, pp. 60–68.
y
x
Rt
Mean surface
FIGURE 13.10
Cross-sectional profi le of surface roughness with vertical direction magnifi ed.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
549
13
It is important to realize that specifying a surface by average roughness height is 
not an ideal approach. Two surfaces can have the same value of Ra and vary consider-
ably in the details of surface profi le.
Surface texture does not completely describe a surface. For example, there is an al-
tered layer just below the surface texture layer. This layer is characteristic of the nature
and amount of energy that has been put into creating the surface. It can contain small
cracks, residual stresses, hardness differences, and other alterations. Control of the sur-
face and subsurface layer as it is infl uenced by processing is called surface integrity.1
Table 13.4 gives a description of the various classes of surface fi nish, and gives 
some examples of different types of machine elements where each would be specifi ed.
The surfaces are defi ned in words and by the preferred values, N, given by the ISO
surface roughness standard.
Control of surface roughness is important in many areas of engineering design.
1. Precision is required in many types of mating surfaces such as gaskets, seals, tools
and dies.
2. Rough surfaces serve as notches and reduce fatigue life.
3. Roughness plays an important role in the tribological issues of friction, wear, and
lubrication.
4. Surface roughness increases electrical and thermal contact resistance.
5. A rough surface will entrap corrosive fl uids.
1. A. R. Marder, “Effects of Surface Treatments on Materials Performance,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20,
pp. 470–90, 1997; E. W. Brooman, “Design for Surface Finishing,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 820–27, 
ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1997.
FIGURE 13.11
Symbols used to specify fi nish characteristics on an engineering drawing. Roughness given in 
microinches.
Maximum waviness height
Maximum waviness width
Roughness width cutofff
Maximum roughness width
Symbols f
S
or la
f
y
Perpendicular to
line representing
Parallel to line
Crossed
Random
Circular
Approximate radial
X
M
C
R
maximum Ra 63
minimum Ra 16
0.002 - 2
0.030
0.020
X
Lay

550 
engineering design 
13
6. The appearance of a product is infl uenced by the surface roughness which can 
vary from shiny to dull.
7. The adherence of surface coatings such as paint or plating is strongly infl uenced 
by roughness.
Dimensional Accuracy and Tolerances
Processes differ in their ability to meet close tolerances. Inability to hold close 
tolerances leads to problems with performance and interchangeability of parts. Gen-
erally, materials with good workability can be held to closer tolerances. Achieving 
dimensional accuracy depends on both the nature of the material and the process. 
Solidifi cation processes must allow for the shrinkage that occurs when a molten metal 
solidifi es. Polymer processes must allow for the much higher thermal expansion of 
polymers than metals, and hot working processes for metals must allow for oxidation 
of the surface.
Each manufacturing process has the capability of producing a part to a certain 
surface fi nish and tolerance range without incurring extra cost. Figure 13.12 shows this 
general relationship. The tolerances apply to a 1-inch dimension and are not necessarily 
scalable to larger and smaller dimensions for all processes. For economical design, the 
loosest possible tolerances and coarsest surface fi nish that will fulfi ll the function of the 
design should be specifi ed. As Fig. 13.13 shows, processing cost increases nearly expo-
nentially as the requirements for tolerances and surface fi nish are made more stringent. 
13.4.6 Cost to Manufacture
The fi nal decision on a manufacturing process is usually made on the basis of the cost 
to make a part, called the unit cost. Now that we have discussed the main factors that 
TABLE 13.4 
Typical Values for Surface Roughness
Description
N-value
Ra, lin
Ra, lm
Typical Application in Design
Very rough
N11
1000
25.0
Nonstressed surface; rough cast surface
Rough
N10 
500
12.5
Noncritical components; machined
Medium
N9
250
6.3
Most common surface for components
Average smooth
N8
125
3.2
Suitable for mating surfaces without motion
Better than avg.
N7
63
1.6
Use for close-fi tting sliding surfaces and 
stressed parts except for shafts and 
vibration conditions
Fine
N6
32
0.8
Use where stress concentration is high: 
gears, etc.
Very fi ne
N5
16
0.4
Use for fatigue-loaded parts; precision 
shafts
Extremely fi ne
N4
8
0.2
High-quality bearings; requires honing/ 
polishing
Superfi nish
N3
4
0.1
For highest precision parts; requires lapping

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
551
13
FIGURE 13.12
Approximate values of surface roughness and tolerance on dimensions typically obtained 
with different manufacturing processes. (J. A. Schey, Introduction to Manufacturing Processes, 3d ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2000)
1
2
4
0.5
8
16
32
63
125
250
500
1000
2000
N1
0.025
N2
0.05
N3
0.1
N4
0.2
N5
0.4
N6
0.8
N7
1.6
N8
3.2
N9
6.3
N10
12.5
N11
25
N12
50
ISO No.
   m

in

0.0001
0.001
0.010
0.100
0.005
0.01
0.1
0.5
1.0
2.0
0.05
Permanent mold
Powder met.
Plaster
Shell
Sand cast
Zn die
Hot roll, extrude, forge
Polymers
(any
surface
finish)
Al-die cast
Investment cast
Cold extrude, roll
Cold draw
Precision blank
Drill, punch
Finish mill 
Shape, plane, rough mill
Broach, ream
ECM–EDM
Finish grind
Finish turn, bore
Rough grind, turn
Polish, lap, hone
mm
Tolerance range, in.
Surface roughness Ra
FIGURE 13.13
Infl uence of surface roughness and tolerance on processing costs (schematic).
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
500
(12.8)
250
(6.4)
125
(3.2)
63
(1.6)
32
(0.8)
Surface roughness, microinches (microns)
Tolerance, inches (mm)
Relative cost increase
16
(0.4)
8
(0.2)
4
(0.1)
2
(0.05)
0.060 (1.52)
0.040 (1.02) Cast or Forged
0.025 (0.64)
0.010 (0.25) Rough machine
0.007 (0.18)
0.004 (0.10) Finish machine
0.001 (0.03)
0.00040 (0.0102) Grind
0.00025 (0.0064) Hone
0.00010 (0.0025)

552 
engineering design 
13
go into processes selection, we present here a useful cost model for unit manufactur-
ing cost.1 More detailed consideration of cost is given in Chap. 17.
The cost to manufacture a part is made up of the cost of the material, cm, the
wages of the persons who make the part, cw, the cost of tooling, ct, a payment that 
over time recovers the capital cost of the equipment, ce, and an overhead cost, cOH,
H  that 
lumps together many general factory costs that cannot be readily associated with each
part made.
The material cost CM
C
is the weight of the part material m times the cost of the
material cm. This must be adjusted by the fraction of material weight that ends up as 
scrap, f, due to the sprues and risers that must be cut from castings or moldings, or the
chips produced in machining, or parts that are rejected for defects of some kind.
C
mc
f
lb
unit lb
unit
1
$
$
M
m
=
−
=
 
(13.4)
The labor cost to make the part, CL
C , is made up of the hourly cost of wages and 
benefi ts, cw, and the number of parts produced per unit time, the production rate, n˙.
C
c
n
h units
unit
.
$
$
h
L
w
=
=
w
(13.5)
The tooling cost, CT , is the cost of making the tooling spread over the entire pro-
duction run for the part, n, adjusted for replacement due to wear of the tooling, given
by the factor k. The factor k is
k
n divided by the life of the tooling, raised to the next 
higher integer.
C
k
n
units
g
c
$
(
)
integer
T
t
=
×
t
 
(13.6)
While tooling is a direct cost of making the part, the capital cost of equipment,
CE
C , is usually not dedicated to a particular part. Instead, many different parts will
be made on an injection molding machine by installing different molds. The capital 
cost of the equipment will be borrowed or charged to a corporate capital equipment 
account. Either way it must be paid back, little by little, as a charge against the parts 
that are made with this equipment. The easiest way to account for this is to determine 
the time to pay off the equipment, capital write-off time, two, typically years. This 
is divided into the cost of capital equipment, ce.2 Two other adjustments are needed.
First, it is likely that the equipment will not be used productively 100 percent of the 
available time, so the cost is divided by a load factor, L, the fractional time the equip-
ment is productive. Also, since the productive equipment time may be shared between 
several parts, the cost assignable to a given product can be obtained by multiplying the 
1 A. M. K. Esawi and M. F. Ashby, “Cost Estimates to Guide Pre-Selection of Processes,” Materials and 
Design, vol. 24, pp. 605–616, 2003.
2 This approach does not consider time value of money. For further details see Chap.16.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
553
13
total cost by the appropriate fraction q. Finally, the cost in $/hr is converted to $/unit 
by dividing by the production rate n˙ .
C
n
c
Lt
q
h
units h
unit
1
.
$
$
E
e
wo
=
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
=
(13.7)
Overhead costs are used due to the many costs in manufacturing a product that 
cannot be charged directly to each part or product because breaking these costs down
to this level is too laborious. Examples are factory maintenance, tool crib operation,
general supervision, or process R&D. These indirect costs are added up and then dis-
tributed to each part or product as an overhead charge. Often this is done in a fairly
arbitrary way, as a cost per production time multiplied by the number of hours or 
seconds required to make the part. Thus, the total overhead pool is accumulated and
then divided by the number of hours of production to give the hourly overhead rate,
cOH, $/hr. Once again, we divide by the production rate, to fi nd the unit overhead COH.
C
c
n
h units
unit
.
$
$
h
OH
OH
=
=
OH
(13.8)
Thus, the unit cost of a part is the sum of these fi ve component costs: CU = CM
C + CL
C
+ CT + CE
C + COH,
C
mc
f
c
n
c k
n
n
c
Lt
q
c
n
unit
1
.
1.
.
L
q
$
U
m
w
c
t
e
k
c
1
wo
OH
=
−
+
+
w
+
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
+
(13.9)
This equation shows that the total unit cost of a part will depend on:
● Material cost, independent of the number of parts, but strongly dependent on its mass
● Tooling cost that varies inversely with the number of parts
● Labor cost, capital equipment cost, and overhead cost, which vary inversely with
the rate of production
These dependencies lead to the concept of economic batch size shown in Sec. 13.4.1.
13.4.7 Availability, Lead Time, and Delivery
Next to cost, a critical business factor in selecting a manufacturing process is the
availability of the production equipment, the lead time to make tooling, and the reli-
ability of the expected delivery date for parts made by outside suppliers. Large struc-
tural parts, such as rotors for electrical generators, or the main structural forgings for 
military aircraft, can be made in only a few factories in the world because of equip-
ment requirements. Careful scheduling with the design cycle may be needed to mesh
with the production schedule. Complex forging dies and plastic injection molding dies
can have lead times of a year. These kinds of issues clearly affect the choice of the
manufacturing process and demand attention during the embodiment design phase.

554 
engineering design 
13
13.4.8 Steps for Process Selection
The book by Schey1 and the handbook chapter by the same author2 are particularly 
helpful in the way they compare a wide spectrum of manufacturing processes. A com-
parison of manufacturing processes is given in Table 13.5. This is based on a series of 
data cards published by the Open University.3 
This table is useful in two ways. First, it gives a quick way to screen for some 
broad process characteristics.
 
● Shape—the nature of the shapes that can be produced by the process
 
● Cycle time—time for a machine cycle to produce one part (1/n . )
 
● Flexibility—time to change tooling to make a different part
 
● Material utilization—percent of input material that ends up in fi nished part
 
● Quality—level of freedom from defects and ability to hold dimensions to drawing
 
● Equipment/tooling costs—level of equipment charges and tooling costs.
The rating scale for ranking processes according to these factors is in Table 13.6. (An-
other rating system using a more detailed listing of process characteristics is given by 
Schey.4) 
A second useful feature of Table 13.5 is the references to the extensive series of 
ASM Handbooks (AHB) and Engineered Materials Handbooks (EMH), which give 
many practical details on the processes.
The Manufacturing Process Information Maps (PRIMA) give much information that 
is useful for an initial selection of process.5 The PRIMA selection matrix (Fig. 13.9) gives 
a set of 5 to 10 possible processes for different combinations of material and quantity of 
parts. Each PRIMA then gives the following information, which is a good summary of 
the information needed to make an intelligent decision on the manufacturing process:
 
● Process description
 
● Materials: materials typically used with the process
 
● Process variations: common variants of the basic process
 
● Economic factors: cycle time, minimum production quantity, material utilization, 
tooling costs, labor costs, lead times, energy costs, equipment costs
 
● Typical applications: examples of parts commonly made with this process
 
● Design aspects: general information on shape complexity, size range, minimum 
thickness, draft angles, undercuts, and limitations on other features
 
● Quality issues: describes defects to watch out for, expected range of surface fi n-
ish, and process capability charts showing dimensional tolerances as a function of 
dimension
1. J. A. Schey, Introduction to Manufacturing Processes, 3d ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000.
2. J. A. Schey, “Manufacturing Processes and Their Selection,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 687–704, 
ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1997.
3. Data cards to accompany L. Edwards and M. Endean, eds., Manufacturing with Materials, Butter-
worth, Boston, 1990.
4. J. A. Schey, “Manufacturing Processes and Their Selection,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 687–704, 
ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1997.
5. K. G. Swift and J. D. Booker, Process Selection, 2nd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2003.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
555
13
TABLE 13.5
Rating of Characteristics of Common Manufacturing Processes
Process
Shape
Cycle 
Time Flexibility
Material 
Utilization Quality
Equipment 
Tooling 
Costs
Handbook 
Reference
Casting
Sand casting
3-D 
2
5
2
2
1
AHB, vol. 15, 
p. 523
Evaporative foam
3-D 
1
5
2
2
4
AHB, vol. 15, 
p. 637
Investment 
casting
3-D 
2
4
4
4
3
AHB, vol. 15, 
p. 646
Permanent mold 
casting
3-D 
4
2
2
3
2
AHB, vol. 15, 
p. 687
Pressure die 
casting
3-D solid
5
1
4
2
1
AHB, vol. 15, 
p. 713
Squeeze casting
3-D 
3
1
5
4
1
AHB, vol. 15, 
p. 727
Centrifugal 
casting
3-D hollow
2
3
5
3
3
AHB, vol. 15, 
p. 665
Injection molding
3-D 
4
1
4
3
1
EMH, vol. 2, 
p. 308
Reaction injection 
molding (RIM)
3-D 
3
2
4
2
2
EMH, vol. 2, 
p. 344
Compression 
molding
3-D 
3
4
4
2
3
EMH, vol. 2, 
p. 324
Rotational 
molding
3-D hollow
2
4
5
2
4
EMH, vol. 2, 
p. 360
Monomer casting 
contact molding
3-D 
1
4
4
2
4
EMH, vol. 2, 
p. 338
Forming
Forging, open die
3-D solid
2
4
3
2
2
AHB, vol. 14A, 
p. 99
Forging, hot 
closed die
3-D solid
4
1
3
3
2
AHB, vol. 14A, 
p. 111, 193
Sheet metal 
forming
3-D 
3
1
3
4
1
AHB, vol. 14B, 
p. 293
Rolling
2-D
5
3
4
3
2
AHB, vol. 14A, 
p. 459
Extrusion
2-D
5
3
4
3
2
AHB, vol. 14A, 
p. 421
Superplastic 
forming
3-D
1
1
5
4
1
AHB, vol. 14B, 
p. 350
Thermoforming
3-D
3
2
3
2
3
EMH, vol. 2, 
p. 399
Blow molding
3-D hollow
4
2
4
4
2
EMH, vol. 2, 
p. 352
(Continued)

556 
engineering design 
13
Process
Shape
Cycle 
Time Flexibility
Material 
Utilization Quality
Equipment 
Tooling 
Costs
Handbook 
Reference
Pressing and 
sintering
3-D solid
2
2
5
2
2
AHB, vol. 7, 
p. 326
Isostatic 
pressing
3-D
1
3
5
2
1
AHB, vol. 7, 
p. 605
Slip casting
3-D
1
5
5
2
4
EMH, vol. 14, 
p. 153
Machining
Single-point 
cutting
3-D
2
5
1
5
5
AHB, vol. 16
Multiple-point 
cutting
3-D
3
5
1
5
4
AHB, vol. 16
Grinding
3-D
2
5
1
5
4
AHB, vol. 16, 
p. 421
Electrical 
discharge 
machining
3-D
1
4
1
5
1
AHB, vol. 16, 
p. 557
Joining
Fusion welding
All
2
5
5
2
4
AHB, vol. 6, 
p. 175
Brazing/
soldering
All
2
5
5
3
4
AHB, vol. 6, 
p. 328, 349
Adhesive 
bonding
All
2
5
5
3
5
EMH, vol. 3
Fasteners
3-D
4
5
4
4
5
. . .
Surface 
treatment
Shot peening
All
2
5
5
4
5
AHB, vol. 5, 
p. 126
Surface 
hardening
All
2
4
5
4
4
AHB, vol. 5, 
p. 257
CVD/PVD
All
1
5
5
4
3
AHB, vol. 5, 
p. 510
Rating scheme: 1, poorest; 5, best. From ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, p. 299, ASM International. Used with permission.
TABLE 13.5 
(continued)
The book Process Selection is an excellent resource for process selection if the Cam-
bridge Selection software is not available.
E X A M P L E 1 3 . 2
The selection of materials for an automobile fan, Example 11.2, was done with the as-
sumption that the manufacturing costs for each material would be approximately equal 
since they were either casting or molding processes. The top-ranked materials were (1) an 
aluminum casting alloy, (2) a magnesium casting alloy, and (3) nylon 6/6 with 30 percent 
chopped glass fi ber to increase the fracture toughness of the material. Casting or molding 

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
557
13
TABLE 13.6 
Rating Scale for Ranking Manufacturing Processes
Rating Cycle Time Flexibility
Material 
Utilization
Quality
Equipment 
Tooling Costs
1
>15 min
Changeover very 
diffi cult
Waste >100% of 
fi nished part
Poor quality
High machine and 
tooling costs
2
5 to 15 min
Slow changeover Waste 50 to 100% Average quality
Tooling and machines 
costly
3
1 to 5 min 
Avg changeover 
and setup time
Waste 10 to 50%
Average to 
good quality
Tooling and machines 
relatively inexpensive
4
20 s to 
1 min
Fast changeover
Waste < 10% 
fi nished part
Good to 
excellent
Tooling costs low
5
<20 s
No setup time
No appreciable 
waste
Excellent 
quality
Equip. and tooling 
very low
Rating scale: 1, poorest; 5, best
were given high consideration since we expect to be able to manufacture the component 
with the fan blades integrally attached to the fan hub.
Now we need to think more broadly about possible processes for making 500,000 
parts per year. Figure 13.9 and Table 13.5 are used to perform a preliminary screening 
for potential processes before making a fi nal decision based on costs calculated from 
Eq. (13.9). Table 13.7 shows the processes suggested in Fig. 13.9 for an aluminum alloy, a 
magnesium alloy, and the thermoplastic nylon 6/6.
In interpreting Table 13.7, the fi rst consideration was whether Fig. 13.9 indicated that 
the process was suitable for one of the materials. The matrix of possible processes versus 
materials shows the greatest number of potential processes for an aluminum alloy, and the 
fewest for nylon 6/6. The fi rst round of screening is made on the basis of the predominant 
shapes produced by each process. Thus, blow molding was eliminated because it pro-
duces thin, hollow shapes, extrusion and drawing because they produce straight shapes 
with high length-to-diameter ratios and because the blades must have a slight degree of 
twist. Sheet metal processes were eliminated because they create only 2-D shapes. In ad-
dition, Table 13.3 was consulted to see if any of the remaining processes were excluded 
based on shape. The bladed-hub is most similar to shape T7 in Fig. 13.6. None of the can-
didate processes were excluded, although information on some of the processes was miss-
ing. Machining was declared too costly by management edict. The preliminary screening 
left the following processes for further consideration:
Aluminum Alloy
Magnesium Alloy
Nylon 6/6
Shell molding
Gravity die casting
Injection molding
Gravity die casting
Pressure die casting
Pressure die casting
Closed die forging
Squeeze casting
Squeeze casting
Closed die forging
It is clear that injection molding is the only feasible process for the thermoplastic 
nylon 6/6. The available processes for aluminum or magnesium alloy come down to 

558 
engineering design 
13
TABLE 13.7
 Initial Screening of Candidate Processes
Aluminum Alloy
Magnesium Alloy
Nylon 6/6
Reason for 
Elimination
Possible Process
Yes or 
No?
Reject?
Yes or 
No?
Reject?
Yes or 
No?
Reject?
1.2 Shell molding
Y
N
N
1.3 Gravity die casting
Y
Y
N
1.4 Pressure die casting
Y
Y
N
1.9 Squeeze casting
Y
Y
N
2.1 Injection molding
N
N
Y
2.6 Blow molding
N
N
Y
R
Used for 3-D hollow 
shapes
2.9 Plastic extrusion
N
N
Y
R
Need to twist the 
blades
3.1 Closed die forging
Y
Y
N
3.2 Rolling
Y
N
N
2-D process for 
making sheet
3.3 Drawing
Y
R
Y
R
N
 
Makes shapes with 
high L/D
3.4 Cold forming
Y
R
Y
R
N
Used for hollow 
3-D shapes
3.5 Cold heading
Y
R
N
R
N
Used for making 
bolts
3.8 Sheet shearing
Y
R
Y
R
N
2-D forming process
3.12 Metal extrusion
Y
R
Y
R
N
Need to twist the 
blades
4A Automatic 
machining
Y
R
Y
R
N
Machining is ruled 
out by edict
several casting processes and closed die forging. These remaining processes are com-
pared using the selection criteria given in Table 13.5. Investment casting is added as 
an additional process because it is known to make high-quality castings. Data for shell 
molding is not listed in Table 13.5, but its entry in Table 13.8 was constructed from data 
given in Process Selection. The gravity die casting process is most commonly found un-
der the name of permanent mold casting, and the data for permanent mold casting from 
Table 13.5 was used in Table 13.8. The rating for each criterion is totaled for each process, 
as seen in Table 13.8.
The results of this process ranking are not very discriminating. All casting processes 
rank 13 or 14, except investment casting. The ranking for hot forging is slightly lower at 
12. Moreover, designing a forging die to produce a part with 12 blades integrally attached 
to the fan hub is more diffi cult than designing a casting mold for the same shape. For this 
application there appears to be no advantage of forging over casting.
The next step (Example 13.3) in deciding on the manufacturing process is to com-
pare the estimated cost to manufacture a part using Eq. (13.9). The following processes 
will be compared: injection molding for nylon 6/6, and low-pressure permanent mold 
casting, investment casting, and squeeze casting for metal alloys. Squeeze casting is 

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
559
13
included because it has the potential to produce low-porosity, fi ne detail castings when 
compared to shell molding and pressure die casting.
E X A M P L E 1 3 . 3
Now we use Eq. (13.9) to determine the estimated cost for making 500,000 units of the 
fan. By using either casting or molding we expect to be able to manufacture a component 
with the blades cast integral with the hub. This will eliminate assembling the blades into 
the hub, although there may be a requirement for a balancing step.
The radius of the bladed hub will be 9 in; see Fig. 11.9. The hub is 0.5 in. thick and 
has a diameter of 4 in. There are 12 blades cast into the hub, each of which is 1 in. wide at 
the root and 2.3 in. wide at the tip. Each blade is 0.4 in. thick, narrowing down somewhat 
toward the tip. About 0.7 of the volume envelope is hub and blades. Therefore, the volume 
of the casting is about 89 cu. in., and if cast in aluminum it would weigh 8.6 lb (3.9 kg).
Only casting or molding processes are considered, since we are interested in an integral 
hub and blade process. Low-pressure permanent mold casting (gravity die casting) is a variant 
of die casting in which the molten metal is forced upward into the die by applying low pres-
sure on the liquid metal. Because the die cavity is fi lled slowly upwards, there is no entrapped 
air, and the casting has fewer defects. Squeeze casting is a combination of die casting and 
forming in which metal is introduced into the bottom half of the die and during solidifi cation 
the top of the die applies high pressure to compress the semisolid material into the fi nal shape.
The surface fi nish on the blades must be at least N8 (Table 13.3) to minimize fatigue 
failure. The tolerance on blade width and thickness should be ± 0.020 in. (0.50 mm). 
Figure 13.12 indicates that these quality conditions can be met by several metal casting 
processes, including die casting and investment casting. In addition, injection molding is 
the process of choice for 3-D thermoplastics, and squeeze casting was added as an inno-
vative casting process that produces high-quality castings with high defi nition of details.
The requirements of the automotive fan are compared with the capabilities of four 
likely manufacturing processes in Table 13.9. The data for the fi rst three processes were 
taken from the CES software. The data for squeeze casting was taken from Swift and 
Booker.1 Note that data for investment casting has not been included because the Eco-
nomic Batch Size for it is below one or two thousand parts, and we are planning for 
500,000 parts annual production.
TABLE 13.8
Second Screening of Possible Manufacturing Processes
Process
Cycle 
Time
Process 
Flexibility
Material 
Utilization
Quality
Equipment & 
Tooling Costs
Total
Shell molding
5
1 
4
3
1
14
Low pressure permanent 
mold
4
2
2
3
2
13
Pressure die casting
5
1
4
2
1
13
Squeeze casting
3
1
5
4
1
14
Investment casting
2
4
4
4
3
17
Hot closed die forging
4
1
3
3
1
12
1. K. G. Swift, and J. D. Booker, Process Selection, 2nd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2003.

560 
engineering design 
13
Each of the candidate processes is capable of producing symmetrical 3-D shapes. The 
screening parameter examined fi rst was the economic batch size. Since it is expected that 
500,000 units will be produced per year, investment casting was eliminated as a possibil-
ity because the economic batch size is less than 1000 units. Several of the other processes 
have borderline issues with respect to process capability, but they do not disqualify them 
from further analysis. For example, it may not be possible to obtain the maximum thick-
ness of 13 mm with injection molding of nylon. This defi ciency could be overcome by a 
different design of the hub using thinner sections and stiffening ribs; see Sec. 12.6.2. There 
is also a possibility that low-pressure permanent mold casting may not be able to achieve 
the required tolerance on critical dimensions. Experiments with process variables such as 
melt temperature and cooling rate will determine whether this proves to be a problem.
Now that we have narrowed the selection of a manufacturing process down to three 
alternatives, the fi nal selection is based on the estimate of the cost to make one unit of the 
integral hub–blade fan using the cost model described in Sec. 13.4.6.
Calculations show that two machines operating three shifts for 50 weeks per year 
will be required to produce 500,000 units per year. This is refl ected in the tooling and 
capital costs. Labor cost is based on one operator per machine. For the permanent mold 
casting and squeeze casting processes the material is A357 aluminum alloy. For injection 
molding the material used is nylon 6/6 reinforced with 30 percent chopped glass fi bers.
It is clear from Table 13.10 that the cost of the material is the major cost category. It var-
ies from 54 percent to 69 percent of total unit cost for the three processes studied. The pro-
duction rate is also an important process parameter. It accounts for the higher cost of squeeze 
casting over permanent mold casting in the categories of labor cost and overhead. Process 
engineering studies using some of the TQM methods discussed in Chap. 4 might be able to 
increase the rate of production. However, there are physical limits to increasing this rate very 
greatly since all three processes are limited by the heat transfer rate that determines the time 
required to solidify the part suffi ciently so that it can be ejected from the mold.
Low-pressure permanent mold casting is the obvious choice for producing the fan hub 
and blades. The only reason for rejecting this process would be if it was not possible to 
maintain required dimensions or tolerance, or if the castings contained porosity. Squeeze 
casting would be an attractive alternative, since the addition of mechanically induced 
TABLE 13.9
Comparison of Characteristics of Each Process with Requirements of the Fan
Process Requirements
Fan 
Design
Low-Pressure 
Permanent 
Mold Casting
Investment 
Casting
Injection 
Molding
Squeeze 
Casting
Size range, max 
mass (kg) (Fig. 13.7)
3.9
80 
30
4.5
Section thickness, 
max (mm) (Fig. 13.8)
13
120
8
200
Section thickness, 
min (mm) (Fig. 13.8)
7.5
3
0.6
6
Tolerance (±mm)
0.50
0.5
0.1
0.3
Surface roughness ( mm) Ra
3.2
4
0.2
1.6
Economic batch 
size, units (Fig. 13.5)
5 × 105
>103
<103
>105
>104

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
561
13
compressive stresses would result in less distortion of the metal on cooling, and the ability 
to hold tighter tolerances for a relatively small increase in unit cost. Injection molding of 
nylon 6/6 is the least attractive alternative due to the higher cost of the polymer compound.
The process selection shown in Examples 13.2 and 13.3 can be done more effi -
ciently and with consideration of many more initial alternatives using a computer da-
tabase. The CES EduPack 2010 contains datasheets on hundreds of processes similar 
to the one shown in Fig. 13.3. 
13.5
DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURE (DFM)
For the past 20 years engineers have seen a large amount of effort devoted to the inte-
gration of design and manufacture, with the goals of reducing manufacturing cost and 
improving product quality. The processes and procedures that have been developed 
have become known as design for manufacture or design for manufacturability 
TABLE 13.10 
Determination of Unit Cost for Three Processes Based on Cost Model in Sec. 13.4.6
Cost Element
Low-Pressure 
Permanent 
Mold
Injection 
Molding
Squeeze 
Casting
Material cost, cm ($/lb)
0.60
1.80
0.60
Fraction of process that is scrap, f
0.1 
0.05
0.1
Mass of part, m (lb)
8.6
4.1
8.6
CM see Eq. (13.4) unit cost of material
$5.73
$7.77
$5.73
Labor cost, cw ($/h)
25.00
25.00
25.00
Production rate, n˙ , (units/h)
38
45
30
CL see Eq. (13.5) unit cost of labor
$0.66
$0.55
$0.83
Tooling cost, ct ($/set)
80,000
70,000
80,000
Total production run, n (units)
500,000
500,000
500,000
Tooling life, nt (units)
100,000
200,000
100,000
Sets of tooling required, k
5 × 2
3 × 2
5 × 2
CT see Eq. (13.6) unit cost of tooling
$1.60
$0.84
$1.60
Capital cost, ce ($)
100,000 × 2
500,000 × 2
200,000
Capital write-off time, two (yrs)
5
5
5
Load fraction, L (fraction)
1
1
1
Load sharing fraction, q
1
1
1
CE see Eq. (13.7) unit cost of capital equipment
$0.17
$0.74
$0.44
Factory overhead, cOH ($/h)
60
60
60
Production rate,  . n (units/h)
38
45
30
COH see Eq. (13.8) unit cost of factory overhead
$1.58
$1.33
$2.00
Total unit cost = CM + CL + CT + CE + COH
$9.74
$11.23
$10.60

562 
engineering design 
13
(DFM). Associated with this is the closely related area of design for assembly (DFA). 
The fi eld is often simply described by the abbreviation DFM/DFA or DFMA. DFMA 
methods should be applied during the embodiment stage of design.
Design for manufacture represents an awareness of the importance of design as 
the time for thoughtful consideration of all steps of production. To best achieve the 
goals of DFM requires a concurrent engineering team approach (Sec. 2.4.4) in which 
appropriate representatives from manufacturing, including outside suppliers, are 
members of the design team from the start.
13.5.1 DFM Guidelines
DFM guidelines are statements of good design practice that have been empirically 
derived from years of experience.1 Using these guidelines helps narrow the range of 
possibilities so that the mass of detail that must be considered is within the capability 
of the designer.
1. Minimize total number of parts: Eliminating parts results in great savings. A 
part that is eliminated costs nothing to make, assemble, move, store, clean, inspect, 
rework, or service. A part is a good candidate for elimination if there is no need for 
relative motion, no need for subsequent adjustment between parts, and no need for 
materials to be different. However, part reduction should not go so far that it adds 
cost because the remaining parts become too heavy or complex.
The best way to eliminate parts is to make minimum part count a requirement 
of the design at the conceptual stage of design. Combining two or more parts into 
an integral design architecture is another approach. Plastic parts are particularly 
well suited for integral design.2 Fasteners are often prime targets for part reduc-
tion. Another advantage of making parts from plastics is the opportunity to use 
snap-fi ts instead of screws, Fig. 13.14a.3
2. Standardize components: Costs are minimized and quality is enhanced when 
standard commercially available components are used in design. The benefi ts also 
occur when a company standardizes on a minimum number of part designs (sizes, 
materials, processes) that are produced internally in its factories. The life and reli-
ability of standard components may have already been established, so cost reduc-
tion comes through quantity discounts, elimination of design effort, avoidance of 
equipment and tooling costs, and better inventory control.
3. Use common parts across product lines: It is good business sense to use parts 
in more than one product. Specify the same materials, parts, and subassemblies 
in each product as much as possible. This provides economies of scale that drive 
down unit cost and simplify operator training and process control. Product data 
management (PDM) systems can be used to facilitate retrieval of similar designs.
1. H. W. Stoll, Appl. Mech. Rev, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1356–64, 1986; J. R. Bralla, Design for Manufactur-
ability Handbook, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999; D. M. Anderson, Design for Manufacturabil-
ity, 2nd ed., CIM Press, Cambria, CA, 2001.
2. W. Chow, Cost Reduction in Product Design, chap. 5, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1978.
3. P. R. Bonnenberger, The First Snap-Fit Handbook, 2nd ed., Hanser Gardener Publications, Cincinnati, 
OH, 2005.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
563
13
4. Standardize design features: Standardizing on design features like drilled hole 
sizes, screw thread types, and bend radii minimizes the number of tools that must be 
maintained in the tool room. This reduces manufacturing overhead cost. An exception 
is high-volume production where special tooling may be more cost effective.
Space holes in machined, cast, molded, or stamped parts, so they can be made 
in one operation without tooling weakness. There is a limit on how close holes can 
be spaced due to strength in the thin section between holes.
5. Aim to keep designs functional and simple: Achieving functionality is para-
mount, but don’t specify more performance than is needed. It is not good engineer-
ing to specify a heat-treated alloy steel when a plain carbon steel will achieve the 
performance with a little bit more careful analysis. When adding features to the 
design of a component, have a fi rm reason for the need. The product with the few-
est parts, the least intricate shapes, the fewer precision adjustments, and the lowest 
number of manufacturing steps will be the least costly to manufacture. Also, the 
simplest design will usually be the most reliable and the easiest to maintain.
6. Design parts to be multifunctional: A good way to minimize part count is 
to design such that parts can fulfi ll more than one function, leading to integral 
 architecture. For example, a part might serve as both a structural member and a 
spring, Fig. 13.14b. The part might be designed to provide a guiding, aligning, or 
self-fi xturing feature in assembly. This rule can cancel out guideline 5 and break 
guideline 7 if it is carried too far.
FIGURE 13.14
Some examples of applying DFM. (a) This product utilizes snap-fi t principles to attach the 
cover, eliminating the need for screw fasteners. Since the cover is molded from plastic mate-
rial and because of the taper of the snap-fi t elements, it also illustrates compliance. (b) This 
illustrates a multifunctional part. By incorporating a spring function in the lever, the need for 
a separate coil spring is eliminated.
Plastic cover
Lever
Spring feature
Spring
(b)
(a)

564 
engineering design 
13
7. Design parts for ease of fabrication: As discussed in Chap. 11, the least costly 
material that satisfi es the functional requirements should be chosen. It is often the 
case that materials with higher strength have poorer workability or fabricability. 
Thus, one pays more for a higher-strength material, and it also costs more to pro-
cess it into the required shape. Since machining to shape tends to be costly, manu-
facturing processes that produce the part to near net shape are preferred whenever 
possible so as to eliminate or minimize machining.
It is important to be able to visualize the steps that a machine operator will 
use to make a part so that you can minimize the manufacturing operations needed 
to make the part. For example, clamping a part before machining is a time-
consuming activity, so design to minimize the number of times the operator will 
be required to reorient the part in the machine to complete the machining task. 
Reclamping also is a major source of geometric errors. Consider the needs for the 
use of fi xtures and provide large solid mounting surfaces and parallel clamping 
surfaces.
Use generous fi llets and radii on castings, and on molded, formed, and ma-
chined parts. For details see J. R. Bralla, Design for Manufacturability Handbook, 
2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
8. Avoid excessively tight tolerances: Tolerances must be set with great care. 
Specifying tolerances that are tighter than needed results in increased cost; recall 
Fig. 13.13. These come about from the need for secondary fi nishing operations like 
grinding, honing, and lapping, from the cost of building extra precision into the 
tooling, from longer operating cycles because the operator is taking fi ner cuts, and 
from the need for more skilled workers. Before selecting a manufacturing process, 
be sure that it is capable of producing the needed tolerance and surface fi nish.
As a designer, it is important to maintain your credibility with manufacturing 
concerning tolerances. If in doubt that a tolerance can be achieved in production, 
always communicate with manufacturing experts. Never give a verbal agreement 
to manufacturing that they can loosen a tolerance without documentation and 
making the change on the part drawing. Also, be careful about how the statement 
for blanket tolerances on the drawing is worded and might be misinterpreted by 
manufacturing.
9. Minimize secondary and fi nishing operations: Minimize secondary operations 
such as heat treatment, machining, and joining and avoid fi nishing operations such 
as deburring, painting, plating, and polishing. Use only when there is a functional 
or safety reason for doing so. Machine a surface only when the functionality re-
quires it or if it is needed for aesthetic purposes.
10. Utilize the special characteristics of processes: Be alert to the special design 
features that many processes provide. For example, molded polymers can be pro-
vided with “built-in” color, as opposed to metals that need to be painted or plated. 
Aluminum extrusions can be made in intricate cross sections that can then be cut 
to short lengths to provide parts. Powder-metal parts can be made with controlled 
porosity that provides self-lubricating bearings. 
These rules are becoming the norm in every engineering design course and in 
engineering practice. 

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
565
13
13.6
DESIGN FOR ASSEMBLY (DFA)
Once parts are manufactured, they need to be assembled into subassemblies and 
products. The assembly process consists of two operations, handling, which involves 
grasping, orienting, and positioning, followed by insertion and fastening. There are 
three types of assembly, classifi ed by the level of automation. In manual assembly 
a human operator at a workstation reaches and grasps a part from a tray, and then 
moves, orients, and pre-positions the part for insertion. The operator then places the 
parts together and fastens them, often with a power tool. In automatic assembly, han-
dling is accomplished with a parts feeder, like a vibratory bowl, that feeds the cor-
rectly oriented parts for insertion to an automatic workhead, which in turn inserts the 
part.1 In robotic assembly, the handling and insertion of the part is done by a robot 
arm under computer control. 
The cost of assembly is determined by the number of parts in the assembly and 
the ease with which the parts can be handled, inserted, and fastened. Design can have 
a strong infl uence in both areas. Reduction in the number of parts can be achieved by 
elimination of parts (e.g., replacing screws and washers with snap or press fi ts, and 
by combining several parts into a single component). Ease of handling and insertion 
is achieved by designing so that the parts cannot become tangled or nested in each 
other, and by designing with symmetry in mind. Parts that do not require end-to-end 
orientation prior to insertion, as a screw does, should be used if possible. Parts with 
complete rotational symmetry around the axis of insertion, like a washer, are best. 
When using automatic handling it is better to make a part highly asymmetric if it can-
not be made symmetrical.
For ease of insertion, a part should be made with chamfers or recesses for ease 
of alignment, and clearances should be generous to reduce the resistance to assembly. 
Self-locating features are important, as is providing unobstructed vision and room for 
hand access. Figure 13.15 illustrates some of these points.
13.6.1 DFA Guidelines
The guidelines for design for assembly can be grouped into three classes: general, 
handling, and insertion.
General Guidelines
1. Minimize the total number of parts: A part that is not required by the design 
is a part that does not need to be assembled. Go through the list of parts in the 
assembly and identify those parts that are essential for the proper functioning of 
1. G. Boothroyd, Assembly Automation and Product Design, 2nd ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 
2005; “Quality Control and Assembly,” Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, vol. 4, Society of 
Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1987.

566 
engineering design 
13
the product. All others are candidates for elimination. The criteria for an essential 
part, also called a theoretical part, are:
● The part must exhibit motion relative to another part that is declared essential.
● There is a fundamental reason that the part be made from a material different 
from all other parts.
● It would not be possible to assemble or disassemble the other parts unless this
part is separate, that is, it is an essential connection between parts.
● Maintenance of the product may require disassembly and replacement of a part.
● Parts used only for fastening or connecting other parts are prime candidates for 
elimination.
Designs can be evaluated for effi ciency of assembly with Eq. (13.10), where the
time taken to assemble a “theoretical” part is taken as 3 seconds.1
Designassemblyefficiency
3 “theoretical” minimumnumberof partr
total assembly timefor allparts
=
 
(13.10)
A theoretical part is one that cannot be eliminated from the design because it is
needed for functionality. Typical fi rst designs have assembly effi ciencies of 5 to 
10 percent, while after DFA analysis it is typically around 20 to 30 percent.
2. Minimize the assembly surfaces: Simplify the design so that fewer surfaces need 
to be prepared in assembly, and all work on one surface is completed before mov-
ing to the next one.
1. For small parts such as those found in household and electronic products, the assembly time runs from
2 to 10 seconds. On an automobile assembly line, times of 45 to 60 seconds are more typical.
FIGURE 13.15
Some design features that improve assembly.
Straight slot will tangle
Provide guide on
surfaces to aid
component placing
Crank slot will not tangle
Difff icult to orientate
small chamfer on chip
with mechanical tooling
Non-functional
longitudinal feature
simplifies orientation
Component does not
have a stable orientation
Flats on the sides make
it easy to orientate with
respect to small holes
Poor Assembly
Improved Assembly

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
567
13
3. Use subassemblies: Subassemblies can provide economies in assembly since there
are fewer interfaces in fi nal assembly. Subassemblies require connected parts that 
can be reoriented without falling apart and connect easily with other assembled
components. Subassemblies can be built and tested elsewhere and brought to the
fi nal assembly area. When subassemblies are outsourced they should be delivered
fully assembled and tested. Products made from subassemblies are easier to repair 
by replacing the defective subassembly.
4. Mistake-proof the design and assembly: An important goal in design for as-
sembly is to ensure that the assembly process is unambiguous so that the opera-
tors cannot make mistakes in assembling the components. Components should be
designed so that they can only be assembled one way. The way to orient the part in
grasping it should be obvious. It should not be capable of being assembled in the
reverse direction. Orientation notches, asymmetrical holes, and stops in assembly
fi xtures are common ways to mistake-proof the assembly process. For more on
mistake-proofi ng, see Sec. 13.8.
Guidelines for Handling
5. Avoid separate fasteners or minimize fastener costs: Fasteners may amount to
only 5 percent of the material cost of a product, but the labor they require for 
proper handling in assembly can reach 75 percent of the assembly costs. The use
of screws in assembly is expensive. Snap fi ts should be used whenever possible.
When the design permits, use fewer large fasteners rather than several small ones.
Costs associated with fasteners can be minimized by standardizing on a few types
and sizes of fasteners, fastener tools, and fastener torque settings. When a product 
is assembled with a single type of screw fastener it is possible to use auto-feed
power screwdrivers.
6. Minimize handling in assembly: Parts should be designed to make the required
position for insertion or joining obvious and easy to achieve. Orientation can be as-
sisted by design features that help to guide and locate parts in the proper position.
Parts that are to be handled by robots should have a fl at, smooth top surface for 
vacuum grippers, or an inner hole for spearing, or a cylindrical outer surface for 
gripper pickup.
Guidelines for Insertion and Fastening
7. Minimize assembly directions: All products should be designed so that they can
be assembled from one direction. Rotation of an assembly requires extra time and
motion and may require additional transfer stations and fi xtures. The best situation
in assembly is when parts are added in a top-down manner to create a z-axis stack.
8. Provide unobstructed access for parts and tools: Not only must the part be de-
signed to fi t in its prescribed location, but there must be an adequate assembly path
for the part to be moved to this location. This also includes room for the operator’s
arm and tools, which in addition to screwdrivers, could include wrenches or welding
torches. If a worker has to go through contortions to perform an assembly operation,
productivity and possibly product quality will suffer after a few hours of work.
9. Maximize compliance in assembly: Excessive assembly force may be required 
when parts are not identical or perfectly made. Allowance for this should be made

568 
engineering design 
13
in the product design. Designed-in compliance features include the use of generous 
tapers, chamfers, and radii. If possible, one of the components of the product can 
be designed as the part to which other parts are added (part base) and as the as-
sembly fi xture. This may require design features that are not needed for the prod-
uct function.
13.6.2 DFA Analysis
The most widely used design for assembly methodology is the Boothroyd-Dewhurst 
DFA method.1 The method uses a step-by-step application of the DFA guidelines, to 
reduce the cost of manual assembly. The method is divided into an analysis phase and 
a redesign phase. In the fi rst phase, the time required to handle and insert each part in 
the assembly is found from data tables based on time and motion study experiments. 
These values are derived from a part’s size, weight, and geometric characteristics. If 
the part requires reorienting after being handled, that time is also included. Also, each 
part is identifi ed as being essential or “theoretical,” (whether it is a candidate for elim-
ination in a redesign phase). The decision on the minimum number of theoretical parts 
is determined by applying the criteria listed under Guideline 1 in Sec. 13.6.1. Then the 
estimated total minutes to put together the assembly is determined. With this informa-
tion the Design Assembly Effi ciency can be determined using Eq. (13.10). This gives 
the designer an indication of how easily the design can be assembled, and how far the 
redesign phase should progress to increase assembly effi ciency.
E X A M P L E 1 3 . 4
A design is needed for a motor-drive assembly that moves vertically on two steel guide 
rails.2 The motor must be fully enclosed and have a removable cover for access to the 
position sensor. The chief functional requirement is that there be a rigid base that supports 
the motor and the sensor and moves up and down on the rails. The motor must be fully 
enclosed and have a removable cover so the position detection sensor can be adjusted.
Figure 13.16 shows the initial design of the motor-drive assembly. The rigid base 
is designed to slide up and down the steel guide rails (not shown). It also supports the 
linear motor and the position sensor. Two brass bushings are pressed into the base to 
provide suitable friction and wear characteristics for sliding on the steel rails. The end 
plate is fi tted with a plastic grommet through which pass the connecting wires to the 
motor and the sensor. The box-shaped cover slides over the whole assembly from below 
the base and is held in place by four cover screws, two attached to the base and two 
passing into the end plate. In addition there are two stand-off rods that support the end 
plate and assorted screws to make a total of eight main parts and nine screws, for a total 
of 17 parts. The motor and sensor are outsourced subassemblies. The two guide rails 
are made from 0.5 in. diameter cold drawn steel bar stock. Because they are clearly 
1. G. Boothroyd, P. Dewhurst and W. Knight, Product Design for Manufacture and Assembly, 2nd ed., 
Marcel Dekker, New York, 2002. DFA and DFM software is available from Boothroyd-Dewhurst, Inc. 
www.dfma.com.
2. G. Boothroyd, “Design for Manufacture and Assembly,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, p. 676, ASM Inter-
national, Materials Park, OH, 1997.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
569
13
essential components of the design, and there is no apparent substitute, they are not 
involved in the analysis.
We now use the DFA criteria to identify the theoretical parts, those that cannot be 
eliminated, and the parts that are candidates for replacement, Sec. 13.6.1.
 
●The base is clearly an essential part. It must move along the guide rails, which is a 
“given” for any redesign. However, by changing the material for the base from alumi-
num to some other material there could be a savings in part count. Aluminum sliding 
on steel is not a good combination. The bushings are part of the base and are included 
in the design to provide the function of low sliding friction. However, it is known that 
nylon (a thermoplastic polymer) has a much lower sliding coeffi cient of friction against 
steel than aluminum. Using nylon for the base would permit the elimination of the two 
brass bushings.
 
●Now we consider the stand-off rods. We ask the question, Are they only there to con-
nect two parts? Since the answer is yes, they are candidates for elimination. However, 
if eliminated the end plate would have to be redesigned.
Motor
(2.75 diam 3 4.75)
2 End-plate screws
(0.2 diam 3 0.5)
End plate (low-carbon steel,
painted, 4.5 3 2.25 3 1.3)
Grommet (plastic injection
molding, 0.7 diam 3 0.4)
2 Stand-offs (low-carbon
steel, machined, 0.5 diam 3 2)
2 Bushings (brass, machined,
0.5 diam 3 0.8)
Base (aluminum,
machined, 4 3 2.2 3 1)
4 Cover screws
(0.12 diam 3 0.3)
Cover (16-gage low-carbon
steel with soldered seams
and painted, 4.5 3 2.75 3 2.4)
Set screw
(0.06 diam 3 0.12)
Sensor
(0.187 diam 3 1)
2 Motor screws
(0.2 diam 3 0.6)
FIGURE 13.16
Initial design of the motor-drive assembly. (ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, p. 680, ASM Interna-
tional, Materials Park, OH, 1997. Used with permission.)

570 
engineering design 
13
 
●The end plate functions to protect the motor and sensor. This is a vital function, so the 
redesigned end plate is a cover and is a theoretical part. It must also be removable to 
allow access for servicing. This suggests that the cover could be a plastic molded part 
that would snap onto the base. This will eliminate the four cover screws. Since it will 
be made from a plastic, there is no longer a need for the grommet that is in the design to 
prevent fraying of the electrical leads entering the cover.
 
●Both the motor and the sensor are outside of the part elimination process. They are 
clearly essential parts of the assembly, and their assembly time and cost of assembly 
will be included in the DFA analysis. However, their purchase cost will not be con-
sidered because they are purchased from outside vendors. These costs are part of the 
material costs for the product.
 
●Finally, the set screw to hold the sensor in place and the two screws to secure the motor 
to the base are not theoretically required.
The time for manual assembly is determined by using lookup tables or charts1 to 
estimate (1) the handling time, which includes grasping and orienting, and (2) the time 
for insertion and fastening. For example, the tables for handling time list different val-
ues depending on the symmetry, thickness, size, and weight of the part, and whether 
it requires one hand or two to grasp and manipulate the part. Extra time is added for 
parts with handling diffi culties such as tangling, fl exibility, or slipperiness, the need for 
optical magnifi cation, or the need to use tools. For a product with many parts this can 
be a laborious procedure. The use of DFA software can be a substantial aid not only in 
reducing the time for this task, but in providing prompts and questions that assist in the 
decision process.
Tables for insertion time differentiate whether the part is secured immediately or 
whether other operations must take place before it can be secured. In the latter case it 
differentiates whether or not the part requires holding down, and how easy it is to align 
the part.
Table 13.11 shows the results of the DFA analysis of the initial design. As discussed 
previously, the base, motor, sensor, and end plate are found to be essential parts, so the 
theoretical part count is 4 out of a total of 19 parts. Therefore, according to Eq. (13.10), the 
design effi ciency for the assembly is quite low, 7.5 percent, indicating that there should be 
ample opportunity for part elimination.
In Table 13.11 the cost of assembly is determined by multiplying the total assembly 
time by the hourly cost of assembly. In this example it is $30/h.
The results of the DFA analysis for the redesigned motor-drive assembly, Fig. 13.17, 
are given in Table 13.12. Note that the part count has been reduced from 19 to 7, with an 
increase in the assembly effi ciency from 7.5% to 26%. There is a commensurate reduction 
in the cost of assembly from $1.33 to $0.384. The three nonessential parts are all screws 
that theoretically could be eliminated but have been retained for reliability and quality 
reasons. The next step is to do a design for manufacture analysis to determine whether the 
changes made in material and design have carried over to reduced part costs.
Example 13.4 shows the importance of DFA in design. Even though assembly 
follows part manufacturing, the DFA analysis contributes much more than reducing 
the cost of assembly, which rarely exceeds 20 percent of the product cost. A major 
1. G. Boothroyd, et. al., op. cit., Chap. 3.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
571
13
TABLE 13.11
Results of DFA Analysis for the Motor-Drive Assembly (Initial Design)
Part
No. 
Theoretical 
Part Count
Assembly 
Time, s
Assembly 
Cost, ¢
Base
 1
1
 3.5
 2.9
Bushing
 2
0
12.3
10.2
Motor subassembly
 1
1 
 9.5
 7.9
Motor screw
 2
0
21.0
17.5
Sensor subassembly
 1
1
 8.5
 7.1
Setscrew
 1
0
10.6
 8.8
Stand-off
 2
0
16.0
13.3
End plate
 1
1
 8.4
 7.0
End-plate screw
 2
0
16.6
13.8
Plastic bushing
 1
0
 3.5
 2.9
Thread leads
. . .
. . .
 5.0
 4.2
Reorient
. . .
. . .
 4.5
 3.8
Cover
 1
0
 9.4
 7.9
Cover screw
 4
0
31.2
26.0
Total
19
4
160.0
133.0
Design effi ciency for assembly = (4 × 3)/160 = 7.5%
FIGURE 13.17
Redesign of motor-drive assembly based on DFA analysis. (ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, p. 68, 
ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1997. Used with permission.)
Motor
(2.75 diam  4.75)
Cover (injection molding,
4.5  2.75  2.4)
Base (nylon,
machined, 4  2.2  1)
Set screw
(0.06 diam  0.12)
Sensor
(0.187 diam  1)
2 Motor screws
(0.2 diam  0.6)

572 
engineering design 
13
contribution of DFA is that it forces the design team to think critically about part 
elimination through redesign. A part eliminated is a part that does not require 
manufacturing.
DFM guidelines as “rules of thumb” have existed for centuries. The design for 
assembly methodology (DFA) was developed prior to the DFM software that will be 
described Sec. 13.9.1. DFA usually precedes DFM in time sequence since the em-
phasis on reducing part count in DFA serves as a driver for design for manufacture 
(DFM). Current thinking considers the two methodologies as complementary parts 
of a single methodology, design for manufacture and assembly (DFMA). DFA looks 
at the entire system of parts that make up the product, while DFM focuses on each 
individual part.
13.7
ROLE OF STANDARDIZATION IN DFMA
In Section 1.7 the important role of codes and standards in engineering design was in-
troduced. There the emphasis was on the role of standards in protecting public safety 
and assisting the designer in performing high-quality work. In this section we extend 
these ideas about standardization to show the important role that part standardization 
can play in DFMA.
Part proliferation is an endemic problem in manufacturing unless steps are taken 
to prevent it from happening. One large automotive manufacturer found that in one 
model line alone it used 110 different radiators, 1200 types of fl oor carpet, and 5000 
different fasteners. Reducing the variety of parts that achieve the same function can 
have many benefi ts to the product development enterprise. Firm numbers on the cost 
of part proliferation are diffi cult to obtain, but estimates are that about half of manu-
facturing overhead costs are related to managing too many part numbers.
TABLE 13.12 
Results of DFA Analysis for Motor-Drive Assembly After Redesign
Part
No. 
Theoretical 
Part Count
Assembly 
Time, s
Assembly 
Cost, ¢
Base
1
1
3.5
2.9
Motor subassembly
1
1
4.5
3.8
Motor screw
2
0
12.0
10.0
Sensor subassembly
1 
1
8.5
7.1
Setscrew
1
0
8.5
7.1
Thread leads
. . .
. . .
5.0
4.2
Plastic Cover
1
1
4.0
3.3
Total
7
4
46.0
38.0
Design effi ciency for assembly = (4 × 3)/46 = 26%

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
573
13
13.7.1 Benefi ts of Standardization
The benefi ts of standardization occur in four areas: cost reduction, quality improvement, 
production fl exibility, and manufacturing responsiveness.1 The specifi cs of benefi ts in 
each area are outlined here.
Cost Reduction
 
● Purchasing costs. Standardization of parts and the subsequent reduction in part 
numbers2 will result in large savings in procurement costs in outsourcing because 
parts will be bought in larger quantities. This allows for quantity discounts, fl exible 
delivery schedules, and less work for the purchasing department.
 
● Reduce costs through raw material standardization. Cost for in-house produc-
tion of parts can be reduced if raw materials can be standardized to a single size of 
bar stock, tubing, and sheet metal. Also, metal casting and plastic molding opera-
tions can each be limited to a single material. These standardization efforts allow 
for increased use of automated equipment with a minimum of cost for tool and 
fi xture changing and setup.
 
● Feature standardization. Part features such as drilled, reamed, or threaded holes 
and bend radii in sheet metal all require special tools. Unless there is a dedicated 
machine for each size, the tools need to be changed for different dimensions, with 
the corresponding setup charge. Designers often specify an arbitrary hole size, 
when a standard size would do just as well. If the specifi cation of radii in lathe 
turning or milling is not standardized it can cause a requirement for the shop to 
maintain a large inventory of cutting tools.
 
● Reduction of inventory and fl oor space requirements. The preceding cost reduc-
tion tactics assist in decreasing inventory costs either as incoming parts inventory, 
or the work-in-progress inventory, through fewer machine setups. Standardization 
makes building-on-demand more of a possibility, which will greatly decrease fi n-
ished goods inventory. Reducing inventory has the advantage of reducing the re-
quired factory fl oor space. All of these issues, reduction of inventory and fl oor space, 
tooling costs, and purchasing and other administrative costs result in a decrease in 
overhead costs.
Quality Improvement
 
● Product quality. Having fewer parts of a given type greatly reduces the chance of 
using the wrong part in an assembly.
 
● Prequalifi cation of parts. The use of standard parts means that there is much 
greater cumulative experience with using the particular part. This means that stan-
dard parts can be prequalifi ed for use in a new product without the requirement for 
extensive testing.
1. D. M. Anderson, Design for Manufacturability, 2nd ed., Chap. 5, CIM Press, Cambria, CA, 2001.
2. A part number is the identifi cation for a part (often a drawing number) and is not to be confused with 
the number of parts.

574 
engineering design 
13
 
● Supplier reduction means improved quality. Standardization of parts means 
there will be fewer outside suppliers of parts. Those suppliers remaining should be 
those with a record of producing quality parts. Giving more business to fewer sup-
pliers will be an incentive for developing stronger supplier relationships.
Production Flexibility
 
● Material logistics. The fl ow of parts within the plant will be easier with fewer 
parts to order, receive, stock, issue, assemble, test, and reorder.
 
● Reliable delivery of standard low-cost parts. These parts can be restocked di-
rectly to points of use in the plant by parts suppliers using long-term purchase 
agreements, much as food is delivered to a supermarket. This reduces overhead 
costs for purchasing and materials handling.
 
● Flexible manufacturing. Eliminating setup operations allows products to be made 
in any batch size. This allows the products to be made to order or to mass customize 
the product. This eliminates fi nished goods inventory and lets the plant make only 
the products for which it has an order.
Manufacturing Responsiveness
 
● Parts availability. Fewer part types used in greater volume will mean less chance 
of running out of parts and delaying production.
 
● Quicker supplier deliveries. Standardization of parts and materials should speed 
up deliveries. Suppliers will have the standard tools and materials in their inventory.
 
● Financially stronger suppliers. Part suppliers to OEMs have seen their profi t mar-
gins narrow, and many have gone out of business. With larger volume orders and 
fewer part types to make, they can rationalize their business model, simplify their 
supply chain management, and reduce overhead costs. This will give them the re-
sources to improve the quality and effi ciency of their operations.
While the benefi ts from standardization seem very compelling, it may not always be 
the best course of action. For example, the compromises required by standardization 
may restrict the design and marketing options in undesirable ways. Stoll1 presents 
advantages and disadvantages about part standardization.
13.7.2 Achieving Part Standardization
Many engineers do not realize that regardless of the cost of a part, there is real cost 
in ordering, shipping, receiving, inspecting, warehousing, and delivering the part to 
where it will be used on the assembly line. Thus, it is just as important to be con-
cerned with standardization of inexpensive parts like fasteners, washers, and resistors 
as it is with more intricate molded parts.
A common misconception is that the way to achieve a minimum-cost design is 
to create a minimum-weight design. Certainly this may be true in aircraft and space-
craft design where weight is very important, but for most product design this design 
1. H. W. Stoll, Product Design Methods and Practices, Chaps. 9 and 10, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1999.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
575
13
philosophy should not be followed if it means using nonstandard parts. The most 
economical approach is to select the next larger standard size of motor, pump, or an-
gle iron to achieve adequate strength or functionality. Special sizes are justifi ed only 
in very special situations.
A common reason for the existence of part duplication is that the designer is not 
aware of the existence of an identical part. Even if she knows of its existence, it may 
be more diffi cult to fi nd the part number and part drawing than it is to create a new 
part. This issue is discussed in Sec. 13.7.3.
13.7.3 Group Technology
Group technology (GT) is a methodology in which similar parts are grouped together 
in order to take advantage of their common characteristics. Parts are grouped into 
part families in terms of commonality of design features (see Fig. 13.6), as well as 
manufacturing processes and processing steps. Table 13.13 lists typical design and 
manufacturing characteristics that would be considered.
Benefi ts of Group Technology
 
● GT makes possible standardization of part design and elimination of part duplica-
tion. Since only about 20 percent of design is original design, new designs can be 
developed using previous similar designs, with a great saving in cost and time.
 
● By being able to access the previous work of the designer and the process planner, 
new and less experienced engineers can quickly benefi t from that experience.
 
● Process plans for making families of parts can be standardized and retained for 
future use. Therefore, setup times are reduced and more consistent quality is ob-
tained. Also, since the tools and fi xtures are often shared in making a family of 
parts, unit costs are reduced.
 
● With production data aggregated in this way, cost estimates based on past experi-
ence can be made more easily, and with greater precision.
Another advantage of group technology addresses the trend among consumers 
for greater variety in products. This has pushed many consumer products from being 
mass produced products to batch production. Batch manufacturing facilities are typi-
cally organized in a functional layout, in which processing machines are arranged by 
TABLE 13.13
Design and Manufacturing Characteristics That Are 
Typically Considered in GT Classifi cation
Design Characteristics of Part
Manufacturing Characteristics of Part
External shape
Part function 
External shape
Annual production
Internal shape
Type of material
Major dimensions
Tooling and fi xtures used
Major dimensions
Tolerances
Length/diameter ratio
Sequence of operations
Length/diameter ratio
Surface fi nish
Primary process used
Tolerances
Shape of raw material
Heat treatment
Secondary processes
Surface fi nish

576 
engineering design 
13
common type; that is, lathes are arranged together in a common area, as are milling 
machines, grinders, and so on. Parts are moved from area to area as the sequence 
of machining operations dictates. The result is delays because of the need for tool-
ing changes as part types change, or the machine stands idle waiting for a new batch 
of parts to be delivered. A functional layout is hardly a satisfactory arrangement for 
batch production.
A much better arrangement is using a manufacturing cell layout. This arrange-
ment exploits the similarities provided by a part family. All the equipment necessary 
to produce a family of parts is grouped into a cell. For example, a cell could be a 
lineup of a lathe, milling machine, drill press, and cylindrical grinder, or it could be 
a CNC machining center that is equipped to do all of these machining operations, in 
turn, on a single computer-controlled machine. Using a cell layout, the part is trans-
ferred with minimum movement and delay from one unit of the cell to another. The 
machines are kept busy because GT analysis has insured that the part mix among the 
products made in the factory provides an adequate volume of work to make the cell 
layout economically viable.
Part Classifi cation
Group technology depends on the ability to classify parts into families. At a su-
perfi cial level this appears relatively easy to do, but to gain the real benefi ts of GT 
requires much experience and hard work. Classifi cation of parts can be approached on 
four levels.
1. Experience-based judgment. The easiest approach is to assemble a team of expe-
rienced design engineers and process planners to classify parts into families based 
on part shape and knowledge of the sequence of processing steps used to make the 
part. This approach is limited in its search capabilities, and it may not assure an 
optimum processing sequence.
2. Production fl ow analysis (PFA). Production fl ow analysis uses the sequence of op-
erations to make a part, as obtained from factory routing sheets or computer-aided 
process planning. Parts that are made by identical operations form a family. This 
is done by creating a matrix of part numbers (rows) versus machine numbers/
operation numbers. The rows and columns are rearranged, often with computer 
assistance, until parts that use the same process operations are identifi ed by being 
grouped together in the matrix. These parts are then candidates for being incorpo-
rated into a manufacturing cell.
The PFA method quickly ends up with very large, unwieldy matrices. A prac-
tical upper limit is several hundred parts and 20 different machines. Also, the 
method has diffi culty if past process routing has not been done consistently.
3. Classifi cation and coding. The previous two methods are chiefl y aimed at im-
proving manufacturing operations. Classifi cation and coding is a more formal ac-
tivity that is aimed at DFMA. The designer assigns a part code that includes such 
factors as basic shape, like in Fig. 13.6, external shape features, internal features, 
fl at surfaces, holes, gear teeth, material, surface properties, manufacturing pro-
cess, and operation sequences. As of yet, there is no universally applicable or ac-
cepted coding system. Some GT systems employ a code of up to 30 digits.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
577
13
4. Engineering database. With the advent of large relational databases, many com-
panies are building their own GT systems directly applicable to their own line of 
products. All information found on an engineering drawing plus processing infor-
mation can be archived.
Software on the market does this in one of three ways:
• The designer sketches the shape of the part on the computer screen and the com-
puter searches for all part drawings that resemble this shape.
• The software provides the capability to rapidly browse the library of hundreds 
of drawings, and the designer fl ags those that look interesting.
• The designer annotates the part drawing with text descriptors such as the part 
characteristics shown in Table 13.13. Then the computer can be asked, for ex-
ample, to retrieve all part drawings with an L/D ratio between certain limits, or 
retrieve a combination of descriptors.
Determining part classifi cation is an active area of research, stimulated by the wide-
spread use of CAD. The power of computational algorithms combined with the capabili-
ties of CAD systems assure that there will be continual improvement in the automation 
of part classifi cation.
13.8
MISTAKE-PROOFING
An important element of DFMA is to anticipate and avoid simple human errors that 
occur in the manufacturing process by taking preventive action early in the prod-
uct design process. Shigeo Shingo, a Japanese manufacturing engineer, developed 
this idea in 1961 and called it poka-yoke.1 In English this is usually referred to as 
mistake-proofi ng or error proofi ng. A basic tenet of mistake-proofi ng is that human 
errors in manufacturing processes should not be blamed on individual operators 
but should be considered to be system errors due to incomplete engineering design. 
Mistake-proofi ng aims at reaching a state of zero defects, where a defect is defi ned as 
any variation from design or manufacturing specifi cation. 
Common mistakes in manufacturing operations are:
 
● Mistakes setting up workpieces and tools in machines or in fi xtures
 
● Incorrect or missing parts in assemblies
 
● Processing the wrong workpiece
 
● Improper operations or adjustment of machines
Note that mistakes can occur not only in manufacturing but in design and purchasing 
as well. An infamous design mistake occurred with the 1999 orbiter to Mars, when it 
crashed on entering the Martian atmosphere. The contractor to NASA used conventional 
U.S. units instead of the specifi ed SI units in designing and building the control rockets, 
and the error was never detected by those who designed the control system in SI units.
1. Pronounced POH-kah YOH-kay.

578 
engineering design 
13
13.8.1 Using Inspection to Find Mistakes
A natural response to eliminating mistakes is to increase the degree of inspection of 
parts by machine operators and of products by assembly line workers. However, as 
shown by Example 13.5, even the most rigorous inspection of the process output can-
not eliminate all defects caused by mistakes.
E X A M P L E 1 3 . 5 Screening with Self-Checks and Successive Checks
Assume a part is being made with a low average defect rate of 0.25% (0.0025). In an at-
tempt to reduce defects even further, 100 percent inspection is employed. Each operator 
self-checks each part, and then the operator next in line checks the work of the previous 
operator.
A defect rate of 0.25% represents 2500 defects in each million parts produced 
(2500 ppm). If an operator has a 3% error rate in self inspection, and two operators in-
spect each part in succession, then the number of defective parts that pass through two 
successive inspections is 2500(0.03)(0.03) = 2.25 ppm. This is a very low level of defec-
tive parts. In fact it is below the magic percentage of defects of 3.4 ppm for achieving the 
Six Sigma level of quality (see Sec. 15.4).
However, the product is an assemblage of many parts. If each product consists of 
100 parts, and each part is 999,998 ppm defect free, then a product of 100 parts has 
(0.999998)100 or 999,800 ppm that are defect free. This leaves 200 ppm of assembled 
products that are defective. If the product has 1000 parts there would be 1999 defective 
products out of a million made. However, if the product has only 50 parts the defective 
products would decrease to 100 ppm.
The prior example shows that even with extreme and expensive 100 percent in-
spection, it is diffi cult to achieve high levels of defect-free products, even when the 
product is not very complex. Example 13.5 also shows that decreasing product com-
plexity (part count) is a major factor in reducing product defects. As Shingo showed,1 
a different approach from inspection is needed to achieve low levels of defects. 
13.8.2 Frequent Mistakes
There are four categories of mistakes in part production. They are design mistakes, 
defective material mistakes, manufacturing mistakes, and human mistakes.
The following are mistakes attributable to the design process:
 
● Providing ambiguous information on engineering drawings or specifi cations: Fail-
ure to properly use GD&T dimensions and tolerances.
 
● Incorrect information: Mistake in conversion of units or just plain wrong calculations.
 
● A poorly developed design concept that does not fully provide the needed func-
tionality. Hastily made design decisions that result in poorly performing products 
with low reliability, or with dangers to the safety of humans or hazards for the 
environment.
1. S. Shingo, Zero Quality Control: Source Inspection and the Poka-yoke System, Productivity Press, 
Portland, OR, 1986.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
579
13
Defective material is another category of mistakes. These mistakes include:
 
● Material that is poorly chosen because not all performance requirements have been 
considered in the selection. Most commonly these involve long-term properties 
such as corrosion or wear.
 
● Material that does not meet specifi cations but gets into production, or purchased 
components that are not up to quality standards.
 
● Parts with hard-to-detect fl aws such as internal porosity or fi ne surface cracks because 
of poorly designed dies or molds, or improper processing conditions (e.g., tempera-
ture, rate of deformation, poor lubrication) for the material that is being processed.
The most common mistakes in manufacturing parts or their assembly are listed 
below, in decreasing order of frequency.1
 
● Omitted operations: Failure to perform a required step in the process plan.
 
● Omitted part: Forgetting to install a screw, gasket, or washer.
 
● Wrong orientation of part: A part is inserted in the proper location but in the wrong 
orientation.
 
● Misaligned part: Alignment is not suffi ciently accurate to give proper fi t or function.
 
● Wrong location of part: Part is oriented properly but in wrong location. Example: 
The short bolt is put in the location for the long bolt.
 
● Selection of wrong parts: Many parts look very much alike. Example: A 1-inch bolt 
is used instead of 1¼-inch bolt.
 
● Misadjustments: An operation is incorrectly adjusted.
 
● Commit a prohibited action: Often this is an accident, like dropping a wrench, or a 
safety violation, like failure to lock-out a power panel before hooking up a motor.
 
● Added material or parts: Failure to remove materials., e.g., leaving on protective cover, 
or cores in a casting. Adding extra parts, e.g., dropping a screw into the assembly.
 
● Misread, mismeasure, or misinterpret: Error in reading instruments, measuring 
dimensions, or understanding correct information.
Some generic human mistakes, and safeguards that can be used against commit-
ting these mistakes, are given in Table 13.14.
Constructive checking and correction, along with training and work standardiza-
tion, are the best ways to limit human mistakes. However, the ultimate way to eliminate 
TABLE 13.14
Causes of Human Mistakes and Suggested Safeguards
Human Mistakes
Safeguard
Inattentiveness 
Discipline; work standardization; work instructions
Forgetfulness
Checking at regular intervals
Inexperience
Skill enhancement; work standardization
Misunderstanding
Training; checking in advance; standard work practices
Poor identifi cation
Training; attentiveness; vigilance
1. C. M. Hinckley, Make No Mistake, Productivity Press, Portland, OR, 2000.

580 
engineering design 
13
mistakes is to engineer them out of the system through improved product design and 
manufacturing. This process is outlined in Sec. 13.8.3.
13.8.3 Mistake-Proofi ng Process
The steps in a mistake-proofi ng process follow a general problem-solving process:
 
● Identify the problem. The nature of the mistake is not always obvious. There is a 
natural human tendency to conceal mistakes. Work hard to develop a culture of open-
ness and quality consciousness. Normal inspection by sampling will not give suffi cient 
sample size of defects in a short time to identify the parts and processes causing the 
problem. Instead, use 100 percent inspection when looking for the cause of an error.
 
● Prioritize. Once the sources of mistakes have been identifi ed, classify them with a 
Pareto chart to fi nd the issues with the highest frequency of occurrence and which 
have the greatest impact on company profi ts.
 
● Use cause fi nding methods. To identify the root cause of the mistake use the TQM 
tools of cause-and-effect diagram, why-why chart, and interrelationship digraph 
(presented in Sec. 4.6) to identify the root cause of the mistake.
 
● Identify and implement solutions. General approaches for generating mistake-
proofi ng solutions are discussed in Sec. 13.8.4. Many solutions will reduce the 
defect rate in manufacturing parts and reduce the mistake rate in assembling the 
parts. However, the greatest impact will occur in the initial design of the part if 
DFMA guidelines are rigorously followed during embodiment design.
 
● Evaluate. Determine if the problem has been solved. If the solution is ineffective, 
revisit the mistake-proofi ng process.
13.8.4 Mistake-Proofi ng Solutions
In the broadest sense, mistake-proofi ng is about introducing controls to prevent mis-
takes, detect mistakes, or detect defects arising from mistakes. Clearly it is better to 
prevent mistakes through appropriate design and operational controls than to only 
take action once a mistake has occurred.
Mistake-proofi ng operates in three areas of control.
 
● Control of variability, as when a part diameter varies from piece to piece as parts 
are made in a manufacturing process. Control of variability is vital to making a 
quality product. This topic is covered in some detail in Chap. 15 under the topic of 
robust design.
 
● Control of complexity is addressed chiefl y through DFMA guidelines and can 
often be traced back to issues arising with product architecture decisions in em-
bodiment design.
 
● Control of mistakes is implemented chiefl y through the design and use of mistake-
proofi ng devices1 as were fi rst suggested by the poka-yoke methodology.
1. 200 examples of mistake-proofi ng devices are described in the Appendix A to C. M. Hinckley, op. cit.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
581
13
Mistake-proofi ng devices can be grouped into fi ve broad classifi cations:
1. Checklists. These are written or computer-based lists of process steps or tasks that 
need to be done for completeness of operation. The checklist that a commercial 
aircraft pilot goes through before take-off is a good example. To catch errors in op-
erations, duplication of actions, as when you enter a computer password twice, is 
sometimes used. In manual assembly processes, instructions must be accompanied 
by clear pictures.
2. Guide pins, guide ways, and slots. These design features are used in assembly 
to ensure that parts are located and oriented properly. It is important that guides 
should align parts before critical features mate.
3. Specialized fi xtures and jigs. These devices deal with a broader case of geom-
etries and orientation issues. They typically are intended to catch any errors be-
tween steps in the manufacturing process.
4. Limit switches. Limit switches or other sensors detect mistakes in location, or 
the absence of a problem. These sensors trigger warnings, shut down the process, 
or enable it to continue. Sensors typically are interlocked with other processing 
equipment.
5. Counters. Counters, either mechanical, electrical, or optical are used to verify that 
the proper number of machine operations or parts have been carried out. Timers 
are used to verify the duration of a task.
Although the methods and examples of mistake-proofi ng have been given in the 
context of manufacturing processes, the methods can be implemented in areas such as 
sales, order entry, and purchasing, where the cost of mistakes is probably higher than 
the cost of errors that occur in manufacturing. A very similar, but more formalized 
process called Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is used to identify and 
improve upon potential failure modes in design; see Sec. 14.5.
13.9
EARLY ESTIMATION OF MANUFACTURING COST
The decisions about materials, shape, features, and tolerances that are made in the 
conceptual design and embodiment design phases determine the manufacturing cost 
of the product. It is not often possible to get large cost reductions once production has 
begun because of the high cost of change at this stage of the product development 
process. Therefore, we need a way of identifying costly designs as early as possible in 
the design process.
One way to achieve this goal is to include knowledgeable manufacturing person-
nel on the product design team. The importance of this is unassailable, but it is not 
always possible from a practical standpoint due to confl icts in time commitments, or 
even because the design and manufacturing personnel may not be in the same location.
The method presented in Sec. 13.4.6 is useful for selecting between alternative 
possible processes on the basis of estimated unit part cost. While considerable infor-
mation is used, the level of detail is not suffi cient to do much better than give a relative 
ranking of competing manufacturing processes.

582 
engineering design 
13
A system that is useful for cost estimation early in the design process was devel-
oped at the University of Hull.1 It is based on data obtained from British automotive, 
aerospace, and light manufacturing companies. It allows for the reasonable calcula-
tion of part cost as changes are made in design details or for changes in part cost as 
different processes are used to manufacture the part. An important extension of the 
method in Sec. 13.4.6 is that the factor of part shape complexity is considered.
While DFM and DFA methods can be done manually on paper, the use of com-
puterized methods greatly aids the designer by providing prompts and help screens, 
providing access to data that is often scattered in the literature, and making it easy 
to quickly see the effect of design changes. The use of DFMA software also teaches 
good design practice. Whatever the method, a major benefi t from performing a DFMA 
analysis is that the rigor of using a formal analysis scheme invariably leads to asking 
better questions, and therefore to better solutions.
13.9.1 Concurrent Costing 
The Design for Manufacture Concurrent Costing software developed by Boothroyd 
Dewhurst Inc. (www.dfma.com) allows real-time cost estimation of parts using much 
more detail than the methods discussed in Sec. 13.4.6. Typically the program starts by 
downloading a CAD fi le for the part that is being designed. If the design is not yet at 
a stage where a CAD drawing has been made, it is possible to input a shape envelope 
with dimensions of the part. We show the power of the software with a brief example.
E X A M P L E 1 3 . 6
We will describe the use of the software in the costing and design of a plastic cover. The 
material and process are selected from drop-down menus. Generally this starts with a 
menu of materials and processes, and selection of a class of materials gives the designer 
the option of selecting a specifi c material. Selecting the material greatly limits the choice 
of processes. Injection molding is the obvious choice for the hollow rectangular shell made 
from thermoplastic polypropylene.
Figure 13.18 shows the computer screen after the material and process have been 
selected. The values are determined by the part geometry that is entered as a drawing, 
and default values for the injection molding process. Because this is a molding process, 
much of the cost is determined by the cost of the mold. The DFM input will be concerned 
chiefl y with how decisions on design details are refl ected in the cost to make the tooling.
Following down the list of design parameters we come to part complexity. Part com-
plexity is measured by the number of surface patches needed to describe both the inner 
and outer surface of the part in a 3-D CAD model. The inner surface of the cover is ribbed 
and contains bosses used for making screw connections, so the patches add up to a con-
siderable value. The next two sections ask for input that further defi nes the mold cost.
 
●Tolerances: The tightness of the tolerance determines the care needed in machining 
the mold cavity.
 
●Appearance: If the part is transparent, the mold surface will need to be polished to a 
high degree.
1. K. G. Swift and J. D. Booker, Process Selection, 2nd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2003; 
also A. J. Allen and K. G. Swift, Proc. Instn. Mech. Engrs., Vol. 204, pp. 143–48, 1990.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
583
13
 
●Texture: If the surface needs to have a grain or leather appearance, this will require 
fi ne engraving of the mold surface.
 
●Parting line: The parting line refers to the shape of the surface across which the mold 
separates to eject the part. A straight parting plane is the least costly, but if the part de-
sign requires a stepped or curved surface, the mold cost will be signifi cantly increased.
 
●Mold construction: A two-plate mold, a stationary cavity plate, and a moving core 
plate is the least complex mold system.
 
●Runner system: For high rates of production a heated runner is designed into the fi xed 
plate. This also eliminates the need to separate the runners and sprues from the part. 
This mold feature adds cost to the mold.
FIGURE 13.18
Design parameters used to determine cost of an injection-molded cover. (Used with permis-
sion of Boothroyd-Dewhurst, Inc.)

584 
engineering design 
13
 
●Mold material: This choice will determine the life of the mold.
 
●Number of cavities: Depending on the size of the part, it is possible to make more than 
one part per shot. This requires several cavities, which increases the productivity, n˙ , 
but also increases the machining time and the mold cost.
 
●Devices in one cavity: If it is necessary to mold depressions or undercuts on the inside 
of the part, it requires building the core pin retraction device inside the core plate. This 
is diffi cult and very expensive.
Users of the software need some knowledge of the construction and operation of injection 
molds to go beyond the basic default values and link the part design with mold construc-
tion costs.1
Note that the preliminary piece part cost and the tooling cost allocated to each 
part are given at the bottom left in Fig. 13.18. Any of the parameters in this table can be 
changed, and the costs will be recalculated quickly to show the effect of the change. For 
example, we might decide that using 30 percent of recycled (regrind) plastic resin would 
degrade the properties of the part, so this value is set at 10 percent. This change increases 
the material cost. Next, we decide that the part size is small enough that two parts can be 
made in a single mold. The number of cavities is changed from 1 to 2. This increases the 
tooling cost but it reduces the piece part cost because the number of parts made per unit 
time is doubled.
Another level of detail that can be changed is the specifi cation of the injection mold-
ing machine (clamping force, shot capacity horsepower), the process operation costs 
(number of operators, operator hourly rate, machine rate), part reject rate, machine and 
mold setup cost, mold process data (cavity life, fi ll time, cooling time, mold reset time), 
and the cost to make the mold broken down into the cost of prefabricated plates, pil-
lars, bushings, etc. and the cost of machining the mold cavity and cores. A review of 
Sec. 13.4.6 will show where these factors fi t into the overall cost equation.
Free cost evaluation software for a limited range of processes is available from www.
custompartnet.com.
This example shows the level of detail that is needed for a reliable determination 
of part cost, especially the cost of tooling and process operations. The degree of de-
sign complexity and interaction with process parameters is such that a computer-based 
cost model is the only way to do this quickly and consistently. Design details made at 
the confi guration design step can be explored in a “what-if” mode for their impact on 
tooling costs before an actual commitment to purchase tooling is made.
13.9.2 Process Modeling and Simulation
Advances in computer technology and fi nite element analysis have led to industry’s wide-
spread adoption of computer manufacturing process models. Just as fi nite element and 
fi nite difference analyses and CFD have made possible refi ned design for performance 
of components that have reduced the cost of prototype testing, so have computer process 
models2 reduced the development time and cost of tooling. The greatest application of 
1. H. Rees and B. Catoen, Selecting Injection Molds, Hanser Gardner Publications, Cincinnati, OH, 2005.
2. ASM Handbook, Vol. 22A, Fundamentals of Modeling for Metals Processing, 2009; ASM Hand-
book, Vol. 22B, Metals Process Simulation, 2010, ASM International, Materials Park, OH.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
585
13
process models has been with casting, injection molding, closed-die forging, and sheet 
metal forming processes.
Since most manufacturing processes use large equipment and expensive tooling, 
it is costly and time consuming to do process improvement development. A typical 
type of problem is making refi nements to the mold to achieve complete material fl ow 
in all regions of a component made by casting or injection molding. In deformation 
processes like forging or extrusion, a typical problem is to modify the dies to prevent 
cracking in regions of high stress in the part. Today, these types of problems and many 
others can be solved quickly using commercially available simulation software. The 
results of the analysis can be seen as a series of color maps of a process parameter, 
such as temperature. Animations showing the actual solidifi cation of the metal over 
time are commonplace. Modeling of microstructure and defects developed during casting 
and deformation processing have reached acceptable levels of reality. References to com-
mon process modeling software will be given as we describe the DFM guidelines for 
several processes in subsequent sections of this chapter. 
13.10
PROCESS SPECIFIC DFMA GUIDELINES
Section 13.5 discussed general guidelines for design for manufacture (DFM), and 
Section 13.6 did the same for design for assembly (DFA). We have also seen how DFA 
can have an important impact on DFM by achieving reduction in part count. As em-
phasized by Boothroyd,1 these are really complementary processes and it makes sense 
to consider them as a single unifi ed process, design for manufacturing and assembly, 
DFMA.
The remaining sections in this chapter will be concerned with DFMA issues spe-
cifi c to the main classes of manufacturing processes. Many of these are aspects of 
shape that can minimize certain types of manufacturing defects, or issues with mate-
rial behavior under processing conditions of which the designer needs to be aware.
Page restrictions preclude using much space to describe the process equipment 
and tooling. Fortunately, excellent descriptions can be found on the Internet. Two 
that we recommend are (1) www.custompartnet.com, which has excellent 3-D models 
showing the equipment and tooling, along with a detailed word descriptions about 
how parts are made using the process; and (2) http://aluminium.matter.org.uk, which 
has excellent animations that help you understand how the main process variables 
infl uence part manufacture. For access to (2) click on Processing at the upper right of 
the diagram, which should lead you to the process you are looking for. Another useful 
website (www.engineersedge.com/manufacturing_design.shtml) considers more pro-
cesses but with more variability in presentation. Yet another (www.npd-solutions.com) 
leads to a listing of DFM rules for 15 common processes.
1. G. Boothroyd, P. Dewhurst, and W. Knight, Product Design for Manufacture and Assembly, 3rd ed., 
Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 2010

586 
engineering design 
13
A valuable resource for details on manufacturing processes is the big green ASM 
Handbooks available in most engineering libraries. They are also available in elec-
tronic form, and through knovel.com. Table 13.5 lists the most pertinent volumes in 
this handbook series.
13.11
DESIGN OF CASTINGS
One of the shortest routes from raw material to fi nished part is a casting process. In 
casting, a molten metal is poured into a mold or cavity that approximates the shape of 
the fi nished part (see www.custompartnet.com). Also, www.diecastingdesign.org gives 
useful details on this important process. Heat is extracted through the mold (in this 
case a sand mold), and the molten metal solidifi es into the fi nal solid shape. The chief 
design issues for the mold are to provide an entry for the molten metal into the mold 
that creates continuous laminar fl ow through the sprue and runner, and to provide a 
source of molten metal, suitably located in the mold so that it stays molten until all of 
the casting has been solidifi ed. Cores are placed to provide hollow features for the part.
This seemingly simple process can be quite complex metallurgically, since the 
metal undergoes a complete transition from the superheated molten state to the solid 
state.1 Liquid metal shrinks on solidifi cation. Thus, the casting and mold must be de-
signed so that a supply of molten metal is available to compensate for the shrinkage. 
The supply is furnished by introducing feeder heads (risers) that supply molten metal 
but must be removed from the fi nal casting. Allowance for shrinkage and thermal 
contraction after the metal has solidifi ed must also be provided in the design. Since 
the solubility of dissolved gases in the liquid decreases suddenly as the metal solidi-
fi es, castings are subject to the formation of trapped gas bubbles that result in porosity.
The mechanical properties of a casting are determined during solidifi cation and 
subsequent heat treatment. The grain structure of the casting, and thus its properties, 
are determined by how fast each part of the casting freezes. The solidifi cation time is 
roughly proportional to the square of the ratio of volume to surface area. Thus, bulky 
castings freeze much more slowly than thin section castings and have lower proper-
ties. A sphere of a given volume will freeze more slowly than a thin plate of the same 
volume because the plate has much more surface area to transfer heat into the mold.
The casting must be designed so that the fl ow of molten metal is not impeded 
by solidifi ed metal before the entire mold cavity fi lls with molten metal. The casting 
should freeze progressively, with the region farthest from the source of molten metal 
freezing fi rst so that the risers can supply liquid metal to feed shrinkage that occurs 
during solidifi cation. Designing the needed solidifi cation pattern can be achieved with 
fi nite element modeling to construct temperature distributions as a function of time.2 
1. H. Fredriksson and  U. Åkerlind, Materials Processing During Casting, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 
Chichester, UK, 2006.
2. Magmasoft, MAVIS-FLOW, ProCAST, and SOLIDcast are among the several commercial software 
programs.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
587
13
The FEA can predict shrinkage regions due to lack of feeding and grain size (prop-
erty) distribution in the casting.
There are a large number of casting processes, which can be classifi ed best with 
respect to the type of mold that is employed (Fig. 13.19). The two broad categories 
are expendable mold casting, in which the mold is destroyed after making each part, 
and permanent mold casting, for which many parts are made in each mold. For more 
details see Custompartnet.com.
13.11.1 Guidelines for the Design of Castings
Proper attention to design details can minimize casting problems and lead to lower 
costs.1 Therefore, close collaboration between the designer and the foundry engineer 
is important. The use of computer-based solidifi cation modeling in this design col-
laboration is recommended.
The chief consideration is that the shape of the casting should allow for orderly 
solidifi cation by which the solidifi cation front progresses from the remotest parts to-
ward the points where molten metal is fed in. Whenever possible, section thickness 
should be uniform. Large masses of metal lead to hot spots, where freezing is delayed, 
and a shrinkage cavity is produced when the surrounding metal freezes fi rst.
Figure 13.20 illustrates some design features that can eliminate the shrinkage cav-
ity problem. A transition between two sections of different thicknesses should be made 
gradually (a). As a rule of thumb, the difference in thickness of adjoining sections 
should not exceed 2 to 1. Wedge-shaped changes in wall thickness should not have a 
taper exceeding 1 to 4. The thickness of a boss or pad (b) should be less than the thick-
ness of the section the boss adjoins, and the transition should be gradual. The local 
FIGURE 13.19
Classifi cation of casting processes.
Casting processes
Expendable mold
Permanent pattern
Expendable pattern
Permanent mold
Sand molding
Green
CO2
Investment casting
Permanent
mold casting
Shell molding 
Resin
Metal
Graphite
Plaster mold
Die casting
Centrifugal casting
1. Casting Design and Performance, American Society for Metals, 2009; ASM Handbook, Vol. 15, 
American Society for Metals, Materials Park, OH, 2008; T. S. Piwonka, “Design for Casting,” ASM 
Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 723–29, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1997.

588 
engineering design 
13
heavy section caused by omitting the outer radius at a corner (c) should be eliminated. 
The radius for good shrinkage control should be from one-half to one-third of the sec-
tion thickness. A strong hot spot is produced when two ribs cross each other (d). These 
areas solidify after the thinner sections surrounding the junction so that the shrinkage 
cannot be fed with liquid metal, resulting in a shrinkage cavity. This problem can be 
eliminated by offsetting the ribs as shown in (d). A good way to evaluate where hot 
spots brought about by a large mass of molten metal occur is to inscribe a circle in the 
cross section of the part. The larger the diameter of the circle, the greater the thermal 
mass effect, and the more the concern with shrinkage cavity formation. 
Castings must be designed to ensure that the pattern can be removed from the 
mold and the casting from a permanent mold. A draft, or taper, of from 6 to 3 degrees 
is required on vertical surfaces so the pattern can be removed from the mold. Project-
ing details or undercuts should be avoided, as these require extra cores. Molds made 
with extensive use of cores cost more money, so castings should be designed to mini-
mize the use of cores. Also, provisions must be made for placing cores in the mold 
cavity and holding them in place when the metal fl ows into the mold.
Solidifi cation stresses can occur when different sections of the casting solidify at 
different times and rates. If this happens while the alloy is cooling through the tem-
perature range where both liquid and solids coexist, it can result in internal fracture 
called hot tearing. Uneven cooling as the temperature continues to drop can result in 
severe distortion or warping of the casting.
Some casting processes like die casting, permanent mold casting, and investment 
casting produce parts with excellent dimensional accuracy and smooth surfaces. Parts 
made with these processes are net shape parts that require no machining before using. 
Sand-cast parts always require machining after casting in order to attain the required 
dimensions and surface fi nish. Therefore, it is necessary to provide extra material in 
the casting as a machining allowance.
FIGURE 13.20
Some design details to minimize shrinkage cavity formation.
Poor
Shrinkage
cavity
Poor
Good
Good
Poor
Good
Poor
Good
(d)
(b)
(c)
(a)

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
589
13
13.11.2 Producing Quality Castings
Casting offers exceptional design fl exibility of shape at reasonable cost. It is an ancient 
metalworking process that has not always enjoyed a reputation for producing high-
quality parts. A point not always understood by designers is that in a part made by 
casting, its mechanical properties depend on the design of the part because the proper-
ties depend on the size and shape of the grains. This depends on the solidifi cation rate, 
which in turn depends on the thickness of different sections of the part. Furthermore, 
most casting processes are carried out in the surrounding atmosphere so that hot liq-
uid metal can react with air to form oxide fi lms and inclusions. Inclusions are nonme-
tallic particles formed by interaction with the mold or from chemical reactions among 
the constituents of the molten metal. These can serve as sites for crack initiation, and 
oxide fi lms themselves can act like cracks.
Porosity of various origins can be present in a cast part. We have already dis-
cussed the macroporosity1 produced by inadequate feeding of liquid while the casting 
is cooling. This is solved by modifi cations to the part geometry combined with better 
placement of risers in the casting. The use of solidifi cation computer models is highly 
effective in identifying possible sites for macroporosity. The second type of porosity, 
microporosity, is more diffi cult to eliminate. As the metal solidifi es it tends to form 
small, interlocking, tree-like structures called dendrites. When these approach 40 per-
cent solid material by volume, the passages for further fl uid infl ow become blocked, 
leaving a fi ne porosity network. A second mechanism for pore formation arises from 
the fact that the solubility of gases in liquid metal decreases strongly with falling tem-
perature. Thus, the dissolved gases are expelled from the liquid metal, and they form 
bubbles that grow into sizeable pores. 
Microporosity can be minimized by the choice of alloy, but it is not something 
the designer can affect by the part design. It can be nearly eliminated by melting and 
pouring in the absence of air (vacuum melting), as is done for aircraft turbine blades, 
but this is very expensive. Another possibility is to use hot isostatic pressing (HIP) to 
close up any residual porosity. This process consists of enclosing the parts in a pres-
sure vessel and subjecting them to a hydrostatic pressure of argon at 15 to 25 ksi at 
an elevated temperature for several hours. This will eliminate nearly all vestiges of 
microporosity, but again it is an expensive secondary process.
The complexity of successfully casting parts with high-quality metallurgical 
properties requires the designer to be able to predict the solidifi cation of the part and 
the metallurgical structure of the fi nal part. At a minimum this means being able 
to determine how the part will solidify before a casting is poured, and to make de-
sign alterations until a casting is obtained without macroporosity. It would be highly 
desirable to be able to map the temperature-time curve at critical points in the cast-
ing. To do this requires teaming up with a progressive foundry with an experienced 
foundry engineer who is skilled in using solidifi cation software. The most advanced 
software is capable of predicting grain size and structure, and therefore being able to 
1. Macroporosity is large enough to be seen with the unaided eye on radiographic inspection. Micropo-
rosity refers to pores that are not visible without magnifi cation.

590 
engineering design 
13
infer mechanical properties. This software is also capable of predicting the distortions 
that occur during casting.
Obtaining quality castings requires working with a foundry that is up-to-date on 
the latest casting technology.1 Much of this newer technology deals with minimizing 
defects in castings. A high-tech foundry will be knowledgeable about and practicing 
such things as:
 
● The proper way to prepare the melt to minimize the level of inclusions and level of 
dissolved gas
 
● Design of sprue, runner, and ingate so as to minimize the distance the liquid metal 
falls or prevent molten metal from spilling into unfi lled regions of the casting
 
● Mold design to keep the liquid metal front moving at all times
 
● Design to eliminate bubbles of entrained air in the liquid metal
 
● Design to avoid the need to feed metal uphill against gravity
 
● Finding out whether feeding requirements are established by calculation or 
guesswork
 
● Design to prevent convection problems by ensuring that thermal gradients act with 
rather than against gravity
 
● The use of fi lters to reduce inclusions in the casting
This knowledge area is not that of the part designer, but he should at least be aware of 
the issues so as to be able to evaluate the technical capability of his casting supplier.
Using casting simulation software to design the part and mold, and using a part 
supplier that employs modern casting operations concepts, will produce parts that 
perform admirably in many applications. Reducing the level of defects will result in 
parts with more reproducible mechanical properties than are usually expected from 
castings.
13.12
DESIGN OF FORGINGS
Forging processes are among the most important means of producing parts for high- 
performance applications. Forging is typical of a group of bulk deformation processes 
in which a solid billet is forced under high pressure by the use of a press to undergo 
extensive plastic deformation into a fi nal near-to-fi nished shape.2 Other examples of 
deformation processes are extrusion, in which a long object with a high L/D ratio is 
produced by pushing a metal billet through a die, drawing, in which a billet is pulled 
through a die, and rolling, in which a slab is passed through rolls to make a thin sheet. 
Figure 13.21 shows the range of bulk deformation processes that are used to convert 
cast material into semi-fi nished or fi nal products.
1. J. Campbell, “Casting Practice-Guidelines for Effective Production of Reliable Castings,” ASM Hand-
book, Vol. 15, Casting, pp. 497–512. J. Campbell, Castings Practice: The Ten Rules of Castings, 2nd ed., 
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2004.
2. B. L. Ferguson, “Design for Deformation Processes,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 730–44, ASM 
International, Materials Park, OH, 1997.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
591
13
Forging usually is carried out on a hot workpiece, but other deformation processes 
such as cold extrusion or impact extrusion may be conducted cold, depending upon the 
material. Because of the extensive plastic deformation that occurs in forging, the metal 
undergoes metallurgical changes. Any porosity is closed up, and the grain structure and 
second phases are deformed and elongated in the principal directions of working, creat-
ing a “fi ber structure.” The forging billet has an axial fi ber structure due to hot working, 
but this is redistributed depending upon the geometry of the forging (Fig. 13.22).
FIGURE 13.21
Bulk deformation processes that convert cast metals into semifabricated or fi nished products. 
(After J.A. Schey)
Cast slab,
band, strip
Flat rolling
Shape rolling
Cast ingot, bloom, billet, wire bar
2-D shapes
2-D shapes 3-D shapes
Tube
 piercing
Hot extrusion
Hot forging
Solid
Bar
Section
Tube
Multihole
Open-die
 forging
Impression
 die forging
Closed-die
 forging
Swaging
Rotary
 forging
Cold extrusion
Cold forging
Drawing
 Sinking
 On plug
 On mandrel
Drawing
 Wire
 Bar
 Section
Hollow
Ring
 rolling
Forge
 rolling
Cross
 rolling
Gear
 rolling
Rolling
Plate
Sheet
Strip
Foil
Beam
Bar
Hexagon
Wire
Rail
Angle
Channel
FIGURE 13.22
The redistribution of the fi ber structure direction during the forging of a part.
Original
billet
Forged
blank

592 
engineering design 
13
The mechanical fi bering due to the preferred alignment of inclusions, voids, 
segregation, and second-phase particles in the direction of working introduces a di-
rectionality (anisotropy) to structure-sensitive properties such as ductility, fatigue 
strength, and fracture toughness. These properties are greatest in the direction of 
working, which has aligned the “fi ber,” but they are lower in directions transverse to 
this longitudinal direction. The designer needs to realize that some properties may 
not be the same in all directions of the forging. Therefore, in designing a forging, the 
direction of maximum plastic deformation (longitudinal) should be aligned with the 
direction of the part that needs to carry the maximum stress.
Forgings are classifi ed into open- or closed-die forgings. Open dies, usually fl at dies, 
are used to impose localized forces for deforming billets progressively into simple shapes, 
much as the blacksmith does with his hammer and anvil. Closed-die forging or impres-
sion die forging uses mechanical presses or hammers to force the metal to fl ow into a 
closed cavity to produce complex shapes to close dimensional tolerances. A wide variety 
of shapes, sizes, and materials can be made in forging. With proper forging die design, 
grain fl ow is controlled to give the best properties at the critically stressed regions.
Closed-die forgings rarely are done in a single step. The billet, often a piece of a 
bar stock, is fi rst shaped in blocker dies (Fig. 13.23a) to shape the material properly 
so it will fl ow to fi ll the cavity of the fi nishing die completely (Fig. 13.23b). To ensure 
complete fi lling of the die cavity, a slight excess of material is used. It escapes into 
the fl ash surrounding the part, where it is “trapped” from further deformation. This 
causes the pressure over the rest of the workpiece to build up, forcing the workpiece 
material into the farthest recesses of the die. In this way, the details of the forging are 
achieved. Then the fl ash is trimmed off from the fi nished forging and recycled.
13.12.1 DFM Guidelines for Closed-Die Forging
Forging is essentially a molding process like casting, only now the material is a plas-
tically deforming solid instead of a very low-viscosity fl uid. Thus the DFM guidelines 
3 to 5°
7 to 10°
Land
Deformed shape
Billet
Flash
gutter
R
R
b
(b)
(a)
Flash
FIGURE 13.23
Schematic of closed-die forging. (a) Blocker die; (b) fi nishing die. (After J.A. Schey.)

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
593
13
for forging are very similar to casting.1 Detailed rules for designing forgings are given 
in ASM Handbook, Vol. 14A, pp. 701–823. The Forging Industry Association (FIA) has 
an excellent website oriented toward showing engineering students how to design and 
use forgings: www.forging.org/engineer/Design_engineer.cfm. Click on Product Design 
Guide (electronic version) and go to Section 3.5.4.
13.12.2 Computer-Aided Forging Design
To predict the sequence of shapes to go from a piece of bar stock to a complex, 
defect-free forged shape requires great skill on the part of the die designer. This com-
plex engineering task has been greatly aided by 30 years of research in applying FEA 
to the analysis of deformation processes. Currently, software is available for the desktop 
computer 2 that allows the designer to accurately determine not only press loads and die 
stresses but also such signifi cant parameters as stress, strain, and temperature distribu-
tion throughout the deforming workpiece and free surface profi le. An important feature 
of the software is the ability to visualize the geometrical changes in the workpiece as 
the dies close in each step of the process. The designer can make changes in the tooling 
design and observe on subsequent simulations whether these led to improvement in the 
material fl ow and eliminated fl ow defects like laps or incomplete die fi ll. The savings 
in the cost of reworking dies and trying out reworked dies have led to broad indus-
try adoption of deformation processing simulation software. Complementary software 
models the change in grain size as the part undergoes forging at elevated temperature. 
13.13
DESIGN FOR SHEET-METAL FORMING
Sheet metal is widely used for industrial and consumer parts because of its capacity 
for being bent and formed into intricate shapes. Sheet-metal parts comprise a large 
fraction of automotive, agricultural, and aircraft components. Successful sheet-metal 
forming depends on the selection of a material with adequate formability, the proper 
design of the part and the tooling, the surface condition of the sheet, the selection and 
application of lubricants, and the speed of the forming press.
13.13.1 Sheet Metal Stamping and Bending
The cold stamping of a strip or sheet of metal with dies can be classifi ed as either a cut-
ting or a forming operation.3 Cutting operations are designed to punch holes in sheets or 
to separate entire parts from sheets by blanking. Cutting is a shearing operation which 
1. J. G. Bralla, Handbook of Product Design for Manufacturing, Sec. 3.13, McGraw-Hill, New York, 
1986.
2. DEFORM® from Scientifi c Forming Technologies, Columbus, OH and FORGE from Transvalor, Inc.
3. ASM Handbook, Vol.14B, Metalworking: Sheet Forming, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 
I. Suchy, Handbook of Die Design, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, 2006; J. A. Schey, Introduction to Manufacturing 
Processes, 3d ed., Chap. 10, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000.

594 
engineering design 
13
culminates in controlled fracture. A blanked shape may be either a fi nished part or the 
fi rst stage in a forming operation in which the fi nal shape is created by plastic defor-
mation, often a bending operation. Individual sheet metal parts are often joined into a 
structure by spot or laser welding. See custompartnet.com for descriptions of stamping 
and bending operations as well as discussion of bend allowance and springback allow-
ance. The great variety of sheet forming operations is shown in Fig.13.24.
When holes are punched in metal sheet, only part of the metal thickness is sheared 
cleanly; that is, a hole with partially tapered sides is created. If the hole is to be used 
as a bearing surface, then a subsequent operation will be required to obtain parallel 
walls. Diameters of punched holes should not be less than the thickness of the sheet or 
a minimum of 0.025 in. Smaller holes result in excessive punch breakage and should 
be drilled. The minimum distance between holes, or between a hole and the edge of 
the sheet, should be at least equal to the sheet thickness. If holes are to be threaded, 
the sheet thickness must be at least one-half the thread diameter.
The ability to bend a metal without cracking at the bend improves when the bend 
is made across the “metal grain” (i.e., the line of the bend is perpendicular to the roll-
ing direction of the sheet). The largest possible bend radius should be used in design to 
prevent cracking, and the bend radius should not be less than the sheet thickness t. The 
formability of sheet in bending is expressed in multiples of the sheet thickness; thus a 2t 
material has a greater formability than a sheet metal whose minimum bend radius is 4t.
FIGURE 13.24
Classifi cation of sheet-metalworking processes. (After J.A. Schey)
Cold forming
Hot forming
Plate, Sheet, Strip
Shearing
 Slitting
 Cut-off
 Blanking
 Punching
 Notching
 Lancing
 Shaving
Fine
blanking
Bending
 Roll forming
 Seaming
 Four-slide
  forming
Stretch
 forming
Embossing
Drawing
 Cupping
 Redrawing
 Reverse
  redrawing
 Ironing
Stretch-drawing
Special processes
Drawing
 Rubber forming
 Hydraulic forming
Flanging and necking
Bulging
Hydroforming
HERF
Peen forming
Spinning
 Shear spinning
Wire
Bending
Four-slide
 forming
Bending
Bending
Drawing
Stretch
 forming
Spinning
Superplastic
 forming
Bending
Necking
Flanging
Hydroforming
Section
Tube
Section, tube
Sheet

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
595
13
13.13.2 Stretching and Deep Drawing
Metal sheets are often formed into large contoured shapes such as the roof or fender 
of an automobile. To form such shapes requires a combination of stretching and deep 
drawing. In stretching, the sheet is clamped around its periphery and subjected to 
tension forces that elongate it and thin the sheet at the same time. The limit of defor-
mation is the formation of a localized region of thinning (necking) in the sheet. This 
behavior is governed by the uniform elongation of the material in a tension test. The 
greater the capacity of the material to undergo strain hardening, the greater its resis-
tance to necking in stretching.
The classic example of sheet drawing is deep drawing, as in the formation of a 
cup.1 In deep drawing, the blank is “drawn” with a punch into a die, Fig. 13.25. In 
deep drawing the circumference of the blank is decreased when the blank is forced to 
conform to the smaller diameter of the punch. The resulting circumferential compres-
sive stresses cause the blank to thicken and also to wrinkle at its outer circumference 
unless suffi cient pressure is provided by the holddown ring or binder. However, as 
the metal is drawn into the die over the die radius, it is bent and then straightened 
while being subjected to tension. That results in substantial thinning of the sheet in 
the region between the punch and the die wall. The deformation conditions in deep 
drawing are substantially different from those in stretching. Success in deep draw-
ing is enhanced by factors that restrict sheet thinning: a die radius about 10 times the 
sheet thickness, a liberal punch radius, Rp, and adequate clearance between the punch 
and die. Of considerable importance is the crystallographic texture or orientation of the 
grains relative to the sheet rolling direction. If the texture is such that the slip mecha-
nisms favor deformation in the width direction over slip in the thickness direction of 
1. See animation of deep drawing at aluminium.matter.com under Sheet Forming.
Punch
Holddown
ring
Holddown
ring
(a)
(b)
P
Do
ho
Die
Blank
Rd
Dp
Rp
Blank
FIGURE 13.25
Deep drawing of a cylindrical cup (a) before drawing; (b) after drawing.

596 
engineering design 
13
the sheet, then deep drawing is facilitated. This property of the material can be mea-
sured with a tension test on the sheet from the plastic strain ratio r.r
r = stra
t in
a
in widthd
t
irectio
r
n of ten
t
sionspecimen
sts ra
t in
a
in thickness directio
r
n
= ε
ε
w
t
 
(13.11)
The best deep-drawing sheet steels have an r of about 2.0.
r
An important tool in developing sheet-forming operations is the Keeler-Goodman
forming limit diagram (Fig. 13.26). It is experimentally determined for each sheet 
material by placing a grid of circles on the sheet before deformation. When the sheet 
is deformed, the circles distort into ellipses. The major and minor axes of an ellipse
represent the two principal strain directions in the stamping. Strains at points where
the sheet just begins to crack are measured. The largest strain, e1, is plotted on the
y-axis and the smaller strain, e2, is plotted along the x-axis. The strains are measured 
at points of failure for different stampings with different geometries to fi ll out the dia-
gram. Strain states above the curve cause failure, and those below do not cause failure.
The tension-tension sector is essentially stretching, whereas the tension-compression 
sector is closer to deep drawing. As an example of how to use the diagram, suppose 
point A represents the critical strains in a particular sheet metal stamping. This failure 
could be eliminated by changing the metal fl ow by either design changes to the die or 
the part to move the strain state to B. Alternatively, a material of greater formability in 
which the forming limit diagram was at higher values could be substituted.
13.13.3 Computer-Aided Sheet Metal Design
Several computer-aided design tools for designing dies for parts to be made by sheet 
metal forming 1 are used extensively by the automotive industry.2 Another software,3
FIGURE 13.26
Example of the use of the 
Keeler-Goodwin forming limit diagram.
Failure
A
B
AK steel
Safe
–40
–20
Major strain   1, %
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
20
40
60
80
100
1
Minor strain   2, %
1
2
2
e
e
e
e
e
e
1. C-Y. Sa, “Computer-Aided Engineering in Sheet Metal Forming,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 14B, pp. 766–90.
2. www.autoform.com; www.dynaform.com
3. www.csi-group.com

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
597
13
PAM-STAMP 2G, provides a completely integrated sheet metal forming simulation 
for a wide range of applications. The CAD model for the part is imported into the 
Diemaker Module where a parametric geometric model of a die is created in a mat-
ter of minutes. Next the Quikstamp Module takes the geometric model, and using 
elastic-plastic models of different steel and aluminum sheet materials it determines 
the feasibility of the formability of the design. This is done using forming limit dia-
grams similar to Fig. 13.26. After possibly several die design changes or changes of 
sheet material, the ability to make the part is verifi ed. Then the design passes to the 
Autostamp Module, where a virtual die tryout is conducted in detail. The simulation 
can show the location of defects like splits and wrinkles and shows where drawbeads 
should be placed to alter metal deformation fl ow. Operating parameters such as the 
die hold down force and sheet lubrication can be changed to observe their effects on 
formability. Built-in springback prediction enables the designer to make changes in 
tooling geometry before any expensive tooling has been built. This software, and the 
others mentioned previously, allow the development of tooling in a few days, whereas 
with conventional “cut and try” methods it may take several months.
13.14
DESIGN FOR MACHINING
Machining operations represent the most versatile of manufacturing processes. Prac-
tically every part undergoes some kind of machining operation in its fi nal stages of 
manufacture. Parts that are machined may have started out as castings or forgings and 
require only a few drilled holes and fi nishing, or they may be machined completely 
from bar stock or plate when only a small number of parts are needed.
There is a wide variety of machining processes with which the design engineer 
should be familiar.1 Machining processes can be categorized by whether the tool 
translates or rotates or is stationary while the workpiece rotates. The classifi cation of 
machining processes based on this system is shown in Fig. 13.27.
All machining operations produce a shape by cutting a succession of small chips 
from the workpiece with a hard, sharp cutting tool. There are many ways of remov-
ing material by chip formation. Some processes use a tool with a single cutting edge 
(e.g., lathe, shaper, planer), but most use a multipoint tool (milling, drilling, sawing, 
grinding). Two very different approaches to machining are forming and generating. A 
shape is formed when a cutting tool possessing the fi nished contour of the shape is fed 
(plunged) directly into the workpiece. The workpiece may be moving or stationary, as 
in drilling a hole.
Most machining processes generate a shape by relative motion between the tool 
and the workpiece. The primary motion moves the cutting tool into the workpiece, 
and the feed motion moves the point of engagement of the tool along the workpiece. 
1. For examples see ASM Handbook, Vol. 16, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1989; J. T. Black 
and R. Kohser, DeGarmo’s Materials and Processes in Manufacturing, 10th ed., John Wiley & Sons, 
Hoboken, NJ, 2008.

598 
engineering design 
13
Fig. 13.28 shows some examples. See custompartnet.com for turning, milling, and hole-
making machining operations. Pay special attention to equipment, process cycle, pos-
sible defects, and design rules. See aluminium.matter and follow the sequence Process-
ing-Machining-Fund of Machining-Cutting. We suggest you look at topics in the order 
1, 2, 7, 8, and 10. To gain deeper insight about individual processes, go to Cutting Pro-
cesses and look at Milling, Turning, Drilling, Tapping, and Reaming as desired.
13.14.1 Machinability
Most metals and plastics can be machined, but they vary a great deal in the ease with 
which they can be machined, that is, their machinability. Machinability is a complex 
FIGURE 13.27
Classifi cation of metal-cutting processes.
Tool translates
Broach
Planer
Shaper
Tool rotates
Vertical
machines
Drill
press
Milling
machine
Milling
machine
Horizontal
boring
machine
Horizontal
machines
Workpiece rotates
Vertical
machines
Vertical
boring
machine
Vertical
turret
lathe
Lathe
Multiple
spindle
lathes
Bar
automatic
Automatic
chucker
Turret
lathe
Engine
lathe
Bar
machine
Shaft-type
machine
Chucking
machine
Horizontal
machines
Tool

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
599
13
technological property that is diffi cult to defi ne precisely. The machinability of a material 
is usually measured relative to a standard material in a particular machining process. A 
material has good machinability if the tool wear is low, the cutting forces are low, the chips 
break into small pieces instead of forming long snarls, and the surface fi nish is acceptable. 
Machinability is a system property that depends on the workpiece material, the 
cutting tool material and its geometry, the type of machining operation, and its op-
erating conditions.1 Table 13.15 lists metallic alloys by decreasing order of machin-
ability. The right column in this table lists various machining processes in decreasing 
order of machinability. For example, for any material, grinding is generally possible 
when other machining processes give poor results, and milling is easier to accomplish 
than generation of gear teeth. 
Nothing has greater impact on machining costs and quality of machined parts 
than the machinability of the work material. Therefore, choose the material of 
highest machinability for the machining process you need to make the part. The one 
1. D. A. Stephenson, “Design for Machining,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, Materials Selection and De-
sign, pp. 754–761, 1997; I. S. Jawahir, “Design for Machining: Machinability and Machining Perfor-
mance Considerations,” Handbook of Metallurgical Process Design, Chap. 22, pp. 919–959, Marcel 
Dekker, New York, 2004.
FIGURE 13.28
Programmed tool motion (feed) is necessary in generating a shape: (a) turning a cylinder 
and (b) a cone; (c) shaping (planing) a fl at and (d) a hyperboloid; (e) milling a pocket; and 
(f) grinding a fl at (principal motions are marked with hollow arrows, feed motions with 
solid arrows).
Chip
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Or
Or
Depth of cut
Feed
Feed
Feed
f
Feed

600 
engineering design 
13
generalization that can be applied to machinability is that the higher the hardness of 
the workpiece material, the poorer the machinability. Therefore, steel parts are usually 
machined in the annealed condition and then heat-treated and fi nished by grinding. It is 
necessary to leave a grinding allowance to remove any distortion from heat treatment.
13.14.2 DFM Guidelines for Machining
The following are general guidelines for designing parts that will be made by machining.1
 
● An important factor for economy in machining is to specify a machined surface 
only when it is needed for the functioning of the part. Two design examples for re-
ducing the amount of machined area are shown in Fig. 13.29. A related issue is to 
specify the size of the workpiece so it requires only a minimum of material removal.
FIGURE 13.29
Examples of design details in castings that minimize the area of the machined surface.
Good
Poor
Good
Poor
TABLE 13.15
Classes of Metals and Machining Processes, 
Listed in Decreasing Order of Machinability
Classes of Metals
Machining Processes
Magnesium alloys
Grinding
Aluminum alloys
Sawing
Copper alloys 
Turning with single-point tools
Gray cast iron
Drilling
Nodular cast iron
Milling
Carbon steels
High-speed, light feed, screw machine work
Low-alloy steels
Screw machining with form tools
Stainless steels
Boring
Hardened and high-alloy steels
Generation of gear teeth
Nickel-base superalloys
Tapping
Titanium alloys
Broaching
1. G. Boothroyd, and W. A. Knight, Fundamentals of Machining and Machine Tools, 2nd ed., Chap. 13, 
 Marcel Dekker, New York, 1989; “Simplifying Machining in the Design Stage,” Tool and Manufactur-
ing Engineers Handbook, Vol. 6, Design for Manufacturability SME, Dearborn, MI, 1992.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
601
13
 
● In designing a part, the sequence by which the part would be machined must be 
kept in mind so the design details that make machining easy are incorporated.1 
Computer modeling software for machining verifi es numerical control tool paths, 
checks fi nal part shape and dimensions, checks for interference between the cutting 
tool and the machine tool, and calculates material removal rate. Some machining 
software also optimizes cutting speed and feed for minimum cutting time. Most of 
the main CAD software vendors offer machining software.2
 
● The workpiece must have a reference surface that is suitable for holding it on the ma-
chine tool or in a fi xture. A surface with three-point support is better than a large, fl at 
surface because the workpiece is less likely to rock. Sometimes a supporting foot or 
tab must be added to a rough casting for support purposes. It will be removed from 
the fi nal machined part.
 
● When possible, the design should permit all the machining to be done without rec-
lamping the workpiece. If the part needs to be clamped in a second, different posi-
tion, one of the already machined surfaces should be used as the reference surface.
 
● Whenever possible, the design should be such that existing tools can be used in pro-
duction. When possible, the radius of the feature should be the same as the radius of 
the cutting tool, Fig. 13.30a.
 
● Design parts so that machining is not needed on the unexposed surfaces of the 
workpiece when the part is gripped in the work-holding device.
 
● Make sure that when the part is machined, the tool, tool holder, work-piece, and 
work-holding device do not interfere with one another.
 
● Remember that a cutting tool often requires a runout space because the tool cannot 
be retracted instantaneously, see Fig. 13.30b.
 
● Adjust the cutting conditions to minimize the formation of sharp burrs. A burr is a 
small projection of metal that adheres at the edges of the cut workpiece. If thicker 
than 0.4 mm, burrs cannot be removed by blast grit or tumbling methods and must 
be machined away.
The following guidelines pertain to drilling holes:
 
● The cost of a hole increases proportionately with depth, but when the depth exceeds 
three times the diameter, the cost increases more rapidly.
1. http//techtv.mit.edu/genres/24-how-to-videos/142-machine-shop-1. Also look at Fundamentals of 
Machining at aluminium.matters.
2. C. E. Fischer, “Modeling and Simulation of Machining,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 22B, Metals Process 
Simulation, ASM International, 2010, pp. 361–371.
FIGURE 13.30
Some design details that affect machining operations.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
5-axis

602 
engineering design 
13
 
● When a drill is cutting, it should meet equal resistance on all cutting edges. It will 
if the entry and exit surfaces it encounters are perpendicular to its axis.
 
● Holes should not be placed too near the edge of the workpiece. If the workpiece 
material is weak and brittle, like cast iron, it will break away. Steel, on the other 
hand, will defl ect at the thin section and will spring back afterward to produce a 
hole that is out of round.
 
● When there is a choice, design a through hole rather than a blind hole.
The following guidelines pertain to turning or milling operations.
 
● To avoid tool changing, radii should be designed to be the same as the edge of a 
milling cutter (Fig. 13.30a) or the nose radius of a lathe cutting tool. Of course, this 
rule should not supersede the need to have the appropriate radius for stress concen-
tration considerations.
 
● The defl ection of tools when boring or milling internal holes sets limits on the 
depth-to-diameter ratio.
 
● Undercuts can be machined if they are not too deep. It is essential to use an under-
cut if the design requires either external or internal threads.
 
● Designing features at an angle to the main tool movement direction call for special 
machines or attachments, Fig. 13.30c. They will be costly to make because of the 
need to interrupt operations and transfer to another machine.
 
● Placing features at an angle to the workplace surface will defl ect the tool and pre-
vent it from holding close tolerances, Fig. 13.30d. Fig. 13.30e shows an appropriate 
design to avoid this problem.
13.15
DESIGN OF WELDING
Welding is the most prominent process for joining large components into complex 
assemblies or structures. It is an important area of the wider topic of joining parts 
into assemblies. While welding is the process by which parts are permanently joined 
together, the assembly of parts is often called a weldment.
13.15.1 Joining Processes
Technology has created a myriad of joining processes, Fig. 13.31. They can be con-
veniently divided into permanent and nonpermanent joints. Nonpermanent joints are 
used when the assembly must be taken apart for maintenance, repair, or recycling.
Bolts and screws1 and snap fi ts 2 (especially in plastic parts) are most common. 
Other nonpermanent joining methods are shrink and press fi ts, snap rings, pins, and 
various types of mechanical quick-release mechanisms like clamps and clips.
1. The design of bolts and screws is typically covered in machine design texts; see R. G. Budynas and J. 
K. Nisbet Shigley’s Mechanical Engineering Design, 8th ed., Chap. 8, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008.
2. P. R. Bonenberger, The First Snap-Fit Handbook, 2nd ed., Hanser Gardner Publications, Cincinnati, 
OH, 2005.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
603
13
Permanent mechanical joining methods include riveting, stitching, and stapling of 
thin materials, and seams produced in sheet metal by making tight bends. Sometimes a 
sealer such as polymer or solder is used to make the seam impermeable. The majority 
of processes for making permanent joints involve melting, either the melting (fusion) 
of two metals at a joint (welding) or the addition of a molten material at a temperature 
where the metals at the joint have not melted (brazing, soldering, and adhesive bonding).
An extensive PRIMA selection matrix and data sheets have been developed for 
joining processes.1
13.15.2 Welding Processes
Figure 13.31 demonstrates that welding processes predominate among permanent 
joining processes.2 Welding processes can be divided into solid-state processes, in 
FIGURE 13.31
Classifi cation of joining processes.
Joining processes
Nonpermanent
Mechanical
Cold welding
Diffusion
Nonconsumable electrode
Consumable electrode
Consumable workpiece
Hot welding
Friction
Electron beam
Laser beam
Brazing
Soldering
Adhesive
bonding
Solid-state
Electric arc
High-energy-
Thermal
Resistance
welding
welding
welding
beam welding
Liquid-state (fusion)
Liquid-solid
Permanent
Screw
Snap
Shrink
Rivet
Stitch
Staple
Lap-seam
Pressure
Roll
Explosion
Ultrasonic
Pressure
Forge
Roll
Gas-W arc (TIG)
Plasma arc
Carbon arc
Gas-metal arc (MIG)
Shielded metal arc
Flux-cored
Submerged arc
Electroslag
Electrogas
Stud
Capacitor discharge
Percussion
welding
Spot
Projection
Seam
Flash-upset
High-frequency
HF induction
Gas
Thermite
1. K. G. Swift and J. D. Booker, Process Selection, 2nd ed., pp. 31–34 and pp. 190–239, Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2003.
2. ASM Handbook, Welding Fundamentals and Processes,  ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2011.

604 
engineering design 
13
which neither the weld metal nor the base metals are melted, and two classes of fusion 
processes, liquid state, and liquid-solid. The latter comprise soldering and brazing, 
which use a low melting weld metal so that the base metal does not melt, and adhesive 
bonding that uses polymeric adhesives to achieve the bond.
Solid-State Welding
In solid-state welding, joining is carried out without melting either of the materi-
als to be joined. The oldest welding process is the solid-state method called forge 
welding. It is the technique used by the blacksmith in which two pieces of steel or iron 
are heated and forged together under point contact. Slag and oxides are squeezed out, 
and interatomic bonding of the metal results. In the modern version of forge welding, 
steel pipe is produced by forming sheet into a cylinder and welding the edges together 
by forge-seam welding in which either the sheet is pulled through a conical die or the 
hot strip is passed between shaped rolls. 
As the name implies, cold-welding processes are carried out at room temperature 
without any external heating of the metal. The surfaces must be very clean, and the 
local pressure must be high enough to produce substantial cold-working. The harmful 
effect of interface fi lms is minimized when there is considerable relative movement of 
the surfaces to be joined. The movement is achieved by passing the metal through a 
rolling mill or subjecting the interface to tangential ultrasonic vibration. In explosive 
bonding there is very high pressure and extensive vorticity at the interfaces to form a 
locking effect.
Diffusion bonding takes place at a temperature high enough for diffusion to occur 
readily across the bond zone. Yet the temperatures are still below the melting points 
of the metals being joined. Hot roll bonding is a combination of diffusion bonding and 
roll bonding.
Friction welding (inertia welding) utilizes the frictional heat generated when two 
bodies slide over each other. In the usual way of doing friction welding, one part is 
held fi xed and the other part (usually a shaft or cylinder) is rotated rapidly and, at the 
same time, forced axially against the stationary part. The friction quickly heats the 
abutting surfaces and, as soon as the proper temperature is reached, the rotation is 
stopped and the pressure is maintained until the weld is complete. The impurities are 
squeezed out into a fl ash, but essentially no melting takes place. The heated zone is 
very narrow, and therefore dissimilar metals are easily joined.
Liquid-State Welding (Fusion Welding)
In the majority of welding processes a bond between the two materials is pro-
duced by melting, usually with the addition of a fi ller metal in the joint between the 
base plates. In welding, the workpiece materials and the fi ller material in the joint 
have similar compositions and melting points. By contrast, in soldering and brazing, 
the fi ller material has a much different composition that is selected to have a lower 
melting point than the workpiece materials. Liquid-state welding processes in effect 
produce miniature castings in a mold made by the space between the plates to be 
welded. Thus they are subject to the defects found in castings (porosity, hot tearing) 
but with geometry and environmental constraints that are much more challenging. 
Cooling rates are rapid and much construction welding is carried out in the open air. 

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
605
13
A welding process needs a controlled and often portable energy source to generate 
heat to melt the base metal and some way to protect the molten metal from oxidation 
by the environment. The large number of welding processes listed in Fig. 13.31 is the 
result of ongoing innovation in new processes. The fi rst energy source was the hot gas 
fl ame provided by the combustion of acetylene and oxygen. A major improvement came 
with shielded metal arc process (SMAW) in which the energy is created by an electric 
arc struck between a consumable metal electrode and the base metal. The electrode is 
coated with a fl ux material that burns to give a protective gas around the weld and also 
forms a slag cover over the molten weld pool. Improvements in this process have used 
an arc submerged in a bed of fl ux and a metal arc surrounded by a cloud of inert ar-
gon gas (MIG). Another version uses a nonconsumable tungsten electrode and a metal 
fi ller rod (TIG). Major advances came with the development of high-energy beams, fi rst 
electron beams and today high-energy laser beams. These make possible deep, narrow 
weld zones that are placed with precision in all kinds of materials. Not to be forgotten is 
resistance welding, which uses the heat produced when two metals are forced in contact 
under a high current fl ow. Spot welding and its variants seam and projection welding 
have found great application in the automotive and consumer appliance industries.
Excellent descriptions of welding processes and how they work can be found on 
the Internet. We suggest fi rst exploring www.weldingengineer.com for descriptions of 
the fusion welding methods mentioned in the previous paragraph. Then go to www.
twi.co.uk where a click on Technologies—Welding and Joining Technology will bring 
more information on arc welding, friction welding, resistance welding, electron beam 
processes, and welding of plastics. Wikipedia has an extensive article on welding 
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Welding) which leads to even more welding processes 
than those mentioned so far.
13.15.3 Welding Design
To design a weldment, consideration must be given to the selection of materials, the 
joint design, the selection of the welding process, and the stresses that must be resisted 
by the design. In liquid-state welding the process subjects the workpiece at the joint 
to a temperature that exceeds the melting point of the material. Heat is applied lo-
cally and rapidly to create a miniature casting in the weld pool. Often successive weld 
passes are laid down. The base metal next to the weld bead, the heat-affected zone 
(HAZ), is subjected to rapid heating and cooling, so the original microstructure and 
properties of the base metal are changed, Fig. 13.32. The fi gure shows coarse columnar 
grains characteristic of a casting in the weld joint. Into the base metal the elongated 
cold-worked grains have recrystallized and formed a large grain size near the original 
joint boundary, falling off in grain size throughout the region of the HAZ because of 
the difference in temperature and time that they have seen. Considerable opportunity 
for defects exists unless the welding process is properly carried out.
Material Behavior and Selection
Since fusion welding is a melting process, controls appropriate to producing qual-
ity castings must be applied. Reactions with the atmosphere are prevented by sealing 

606 
engineering design 
13
off the molten pool with an inert gas or a slag or by carrying out the welding in a 
vacuum chamber. The surfaces of the weld joint should be cleaned of scale or grease 
before welding is undertaken. The thermal expansion of the weld structure upon heat-
ing, followed by solidifi cation shrinkage, can lead to high internal tensile stresses that 
can produce cracking and/or distortion. Rapid cooling of alloy steels in welding can 
result in brittle martensite formation and consequent crack problems. Since the hard-
ness of martensite increases with carbon content, it is common to limit welding to 
carbon steels with less than 0.3 percent carbon or to alloy steels in which the carbon 
equivalent1 is less than 0.3 percent carbon. When steels with 0.3 to 0.6 percent car-
bon must be used because their high strength is required, welding without martensite 
cracking can be performed if the weld joint is preheated before welding and posthe-
ated after the weld bead has been deposited. These thermal treatments decrease the 
rate of cooling of the weld and heat-affected zone, and they reduce the likelihood of 
martensite formation.
Material selection for welding involves choosing a material with high weldabil-
ity. Weldability, like machinability, is a complex technological property that combines 
many more basic properties. The melting point of the material, together with the spe-
cifi c heat and latent heat of fusion, will determine the heat input necessary to produce 
fusion. A high thermal conductivity allows the heat to dissipate and therefore requires 
a higher rate of heat input. Metals with higher thermal conductivity result in more rapid 
cooling and more problems with weld cracking. Greater distortion results from a high 
thermal expansion, with higher residual stresses and greater danger of weld cracking. 
There is no absolute rating of weldability of metals because different welding processes 
impose a variety of conditions that can affect the way a material responds.
Weld Joint Design
The basic types of welded joints are shown in Fig. 13.33. Many variations of these 
basic designs are possible, depending on the type of edge preparation that is used. 
FIGURE 13.32
Sketch showing the grain 
structure in a section through an 
electric arc weld in two rolled 
metal plates.
Original
workpiece
edge
Melt
boundary
Coarse
Recrystallized
grains
Original
cold-worked
grains
HAZ
Fine
1. C
C
Mn
6
Cr + Mo + V
5
Ni + Cu
eq
+
C
+
+
15

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
607
13
A square-edged butt joint requires a minimum of edge preparation. However, an im-
portant parameter in controlling weld cracking is the ratio of the width of the weld 
bead to the depth of the weld. It should be close to unity. Since narrow joints with 
deep weld pools are susceptible to cracking, the most economical solution is to spend 
money shaping the edges of the plate to produce a joint design with a more acceptable 
width-to-depth ratio. Ideally, a butt weld should be a full-penetration weld that fi lls 
the joint completely throughout its depth. When the gap in a butt joint is wide, a back-
ing strip is used at the bottom of the joint. Fillet welds (center, top row in Fig. 13.33) 
are the welds most commonly used in structural design. They are inherently weaker 
than full-penetration butt welds. A fi llet weld fails in shear. The design of welded 
structures calls for specialized expertise that is discussed in machine design texts and 
books on welding design.1
Distortion in Welding
Distortion is ever-present in welding since it involves the rapid application of heat 
to a localized area, followed by the rapid removal of the heat. One of the best ways to 
eliminate welding distortion is to design the welding sequence with thermal distortion 
in mind. If, because of the geometry, distortion cannot be avoided, then the forces that 
produce the shrinkage distortion should be balanced with other forces provided by fi x-
tures and clamps. Shrinkage forces can also be removed after welding by postwelding 
annealing and stress-relief operations. Distortion can be minimized by specifying in 
the design only the amount of weld metal that is absolutely required. Overwelding 
adds not only to the shrinkage forces but also to the costs.
FIGURE 13.33
Basic types of welded joints.
Double-welded lap joint
Butt weld
Tee joint fillet welds
Corner joint
Edge joint
1. R. G. Budynas and J. K. Nisbet, op. cit., Chap. 9; Design of Weldments, O. W. Blodgett, Design of 
Welded Structures, The James F. Lincoln Arc Welding Foundation, Cleveland, OH, 1963; T. G. F. Gray 
and J. Spencer, Rational Welding Design, 2nd ed., Butterworths, London, 1982; www.engineersedge.
com/weld_design_menu.shtml.

608 
engineering design 
13
DFM Guidelines for Welding1
The following are some general considerations applicable in designing a welded
part.
● Welded designs should refl ect the fl exibility and economy inherent in the welding
process. Do not copy designs based on casting or forging.
● In the design of welded joints, provide for straight force fl owlines. Avoid the use
of welded straps, laps, and stiffeners except as required for strength. Use the mini-
mum number of welds.
● Weld together parts of equal thickness whenever possible.
● Locate the welds at areas in the design where stresses and/or defl ections are least 
critical.
● Carefully consider the sequence with which parts should be welded together and
include that information as part of the engineering drawing.
● Make sure that the welder or welding machine (for automatic welding) has unob-
structed access to the joint so that a quality weld can be produced. Whenever possible, 
the design should provide for welding in the fl at or horizontal position, not overhead.
13.15.4 Cost of Joining
We can adapt the cost of manufacture model presented in Sec. 13.4.6 to cover the cost 
of joining parts. The cost of joining per unit part,
t
Cunit, is given by2
C
c
c
n
c
Lt
c
t
t
n
(
)
c
t
unit
cc om
w
pt rocess
t
ec
wo
OH
pro
r cess
setup
u
batch
n
1
p
∑
+
ccc om
+
)
t
+
e
+
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
+
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
⎧
⎨
⎧
⎨
⎧
⎩
⎫
⎞
⎬
⎫
⎬
⎫
⎭
⎠
⎬
⎭
⎬
(13.12)
where ccom is the cost of consumable materials (weld rod, fl uxes, gases, adhesives,
or fasteners) for one joing, $/joint
ct is the cost of dedicated jigs and fi xtures, $
t
np
n is the number of joints required to make the part (or one unit)
n is the number of joints to be made in the entire production run of the part 
or weldment
nbatch is the number of joints made per batch. For every batch there is one
setup.
tprocess
t
is the hours to make a single weld, adhesive joint, or to insert and 
torque one fastener
tsetup
t
is the time to complete a tooling setup, h
cw, ce, cOH, L,
H
and two have the same meaning as given in Sec. 13.4.6
1. Welding simulation software has been developed to aid in design for welding. It aids in selection of 
fi ller materials, determines the temperature distribution for given welding conditions, and estimates the 
properties of the HAZ. An important feature is the ability to determine residual stresses produced by the 
process and the resulting distortion. The most widely used is Sysweld (www.esi-group.com).
2. A. M. K. Esawi and M. F. Ashby, Materials and Design, Vol. 24, pp. 605–16, 2003.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
609
13
The term in brackets has units of $/joint. When summed over the np joints in the 
part it has the dimension of $/unit. Note that ccom and tprocess could be different for each 
joint in a part.
13.16
RESIDUAL STRESSES IN DESIGN
Residual stresses are the system of stresses that can exist in a part when the part is free 
from external forces. They are sometimes referred to as internal stresses or locked-in 
stresses.1 They arise from nonuniform plastic deformation of a solid, chiefl y as a re-
sult of inhomogeneous changes in volume or shape that occur during manufacturing 
processes.
13.16.1 Origin of Residual Stresses
Residual stresses are developed due to nonuniform deformation. To understand how, 
consider an assembly that is made by joining a core and a tight-fi tting tube2 (Fig. 13.34a). 
Both components are made from the same material and have equal cross-sectional 
areas. The core was longer than the tube, so before they were joined by welding the core 
was compressed by a fi xture to the same length as the tube, (Fig. 13.34b). After mak-
ing the weld, the fi xture compressing the core was removed and the assembly assumed 
a new length somewhere between the original lengths of the two components. Now the 
core wants to expand to its original length, and the tube wants to return to its original 
length, but they are now joined as a single assembly and the individual components 
cannot move. The tube has extended relative to its original length, so it is subjected to 
tensile residual stresses. The core has been compressed relative to its original length, 
so it is subjected to compressive residual stresses. Even though there is no external load 
on the assembly, it has a tensile stress at its surface and a compressive stress in its core 
(Fig. 13.34c). Because the areas of tube and core are equal, the stresses are equal and 
uniform in each region. The residual stress system existing in the assembly after reach-
ing its fi nal state (c) must be in static equilibrium. Thus, the total force acting on any 
plane through the body and the total moment of forces on any plane must be zero. For 
the longitudinal stress pattern in Fig. 13.34 this means that the area subjected to com-
pressive residual stresses must balance the area subjected to tensile residual stresses.
The situation regarding residual stress generation is not quite so simple as is pic-
tured in Fig. 13.34. Often residual stresses in deformation processes arise from having 
regions of heavy plastic deformation contiguous to regions of light deformation. The 
boundaries between these regions are not as simple nor are the volumes of the regions 
the same as in the previous example, but the results are the same. Regions of the part 
1. W. B. Young, ed., Residual Stresses in Design, Process and Materials Selection, ASM Interna-
tional, Materials Park, OH, 1987; U. Chandra, “Control of Residual Stresses,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, 
pp. 811–19, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1997.
2. J. A. Schey, Introduction to Manufacturing Processes, 3d ed., pp. 105–6, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000.

610 
engineering design 
13
that have been required to deform in tension will upon unloading develop compres-
sive residual stresses, and vice versa. In some cases the residual stresses acting in the 
three principal directions need to be known. The state of residual stress at any point is 
a combined stress derived from the residual stresses in the three principal directions. 
Frequently, because of symmetry, only the residual stress in one direction need be 
considered. A complete determination of the state of residual stress in three dimen-
sions is a considerable undertaking.
Residual stresses cannot exceed the value of the yield stress of the material. A stress 
in excess of that value, with no external force to oppose it, will relieve itself by plastic de-
formation until it reaches the value of the yield stress. Residual stress and stresses from 
applied forces add algebraically, so long as their sum does not exceed the yield stress of 
the material. For example, if the maximum applied stress due to applied loads is 60,000 
psi tension and the part already contains a tensile residual stress of 40,000 psi, the total 
stress at the critically stressed region is 100,000 psi. However if the residual stress is a 
compressive 40,000 psi produced by shot peening, then the actual stress is 20,000 psi.
In Fig. 13.34, if the weld holding together the two components was machined 
away, each component would be free to assume its original length. The assembly 
would undergo distortion from its intended shape. The same thing happens in parts 
with more complex residual stress distributions. If they are machined, removing ma-
terial alters the residual stress distribution and the new balance of forces may cause 
distortion of the part.
Any process, whether mechanical, thermal, or chemical, that produces a permanent 
nonuniform change in shape or volume creates a residual stress pattern. Practically, all 
cold-working operations develop residual stresses because of nonuniform plastic fl ow. 
FIGURE 13.34
Example of the formation of residual stresses due to inhomogeneous deformation.
Atube
lcore
ltube
Acore
(a)
(b)
( ) Tensile
( ) Compressive
(c)

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
611
13
In surface-working operations, such as shot peening, surface rolling, or polishing, the 
penetration of the deformation is very shallow. The distended surface layer is held in 
compression by the less-worked interior. 
A surface compressive residual stress pattern is highly effective in reducing the 
incidence of fatigue failure.
Residual stresses arising from thermal processes may be classifi ed as those due 
to a thermal gradient alone or to a thermal gradient in conjunction with a phase trans-
formation, as in heat-treating steel. These stresses arise most frequently in quenching 
during heat treatment, or in heating and cooling experienced in casting and welding.
The control of residual stresses starts with understanding the fundamental source 
of the stress and identifying the parameters in the manufacturing process that infl u-
ence the stress. Then, experiments are performed in varying the process parameters 
to produce the desired level of stress. FEA modeling has been used effectively in pre-
dicting how residual stresses can be reduced.1
13.16.2 Residual Stress Created by Quenching
The case of greatest practical interest involves the residual stresses developed dur-
ing the quenching of steel for hardening. The residual stress pattern created is due to 
thermal volume changes plus volume changes resulting from the transformation of 
austenite to martensite. The simpler situation, in which the stresses are due only to 
thermal volume changes, will be considered fi rst. This is the situation encountered in 
the quenching of a metal that does not undergo a phase change on cooling, like cop-
per. This condition is also present when steel is quenched from a tempering tempera-
ture below the A1 critical temperature.
The distribution of residual stress over the diameter of a quenched bar in the lon-
gitudinal, tangential, and radial directions is shown in Fig. 13.35a for the most com-
mon situation of a metal that contracts on cooling. Figure 13.35c shows that the oppo-
site residual stress distribution is obtained if the metal expands on cooling (this occurs 
for only a few materials). The sequence of events producing the stress pattern shown 
in Fig. 13.35a is as follows: The relatively cool surface of the bar tends to contract into 
a ring that is both shorter and smaller in diameter than it was originally. This tends to 
extrude the hotter, more plastic center into a cylinder that is longer and thinner than it 
was originally. If the inner core were free to change shape independently of the outer 
region of the bar, it would change dimensions to a shorter and thinner cylinder on 
cooling. Mechanics of materials principles require that continuity must be maintained 
throughout the bar. Thus, the outer ring is drawn in (compressed) in the longitudinal, 
tangential, and radial directions at the same time the inner core is extended in the 
same directions. The stress pattern shown in Fig. 13.35a results.
The magnitude of the residual stresses produced by quenching depends on the 
stress-strain relationship for the metal and the degree of strain mismatch produced 
by the quenching operation. For a given strain mismatch, the higher the elastic 
modulus of the metal the higher the residual stress. Further, since the residual stress 
1. U. Chandra, op. cit.

612 
engineering design 
13
cannot exceed the yield stress, the higher the yield stress the higher the possible re-
sidual stress. The yield stress–temperature curve for the metal also is important. If 
the yield stress decreases rapidly with increasing temperature, the strain mismatch 
will be small at high temperatures because the metal can accommodate to thermally 
produced volume changes by plastic fl ow. Metals that have a high yield strength at 
elevated temperatures, like nickel base superalloys, will develop strain mismatches in 
quenching, leading to high residual stresses.
The following physical properties will lead to high mismatch strains on quenching:
 
● Low thermal conductivity, k
 
● High specifi c heat, c
 
● High density, ρ
 
● High coeffi cient of thermal expansion, α
The fi rst three factors can be combined into the thermal diffusivity D = k/ρc. Low val-
ues of thermal diffusivity lead to high strain mismatch. Other process conditions that 
produce an increase in the temperature difference between the surface and center of 
the bar promote high quenching stresses. They are (1) a large diameter of the cylinder, 
(2) a large temperature difference between the initial temperature and the temperature 
of the quenching bath, and (3) rapid heat transfer at the metal-liquid interface.
In the quenching of steels, austenite (the high-temperature form of steel) be-
gins to transform to martensite whenever the local temperature of the bar reaches 
the Ms temperature. Since an increase in volume accompanies the phase transforma-
tion, the metal expands as the martensite reaction proceeds on cooling from the Ms 
L
R
T
Longitudinal
L = longitudinal
T = tangential
R = radial
+
–
Longitudinal
Tangential
Tangential
Radial
Radial
(a)
(c)
(b)
FIGURE 13.35
Residual stress patterns found in quenched bars and due to thermal strains (schematic). 
(a) For metal that contracts on cooling; (b) orientation of directions; (c) for metal that expands 
on cooling.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
613
13
to Mf temperature.1 This produces a residual stress distribution of the type shown in 
Fig. 13.35c. The residual stress distribution in a quenched steel bar is the resultant of 
the competing processes of thermal contraction and volume expansion due to mar-
tensite formation. The resulting stress pattern depends upon the transformation char-
acteristics of the steel, as determined chiefl y by composition and hardenability,2 the 
heat-transfer characteristics of the system, and the severity of the quench.
Figure 13.36 illustrates some of the possible residual stress patterns that can 
be produced by quenching steel bars. On the left side of the fi gure is an isothermal 
FIGURE 13.36
Transformation characteristics of a steel (a and c), and resulting residual stress distributions 
(b and d).
Austenite
Pearlite
Martensite
0
0
0
+
–
log time
(a)
(b)
Temperature
o
m
T
R
L
c
Ms
Austenite
Pearlite
Martensite
0
0
0
+
–
log time
(c)
(d)
Temperature
o
m
T
R
L
c
Ms
1. Ms and Mf are the temperatures at which martensite starts to form and fi nishes forming, respectively, 
on quenching.
2. Hardenability is an engineering measurement of the depth of hardening in a steel as a result of 
quenching into a specifi c medium.

614 
engineering design 
13
transformation diagram for the decomposition of austenite. To form martensite the bar 
must cool fast enough to avoid entering the area where soft pearlite forms. The cool-
ing rates of the outside, midradius, and center of the bar are indicated on the diagram 
by the curves marked o, m, and c. In Fig. 13.36a the quenching rate is rapid enough 
to convert the entire bar to martensite. By the time the center of the bar reaches the 
Ms temperature, the transformation has been essentially completed at the surface. The 
surface layers try to contract against the expanding central core, and the result is ten-
sile residual stresses at the surface and compressive stresses at the center of the bar 
(Fig. 13.36b). However, if the bar diameter is rather small and the bar has been dras-
tically quenched in brine so that the surface and center transform at about the same 
time, the surface will arrive at room temperature with compressive residual stresses. 
If the bar is slack-quenched so that the outside transforms to martensite while the 
middle and center transform to pearlite (Fig. 13.36c), there is little restraint offered 
by the hot, soft core during the time when martensite is forming on the surface, and 
the core readily accommodates to the expansion of the outer layers. The middle and 
center pearlite regions then contract on cooling in the usual manner and produce a re-
sidual stress pattern consisting of compression on the surface and tension at the center 
(Fig. 13.36d).
13.16.3 Other Issues Regarding Residual Stresses
The two previous sections were concerned with residual stresses produced by inho-
mogeneous plastic deformation due to mechanical forces or constraints, due to ther-
mal expansion, or due to volume changes as a result of solid-state transformations. 
In this section we briefl y discuss several additional important issues about residual 
stresses.
 
● The residual stresses in castings are often modeled by a quenched cylinder. How-
ever, the situation in castings is made more complicated by the fact that the mold 
acts as a mechanical restraint to the shrinking casting. Moreover, the casting de-
sign may produce greatly different cooling rates at different locations that are due 
to variations in section size and the introduction of chills. Chills are metal plates 
added to a sand mold to produce an artifi cially rapid cooling rate.
 
● Appreciable residual stresses are developed in welding, even in the absence of a 
phase transformation. As the weld metal and heat-affected zone shrink on cooling, 
they are restricted by the cooler surrounding plate. The result is that the weld region 
contains tensile residual stresses, which are balanced by compressive stresses in 
a region of the plate outside of the heat-affected zone. Because thermal gradients 
tend to be high in welding, the residual stress gradients also tend to be high. Re-
sidual stresses in welds are often involved in weld cracking.
 
● Chemical processes such as oxidation, corrosion, and electroplating can generate 
large surface residual stresses if the new surface material retains coherency with 
the underlying metal surface. Other surface chemical treatments such as carburiz-
ing and nitriding cause local volume changes by the diffusion of an atomic species 
into the surface, and this can result in residual stresses.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
615
13
Residual stresses are measured by either destructive or nondestructive testing 
methods.1 The destructive methods relax the locked-in stress by removing a layer from 
the body. The stress existing before the cut was made is calculated from the defor-
mation produced by relaxing the stress. The nondestructive method depends on the 
fact that the spacing of atomic planes in a crystalline material is altered by stress. 
This change can be measured very precisely with a diffracted x-ray beam. The x-ray 
method is nondestructive, but it gives only the value of residual surface stress.
13.16.4 Relief of Residual Stresses
The removal or reduction in the intensity of residual stress is known as stress relief. 
Stress relief may be accomplished either by heating or by mechanical working opera-
tions. Although residual stresses will disappear slowly at room temperature, the process 
is very greatly accelerated by heating to an elevated temperature. The stress relief that 
comes from a stress-relief anneal is due to two effects. First, since the residual stress 
cannot exceed the yield stress, plastic fl ow will reduce the residual stress to the value of 
the yield stress at the stress-relief temperature. Only the residual stress in excess of the 
yield stress at the stress-relief temperature can be eliminated by immediate plastic fl ow. 
Generally, most of the residual stress will be relieved by time-dependent creep or stress 
relaxation. Since the process is extremely temperature-dependent, the time for nearly 
complete elimination of stress can be greatly reduced by increasing the temperature. Of-
ten a compromise must be made between the use of a temperature high enough for the 
relief of stress in a reasonable length of time and annealing the effects of cold working.
The differential strains that produce high residual stresses also can be eliminated 
by plastic deformation at room temperature. Products such as sheet, plate, and extru-
sions are often stretched several percent beyond their yield stress to relieve differential 
strains by yielding. In other cases the residual stress distribution that is characteristic 
of a particular working operation may be superimposed on the residual stress pattern 
initially present in the material. A surface that contains tensile residual stresses may 
have the stress distribution converted into benefi cial compressive stresses by a surface-
working process like rolling or shot peening. However, it is important in using this 
method of stress relief to select surface-working conditions that will completely cancel 
the initial stress distribution. If only very light surface rolling were used on a surface 
that initially contained tensile stresses, only the tensile stresses at the surface would be 
reduced. Dangerously high tensile stresses could still exist below the surface.
13.17
DESIGN FOR HEAT TREATMENT
Heat treatment is widely used to change the metallurgical structure of a part and by 
this process improve its mechanical properties. Common heat treatment processes are 
described here.
1. A. A. Denton, Met. Rev., vol. 11, pp. 1–22, 1966; C. O. Ruud, J. Metals,  pp. 35–40, July 1981.

616 
engineering design 
13
 
● Annealing is heating a metal or alloy to an elevated temperature, holding at tempera-
ture for enough time to allow a desired metallurgical change to occur, and then cool-
ing slowly to room temperature. It is used to relieve residual stresses, to homogenize a 
cast structure so that chemical segregation is minimized, or to remove the hardening 
effects of cold working and through the generation of new strain-free grains (recrys-
tallization) create a structure that has adequate ductility to allow additional working.
 
● Quenching of steels to produce hard but brittle martensite has been described in 
the previous section. Quenching must be followed by heating below the transforma-
tion temperature (A1) to temper the martensite into a precipitation of fi ne carbides. 
Quenched and tempered (Q&T) steels are the engineering materials with the best 
combination of readily achievable strength and toughness.
 
● Many nonferrous alloys, especially aluminum alloys, are strengthened by fi rst heat-
ing to solution treatment temperature to put the alloying elements into solid solu-
tion, and then cooling rapidly to an aging temperature. The alloy is held (aged) for 
a suffi cient time to allow the formation of a fi ne precipitate that hardens the alloy.
13.17.1 Issues with Heat Treatment
Processing by heat treatment requires energy. It also requires a protective atmosphere 
or surface coating on the metal to prevent the part from oxidizing or otherwise react-
ing with the furnace atmosphere. During long exposure at elevated temperatures, metal 
parts soften, creep, and eventually sag. Therefore, parts may require special fi xtures 
to support them during heat treatment. Since heat treatment is a secondary processing 
step, it would be advantageous to eliminate the need whenever possible. Sometimes a 
part made from a cold-worked sheet or bar can be substituted for a heat-treated part to 
achieve the needed strength properties. Usually the fl exibility and/or superior proper-
ties that result from heat treatment make it the preferred choice in manufacturing.
The best combination of high strength and high toughness is produced in a steel 
by fi rst heating within the austenite temperature region (1400 to 1650°F) and then 
quenching rapidly enough that hard and brittle martensite is formed (see Fig. 13.36). 
The part is then reheated below the austenite region to allow the martensite to break 
down (temper) into a fi ne precipitation of carbides in a soft ferrite (iron) matrix. 
Achieving a proper quenched and tempered microstructure depends on cooling fast 
enough that pearlite or other nonmartensitic phases are not formed. This requires a 
balance between the heat transfer from the part (as determined chiefl y by geometry), 
the cooling power of the quenching medium (brine, water, oil, or air), and the trans-
formation kinetics of the steel (as controlled by the alloy chemistry). These factors are 
interrelated by the property called hardenability.1
In heating for austenitization, care should be taken to subject the parts to uniform 
temperature in the furnace. Long, thin parts are especially prone to distortion from 
nonuniform temperature. Parts containing residual stress from previous processing 
operations may distort on heating as the residual stresses are partially relieved.
1. ASM Handbook, Vol. 4, Heat Treating, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1991; C. A. Siebert, 
D. V. Doane, and D. H. Breen, The Hardenability of Steels, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1977.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
617
13
Quenching is a severe treatment to impose upon a piece of steel.1 In quenching, 
the part is suddenly cooled at the surface. The part must shrink rapidly because of 
thermal contraction (steel is at least 0.125 in. per ft larger before quenching from the 
austenitizing temperature), but it also undergoes a volume increase when it transforms 
to martensite at a comparatively low temperature. As discussed in Sec. 13.16.2 and 
shown in Fig. 13.36, this heat treatment can produce high residual stresses on the sur-
face. Locally concentrated tensile stresses may be high enough to produce fractures 
called quench cracks. Local plastic deformation can occur in quenching even if cracks 
do not form, and that causes warping and distortion.
Problems with quench cracks and distortion are chiefl y caused by nonuniformity 
of temperature distribution that result from part geometry as infl uenced by the design. 
Thus, many heat-treatment problems can be prevented by proper design. The most 
important guideline is to make the cross sections of the part as uniform as possible. In 
the ideal design for heat treatment, all sections should have equal ability to absorb or 
give up heat. Unfortunately, designing for uniform thickness or sectional area usually 
interferes with the functions of the design.
13.17.2 DFM for Heat Treatment
The following are good suggestions for avoiding problems in heat treatment.
 
● Design details that minimize stress concentrations to prevent fatigue also are good 
design features to minimize quench cracking. 
 
● Distortion in heat treatment is minimized by designs that are symmetrical. A single 
keyway in a shaft is a particularly diffi cult design feature to deal with in quenching. 
 
● A part with a severe distortion problem may have to be quenched in a special fi x-
ture that restrains it from distorting beyond the tolerance limits. Gears are often 
hardened this way.
 
● Design the part so that the quenching fl uid has access to all critical regions that must be 
hardened. Since the quenching fl uid produces a vapor blanket when it hits the hot steel 
surface, it may be necessary to add venting or access holes to the design of the part.
Sysweld is a design simulation software for heat treatment and welding.2 This 
software assists with the steel selection and choice of the quenching media. It uses 
hardenability calculations to determine what the hardness distribution will be in the 
part. The software will also determine whether the risk of cracking is acceptable and 
whether distortion is within acceptable limits. It also evaluates whether compressive 
residual stresses are high enough and properly located in the part. DICTRA (www
.thermcaic.com) is a simulation software for diffusion processes in alloy systems, such 
as occur in heat treating. It can be used to simulate such things as homogenization of 
an alloy, carburization, or coarsening of a precipitate phase.
1. A. J. Fletcher, Thermal Stress and Strain Generation in Heat Treatment, Elsevier Applied Science, 
New York, 1989.
2. See esi-group.com.

618 
engineering design 
13
13.18
DESIGN FOR PLASTICS PROCESSING
The manufacturing processes used with plastics must accommodate to the unique 
fl ow properties of polymers. Compared to metals, the fl ow stress of a plastic part is 
much lower and highly strain rate dependent, the viscosity is much higher than liquid 
metal, and the formability is much greater. See Sec. 12.6 for a discussion of how the 
properties of plastics affect their use in design. Plastics divide broadly into (1) ther-
moplastic polymers (TP) that soften and melt on heating and harden when cooled. A 
TP can be reshaped by heating the part. (2) Thermosetting polymers (TS) that set or 
cross-link upon heating. On reheating they char instead of melting, so they cannot be 
reshaped. (3) Polymer composites that have either a TS or TP matrix reinforced with 
fi bers of glass or graphite. TP polymers are polymerized in their primary manufactur-
ing step and enter plastics processing as a granule or pellet resin. TS polymers are 
polymerized during the processing step, usually by the addition of a catalyst or simply 
by the addition of heat.
The plastic manufacturing processes considered in this section are:1
 
● Injection molding (mostly TP)
 
● Extrusion (TP)
 
● Blow molding (TP)
 
● Rotational molding (TP)
 
● Thermoforming (TP)
 
● Compression molding (mostly TS)
 
● Casting (mostly TS)
 
● Composite processing (mostly TS)
Plastic manufacturing processes excel in producing parts with good surface fi nish and 
fi ne detail.2 By adding dyes and colorants, the part can be given a color that elimi-
nates a secondary painting operation. However, the cycle time is usually longer than 
for metal-working processes. Depending on the plastic process, the cycle time can 
vary from 10 s to 10 h. Generally plastics manufacturing is the preferred method for 
producing small- to medium-sized parts for consumer and electronic products where 
mechanical stresses in parts are not too high. Thermoplastic resins are often tailored 
for best performance in specifi c processing operations. For example, a resin may be 
labelled “extrusion grade” because it has high molecular weight and works well in 
extrusion.
1. For a set of colorful and informative diagrams of polymer processing equipment see www.me.gatech.
edu/jonathan.colton/me4210/polymer.pdf
2. Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, Vol. 8, Plastic Part Manufacturing, Society of Man-
ufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1996; “Engineering Plastics,” Engineered Materials Handbook 
Vol. 2, Sec. 3, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1988; E. A. Muccio, “Design for Plastics Process-
ing,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 793–803, 1997.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
619
13
13.18.1 Injection Molding
Injection molding is a process in which plastic granules are heated and forced under 
pressure into a die cavity (see Fig. 13.3). It is a fast process (5 to 60 s cycle time) that is 
economical for production runs in excess of 10,000 parts. It is well suited for produc-
ing three-dimensional shapes that require fi ne details like holes, snaps, and surface 
details. It is the plastics analog to pressure die casting in metals. There are more injec-
tion molding machines in use than any other type of plastic molding equipment. See 
custompartnet.com for details of equipment and mold design and also for an excellent 
discussion of DFM guidelines.
Design of the gating and feed system for the die is crucial to ensure complete die 
fi ll.1 As in design for casting, it is important to design the molding so that solidifi ca-
tion does not prevent complete mold fi ll. The design and location of the gates for entry 
of polymer into the die is a crucial design detail. In large parts there may need to be 
more than one gate through which resin will fl ow in two or more streams into the 
mold. These will meet inside of the mold to create a weld line. This may be a source 
of weakness or a surface blemish.
The mold must be designed so that the solid part can be ejected without distor-
tion. Thus, the direction of mold closure, the parting surface between the two halves 
of the mold, and the part design must be considered concurrently. By proper consider-
ation of part orientation in the mold it may be possible to avoid expensive mold costs 
like side cores. If at all possible, design the part so that it can be ejected in the direc-
tion of mold closure.
In addition to the economics of the process, the main DFM concerns involve the 
ability to achieve the required dimensional tolerances.2 Mostly this deals with shrink-
age, which is much larger in plastics than in metals. As the polymer cools from a 
plastic melt to a solid, the volume decreases (the density increases). Different plastics 
show different amounts of shrinkage. To minimize shrinkage, fi llers, like glass fi ber, 
wood fl our, or natural fi bers, are added during molding. Shrinkage can also be infl u-
enced by the rate and direction of injecting the melt into the mold. It is best to have 
any shrinkage occur while the part is confi ned by the mold.
13.18.2 Extrusion
Extrusion involves forcing a polymer through a die to produce long, axisymmetric 
shapes like rods, pipe, fi ber, and sheet. Extrusion is commonly used for melting poly-
mer resin and mixing in (compounding) fi llers, colorants, and other additives like anti-
oxidants. The homogeneous mixture is then extruded into thin rods and chopped into 
pellets. For information on equipment see Plastic Extrusion in Wikipedia. The chief 
1. Software to aid in mold design and provide practical advice on manufacturing constraints is 
available as an add-on module with most 3-D CAD software. The most common software is Moldfl ow 
(www.moldfl ow.com).
2. R. A. Malloy, Plastic Part Design for Injection Molding, Hanser Publishers, New York, 1994.

620 
engineering design 
13
DFM issues with the process are die swell and molecular orientation. In die swell 
the extrudate swells to a size greater than the die from which it just exited. Thus, the 
design must compensate for the swell. During extrusion, polymer molecules become 
highly oriented in one or two directions as a result of the strongly oriented fl ow inher-
ent in the extrusion process. When molecular orientation is controlled, it can improve 
the properties of the material.
13.18.3 Blow Molding
Blow molding produces hollow products. A heated thermoplastic tube (called a pari-
son) is held inside a mold and is expanded under air pressure to match the inner con-
tour of the mold. The part cools, hardens, and is ejected from the mold. The process 
produces a part that is dimensionally defi ned on its external dimensions, but the inte-
rior surfaces are not controlled. Examples are milk bottles and automotive fuel tanks. 
The process does not lend itself to incorporating design details such as holes, sharp 
corners, or narrow ribs. For more detail see custompartnet.com.
13.18.4 Rotational Molding
Like blow molding, rotational molding produces a hollow part. Rotational molding 
uses a fi ne TP powder that is placed inside a hollow, heated metal mold. The mold 
is slowly rotated about two perpendicular axes. Gravity rather than centrifugal force 
causes even coating of the mold surface. While still rotating, the mold is cooled and 
the part solidifi es and hardens. Rotational molding can produce large parts, like 
tanks up to 500 gal capacity. Since it is a low-pressure process and the plastic is not 
forced through narrow channels, rotational molding does not induce a signifi cant 
amount of residual stress. Therefore, parts made by rotational molding exhibit a 
high degree of dimensional stability. For details on the process see rotational mold-
ing in Wikipedia. 
13.18.5 Thermoforming
Thermoforming, or vacuum forming, is a sheet forming process in which a TP sheet 
is clamped to a mold and heated to soften it, and a vacuum is applied to draw the 
sheet into the contour of the mold. When the sheet cools, it will retain the shape of 
the mold. Traditionally, thermoforming is done with only a single mold, but for more 
precise control of dimensions, two matching mold halves are used, as is done in sheet 
metal forming. For more details see custompartnet.com.
13.18.6 Compression Molding
The oldest plastics process is compression molding. It is similar to powder metallurgy. 
A preform of polymer, usually TS, is placed in a heated mold cavity and a plunger 

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
621
13
applies pressure to force the polymer to fi ll the mold cavity. The plastic is allowed to 
cure and is then ejected from the mold. Because the amount of fl ow is much less than 
in injection molding or extrusion, the level of residual stress in the part is low.
A variation of compression molding is transfer molding. In this process the plastic 
is preheated in a transfer mold and then “shot” into the mold as a viscous liquid with a 
transfer ram. The ram holds the plastic under pressure until it begins to cure. Then the 
ram retracts, and the part completes its cure cycle and is ejected. Compression mold-
ing has a cycle time of 40 to 300 s, while for transfer molding the cycle time is 30 to 
150 s. Also, because a liquid plastic enters the mold in transfer molding it is possible 
to mold in inserts or to encapsulate parts. However, parts made this way have sprues 
and runners which must be trimmed and which result in lower yield of material. For 
schematics of these processes see www.substech.com, Compression molding of poly-
mers and Transfer molding of polymers.
13.18.7 Casting
Plastics are cast much less frequently than metals. The oldest applications are the cast-
ing of sheets and rods of acrylics and the “potting” of electrical components in epoxy. 
The development of a wider range of casting resins has led to consideration of casting 
as a way to make prototypes and low-volume production parts. Casting produces parts 
with low residual stress and a high degree of dimensional stability. Because of the 
high viscosity (low fl uidity) of polymers it is diffi cult to fi ll molds by gravity alone and 
get fi ne detail without applying pressure, as in injection molding.
13.18.8 Composite Processing
The most common composite materials are plastics reinforced with glass, metal, or 
carbon fi bers.1 The reinforcement may be in the form of long, continuous fi laments, 
short fi bers, or fl akes. TS polymers are the most common matrix materials. Except 
for fi lament winding, as in making a rocket motor case, the fi ber and the matrix are 
combined in some preliminary form prior to processing. Molding compounds consist 
of TS resin with short, randomly dispersed fi bers. Sheet molding compound (SMC) is 
a combination of TS resin and chopped fi bers rolled into a sheet about 1/4 in. thick. 
Bulk molding compound (BMC) consists of the same ingredients made in billet form 
instead of sheet. SMC is used in the lay up of large structures. BMC is used in com-
pression molding. Prepreg consists of long fi bers in partially cured TS resin. Prepregs 
are available as tape or cross-plied sheets or fabrics.
Composites are made by either open-mold or closed-mold processes. In hand la-
yups, successive layers of resin and fi ber are applied to the mold by hand, with the 
resin being rolled into the fi ber. An alternative is an open-mold process in which the 
1. ASM Handbook, Vol. 21, Composites, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2001.

622 
engineering design 
13
liquid resin and chopped glass fi bers are sprayed into the surface of the mold. In bag 
molding, a plastic sheet or elastomer bag is clamped over the mold and pressure is ap-
plied either by drawing a vacuum or with compressed air.
Closed-mold composite processing closely follows the compression molding pro-
cess. Variations have evolved to better place and orient the fi bers in the composite. In 
resin transfer molding (RTM) a glass preform or mat is placed in the mold and a TS 
resin is transferred into the cavity under moderate pressure to impregnate the mat.
13.18.9 DFM Guidelines for Plastics Processing
The issues of designing with plastics have been discussed in Sec. 12.6. These issues 
chiefl y result from the lower strength and stiffness of polymers compared with metals. 
This limits plastic parts to applications where stresses are low, and to parts designed 
with many internal stiffening features. In considering DFM it must be recognized that 
(1) polymers have much higher coeffi cients of thermal expansion and (2) much lower 
thermal conductivity than metals. The fi rst issue means that molds must be carefully 
designed to achieve tight tolerances. The second issue means that because of slower 
heat conduction, the time for the part to cool from the melt to a solid object that can be 
ejected from the mold is too long to result in a desirably short cycle time. This drives 
the design for many plastic parts to have thin walls, usually less than 5 mm.
Since many of the design for manufacturing guidelines are common to all plastics 
processes, we have consolidated them here.
 
● The wall is the most important design feature of the plastic part. The wall thick-
ness should be uniform. This is the most important design rule of all. The nominal wall 
thickness will vary from about 4 to 30 mm depending on the process and the plastic. 
The rate of change of the thickness of the nominal wall should be gradual to ensure 
mold fi lling. Avoid thick walls. They require more plastic, but more importantly, 
they reduce the cycle time by requiring longer time until the part is rigid enough to 
be ejected from the mold.
 
● The typical projections from the inside surface of a molded wall are ribs, webs, 
and bosses. Ribs and webs are used to increase stiffness rather than increasing wall 
thickness. A rib is a piece of reinforcing material between two other features that 
are more or less perpendicular. A web is a piece of bracing material between two 
features that are more or less parallel. A boss is a short block of material protruding 
from a wall which is used to drive a screw through or to support something in the 
design. Ribs should be made slightly thinner than the walls they reinforce in order 
to avoid sink marks (depressions) on the outside wall.
 
● It is important to design into a part as many features (e.g., holes, countersinks to re-
ceive fasteners, snap fi ts, and living hinges) as are needed rather than adding them 
as secondary operations. A big part of the attractiveness of plastic manufacture is 
that it minimizes the need for secondary operations.
 
● Part design and process selection affect the residual stresses formed in the part. 
These stresses arise from inhomogeneous fl ow as the polymer molecules fl ow 
through the passages of the mold. Generous radii, higher melt temperatures (which 

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
623
13
result in longer cycle time), and processes which minimize polymer fl ow like 
rotational molding result in lower residual stresses. Lower residual stresses lead to 
better dimensional stability.
 
● Plastic parts are often used in consumer products where appearance is of great im-
portance. An attractive feature of plastics is that they can be colored by adding 
color concentrates when compounding the polymer resin. The surface roughness of 
a molded part will reproduce the surface fi nish of the mold. By etching the surface 
of the mold, letters or logos that protrude about 0.01 mm above the surface of the 
part can be produced. It is much more expensive to mold depressed letters on the 
part, and this should be avoided if possible.
 
● As in forging and casting, the parting line should be chosen to avoid unnecessary 
complexity of the mold. Perfect mating of the parting surfaces is diffi cult to achieve 
when they are not fl at. This results in a small fl ash all of the way around the perim-
eter of the part. If the fl ash is small due to good placement of the parting line it may 
be removed by tumbling, rather than a more expensive machining process. Avoid 
undercuts since they will require expensive movable inserts and cores.
 
● Tight radii can be molded but generous radii allow for better polymer fl ow, lon-
ger mold life, and lower stress concentrations. The minimum radii should be 1 to 
1.5 mm. However, large radii lead to hot spots and sinks.
 
● Molded parts require a taper (draft angle) to remove the parts. The draft on exterior 
surfaces is a modest 0.5 to 2 degrees, with larger allowance on ribs and bosses. 
 
● Metal inserts are often molded in plastic parts to provide functions such as screw 
attachments or electrical binding posts. The fl ow in these regions of the mold must 
be carefully designed to prevent weld lines. A weld line is formed when the fronts 
of two or more melt streams meet each other and fail to achieve complete intermo-
lecular penetration. Often there is air trapped by the meeting of the fl ow streams. 
This reduces the mechanical properties in the region and affects the appearance of 
the surface of the part. Since there is no adhesion between the surface of metals and 
plastics, it is important to provide mechanical locking features, like knurling, for 
metal inserts in plastics.
The following sources from the Internet provide useful information and visuals about 
design for manufacture of plastics.
 
● http://engr.bd.psu.edu/pkoch/plasticdesign/e_frames.htm: Provides details of design 
for manufacture of plastic parts.
 
● http://www.protomold.com/DesignGuidelines_UniformWallThickness.aspx: 
Provides DFM guidelines for rapid prototyping service for injection molding.
13.19 
SUMMARY
This chapter completes the core theme of the book that design, materials selection, 
and processing are inseparable. Decisions concerning the manufacturing of parts 
should be made as early as possible in the design process—certainly in embodiment 

624 
engineering design 
13
design. We recognize that there is a great deal of information that the designer needs 
to intelligently make these decisions. To aid in this the chapter provides:
 
● An overview of the most commonly used manufacturing processes, with emphasis 
on the factors that need to be considered in design for manufacture
 
● References to a carefully selected set of books and handbooks that will provide 
both in-depth understanding of how the processes work and detailed data needed 
for design. Also, carefully selected websites that give clear illustrations of how the 
process works and that provide in-depth DFM guidelines.
 
● An introduction to a simple methodology for ranking manufacturing processes on a 
unit cost basis that can be used early in the design process
 
● Reference to some of the most widely used computer simulation tools for design for 
assembly and design for manufacturing
A material and a process for making a part must be chosen at the same time. The 
overall factor in deciding on the material and the manufacturing process is the cost to 
make a quality part. When making a decision on the material, the following factors 
must be considered:
 
● Material composition: grade of alloy or plastic
 
● Cost of material
 
● Form of material: bar, tube, wire, strip, plate, pellet, powder, etc.
 
● Size: dimensions and tolerance
 
● Heat-treated condition
 
● Directionality of mechanical properties (anisotropy)
 
● Quality level: control of impurities, inclusions, cracks, microstructure, etc.
 
● Ease of manufacture: workability, weldability, machinability, etc.
 
● Ease of recycling
The decision on the manufacturing process will be based on the following factors:
 
● Unit cost of manufacture
 
● Life cycle cost per unit
 
● Quantity of parts required
 
● Complexity of the part, with respect to shape, features, and size
 
● Compatibility of the process for use with candidate materials
 
● Ability to consistently make a defect-free part
 
● Economically achievable surface fi nish
 
● Economically achievable dimensional accuracy and tolerances
 
● Availability of equipment
 
● Lead time for delivery of tooling
 
● Make-buy decision. Should we make the part in-house or purchase from a supplier?
Design can decisively infl uence manufacturing cost. That is why we must adopt 
methods to bring manufacturing knowledge into the embodiment design. An inte-
grated product design team that contains experienced manufacturing people is a very 
good way of doing this. Design for manufacture guidelines is another way. Some gen-
eral DFM guidelines are:

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
625
13
 
● Minimize total number of parts in a design.
 
● Standardize components.
 
● Use common parts across product lines.
 
● Design parts to be multifunctional.
 
● Design parts for ease of manufacture.
 
● Avoid too-tight tolerances.
 
● Avoid secondary manufacturing and fi nishing operations.
 
● Utilize the special characteristics of a process.
Experience has shown that a good way to proceed with DFM is to fi rst do a rigorous 
design for assembly (DFA) analysis in an attempt to reduce part count. This will trigger 
a process of critical examination that can be followed up by what-if exercises on criti-
cal parts to drive down manufacturing cost. Use manufacturing simulation software to 
guide part design in improving parts for ease of manufacture and reducing tooling costs.
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Batch fl ow process 
Group technology 
Process cycle time
Blanking 
Heat affected 
Process fl exibility
Continuous fl ow process 
 zone (HAZ) 
Secondary manufacturing
Deep drawing 
Job shop 
 process
Design for assembly (DFA) 
Machinability 
Shielded metal arc
Design for manufacturing 
Mistake-proofi ng 
 welding
 (DFM) 
Near net shape 
Solidifi cation
Economic batch size 
Parting surface 
Tooling
Feed motion in machining 
Primary manufacturing 
Undercut
Finishing process 
 process
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Manufacturing Processes (see Table 13.1)
Benhabib, B.: Manufacturing: Design, Production, Automation, and Integration, Marcel 
Dekker, New York, 2003.
Creese, R. C.: Introduction to Manufacuring Processes and Materials, Marcel Dekker, New 
York, 1999.
Koshal, D.: Manufacturing Engineer’s Reference Book, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 
UK, 1993.
Kutz, M., ed.: Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 
2007.
Design for Manufacture (DFM)
Anderson, D. M.: Design for Manufacturability and Concurrent Engineering, CIM Press, 
Cambria, CA, 2010.

626 
engineering design 
13
Boothroyd, G., P. Dewhurst, and W. Knight: Product Design for Manufacture and Assembly, 
3d ed., Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 2010.
Bralla, J. G., ed.: Design for Manufacturability Handbook, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 
1999.
“Design for Manufacturability,” Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, Vol. 6, Soci-
ety of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1992.
Dieter, G. E., ed.: ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, Materials Selection and Design, ASM Interna-
tional, Materials Park, OH, 1997.
Poli, C.: Design for Manufacturing, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2001.
The following websites will connect you with DFM guidelines for many processes: www.
engineersedge.com/manufacturing_design.shtml and www.npd-solutions.com.
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
13.1 Classify the following manufacturing processes as to whether they are shape- replication 
or shape-generative: 
 
(a) honing the bore of a cylinder, 
 
(b) powder metallurgy gear, 
 
(c) rough turning a cast roll, 
 
(d) extrusion of vinyl house siding.
13.2 A small hardware fi tting is made from free-machining brass. For simplicity, consider 
that the production cost is the sum of three terms: (1) material cost, (2) labor costs, and 
(3) overhead costs. Assume that the fi tting is made in production lots of 500, 50,000, 
and 5 × 106 pieces by using, respectively, an engine lathe, a tracer lathe, and an au-
tomatic screw machine. Schematically plot the relative distribution of the cost due to 
materials, labor, and overhead for each of the production quantities.
13.3 Product cycle time is the time it takes for raw materials to be transformed into a fi nished 
product. A fi rm makes 1000 products per day. Before it is sold, each product represents 
$200 in materials and labor.
(a) 
If the cycle time is 12 days, how many dollars are tied up with in-process inven-
tory? If the company’s internal interest rate is 10 percent, what is the annual cost 
due to in-process inventory?
(b) If the cycle time is reduced to 8 days as a result of process improvement, what is 
the annual cost saving?
13.4 You are the designer of a crankshaft for an automotive engine. You have decided to 
make this part from nodular cast iron using a casting process. During design you con-
sult frequently with an experienced manufacturing engineer from the foundry where the 
part will be made. What design factors determine the manufacturing cost? Which of the 
costs are chiefl y determined by the foundry and which by the designer?
13.5 Determine the shape complexity for a part with shape R0 in Fig. 13.6, and compare with 
shape R2. For shape R0 the diameter is 10 mm and the length is 30 mm. For shape R2 
the overall length is 30 mm and the length of each shoulder is 10 mm. The large diameter 
is 10 mm and the small diameter is 6 mm. Use Eq. (13.1) to determine shape complexity. 
The tolerance on each dimension is ±0.4 mm.

 
chapter 13: Design for Manufacturing 
627
13
13.6 
Give four metrics that could be used to measure the complexity of an assembly 
operation.
13.7 
Examine the processes in Example 13.2. One of the processes that was rejected in the 
second round of decision making has great potential for making the integral bladed 
hub for the fan from an aluminum alloy. This process selection would have required 
a creative design for the die that might have required considerable development time 
and cost. Identify the process, and briefl y describe what technical issues prevented its 
selection.
 
 
Another approach is to abandon the concept that the hub and blades should be 
made as an integral piece. Instead, think about making the part as separate pieces to 
be assembled. What manufacturing processes does this open up for consideration?
13.8 
Make a brief literature study of the hot isostatic process (HIP). Discuss the mechanics 
of the process, its advantages, and its disadvantages. Think broadly about how HIPing 
can improve more conventional processes, and how it can impact design.
13.9 
The limiting draw ratio, the ratio of the diameter of the blank to the diameter of the 
deep drawn cup, is generally less than 2 for metal sheets. How then is a two-piece soft 
drink can made? A two-piece can is one that does not have a soldered longitudinal 
seam. The two parts of the can are the cylindrical can body and the top.
13.10 A manufacturing process to make a product consists of 10 separate processes. A mis-
take occurs in each process on average of once every 10,000 part produced. What is 
the product defect rate, expressed in parts per million (ppm)?
13.11 What kind of mistake-proofi ng device or assembly method would you suggest using 
the following situations?
(a) 
A check that the required number of bolts are available for assembling a product.
(b) A count that the proper number of holes has been drilled in a plate.
(c) 
Insurance that three wires are connected to the proper terminals.
(d) A simple method to ensure that a product identifi cation label has not been glued 
upside down.
(e) 
A simple method to ensure that a plug is inserted in the proper orientation in an 
electrical plug.
13.12 As a team project, create a table comparing the plastic processing processes listed 
in Sec. 13.18. Develop your own list of process characteristics that are generic to all 
plastic processing processes. Include a clear schematic drawing of the equipment and 
tooling, along with a description of how the process works.

14
14
628
14
RISK, RELIABILITY, AND SAFETY
14.1
INTRODUCTION
We start this chapter by defi ning terms that are often confused in the public mind 
but actually have precise technical meanings. A hazard is a condition that has the 
potential for human, property, or environmental damage. A cracked steering linkage, 
a leaking fuel line, or a loose step all represent hazards. Another term for a hazard is 
an unsafe condition. This is a condition which, if not corrected, can reasonably be 
expected to result in failure and/or injury.
A risk is the likelihood, expressed either as a probability or as a frequency, of a haz-
ard’s potential for harm being realized. Risk exists only when a hazard exists and some-
thing of value is exposed to the hazard. It is part of our individual existence and that of 
society as a whole. As young children we were taught about risks. “Don’t touch the stove.” 
“Don’t chase the ball into the street.” As adults we are made aware of the risks of society 
in our everyday newspaper and newscast. Thus, depending upon the particular week, the 
news makes us concerned about the risk of all-out nuclear war, a terrorist attack, or an 
airplane crash. The list of risks in our highly complex technological society is endless.
Risk is expressed as the product of the frequency of an event times the magnitude (conse-
quence) of the event. The result is the probability of the event occurring over a specifi ed 
time period, usually a year. An event can be an accident, death, or loss of property. 
 
Risk consequence
unit time
frequency
events
unit time
magnitude consequence
event
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟×
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(14.1)
For example, if there are 15 million automobile accidents in the United States per year, 
and on average 1 out of 300 accidents results in a fatality, the annual fatality risk is:
 
Risk fatality
year
15
10 accidents
year
1 fatality
300 accidents
50,000 fatalities
year
6
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
×
×
=

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
629
14
Table 14.1 lists the six classes of hazards to which society is subject. We can see 
that categories 3 and 4 are directly within the responsibility of the engineer and cat-
egories 2, 5, and possibly 6 provide design constraints in many situations. 
Risk assessment has become increasingly important in engineering design as the 
complexity of engineering systems has increased. The risks associated with engineer-
ing systems do not always arise because risk avoidance procedures were ignored. One 
category of risks arises from external factors that were considered acceptable at the 
time of design but subsequent research has revealed to be a health or safety hazard. A 
good example is the extensive use of sprayed asbestos coating as an insulation and fi re 
barrier before the toxicity of asbestos fi bers was known.1 
A second category of risks comes from abnormal conditions that are not a part of 
the basic design concept in its normal mode of operation. Usually these abnormal events 
stop the operation of the system without harming the general public, although there may 
be danger to the operators. Other systems, such as passenger aircraft or a nuclear power 
plant, pose a potential risk and cost to the larger public. Risks in engineering systems 
are often associated with operator error. Although these should be eliminated by us-
ing mistake-proofi ng methods, Sec. 13.8, it is diffi cult to anticipate all possible future 
events. This topic is discussed in Secs. 14.4 and 14.5. Finally, there are the risks associ-
ated with poor decisions, design errors and accidents. Clearly, these should be elimi-
nated, but since design is a human activity, errors and accidents will occur.2 
Most reasonable people will agree that life is not risk-free and cannot be made so.3 
However, an individual’s reaction to risk depends upon three main factors: (1) whether 
the person feels in control of the risk or whether the risk is imposed by some out-
side group, (2) whether the risk involves one big event (like an airplane crash) or 
many small, separate occurrences (like auto collisions), and (3) whether the hazard 
is familiar or is some strange, puzzling risk like a nuclear reactor. Through the me-
dium of mass communication the general public has become better informed about 
TABLE 14.1 
Classifi cation of Societal Hazards
Category of Hazard
Examples
1. Infections and degenerative diseases 
Infl uenza, heart disease, AIDS
2. Natural disasters
Earthquakes, fl oods, hurricanes
3. Failure of large technological systems
Failure of dams, power plants, aircraft, ships, buildings
4. Discrete small-scale accidents
Automotive accidents, power tools, consumer and sport 
goods
5. Low-level, delayed-effect hazards
Asbestos, PCB, microwave radiation, noise
6. Sociopolitical disruption
Terrorism, nuclear weapons proliferation, oil embargo 
From W. W. Lawrance, in R. C. Schwing and W. A. Albus (eds.), Social Risk Assessment, Plenum Press, New York, 1980.
1. M. Modaress, Risk Analysis in Engineering, Taylor & Francis, New York, 2006.
2. T. Kletz, An Engineer’s View of Human Error, 3d ed., Taylor & Francis, New York, 2006.
3. E. Wenk, Tradeoffs: Imperatives of Choice in a High-Tech World, Johns Hopkins University Press, 
Baltimore, 1986.

630 
engineering design 
14
the existence of risks in society, but they have not been educated concerning the need 
to accept some level of risk and to balance risk avoidance against cost. It is inevitable 
that there will be confl ict between various special-interest groups when trying to de-
cide on what constitutes an acceptable risk. 
Reliability is a measure of the capability of a part or a system to operate without 
failure in the service environment for a given period of time. It is always expressed as 
a probability; for example, a reliability of 0.999 implies that there is probability of fail-
ure of 1 part in every 1000. The mathematics of reliability is introduced in Sec. 14.3.
Safety is relative protection from exposure to hazards. A thing is safe if its risks are 
judged to be acceptable.1 Therefore, two different activities are involved in determining 
how safe a design is: (1) a risk assessment, which is a probabilistic activity, and (2) a 
judgment of the acceptability of that risk, which is a societal value judgment. 
14.1.1 Regulation as a Result of Risk
In a democracy, when the public perception of a risk reaches suffi cient intensity, legis-
lation is enacted to control the risk. That usually means the formation of a regulatory 
commission that is charged with overseeing the regulatory act. In the United States 
the fi rst regulatory commission was the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC). The 
following federal organizations have a major role to play in regulating technical risk:
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Federal Aviation Agency (FAA)
Federal Highway Administration (FHA)
Federal Railway Administration (FRA)
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
Some of the federal laws concerning product safety are listed in Table 14.2. The 
rapid acceleration of interest in consumer safety legislation is shown by the dates 
of enactment of these regulatory laws. Once a federal regulation becomes offi cial it 
has the force of law. In the United States, some 60 federal agencies issue more than 
1800 regulations a year; the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), contains more than 
130,000 pages.2 
Legislation has the important result that it charges all producers of a product with 
the cost of complying with the product safety regulations. Thus, we are not faced with 
the situation in which the majority of producers spend money to make their product 
safe but an unscrupulous minority cuts corners on safety to save on cost. However, 
in complex engineering systems it may be very diffi cult to write regulations that do 
not confl ict with each other and work at cross purposes. The automobile is a good 
example.3 Here, separate agencies have promulgated regulations to infl uence fuel 
1. W. W. Lawrance, Of Acceptable Risk, William Kaufman, Inc., Los Altos, CA, 1976.
2. The Economist, Aug. 2, 1997, p. 2; for CFR see www.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/index.html.
3. L. B. Lave, Science, vol. 212, pp. 893–99, May 22, 1981.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
631
14
economy, exhaust emissions, and crash safety. The law to control emissions also re-
duces fuel effi ciency by 7.5 percent, but the fuel effi ciency law has forced the building 
of smaller cars that have increased crash fatalities each year, until the widespread 
use of safety air bags. The need for strong technical input into the regulatory process 
should be apparent from this example. 
A common criticism of the regulatory approach is that decisions are often made 
arbitrarily. That is understandable when we consider that a regulatory agency often 
has a congressional mandate to protect the public from “unreasonable risk.” Since 
there usually are no widely agreed-on defi nitions of unreasonable risk, the regulators 
are accused of being hostile to or soft on the regulated industry, depending upon the 
individual’s point of view. Sometimes the regulating agency specifi es the technology 
for meeting the target level of risk. This removes the incentive for innovation in devel-
oping more effective methods of controlling the risk.
14.1.2 Standards
Design standards were fi rst considered in Sec. 1.7. There we discussed the difference 
between a code and a standard, the different kinds of standards, and the types of 
organizations that develop standards. In Sec. 5.8 standards were discussed for their 
value as sources of information. In this section we consider standards and codes more 
broadly from the viewpoint of the role they play in minimizing risk. Standards are 
among the most important ways in which the engineering profession makes sure that 
society receives a minimum level of safety and performance.
TABLE 14.2 
A Sample of Federal Laws Concerning 
Product Safety
Year
Legislation
1893
Railroad Appliance Safety Act
1938
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
1953
Flammable Fabrics Act
1960
Federal Hazardous Substance Act
1966
National Traffi c and Motor Vehicle Safety Act
1968 
Fire Research and Safety Act
1969
Child Protection and Toy Safety Act
1970
Lead-Based Paint Poison Prevention Act
1970
Occupational Safety and Health Act
1972
Consumer Product Safety Act
1982
Nuclear Waste Policy Act
1990
Oil Pollution Act
1996
Mercury-Containing and Rechargeable 
Battery Management Act

632 
engineering design 
14
The role that standards play in protecting public safety was fi rst shown in the 
United States in the middle of the 19th century. This was a time of rapid adoption 
of steam power on railroads and in ships. The explosion of steam boilers was an all-
too-frequent occurrence, until the ASME developed the Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Code that prescribed detailed standards for materials, design, and construction. The 
ASME Boiler Code was quickly adopted as law by the individual states. Other exam-
ples of public safety standards are fi re safety and structural codes for buildings and 
codes for the design, construction, maintenance, and inspection of elevators.
Other standards protect the general health and welfare. Examples are emission 
standards for cars and power plants to protect public health by minimizing air pollu-
tion, and standards on the discharge of effl uents into rivers and streams.
Mandatory Versus Voluntary Standards
Standards may be mandatory or voluntary. Mandatory standards are issued by 
governmental agencies, and violations are treated like criminal acts for which fi nes 
and/or imprisonment may be imposed. Voluntary standards are prepared by a com-
mittee of interested parties (industry suppliers and users, government, and the general 
public), usually under the sponsorship of a technical society or a trade association. 
Approval of a new standard generally requires agreement by nearly all participants 
in the committee. Therefore, voluntary standards are consensus standards. They usu-
ally specify only the lowest performance level acceptable to all members of the stan-
dards committee. Thus, a voluntary standard indicates the lowest safety level that an 
industry intends to provide in the product it manufactures. In contrast, a mandatory 
standard indicates the lowest safety level the government will accept. Because manda-
tory standards frequently set more stringent requirements than voluntary standards 
do, mandatory standards force manufacturers to innovate and advance the state of the 
art. This is often at increased cost to the consumer.
Regulatory agencies often adopt an existing voluntary standard. They may do this 
by citing the voluntary standard by reference in the regulation. They may also choose 
to modify the existing voluntary standard before adopting it, or they may decide to 
ignore the voluntary standard and write their own standard.
14.1.3 Risk Assessment
The assessment of risk is an imprecise process involving judgment and intuition. 
However, triggered by the consumer safety movement and the public concern over 
nuclear energy, a growing literature has evolved.1 The level of risk, as perceived by an 
individual or the public, can be classifi ed as tolerable, acceptable, or unacceptable.2
1. C. Starr, Science, vol. 165, pp. 1232–38, Sept. 19, 1969; N. Rasmussen, et al., Reactor Safety Study, 
WASH-1400, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1975; W. D. Rowe, An Anatomy of Risk, John Wiley 
& Sons, New York, 1977; J. D. Graham, L. C. Green, and M. J. Roberts, In Search of Safety, Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, 1988; M. Modarres, Risk Analysis in Engineering, CRC Press, Boca Baton, 
FL, 2006.
2. D. J. Smith, Reliability, Maintainability, and Risk, 5th ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 1997.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
633
14
Tolerable risk: Indicates that people are prepared to live with the level of risk but 
want to continue to review its causes and seek ways of reducing the risk.
Acceptable risk: Indicates that people accept the level of risk as reasonable and 
would not seek to expend much in resources to reduce it further. An acceptable risk 
is one that satisfi es the general public. This is often infl uenced by the decisions of rel-
evant government regulating agencies.
Unacceptable risk: Indicates that people do not accept this level of risk and would 
not participate in the activity or permit others to participate.
Many regulations are based on the principle of making the risk “as low as reason-
ably practicable” (ALARP). This means that all reasonable measures will be taken to 
reduce risks that lie in the tolerable region until the cost to achieve further risk reduc-
tion becomes greatly disproportionate to the benefi t.
Data on risk are subject to considerable uncertainty and variability. In general, 
three classes of statistics are available: (1) fi nancial losses (chiefl y from the insurance 
industry), (2) health information, and (3) accident statistics. Usually the data are dif-
ferentiated between fatalities and injuries. Risk is usually expressed as the probability 
of the risk of a fatality or accident per person per year. A risk that exceeds 10−3 fatali-
ties per person per year (or 1 in 1,000) is generally considered unacceptable, while a 
rate that is less than 10−5 is not of concern to the average person.1 The range 10−3 to 
10−5 is the tolerable range. However, an individual’s perception of risk depends upon 
the circumstances. If the risk is voluntarily assumed, like smoking or driving a car, 
then there is a greater acceptance of the risk than if the risk was assumed involun-
tarily, as with traveling in a train or breathing secondhand smoke. There is a large 
difference between individual risk and societal risk. Table 14.3 gives some generally 
accepted fatality rates for a variety of risks. 
TABLE 14.3 
Fatality Rate
Cause of Fatality
Fatality per Person per Year
Smoking (20 per day)
5 × 10−3
Cancer, in general 
3 × 10−3
Race car driving
1 × 10−3
Motor vehicle driving
3 × 10−4
Fires
4 × 10−5
Poison
2 × 10−5
Industrial machinery
1 × 10−5
Air travel
9 × 10−6
Railway travel
4 × 10−6
California earthquake
2 × 10−6
Lightning
5 × 10−7
1. D. J. Smith, Reliability, Maintainability, and Risk, 5th ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 1997.

634 
engineering design 
14
14.2
PROBABILISTIC APPROACH TO DESIGN
Conventional engineering design uses a deterministic approach. It disregards the fact 
that material properties, the dimensions of the parts, and the externally applied loads
vary statistically. In conventional design these uncertainties are handled by applying
a factor of safety. In critical design situations such as aircraft, space, and nuclear ap-
plications, it is often necessary to use a probabilistic approach to better quantify un-
certainty and thereby increase reliability.1
14.2.1 Basic Probability Using the Normal Distribution
Many physical measurements follow the symmetrical, bell-shaped curve of the nor-
mal, or Gaussian frequency distribution. The distributions of yield strength, tensile
strength, and reduction of area from the tension test follow the normal curve to a suit-
able degree of approximation. The equation of the normal curve is
f
x
1
2
exp
1
2
2
σ
π
2
μ
σ
( )
x =
−
exp
−
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
 
(14.2)
where f(f x( ) is the height of the frequency curve corresponding to an assigned value
x
x,
m is the mean of the population, and 
m
s is the standard deviation of the population. The
s
normal distribution extends from x = −∞ to x = +∞ and is symmetrical about the popu-
lation mean m. The existence of negative values and long “tails” makes the normal 
distribution a poor model for certain engineering problems.
In order to place all normal distributions on a common basis in a standardized
way, the normal curve frequently is expressed in terms of the standard normal vari-
able or the z variable.
z
x
μ
σ
=
−
 
(14.3)
Now, the equation of the standard normal curve becomes
f
z
1
2
exp
2
2
π
( )
z =
−
exp⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠ 
(14.4)
For the standardized normal curve m = 0 and s = 1. The standardized normal curve 
was presented previously in Chap. 8, Fig. 8.23. The total area under the curve is unity.
The probability of a value of z falling between z = −∞ and a specifi ed value of z is
given by the area under the curve. Probability is the numerical measure of likelihood
1. E. B. Haugen, Probabilistic Mechanical Design, Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ, 1980; J. N. Siddal, 
Probabilistic Engineering Design, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1983.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
635
14
of an event. The probability, P, is bounded between
P
P = 0 (an impossible event) and 
P = 1 (a certain event).
The area under the curve from −∞ to z = −1.0 is 0.1587, so the probability of 
a value falling into that interval is P = 0.l587, or 15.87 percent. Since the curve is
symmetric, the probability of a value falling into the interval z = −l to z = l or m ± s
is 1.0000 −2(0.1587) = 0.6826. In a similar way it can be shown that m ± 3s encom-
s
passes 99.73 percent of all values.
Some typical values for the area under the z curve are listed in Table 14.4. More 
complete values will be found in Appendix A. For example, if z = −3.0 the probabil-
ity of a value being less than z is 0.0013 or 0.13 percent. The percentage of values 
greater than this z is 100 − 0.13 = 99.87 percent. The fraction of values less than z
is 1/0.0013 = 1 in 769. Table 14.4 also shows that if we wanted to exclude the lowest 
5 percent of the population values we would set z at −1.645.
E X A M P L E 14 .1
A highly automated factory is producing ball bearings. The average ball diameter is 0.2152 in. 
and the standard deviation is 0.0125 in. These dimensions are normally distributed.
(a) What percentage of the parts can be expected to have a diameter less than 0.2500 in.? 
Note that up until now we have used m and
m
s to represent the mean and standard deviation 
s
of the population. The sample values of the mean and standard deviation are given by x_
and s. In this example, where we are sampling literally millions of balls, these values are
nearly identical.
Determining the standard normal variable 
z
x
x
x
s
0.2500
0.2512
0.0125
0.0012
0.0125
0.096
μ
σ
=
≈
−
=
−
= −
= −
From Appendix A, P(z( < −0.09) = 0.4641 and P(z( < −0.10) = 0.4602. Interpolating, the
area under the z distribution curve at z = −0.096 is 0.4618. Therefore, 46.18 percent of the
ball bearings are below 0.2500 in. diameter.
TABLE 14.4
Areas Under Standardized Normal Frequency Curve
z
x
=
- l
r
Area
z
Area
z
0


−3.0
0.0013
−3.090
0.001
−2.0
0.0228 
−2.576
0.005
−1.0
0.1587
−2.326
0.010
−0.5
0.3085
−1.960
0.025
0.0 
0.5000  
−1.645
0.050
+0.5 
0.6915  
1.645
0.950
+1.0  
0.8413  
1.960
0.975
+2.0
0.9772
2.326
0.990
+3.0
0.9987
2.576
0.995
3.090
0.999

636 
engineering design 
14
(b) What percentage of the balls are between 0.2574 and 0.2512 in.? 
z
z
0.2512
0.2512
0.0125
0.0
0.2574
0.2512
0.0125
0.0062
0.0125
0.50
=
−
=
=
−
=
= +
z
Area under curve
r
from
to
0
z
is 0.5000.
to z
z
Area under curve
r
from
to
0.5 is 0.6915
−∞
=
z
to
∞
Therefore, percentage of ball diameters in interval 0.2512 to 0.2574 is 0.6915 −0.5000 =
0.1915 or 19.15 percent.
14.2.2 Sources of Statistical Tables
All statistical texts contain tables for the z distribution, the confi dence limits of the 
mean, and the t and 
t
F distributions, but tables of more esoteric statistics often needed 
F
in engineering may be more elusive. Here we mention two convenient sources of sta-
tistical tables and information.
The Microsoft spreadsheet program Excel provides access to many special math-
ematical and statistical functions. To display this menu of functions, click on the In-
sert Function button, f xf , on the formula bar at the top of a spreadsheet and search in 
the function box for the special function you might need. Click on the name of the
function for a description and example of how to use it. Table 14.5 is a short listing of 
some of the more useful statistical functions.
The NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook of Statistical Methods is the modern version
of Experimental Statistics, edited by Mary Natrella and published in 1963 by the 
National Bureau of Standards as Handbook 91. It is available online at www.itl.nist 
.gov/div898/handbook.
TABLE 14.5
Some Statistical Functions Available in Excel
Function
Description of Excel Function
NORMDIST
Returns the f(x) in Eq. (14.2) for given x, m and s
NORMINV
Returns x in Eq. (14.2) for given f(x), m and s
NORMSDIST
Returns the area under Eq. (14.4) for a given z (probability)
NORMSINV
Returns the std normal variable z, given the probability (area under f(z))
LOGNORMDIST
Returns the f(x) for a distribution where 1n x is normally distributed
EXPONDIST
Returns the exponential distribution
GAMMADIST
Returns values of the Gamma distribution (useful in Weibull distribution)
WEIBULL
Returns the Weibull distribution for values of x, and shape and scale parameters
ZTEST
Returns the two-tailed probability in a z test
TDIST
Returns values of the t distribution
FDIST 
Returns values of the F distribution
FINV
Returns the inverse of the F probability distribution

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
637
14
14.2.3 Variability in Material Properties
The mechanical properties of engineering materials exhibit variability. Fracture and 
fatigue properties show greater variability than the static tensile properties of yield 
strength and tensile strength (see Table 14.6). Most published mechanical property
data do not give mean values and standard deviations. Haugen1 has presented much 
of the published statistical data. MMPDS-02 Handbook presents extensive statistical
k
data for materials used in aircraft.2 Much other statistical data resides in the fi les of 
companies and government agencies.
Published mechanical property data without statistical attribution is usually taken 
to represent a mean value. If a range of values is given, the lower value is often taken 
to represent a conservative value for design. Although certainly not all mechanical 
properties are normally distributed, a normal distribution is a good fi rst approxima-
tion that usually results in a conservative design. When statistical data are not avail-
able we can estimate the standard deviation by assuming that the upper xU and lower 
U
xL values of a sample are
L
± three standard deviations from the mean. Thus,
x
x
x
x
6
a d
=
6
U
L
x
U
L
x
σ
σ
s
and
=
x
 
(14.5)
When the range of property values is not given, it is still possible to approximate 
the standard deviation by using the coeffi cient of variation, d, which is a measure of 
d
the uncertainty of the value of the mean.
s
x
δ =
 
(14.6)
1. E. B. Haugen, op. cit., Chap. 8 and App. 10A and 10B.
2. Metallic Materials Properties Development and Standardization Handbook, 5 volumes, 2005. This 
is the successor to MIL-HDBK-5 formerly published by DOD. The last (2003) version of this handbook 
can be viewed at www.mmpds.org.
TABLE 14.6 
Typical Values of Coeffi cient of Variation
Variable x
Typical c
Modulus of elasticity of metals
0.05
Tensile strength of metals
0.05
Yield strength of metals
0.07
Buckling strength of columns
0.15
Fracture toughness of metals
0.15 
Cycles to failure in fatigue
0.50
Design load in mechanical components
0.05–0.15
Design load in structural systems
0.15–0.25
H. R. Millwater and P. H. Wirsching, “Analysis Methods for 
Probabilistic Life Assessment,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 17, 
p. 251, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2002.

638 
engineering design 
14
The coeffi cient of variation is different for each mechanical property, but it tends to
be relatively constant over a range of mean values. Thus, it is a way of estimating the
standard deviation. Table 14.6 gives some values of coeffi cient of variation.
E X A M P L E  14 . 2
The yield strength of a sample of 50 tensile specimens from an alloy steel is x
130.1ksi.
=
The range of yield strength values is from 115 to 145 ksi. The estimate of standard deviation,
which measures the variability in the strength values, is s
x
x
U
L
x
6
145 115
6
5ksi.
=
=
−
=
Assuming that a normal distribution applies, estimate the value of yield strength which
99 percent of the yield strengths will exceed. From Table 14.4, z1% = −2.326, and from
Eq. (14.3)
x
x
2.326
130.1
5
and
118.5ksi
1%
1%
−
=
2 326
−
=
Note that if the range of yield strength had not been known, we could estimate the stan-
dard deviation from Table 14.6 and Eq. (14.6).
s
x
x
130.1
0.07
9.1ksi. Thisresultsin
108.9ksi
1
δ =
xδ
×
=
0.07
=
%
In Example 14.2, sample values of mean and standard deviation were used to
determine the probability limits. This is inaccurate unless the sample size n is very 
large, possibly approaching n = 1000. This is because the sample values x and 
x
s are
only estimates of the true population values m and 
m
s. The error in using sample values 
s
to estimate population values can be corrected if we used tolerance limits. Because
we generally are interested in fi nding the lower limit of the property, we use the one-
sided tolerance limit.
x
x
k
s
(
)
k
L
R
x
(k
C
,
−
x
 
(14.7)
To fi nd kR,C
k
statistical tables
C
1 we fi rst need to decide on the confi dence level, c. This
is usually taken as 95 percent, indicating that we have a 95 percent confi dence that 
the method will produce a true lower limit on the property. R is our expectation that 
the value of xL will be exceeded
L
R percent of the time. Usually R is taken at 90, 95 or 
99 percent. Table 14.7 gives some values of kR,C
k
for different values of sample size
C
n.
E X A M P L E 14 . 3
Now we redo Example 14.2 using the one-sided tolerance limit. The sample size is n = 50,
so kR,C
k
= 2.86 at a 95 percent confi dence level and with R = 0.99. Then, xL = 130.1 −2.86(5) =
115.8 ksi. Note that xL has been decreased from 118.5 to 115.8 ksi when we  corrected for 
L
using sample statistics instead of population statistics. If n consisted of only 10 speci-
mens, xL would be 110.2 ksi.
L
1. J. Devore and N. Farnum, Table V, Applied Statistics for Engineers and Scientists, Duxbury Press, 
Pacifi c Grove, CA.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
639
14
14.2.4 Safety Factor
An important concept in risk and reliability analysis is that hazards are controlled, 
mitigated, or removed by barriers. Barriers can be physical objects like pipes, walls, 
or containment vessels, or active barriers such as human operators and computer con-
trolled systems. On a more abstract level, the property of a material that is used to 
build a component can be considered a barrier. This situation is considered in a class of 
problems called Stress-Strength Models, Sec. 14.2.5. This model assumes that the bar-
rier fails if the stress (mechanical, thermal, electrical, etc.) exceeds the resistance of the
material to the stress, measured in terms of some material property like yield strength.
The use of a safety factor is the oldest and simplest stress-strength model. We will
r
defi ne the safety factor, SF, as the ratio of the strength, S, divided by the stress s. Another 
s
way to view the safety factor is that it is the ratio of the capacity of the system to its load. 
S
SF
strength
stress
capacity
load
σ
=
=
=
 
(14.8)
The concept of safety factor is sometimes expressed by the margin of safety, MS. 
MS = capacity − load 
(14.9)
The margin of safety indicates the amount by which the design capacity exceeds the load.
If you have information on the mean values of strength and stress, then using Eq. (14.8) 
is advisable. However, this information is often unavailable.
Deciding on a safety factor requires experience. Often design standards or codes pre-
scribe what SF to use. In the absence of this advice, the following is a rational way to arrive 
at a factor of safety.1 Rather than using Eq. (14.8), break the safety factor into fi ve compo-
nents which measure how well you understand the capacity vs. load issues for the design 
of the part. Estimate how well you know the material properties, the loads and stress state, 
the manufacturing tolerances, the degree to which the design is based on a well-validated 
1. D. G. Ullman, The Mechanical Design Process, 4th ed, pp. 405–406, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2010.
TABLE 14.7 
One-Sided Tolerance Limit Factors 
for 95% Confi dence Level
n
k90,95
k99,95
5
3.41
5.74
10
2.35
3.98
20
1.93
3.30
50
1.65
2.86
100
1.53
2.68 
500
1.39
2.48
∞
1.28
2.37
Note: These apply only to normally distributed variables.

640 
engineering design 
14
theory of failure, and fi nally, the level of reliability the application requires. Each of these 
factors is evaluated separately, and then multiplied to arrive at the overall SF.
 
SF = SF 
material × SF 
stress × SF tolerances × SF failure theory × SF reliability 
(14.10)
Each component SF should be estimated from the following listing.
Estimating the Contribution from the Material
SFmaterial = 1.0
The properties of the material are well known, or they 
have been obtained from tests on the same material used 
for the design of the part.
SFmaterial = 1.1
The material properties are known from a handbook or 
from manufacturer’s values.
SFmaterial = 1.2–1.4
The material properties are not well known.
Estimating the Contribution from the Load or Stress
SFstress = 1.0
The load is well defi ned as static or fl uctuating. There 
are no expected overloads or shock loads. An accurate 
method of analyzing stress has been used.
SFstress = 1.2–1.3  
Average overloads of 20–50%. The stress analysis method 
may result in errors less than 50%.
SFstress = 1.4–1.7 
The load is not well known or the stress analysis method 
is of doubtful accuracy.
Estimating the Contribution from Tolerances (Geometry)
SFtolerances = 1.0
The manufacturing tolerances are tight and well held.
SFtolerances = 1.0
The manufacturing tolerances are average.
SFtolerances = 1.1–1.2
The dimensions are not closely held.
Estimating the Contribution from Failure Analysis
SFfailure theory = 1.0–1.1
The failure analysis used is based on static uniaxial or 
multiaxial state of stress, or fully reversed uniaxial fa-
tigue stresses.
SFfailure theory = 1.2
Same as above, but now includes multiaxial fully reversed 
fatigue stresses or uniaxial nonzero mean fatigue stresses.
SFfailure theory = 1.3–1.5
Failure analysis not well developed, as with cumulative 
fatigue damage.
Estimating the Contribution from Reliability
SFreliability = 1.1
The reliability of the part does not need to be high; less 
than 90%.
SFreliability = 1.2–1.3
The reliability is on average 92–98%.
SFreliability = 1.4–1.6
The reliability must be 99% or higher.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
641
14
The following section shows how the safety factor can be expressed in terms of 
probability.
14.2.5 Reliability-Based Safety Factor
Consider a structural member subjected to a static load that develops a stress s.
s
The variation in load or sectional area results in the distribution of stress shown in 
Fig. 14.1, where the mean is –s and the standard deviation
–s
1 of the sample of stress val-
ues is s. The yield strength of the material SyS has a distribution of values given by Sy
and sy. However, the two frequency distributions overlap, and it is possible for s > SyS ,
which is the condition for failure. The probability of failure is given by
P
P(
)
S
f
y
P
(
S
P(
P(
 
(14.11)
The reliability R is defi ned as
R
P
1
fP  
(14.12)
If we subtract the stress distribution from the strength distribution, we get the distribu-
tion Q = SyS −s shown at the left in Fig. 14.1. 
s
We now need to be able to determine the mean and standard deviation of the 
distribution Q constructed by performing algebraic operations on two indepen-
dent random variables x and 
x
y, that is, Q = x ± y. Without going into statistical
details,2 the results are as given in Table 14.8. Referring now to Fig. 14.1, and using 
the results in Table 14.8, we see that the distribution Q = SyS −s has a mean value and
s
Q
40
30
10 and
6
8
10.
Q
2
2
8
σ
=
−
40
=10 and
+
=
82
8
The part of the distribution to the left of Q = 0
1. Note that probabilistic design is at the intersection of two engineering disciplines: mechanical design 
and engineering statistics. Thus, confusion in notation is a problem.
2. E. B. Haugen, op. cit., pp. 26–56.
FIGURE 14.1
Distributions of yield strength Sy and stress.
Sy
sQ = 10
Q = 10
0
Stress, ksi
Q = Sy –

s = 8
 = 30

sy = 6
Sy = 40

642 
engineering design 
14
represents the area for which SyS −s is a negative number; that is,
s
s > SyS , and failure 
occurs. If we transform to the standard normal variable, z = (x( −m)/s, we get, at 
s
Q = 0,
z
Q
0
1
Q
0
10
1.0
Q
σ
=
= −
= −
From Table 14.4 we fi nd that 0.16 of the area falls between −∞and z = −1.0. Thus, the 
probability of failure is PfP = 0.16, and the reliability is R = 1 − 0.16 = 0.84. Clearly,
this is not a particularly satisfactory situation. If we select a stronger material with
S
Q
50 k i
20
y
=
Q
and z = 2.0. The probability of failure now is about 0.02. Values
of z corresponding to various values of failure probabilities are given in Table 14.9.
14.3
RELIABILITY THEORY
Reliability is the probability that a system, component, or device will perform without 
failure for a specifi ed period of time under specifi ed operating conditions. The dis-
cipline of reliability engineering basically is a study of the causes, distribution, and
TABLE 14.9 
Value of z to Give Different Levels 
of Probability of Failure
Probability of Failure Pf
z = (x - l)/r
10−1
−1.28
10−2
−2.33 
10−3
−3.09
10−4
−3.72
10−5
−4.26
10−6
−4.75
TABLE 14.8 
Mean and Standard Deviation of 
Independent Random Variables x and y
Algebraic Functions
Mean, Q
Std. Deviation
Q = C
 C
0
Q = Cx
C x
Csx
s
Q = x + C
x
C
sx
s
Q = x ±
x
y
x
y
±
σ
σ
x
y
2
2
+
Q = xy
x y
x
y
y
x
y
2
2
2
2
σ
σ
y
2
2
+
Q = x/y/
x
y
/
y
/
1/2
2
(
)
x
y
x
y
2
2
2
2
σ
σ
y
2
2
Q = 1/x/
1 / x
σ x
x
/
2

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
643
14
prediction of failure. If R(t) is the reliability with respect to time
t
t, then F(t) is the un-
t
reliability (probability of failure) in the same time t. Since failure and nonfailure are
mutually exclusive events,
R
F
1
( )t
( )t( )t
+
=
F
)t
 
(14.13) 
If N0
N  components are put on test, the number surviving to or at time t is
t
Ns
N (t), and the
t
number that failed between t = 0 and t = t is
t
Nf
N (t).t
N
N
N
s
f
N
0
( )t
( )t
+
=
N
)t
(14.14)
From the defi nition of reliability
R
N
N
N
N
1
s
f
0
0
N
( )t
( )t
( )t
=
= −
(14.15)
Taking the derivative with respect to time
dR
dt
N
d N
dt
( )t
1
(
)
N f
0
= −
 
(14.16)
or 
dN
dt
N dR
dt
f
0
= −
(14.17)
We could fi nd the failure rate from Eq. (14.17), but this would not be a valid metric since
the numbers would depend on the sample size N0
N . The larger of two samples of the same
components under test will have more items failing per unit time. A much more mean-
ingful measure of failure rate is the hazard rate or the instantaneous failure rate, h(t( ).t
h t
dN
dt N
f t
t
f t
R
( )t
1
( )t
)t
1
(
F )
)t
( )t
f
s
=
=
=
 
(14.18)
The last part of Eq. (14.18) uses statistical terminology to defi ne h(t). It is expressed as 
t
the probability density function of time to failure divided by the cumulative distribu-
tion function of nonfailures. It is the probability that a given test item will fail between
t1 and t1 + dt1 when it has already survived to t1. 
If we divide Eq. (14.17) by Ns
N  and combine with Eq. (14.18)
h t
dN
dt N
N
N
dR
dt
( )t
1
f
s
s
N
0
=
= −
and since R
N
N
( )t
s
0
=
 this simplifi es to
h t
R
dR
dt
( )t
1
= −
and 
h t dt
dR
R
( )t
= −
Integrating gives
dR
R
t
R
0
1
∫
∫
h t dt
( )t
t
0
1
( )
where the reliability (probability of survival) at 
t = 0 is one.
h t dt
( )t
t
0
0∫
∫h t dt
R
R t
( )t
ln
o
( )t
p
t
0 ( )
( )
p
−∫h
dt
)t
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎤ 
(14.19)

644 
engineering design 
14
Equation (14.19) can be used to drive the reliability function from a known hazard
rate function. Making a good estimate of the reliability depends on using an appropri-
ate model for the hazard rate function. In this chapter we consider the constant failure
rate model and the Weibull model.
The hazard rate or failure rate is given in terms like 1 percent per 1000 h or 
10−5 per hour. Components in the range of failure rates of 10−5 to 10−7 per hour  exhibit 
a good commercial level of reliability.
The general failure curve shown in Fig. 14.2 is the summation of three competing
processes: (1) an early failure process, (2) a random failure process, and (3) a wearout 
process. The three-stage curve shown in Fig. 14.2a is typical of electronic compo-
nents. At short lifetimes there is a high failure rate due to “infant mortality” arising
from design errors, manufacturing defects, or installation defects. This is a period of 
shakedown, or debugging, of failures. These early failures can be minimized by im-
proving production quality control, subjecting the parts to a proof test before service,
or “running in” the equipment before sending it out of the plant. As these early fail-
ures leave the system, failure will occur less and less frequently until eventually the
failure rate will reach a constant value. The time period of constant failure rate is a
period in which failures can be considered to occur at random from random  overloads
or random fl aws. These failures follow no predictable pattern. Finally, after what 
is hopefully a long time, materials and components begin to age and wear rapidly
and the wearout period of accelerating failure rate begins. Mechanical components
(Fig. 14.2b) do not exhibit a region of constant failure rate. After an initial break-in
b
period, wear mechanisms operate continuously until failure occurs.
14.3.1 Defi nitions
Following are some defi nitions that are important in understanding reliability.
Cumulative time to failure (T): When N0
N  components are run for a time t without 
t
replacing or repairing failed components,
t
t
t
t
k t
T
[
(
)
N
k ]
k
1
2t
3
0
t
(N
k
t[
+t
+(N
(N
 
(14.20)
FIGURE 14.2
Forms of the failure curve: (a) three-stage (bath tube) curve typical of electronic equipment; 
(b) failure curve more typical of mechanical equipment.
Break-in
Constant
failure rate
(a)
Time
(b)
Time
Hazard rate
Wear out

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
645
14
where t1 is the occurrence of the fi rst failure, etc., and k is the number of failed
k
components.
Mean life: The average life of the N0
N  components put on test or in service, mea-
sured over the entire life curve out to wearout.
Mean time to failure (MTTF): The sum of the survival time for all of the com-
ponents divided by the number of failures. This can be applied to any period in the 
life of the component. MTTF is used for parts that are not repaired, like light bulbs, 
transistors, and bearings, or for systems containing many parts, like a printed circuit 
board or a spacecraft. When a part fails in a nonrepairable system, the system fails; 
therefore, system reliability is a function of the fi rst part failure.
Mean time between failures (MTBF): The mean time between two successive 
component failures. MTBF is similar to MTTF, but it is applied to components or 
systems that are repaired.
Table 14.10 gives some rough ideas of average failure rates for different engineer-
ing components and systems.
14.3.2 Constant Failure Rate
For the special case of a constant failure rate, h(t)t = l, and Eq. (14.19) can be written
R
e
exp
t
(
)
dt
t
0∫0 λ
( )t = exp(
=
λt
−
(14.21)
TABLE 14.10 
Average Failure Rates for a Variety of 
Components and Systems
Component 
Failure Rate: Number of 
Failures per 1000 h
Bolts, shafts
2 × 10−7
Gaskets
5 × 10−4
Pipe joints
5 × 10−4
Plastic hoses 
4 × 10−2
Valves, leaking
2 × 10−3
Systems:
Centrifugal compressor
1.5 × 10−1
Diesel-driven generator
1.2–5
Refrigerator, household
4–6 × 10−2
Mainframe computer
4–8
Personal computer
2–5 × 10−2
Printed circuit board
7–10 × 10−5

646 
engineering design 
14
The probability distribution of reliability, for this case, is a negative exponential
distribution.
number of failu
f
res
numberof timeunitsdurin
r gwhichallitemswereexposedtofailure
λ =
The reciprocal of l, T
1/
,
λ
=
 is the mean time between failures (MTBF).
T
1
number of time units durin
r g which all items were exposed to failure
number of failu
f
res
λ
=
=
so 
R
e t T
/
( )t =
−
 
(14.22)
Note that if a component is operated for a period equal to MTBF, the probability of 
survival is 1/e/ = 0.37.
Although an individual component may not have an exponential reliability distribu-
tion, in a complex system with many components the overall reliability may appear as a 
series of random events, and the system will follow an exponential reliability distribution.
E X A M P L E 14 . 4 . If a device has a failure rate of 2 × 10−6 failures/h, what is its reliabil-
ity for an operating period of 500 h? If there are 2000 items in the test, how many failures
are expected in 500 h? Assume that strict quality control has eliminated premature fail-
ures so we can assume a constant failure rate.
R
e
N
N R
N
N
N
(500)
e p( 2
10
500)
0.999
2000(0.999)
1998
2 failu
f
res expected
s
f
s
N
N
6
0.001
0 ( )t( )t
=
e
=
N R
0
)t
=
−
N
=
−
If the MTBF for the device is 100,000 h, what is the reliability if the operating time
equals 100,000 h?
t
T
R
e
e
e
1/
( )t
0.37
T
t /
100,000/100,000
1
λ
=
T
= e
=
=
e
−
−
t T
−
We note that a device has only a 37 percent chance of surviving as long as the MTBF.
If the length of the constant failure rate period is 50,000 h, what is the reliability for 
operating for that length of time?
R
e
(50,000)
e p( 2
10
5
0 )
0.905
6
4
5
10
0.1 =
−
If the part has just entered the useful life period, what is the probability it will survive 100 h?
R
e
(100)
e p( 2
10
0 )
0.9998
6
2
10
0.0002 =
e−
If the part has survived for 49,900 h, what is the probability it will survive for the next 100 h?
R
e
(100)
e p( 2
10
0 )
0.9998
6
2
10
0.0002 =
e−
We note that the reliability of the device is the same for an equal period of operating time
so long as it is in the constant-failure-rate (useful-life) region.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
647
14
14.3.3 Weibull Frequency Distribution
The normal frequency distribution is an unbounded symmetrical distribution with
long tails extending from −∞ to +∞. However, many random variables follow a
bounded, nonsymmetrical distribution. The Weibull distribution describes the life of a
component for which all values are positive (there are no negative lives) and for which 
there are occasional long-lived results.1 It is useful for describing the probability of 
fracture in brittle materials, and also for describing fatigue life at a given stress level.
The two-parameter Weibull distribution function is described by 2
f x
m x
x
x
)
x
exp
0
m
m
1
θ θ
θ
=
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
m
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
⎛⎞
m
⎠
⎞
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
>
(14.23)
where f(f x( )x = frequency distribution of the random variable x
m = shape parameter, which is sometimes referred to as the Weibull modulus
q = scale parameter, sometimes called the characteristic value
The change in the Weibull distribution for various values of shape parameter is shown 
in Fig. 14.3, illustrating its fl exibility for describing a wide range of situations. The
probability of x being less than a value
x
q for a Weibull distribution of given m and q
is given by
P
q
f x dx
e
d
(x
q
( )
x
1
o
q
q
( /
q
)m
∫
q
θ
−
 
(14.24)
The mean of a Weibull distribution can be found from
x
m
1
1
θ
=
−
θ
+
1
Γ⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞ 
(14.25)
where Γ is the gamma function. Tables of the gamma function are available in many
Γ
statistical texts or in Excel. The variance of a Weibull distribution is given by
m
m
1
2
1
1
2
2
2
σ
θ
2
Γ
2
θ
+
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞−Γ
+
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
⎧
⎨
⎧
⎨
⎧
⎩
⎨
⎩
⎨
⎫
⎬
⎫
⎬
⎫
⎭
⎬
⎭
⎬ 
(14.26)
The cumulative frequency distribution of a Weibull distribution is given by
F
x
( )
x
1 exp
m
θ
=1
−⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
m
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
 
(14.27)
1. W. Weibull, J. Appl. Mech., vol. 18, pp. 293–97, 1951; Materials Research and Stds., pp. 405–11, May 
1962; C. R. Mischke, Jnl. Mech. Design, vol. 114, pp. 29–34, 1992.
2. Writers use different symbols for the Weibull parameter. Other uses are a or b for the shape param-
eter and b or h for the scale parameter.

648 
engineering design 
14
Rewriting Eq. (14.27) as
x
x
x
x
x
m
x
m
1
1
(
F
)
exp
ln
1
1
(
F
)
ln ln
1
1
(
F
)
ln
ln
(
n )
m
m
θ
θ
θ
θ
m
x
(ln
l
x
n
=
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
m
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
= ⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
m
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
=
−
m
x
m
 
(14.28)
This is a straight line of the form y = mx + c. Special Weibull probability paper is
available to assist in the analysis according to Eq. (14.28). When the cumulative prob-
ability of failure is plotted against x (life) on Weibull paper, a straight line is obtained 
x
(Fig. 14.4). The slope is the Weibull modulus m. The greater the slope, the smaller the
scatter in the random variable x.
q is called the 
q
characteristic value of the Weibull distribution. If x = q, then
F
e
( )
x
1
exp
1
1
e
1
2.718
0.632
1
θ
θ
= 1
−
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦= 1
−
1
=
For any Weibull distribution, the probability of being less than or equal to the charac-
teristic value is 0.632. The value of x at a probability of 63 percent on the Weibull plot 
x
is the value of q.
FIGURE 14.3
The Weibull distribution for q = 1 and different values of m.
f(x)
m 
m  4
m  1
m  2
x
m  8
1
2

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
649
14
If the data do not plot as a straight line on Weibull graph paper, then either the 
sample was not taken from a population with a Weibull distribution or it may be that 
the Weibull distribution has a minimum value x0 that is greater than x0 = 0. This leads 
to the three parameter Weibull distribution.
F
x
x
x
( )
x
1 exp
m
0
0
θ
=1
−
−
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥ 
(14.29)
For example, in the distribution of fatigue life at a constant stress, it is unrealistic 
to expect a minimum life of zero. The easiest procedure for fi nding x0 is to use the 
Weibull probability plot. First, plot the data as in the two-parameter case where x0 = 0. 
Then, pick a value of x0 between 0 and the lowest observed value of x and subtract it 
x
FIGURE 14.4
Weibull plot for life of ball bearings. (From C. Lipman and N. J. Sheth, Statistical Design and 
Analysis of Engineering Experiments, p. 41, 1974. Used with the permission of McGraw-Hill, 
New York.)
m  1.5
1.0
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
104
105
106
2
3
4
5
6
7 8 9
2
3
4
5
6
Weibull function
Life, cycles
7 8 9

650 
engineering design 
14
from each of the observed values of x. Continue adjusting x0 and plotting x −x0 until a 
straight line is obtained on the Weibull graph paper.
14.3.4 Reliability with a Variable Failure Rate
Mechanical failures, and some failures of electronic components, do not exhibit a pe-
riod of constant failure rate such as that shown in Fig. 14.2a but instead have a curve
like Fig. 14.2b. Since the failure rate is a function of time, the simple exponential rela-
tion for reliability no longer applies. Instead, reliability is expressed by the Weibull
distribution, Eq. (14.27). Since reliability is 1 minus the probability of failure,
R
t
e
( )t
1
(
F )
( /t
)m
=1
=
θ
−
 
(14.30)
E X A M P L E 14 . 5
For the ball bearings plotted in Fig 14.4, m = 1.5 and q = 6 × 105 cycles. The proportion
of bearings having a life less than one-half million cycles is given by the area under the
curve to the left of x = 5 × 105 for a Weibull distribution function like Fig. 14.3 but with
m = 1.5 and q = 6 × 105.
F
t
e
( )t
1
exp
1
exp
5
10
6
10
1
1
1
(2.718
)
1
0.468
0.532
m
5
5
1.5
0.760
0.760
θ
= 1
−⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
m
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
= 1
−⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥=
−
1
=
−
1
=
−
1
=
−
Thus, 53 percent of the bearings will fail before 500,000 cycles. The probability of failure
in less than 100,000 cycles is still 8.5 percent. This apparently is a heavily loaded bearing
operating at low speed.
Substituting Eq. (14.29) into Eq. (14.18) gives the hazard rate for the three-parameter 
Weibull distribution.
h t
m t
t
( )t
m
0
1
θ
θ
=
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
m
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
−
 
(14.31)
For the special case t0 = 0 and m = 1, Eq. (14.31) reduces to the exponential distri-
bution with q = MTBF. When m = 1, the hazard rate is constant. When m < 1, h(t)t
decreases as t increases, as in the break-in period of a three-stage failure curve. When
t
1 < m < 2, h(t) increases with time. When
t
m = 3.2, the Weibull distribution becomes a 
good approximation of the normal distribution.
E X A M P L E 14 . 6
Ninety components, N, are tested for a total time of 3830 hours. At various times the tests 
N
are stopped and the number of failed components, n, is recorded. Instead of just plotting
percentage failure versus time, we use the mean rank to estimate F(t)t = n/(N
(
+ 1).1
1. An alternative plotting metric is the median rank, M = (n − 0.3)/(N + 0.4). See C. R. Mischke, 
“Fitting Weibull Strength Data and Applying It to Stochastic Mechanical Design,” Jnl of Mech. Design, 
vol. 114, pp. 35–41, 1992. For a database of Weibull failure statistics, as well as many documents on reli-
ability analysis, see http://www.barringer1.com.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
651
14
(a)  Plot the data in Table 14.11 and evaluate the parameters for the Weibull reliability, 
Eq. (14.29).
(b) Find the probability of survival for 700 h.
(c) Determine the instantaneous hazard rate from Eq. (14.31).
(a) F(t) is plotted against time on Weibull probability paper to give the plot shown
t
in Fig. 14.5. A straight line drawn through the data shows that the data follow a Weibull
distribution. From Table 14.11, t = 0 = t0. Thus, R(t) 
t = exp[−(t/t q)
q m]. When t = q, R(t) 
t = e−1 =
0.368 and F(t) 
t = 1 − 0.368 = 0.632. Thus, we can fi nd the scale parameter q from the
q
value of t where a horizontal line
t
F(t)t = 0.632 intersects the line through the data points. 
From Fig. 14.5, q = 1.7 × 103 h. To fi nd the shape parameter m we need to fi nd the slope 
of the line. The line has the equation lnln[1/1 −F(t)] 
t
= mln(t −t0) −mlnq. The line passes
through the points (100, 0.04) and (2000, 0.75). Then, its gradient is given by 
m
ln ln
1
1
0.75
ln ln
1
1
0.04
ln(2000)
ln(100)
=
−
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠−
−
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
m
m
R
t
ln(ln 4.00)
ln(ln1.0417)
7.601
4.605
0.327
( 3.198)
2.996
3.525
2.996
1.17
( )t
exp
1700
1.17
=
−
=
−−
(
=
=
=
−
exp
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
1
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
TABLE 14.11 
Time
 t ë 102 h
Cumulative Total 
Number of Failures, n
Cumulative Probability of 
Failure F(t) = n/(90 + 1)
Reliability 
R(t) = 1 - F(t)
0
0
0.000
1.000
0.72
2
0.022
0.978
0.83
3
0.033
0.967
1.0
4
0.044
0.957
1.4
5
0.055 
0.945
1.5
6
0.066
0.934
2.1
7
0.077
0.923
2.3
9
0.099
0.901
3.2
13
0.143
0.857
5.0
18
0.198
0.802
6.3
27
0.297
0.703
7.9
33
0.362
0.638
11.2
52
0.571
0.429
16.1
56
0.615
0.385
19.0
69
0.758
0.242
38.3
83
0.912
0.088

652 
engineering design 
14
R(700) exp
700
1700
exp
(0.412)
exp[ (0.354)]
0.702
70.2%
1.17
1.17
( )
b
−
exp
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤⎞
⎦⎠⎥
⎤
⎦
= exp⎡⎣
⎤⎦⎤
=
−
exp[
=
=
0 702
h
m t
t
t
t
( )t
1.17
1.7
10
0
1.7
10
6.88
10
1700
m
0
1
3
3
1 7
10
1.17 1
4
0.17
θ
θ
( )
c
=
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
=
×
−
×
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
=
×
6.88
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
−
−
−
The failure rate is slowly increasing with time.
14.3.5 System Reliability
Most mechanical and electronic systems comprise a collection of components. The
overall reliability of the system depends on how the individual components with their 
individual failure rates are arranged.
If the components are arranged so that the failure of any component causes the
system to fail, it is said to be arranged in series.
R
R
R
R
A
B
R
n
R
system
×
RA
 
(14.32)
FIGURE 14.5
Plot of F(t) vs. time on Weibull 
probability paper, for the data in 
Table 14.11.
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.632
0.80
0.90
0.99
0.01
103
t, hours
F(t)
102
101

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
653
14
It is obvious that if there are many components exhibiting series reliability, the system
reliability quickly becomes very low. For example, if there are 20 components each 
with R = 0.99, the system reliability is 0.9920 = 0.818. Most consumer products exhibit 
series reliability.
If we are dealing with a constant-failure-rate system,
R
R
R
e
e
e
A
B
R
t
t
system
(
)
B
e
A
B
×
RA
×
e
A
λ
λ
t
A
e
t
At
λ
λ
−λ t
At
−(
and the value of l for the system is the sum of the values of 
l
l for each component.
l
A much better arrangement of components is one in which it is necessary for all 
components in the system to fail in order for the system to fail. This is called parallel 
reliability.
R
R
1 (1
)
R (1
)
(1
)
R
A
B
R
)(1
n
R
system
−
)
R (1
 
(14.33)
If we have a constant-failure-rate system,
R
R
e
e
e
1 (1
)
R (1
)
1
A
B
R
)(1
t
t
system
(
)
B
e
A
B
(
)
e
1 e
(
)
e
1
t
B
e
1
−
)
R (1
e
1
= e
−
λ
λ
)
t (1 e
1
λ
λ
t
A
e
t
At
λ
λ
1
−λ t
At
−(
Since this is not in the form e−const, the parallel system has a variable failure rate.
A system in which the components are arranged to give parallel reliability is said 
to be redundant; there is more than one mechanism for the system functions to be
carried out. In a system with full active redundancy, all but one component may fail
before the system fails.
Other systems have partial active redundancy, in which certain components can 
fail without causing system failure, but more than one component must remain operat-
ing to keep the system operating. A simple example would be a four-engine aircraft 
that can fl y on two engines but would lose stability and control if only one engine
were operating. This type of situation is known as an n-out-of-m unit network. At least 
n units must function normally for the system to succeed rather than only one unit in 
the parallel case and all units in the series case. The reliability of an n-out-of-m sys-
tem is given by a binomial distribution, on the assumption that each of the m units is 
independent and identical.
R
m
i
R
R
(
)
n m
R
i n
m
i
m
R
(1
)
i
|
∑
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
− 
(14.34)
where
m
i
m
i m
i
!
!(
)!
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
=
−
E X A M P L E 14 .7
A complex engineering design can be described by a reliability block diagram as shown 
in Fig. 14.6. In subsystem A, two components must operate for the subsystem to function
successfully. Subsystem C has true parallel reliability. Calculate the reliability of each 
subsystem and the overall system reliability.

654 
engineering design 
14
Subsystem A is an n-out-of-m model for which n = 2 and m = 4. Using Eq. (14.34),
R
i
R
R
A
i
i
R
i
4
(
)4
2
4
∑
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
=
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
4
2
(
)
4
3
(
)
4
4
6
(
R
)
4
(
)
( )
3
8
R
6
3
R
(0.92)
8(0.92)
6(0.9 )
0.998
2
2
R
(1
)
4
R
4
3
R
(1
)
2
2
R
R
(1
2
3
4
R
R
(1
)
(1)
4
3
R
8
2
4
3(0 92)
3
2
6(0 92)
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
−
+
R)2
R)
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
−
+
R)
R)
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
−
+
R
−
R (1
3(1
+
R3
R
3(0 92)
=
6(0.92)2
6(0 92)
Since subsystem B is a single component, RB = 0.97.
Subsystem C is a parallel system. Using Eq. (14.33),
R
R
C
1
(1
)
R (1
)(1
)
R
1
(1
)
R
1
(1
0.85)
1
(0.15)
1
3.375
10
0.9966
1
2
R
)(1
3
3
3
3
1
(0 15)
3
−
)
R (1
=
)
R
(1
=1
−0 85)
−(0 15)
−
×
3.375
=
−
The total system reliability can be calculated by visualizing the system reduced to three
subsystems in series, of value RA = 0.998, RB = 0.970, and RC = 0.997. From Eq. (14.33),
R
R
R
R
A
B
R
C
(0.998)(0.970)(0.997)
0.965
Syst.
×
RA
=
RC
=
Another approach to redundancy is to employ a standby system, which is activated
only when it is needed. An emergency diesel generating unit in a hospital is a common 
example. In the analysis of the standby redundant system,1 the Poisson distribution is
used. The reliability of a system of two components, one of which is on standby, is
R
e
t
( )t
(1
)
t
λt
= e λt
−
(14.35)
If the units are not identical, but have failure rates l1 and l2
l , the reliability of the sys-
tems is given by
R
e
( )t
(
)
e
e
t
t
1
2
1
1
λ
λ
λ
2
1
2
1
=
+
)
e
λ
λ
t
e
λ1
−
 
(14.36)
FIGURE 14.6
Reliability block diagram depicting 
complex design network.
0.92
0.92
0.97
0.92
0.92
0.85
0.85
0.85
Subsystem A
Subsystem B
Subsystem C
1. C. O. Smith, Introduction to Reliability in Design, pp. 50–59, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1976.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
655
14
On a theoretical basis, the use of standby redundancy results in higher reliability than
active redundancy. However, the feasibility of standby redundancy depends com-
pletely on the reliability of the sensing and switching unit that activates the standby 
unit. When this key factor is considered, the reliability of a standby system is little 
better than that of an active redundant system.
14.3.6 Maintenance and Repair
An important category of reliability problems deals with maintenance and repair of sys-
tems. If a failed component can be repaired while a redundant component has replaced it 
in service, then the overall reliability of the system is improved. If components subject to
wear can be replaced before they have failed, then the system reliability will be improved.
Preventive maintenance is aimed at minimizing system failure. Routine mainte-
nance, such as lubricating, cleaning, and adjusting, generally does not have a major 
positive effect on reliability, although the absence of routine maintenance can lead 
to premature failure. Replacement before wearout is based on knowledge of the sta-
tistical distribution of failure time; components are replaced sooner than they would
normally fail. Here a small part of the useful life is traded off for increased reliability. 
This approach is greatly facilitated if it is possible to monitor some property of the 
component that indicates degradation toward an unacceptable performance.
Repairing a failed component in a series system will not improve the reliability, 
since the system is not operating. However, decreasing the repair time will shorten 
the period during which the system is out of service, and thus the maintainability and 
availability will be improved.
A redundant system continues to operate when a component has failed, but it may 
become vulnerable to shutdown unless the component is repaired and placed back in 
service. To consider this fact we defi ne some additional terms.
MTBF
MTTF
MTTR
=
+
MTTF
(14.37)
where MTBF = mean time between failures = 1/l/ for constant failure rate
l
MTTF = mean time to fail
MTTR = mean time to repair
If the repair rate r = 1/MTTR, then for an active redundant system,
r
MTTF
3
2
2
λ
λ 2
=
+
(14.38)
As an example of the importance of repair, let r = 6 h−1 and l = 10−5 per h. With repair,
the MTTF = 3 × 1010 h, but without repair it is 1.5 × 105 h.
Maintainability is the probability that a component or system that has failed will 
be restored to service within a given time. The MTTF and failure rate are measures of 
reliability, but the MTTR and repair rate are measures of maintainability.
M
e
e
( )t
1
1
e rt
t/MTTR
=1
−
1
(14.39)
where M(t)t = maintainability
r = repair rate
t = permissible time to carry out the required repair

656 
engineering design 
14
It is important to try to predict maintainability during the design of an engineer-
ing system.1 The components of maintainability include (1) the time required to deter-
mine that a failure has occurred and to diagnose the necessary repair action, (2) the
time to carry out the necessary repair action, and (3) the time required to check out 
the unit to establish that the repair has been effective and the system is operational.
An important design decision is to establish what constitutes the least repairable as-
sembly, that is, the unit of the equipment beyond which diagnosis is not continued but 
the assembly simply is replaced. An important design trade-off is between MTTR and
cost. If MTTR is set too short for the labor hours to carry out the repair, then a large
maintenance crew will be required at an increased cost.
Availability is the concept that combines both reliability and maintainability; it is
the proportion of time the system is working “on line” to the total time, when that is
determined over a long working period.
Availability
total on-line time
total on-line time
total downtime
total on-line time
total on-line time
( o. of failu es
MTTR)
total on-line time
total on-line time
(
total on-line time
MTTR)
1
1
MTTR
λ
λM
=
+
=
+ (no. of failures
=
+ (
×
=
 
  (14.40)
If MTTF = 1/l/ , then
Availability
MTTF
MTTF
MTTR
=
+
 
(14.41)
14.3.7 Further Topics
In Sec. 14.3 we have mainly covered situations dealing with continuous variables that 
can take on any value over a considerable range of data. Also, we have not covered in
any detail how to examine a mass of data to determine its characteristics of central ten-
dency and variability, or how to determine what frequency distribution best describes
the data. Nor have we discussed how to determine with confi dence whether two experi-
mentally determined values are statistically signifi cant from each other. Moreover, we
have given scant attention to the statistics of discrete variables other than to mention
the binomial and Poisson distributions in passing. For these and other topics of engi-
neering we suggest reading beginning texts2 or a formal course in statistics.
1. B. S. Blanchard, Logistics Engineering and Management, 2d ed., Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1981; C. E. Cunningham and W. Cox, Applied Maintainability Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, 1972; A. K. S. Jardine, Maintenance, Replacement and Reliability, John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, 1973.
2. W. Navidi, Statistics for Engineers and Scientists, 2d ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
657
14
We have just begun to scratch the surface of such a dynamic and rich subject 
as reliability engineering. Models for realistic situations where reliability varies with 
time are important. Also, there are models for censored or truncated frequency distri-
butions in which a life test is terminated after a specifi ed number of failures have oc-
curred. Another extension is models for the case where each element in a system fails 
by two mutually exclusive failure modes, and the further refi nement where failure is 
by a common cause. A common cause failure is one where a single event can lead to 
multiple failures. Often such failure results from the location of a component, as when 
an aircraft turbine disk shatters and the fl ying pieces break several independent hy-
draulic control systems of the airplane. Additional complexity yet realism arises when 
the repairability condition is added to the above reliability models. These topics are 
beyond the scope of this book. The interested reader is referred to the references in the 
Bibliography at the end of this chapter.
14.4
DESIGN FOR RELIABILITY
The design strategy used to ensure reliability can fall between two broad extremes. 
The fail-safe approach is to identify the weak spot in the system or component and 
provide some way to monitor that weakness. When the weak link fails, it is replaced, 
just as the fuse in a household electrical system is replaced. At the other extreme is 
what can be termed “the one-horse shay” approach. The objective is to design all com-
ponents to have equal life so the system will fall apart at the end of its useful lifetime 
just as the legendary one-horse shay did. Frequently an absolute worst-case approach 
is used; in it the worst combination of parameters is identifi ed and the design is based 
on the premise that all can go wrong at the same time. This is a very conservative ap-
proach, and it often leads to overdesign.
Two major areas of engineering activity determine the reliability of an engi-
neering system. First, provision for reliability must be established during the design 
concept stage, carried through the detailed design development, and maintained 
during the many steps in manufacture. Second, once the system becomes opera-
tional, it is imperative that provision be made for its continued maintenance during 
its service.1
The steps in building reliability into a design are shown in Fig. 14.7. The process 
starts at the beginning of conceptual design by clearly laying out the criteria for the 
success of the design, estimating the required reliability, the duty cycle, and carefully 
considering all of the factors that make up the service environment. In the confi guration 
step of embodiment design the physical arrangement of components can critically 
1. H. P. Bloch and F. K. Gleitner, An Introduction to Machinery Reliability Assessment, 2d ed., Gulf 
Publishing Co., Houston, TX, 1994; H. P. Bloch, Improving Machinery Reliability, 3d ed., Gulf Publish-
ing Co., 1998; H. P. Bloch, and F. K. Geitner, Machinery Failure Analysis and Troubleshooting, Gulf 
Publishing Co., Houston, TX, 1997; C. Hales and C. Pattin, ASM Handbook, Vol. 11, Design Review for 
Failure Analysis and Prevention, pp. 40–49, ASM International, 2003.

658 
engineering design 
14
affect reliability. In laying out functional block diagrams, consider those areas that 
strongly infl uence reliability, and prepare a list of parts in each block. This is the 
place to consider various redundancies and to be sure that physical arrangement al-
lows good access for maintenance. In the parametric step of embodiment design, 
select components with high reliability. Build and test both computer and physical 
prototypes. These should be subjected to the widest range of environmental condi-
tions. Establish failure modes and estimate the system and subsystem MTBF. Detail 
design is the place for the fi nal revision of specifi cations, for building and testing the 
preproduction prototype, and the preparation of the fi nal production drawings. Once 
the design is released to the production organization the design organization is not 
fi nished with it. Production models are given further environmental tests, and these 
help establish the quality assurance program (see Sec. 15.2) and the maintenance 
schedules. When the product is put into service with customers, there is a steady feed-
back concerning fi eld failures and MTBFs that helps in redesign efforts and follow-on 
products.
FIGURE 14.7
Reliability activities throughout design, production, and service.
Design Stage 
Design Activity
Conceptual design 
Problem definition:
 
 
Estimate reliability requirement
 
 
Determine likely service environment
Embodiment design 
Configuration design:
 
 
Investigate redundancy
 
 
Provide accessibility for maintenance
 
Parametric design:
 
 
Select highly reliable components
 
 
Build and test physical and computer prototypes
 
 
Full environment tests
 
 
Establish failure modes/FMEA
 
 
Estimate MTBF
 
 
User trials/modification
Detail design 
Produce & test preproduction prototype
 
Final estimate of reliablity
Production 
Production models:
 
 
Further environmental tests
 
 
Establish quality assurance program
Service 
Deliver to customer:
 
 
Feedback field failures and MTBFs to designers
 
 
Repair and replace
 
 
Retirement from service

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
659
14
14.4.1 Causes of Unreliability
The malfunctions that an engineering system can experience can be classifi ed into 
fi ve general categories.1
1. Design mistakes: Among the common design errors are failure to include all im-
portant operating factors, incomplete information on loads and environmental con-
ditions, erroneous calculations, and poor selection of materials.
2. Manufacturing defects: Although the design may be free from error, defects intro-
duced at some stage in manufacturing may degrade it. Some common examples 
are (1) poor surface fi nish or sharp edges (burrs) that lead to fatigue cracks and (2) 
decarburization or quench cracks in heat-treated steel. Elimination of defects in 
manufacturing is a key responsibility of the manufacturing engineering staff, but a 
strong relationship with the R&D function may be required to achieve it. Manufac-
turing errors produced by the production work force are due to such factors as lack 
of proper instructions or specifi cations, insuffi cient supervision, poor working en-
vironment, unrealistic production quota, inadequate training, and poor motivation.
3. Maintenance: Most engineering systems are designed on the assumption they 
will receive adequate maintenance at specifi ed periods. When maintenance is ne-
glected or is improperly performed, service life will suffer. Since many consumer 
products do not receive proper maintenance by their owners, a good design strat-
egy is to design products that do not require maintenance.
4. Exceeding design limits: If the operator exceeds the limits of temperature, speed, 
or another variable for which it was designed, the equipment is likely to fail.
5. Environmental factors: Subjecting equipment to environmental conditions for 
which it was not designed, such as rain, high humidity, and ice, usually greatly 
shortens its service life.
14.4.2 Minimizing Failure
A variety of methods are used in engineering design practice to improve reliability. 
We generally aim at a probability of failure of Pf < 10−6 for structural applications and 
10−4 < Pf < 10−3 for unstressed applications.
Margin of Safety
We saw in Sec. 14.2.4 that variability in the strength properties of materials and 
in loading conditions (stress) leads to a situation in which the overlapping statistical 
distributions can result in failures. The variability in strength of materials has a major 
impact on the probability of failure, so failure can be reduced with no change in the 
mean value if the variability of the strength can be reduced.
1. W. Hammer, Product Safety Management and Engineering, Chap. 8, Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ, 1980.

660 
engineering design 
14
Derating
The analogy to using a factor of safety in structural design is derating electrical, 
electronic, and mechanical equipment. The reliability of such equipment is increased 
if the maximum operating conditions (power, temperature, etc.) are derated below 
their nameplate values. As the load factor of equipment is reduced, so is the failure 
rate. Conversely, when equipment is operated in excess of rated conditions, failure 
will ensue rapidly.
Redundancy
One of the most effective ways to increase reliability is with redundancy. In paral-
lel redundant designs the same system functions are performed at the same time by 
two or more components even though the combined outputs are not required. The ex-
istence of parallel paths may result in load sharing so that each component is derated 
and has its life increased by a longer-than-normal time.
Another method of increasing redundancy is to have inoperative or idling standby 
units that cut in and take over when an operating unit fails. The standby unit wears out 
much more slowly than the operating unit does. Therefore, the operating strategy of-
ten is to alternate units between full-load and standby service. The standby unit must 
be provided with sensors to detect the failure and switching gear to place it in service. 
The sensor and/or switching units frequently are the weak link in a standby redundant 
system.
Durability
The material selection and design details should be performed with the objective 
of producing a system that is resistant to degradation from such factors as corrosion, 
erosion, foreign object damage, fatigue, and wear. This usually requires the decision 
to spend more money on high-performance materials so as to increase service life and 
reduce maintenance costs. Life cycle costing is the technique used to justify this type 
of decision.
Damage Tolerance
Crack detection and propagation have taken on great importance since the devel-
opment of the fracture mechanics approach to design (Sec. 12.2). A damage-tolerant 
material or structure is one in which a crack, when it occurs, will be detected soon 
enough after its occurrence so that the probability of encountering loads in excess of 
the residual strength is very remote. Figure 14.8 illustrates some of the concepts of 
damage tolerance. The initial population of very small fl aws inherent in the material 
is shown at the far left. These are small cracks, inclusions, porosity, surface pits, and 
scratches. If they are less than a1, they will not grow appreciably in service. Additional 
defects will be introduced by manufacturing processes. Those larger than a2 will be 
detected by inspection and eliminated as scrapped parts. However, some cracks will 
be present in the components put into service, and they will grow to a size a3 that can 
be detected by the nondestructive evaluation (NDE) techniques that can be used in 
service. The allowable design stresses must be so selected that the number of fl aws of 
size a3 or greater will be small. Moreover, the material should be damage-tolerant so 
that propagation to the critical crack size acr is slow.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
661
14
In conventional fracture mechanics analysis (Sec. 12.2), the critical crack size is 
set at the largest crack size that might be undetected by the NDE technique used in 
service. The value of fracture toughness of the material is taken as the minimum rea-
sonable value. This is a safe but overly conservative approach. These worst-case as-
sumptions can be relaxed and the analysis based on more realistic conditions by using 
probabilistic fracture mechanics (PFM).1
Ease of Inspection
The importance of detecting cracks should be apparent from Fig. 14.8. Ideally 
it should be possible to employ visual methods of crack detection, but special design 
features may have to be provided in order to do so. In critically stressed structures, 
special features to permit reliable NDE by ultrasonics or eddy current techniques may 
be required. If the structure is not capable of ready inspection, then the stress level 
must be lowered until the initial crack cannot grow to a critical size during the life of 
the structure. For that situation the inspection costs will be low but the structure will 
carry a weight penalty because of the low stress level.
Specifi city
The greater the degree of specifi city, the greater the inherent reliability of de-
sign. Whenever possible, be specifi c with regard to material characteristics, sources 
of supply, tolerances and characteristics of the manufacturing process, tests required 
for qualifi cation of materials and components, and procedures for installation, main-
tenance, and use. Specifying standard items increases reliability. It usually means 
that the materials and components have a history of use so that their reliability is 
known. Also, replacement items will be readily available. When it is necessary to use 
FIGURE 14.8
Distribution of defects in engineering components.
a1
a2
a3
acr
Number of cracks or defects
Defects inherent
in material
Defect size
Defects introduced
by manufacturing
Defects introduced
into service
1. H. R. Millurter and P. H. Wirsching, “Analysis Methods for Probabilistic Life Assessment,” ASM 
Handbook, Vol. 11, pp. 250–68, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2002.

662 
engineering design 
14
a component with a high failure rate, the design should especially provide for the easy 
replacement of that component.
14.4.3 Sources of Reliability Data
Data on the reliability of a product clearly is highly proprietary to its manufacturer. 
However, the U.S. defense and space programs have created a strong interest in reliabil-
ity, and this has resulted in the compilation of a large amount of data on failure rates and 
failure modes. The Reliability Information Analysis Center (RIAC),1 sponsored by the 
DOD Defense Information Analysis Center, has for many years collected failure data 
on electronic components. Extensive reliability data on electronic components is avail-
able online, for a fee, in 217 Plus, the successor to MIL-HDBK-217. Reliability data 
on nonelectronic components is available on compact disk NPRD-95. Information on 
European sources of reliability data can be found in the book by Moss.2 Appendix G of 
this book contains 20 pages of tables on failure rates. Data and failure rate λ for a wide 
selection of mechanical components is given by Fisher and Fisher.3
14.5
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECTS ANALYSIS (FMEA)
Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) is a team-based methodology for identify-
ing potential problems with new or existing designs.4 It was fi rst used to identify and 
correct safety hazards. FMEA identifi es the mode of failure of every component in a 
system and determines the effect on the system of each potential failure. By failure we 
mean inability to meet a customer’s requirements as opposed to actual catastrophic 
material breakage or failure.
Thus, a failure mode is any way that a part could fail to perform its required 
function. For example, a cable used to lift I-beams could fray from wear, kink from 
misuse, or actually fracture from excessive load. Note that either fraying or kinking 
could lead to fracture, but fracture might occur without these events if a design error 
incorrectly estimated either the strength of the cable or the load it needed to support. 
Failure modes are discussed in more detail in Sec. 14.7.
There are many variations in detailed FMEA methodology, but they are all aimed 
at accomplishing three things: (1) predicting what failures could occur; (2) predict-
ing the effect of the failure on the functioning of the system; and (3) establishing 
1. http://quanterion.com/RIAC/index.asp
2. T. R. Moss, The Reliability Data Handbook, ASME Press, New York, 2005.
3. F. E. Fisher and J. R. Fisher, Probabilistic Applications in Mechanical Design, Appendix D, Marcel 
Dekker, New York, 2000.
4. R. E. McDermott, R. J. Mikulak, and M. R. Beauregard, The Basics of FMEA, 2d ed., CRC Press, 
New York, 2009. D. H. Stamatis, Failure Mode and Effects Analysis: FMEA from Theory to Execution, 
ASQ Quality Press, Milwaukee, WI, 1995; ASM Handbook, Vol. 11, Failure Analysis and Prevention, 
pp. 50–59, ASM International, 2003. MIL-STD-1629.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
663
14
steps that might be taken to prevent the failure, or its effect on the function. FMEA 
is useful in identifying critical areas of the design that need redundant components 
and improved reliability. FMEA is a bottom-up process that starts with the required 
functions, identifi es the components to provide the functions, and for each component, 
lists all possible modes of failure.
Three factors are considered in developing a FMEA.
1. The severity of a failure. Table 14.12 gives the scale for rating severity. Many or-
ganizations require that potential failures with a 9 or 10 rating require immediate 
redesign.
2. The probability of occurrence of the failure. Table 14.13 gives a scale for prob-
ability of occurrence. The probabilities given are very approximate and depend 
on the nature of the failure, the robustness of the design, and the level of quality 
developed in manufacturing.
TABLE 14.12 
Rating for Severity of Failure
Rating
Severity Description
 1
The effect is not noticed by the customer
 2
Very slight effect noticed by customer; does not annoy or inconvenience customer
 3
Slight effect that causes customers annoyance, but they do not seek service
 4 
Slight effect, customer may return product for service
 5
Moderate effect, customer requires immediate service
 6
Signifi cant effect, causes customer dissatisfaction; may violate a regulation or design code
 7
Major effect, system may not be operable; elicits customer complaint; may cause injury
 8
Extreme effect, system is inoperable and a safety problem; may cause severe injury
 9
Critical effect, complete system shutdown; safety risk
10
Hazardous; failure occurs without warning; life-threatening
TABLE 14.13 
Rating for Occurrence of Failure
Rating
Approx. Probability of Failure
Description of Occurrence
 1 
≤1 × 10–6
Extremely remote
 2
1 × 10–5
Remote, very unlikely
 3
1 × 10–5
Very slight chance of occurrence
 4
4 × 10–4
Slight chance of occurrence
 5
2 × 10–3
Occasional occurrence
 6
1 × 10–2
Moderate occurrence
 7
4 × 10–2
Frequent occurrence
 8
0.20
High occurrence
 9
0.33
Very high occurrence
10
≥0.50
Extremely high occurrence

664 
engineering design 
14
3. The likelihood of detecting the failure in either design or manufacturing, before
the product is used by the customer. Table 14.14 gives the scale for detection.
Clearly, the rating for this factor depends on the quality review systems in place in
the organization.
Usual practice is to combine the rating for the three factors into a risk priority number
(RPN).
RPN
(severity
r
of failure)
(occurrence of failu
f
re)
 (detection rating)
×
(severity
r
of failure)
×
 
(14.42)
Values of RPN can vary from a maximum of 1000, the greatest risk, to a minimum
of 1. Numbers derived from Eq. (14.42) are often used to select the “vital few” problems
to work on. This can be done by setting a threshold limit, for example, RPN = 200,
and working on all potential failures above this limit. Another approach is to arrange
the RPN values in a Pareto plot and give attention to those potential failures with the
highest ratings. The next paragraph suggests an alternative approach.
Decisions on how to use the information provided from the FMEA should not be
blindly based on the RPN values. Consider the results of a FMEA analysis shown in
Table 14.15.
Compare failure modes A and B. A has nearly four times the RPN of B, yet B has
a severity of failure that would cause safety risk and complete system shutdown. Fail-
ure by A would cause only a slight effect on product performance. It achieves its high
TABLE 14.14 
Rating for Detection of Failure
Rating
Description of Detection
 1
Almost certain to detect
 2 
Very high chance of detection
 3
High chance of detection
 4
Moderately high chance of detection
 5
Medium chance of detection
 6
Low chance of detection
 7
Slight chance of detection
 8
Remote chance of detection
 9
Very remote chance of detection
10
No chance of detection; no inspection
TABLE 14.15
Results of a FMEA Analysis
Failure Mode
Severity
Occurrence
Detection
RPN
A
3
4
10
120
B
9 
4
1
36
C
3
9
3
81

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
665
14
RPN value because it is not possible to detect the defect that is causing the failure. 
Certainly failure B is more critical than A and should be given prompt attention for 
design of the product. Failure mode C has over 2 times the RPN of B, but because the 
severity of the failure is low it should be given lower priority than B even though the 
occurrence of failure is high.
A rational way to interpret the results of FMEA analysis has been given by 
Harpster,1 Fig. 14.9. Often product specifi cations include a requirement that action 
should be taken if the RPN value exceeds some number like 100 or 200. It may not 
be rational to require a design change if the reason for the high RPN is due to a very 
hard-to-detect defect or if detectability scores high because no inspection process is in 
use. Using a plot such as Fig. 14.9 gives better guidance on which design details (failure 
modes) require remedial action than simply basing all decisions on the RPN value.
14.5.1 Creating a FMEA Chart
The development of a FMEA is best done as a team effort that employs many of the 
problem-solving tools presented in Sec. 4.7. FMEA can be done on a design, a manu-
facturing process, or a service. While there is no well-defi ned format, as there is for a 
House of Quality (HOQ), a FMEA is usually developed in a spreadsheet format.2 First 
you must clearly identify the system or subassembly that you are investigating. Then the 
following steps are performed and the results recorded in the spreadsheet, Example 14.8.
1. The design is reviewed to determine the interrelations of assemblies and the inter-
relations of the components of each subassembly. Identify how each component 
might fail to perform its required function. A complete list of the components in 
1. R. A. Harpster. Quality Digest, pp. 40–42, June 1999.
2. FMEA software is available to aid in the process. Two examples are FailMode®, from Item Software, 
and FMEAplus®, developed by Ford Motor Co. and available from the Society of Automotive Engineers.
FIGURE 14.9
A rational way to interpret 
FMEA results.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
Severity
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
Occurrence
A
C
B
Warranty
issues
Legal or code issues
6
7
8
9
10

666 
engineering design 
14
each assembly and the function of each component is prepared. For each function 
ask, What if this function fails to take place? To further sharpen the point ask:
● What if the function fails to occur at the right time?
● What if the function fails to occur in the proper sequence?
● What if this function fails to occur completely?
2. Now look more broadly, and ask what are the consequences to the system of each 
failure identifi ed in step 1. It may be diffi cult to answer this question in systems 
for which the subsystems are not independent. A frequent cause of hazardous 
failures is that an apparently innocuous failure in one subsystem overloads an-
other subsystem in an unexpected way.
3. For each of the functions, list the potential failure modes (see Sec. 14.7). There are 
likely to be several potential failure modes associated with each of the functions.
4. For each of the failure modes identifi ed in step 3, describe the consequences or 
effects of the failure. First list the local effect on the particular component; then 
extend the effects analysis to the entire subassembly and to the total system.
5. Using the severity of failure table (Table 14.12), enter the numerical value. This is 
best done as a team using consensus decision methods.
6. Identify the possible causes of the failure mode. Try to determine the root cause 
by using a why-why diagram and interrelationship digraph. (see Sec. 4.7).
7. Using the occurrence of failure table (Table 14.13), enter a value for the occur-
rence of the cause of each failure.
8. Determine how the potential failure will be detected. This might be a design 
checklist, a specifi c design calculation, a visual quality inspection, or a nonde-
structive inspection.
9. Using Table 14.14, enter a rating that refl ects the ability to detect the cause of fail-
ure identifi ed in step 8.
10. Calculate the risk priority number (RPN) from Eq. (14.42). Those potential fail-
ures with the highest RPN values will be given priority action. In making deci-
sions about where to deploy the resources, also consider Fig. 14.9.
11. For each potential failure, determine the corrective action to remove a potential 
design, manufacturing, or operational failure. One of the actions might be “no ac-
tion required.” Assign ownership for the removal of each potential failure.
E X A M P L E 14 . 8
Rifl e bolts are made by a powder forging process in which steel preforms of the rifl e bolt 
are made by cold pressing and sintering, followed by hot forging to the required shape and 
dimensions. The completed chart for the FMEA is given on the following page. Note that 
the analysis rates the part design and process as it performs in service, and then recom-
mends design or process changes that are expected to improve the RPN of the design.
When the bolt in a rifl e fractures, it is the most severe type of failure since the prod-
uct no longer functions, but of more importance, someone’s life is in great danger. The 
corrective action is to scan all fi nished parts with 3-D x-ray tomography, the most precise 
nondestructive inspection method, to reject any parts with fi ne cracks in the interior of the 
metal part. This is an expensive step taken while the powder forging process is studied in 
detail to identify the source of the fi ne cracks. If these cannot be eliminated, then another 
manufacturing process would be used to make the part. Note that the severity of the event 

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
667
14
is not changed by the corrective action, but the occurrence is set at one chance in a million 
because of the consequences of failure of this part.
The second failure found in the rifl e is jamming of the bolt in the chamber. This makes 
the rifl e inoperable, but is less life threatening than a failure by fracture.  Examination of 
the design notebooks showed that thermal expansion of the bolt due to heating  produced 
by extensive rapid fi re was not taken into account when setting the tolerances for the origi-
nal design. When this is done, and statistical process control (SPC) is initiated for the 
critical-to-quality dimensions, it is expected that this will eliminate failure by jamming.
FMEA is a powerful design tool, but it can be tedious and time consuming. It 
requires top-level corporate support to make sure it is used routinely. However, FMEA 
reduces total life cycle cost by avoiding cost due to warranty problems, service calls, 
customer dissatisfaction, product recalls, and damaged reputation.
14.6
FAULT TREE ANALYSIS
Fault tree analysis (FTA) is a systematic method to identify undesired events (faults) 
in a system. A fault is when a system does something it is not supposed to do or does 
not do something it is supposed to do. Often these faults are reliability or safety issues. 
Fault tree analysis starts with the top undesired event and develops in a tree-like 
fashion all potential causes for that event. It considers component failure, subassembly 
failures (modules), operating conditions, and human error. An important attribute of 
FTA is the ability to identify combinations of events that can affect the top undesired 
event. FTA is in contrast to FMEA which is a much more bottom-up approach that 
identifi es all of the failure modes that can affect the components of a system in isola-
tion. Building a FTA starts with the function structure established in conceptual design. 
Failure Modes and Effect Analysis
Prepared by:     Sheet No.    of   
Product name:
Part name: Rifl e bolt
Primary design responsibility:
Product code:
Part no.:
Design deadline:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12 13
14
Function
Failure 
mode
Effects 
of failure
Causes 
of failure
Detection
S
O
D
RPN Recommended 
corrective 
action
S O D RPN
1. Cham-
bers and 
fi res the 
round.
Brittle 
fracture
Destroys 
rifl e. 
Injures 
people.
Internal 
fi ne 
cracks
Dye 
penetrant
10
4
8
320
Scan all 
parts with 
x-ray 
tomography.
10 1
2
20
2. Seals 
against gas 
blowback.
3. Extracts 
cartridge 
case.
Jamming 
after fi ring 
4 clips in 
succession.
Rifl e will 
not fi re 
another 
round.
CTQ 
dimen-
sions out 
of spec.
Dimensions 
checked 
with 
gages.
8
6
3
144
Rework toler-
ances to incl. 
thermal expan-
sion. Start SPC.
3 4
2
24

668 
engineering design 
14
Basically, a fault tree is a logic diagram in which logic gates are used to determine 
the relations between input events and output events.1 A fully quantitative FTA uses 
Boolean algebra in the logical analysis, and probabilities of failure are computed for each 
event. However, considerable insight can be gained from the graphical relations por-
trayed by the fault tree. Our discussion of PTA will be restricted to this qualitative level.
Each fault tree deals with a specifi c event, for example, failure of a lawn mower 
engine to start (see Fig. 14.10). FTA is a “top-down approach” that starts with the top 
event and then determines the contributory events that would lead to the top event. 
Most top events would be suggested from a preliminary hazard analysis. They can be 
either hardware failures or human errors.
Different kinds of events are identifi ed with specifi c symbols on the fault tree 
diagram.
An output event 
 is an event that should be developed or analyzed further to 
determine how it can occur. It is the only symbol on the fault tree diagram that will 
have a logic gate and input events below it. Except when it represents the undesired 
top event, the rectangle also serves as an input event to another output event.
An independent event 
 is an event that does not depend on other components 
within the system for its occurrence. A common example is a failure of a system 
component.
A normal event 
 is an event that is expected to occur during system operation. 
It always occurs unless failure occurs.
An undeveloped event 
 is an event that has not been developed further be-
cause of the lack of information or because it is not of suffi cient consequence.
A transfer symbol 
 is a connection to another part of the fault tree within the 
same branch.
The AND gate 
 is used to represent a logic condition in which all inputs below 
the gate must be present for the output (at the top of the gate) to occur.
The OR gate 
 is used to represent the situation in which any of the input events 
will lead to the output.
These symbols are employed in Fig. 14.10, which is a fault tree for the failure of 
a lawn mower engine. The bottom branch of the tree consists of failures or initiating 
events that are errors. They point out events where FMEA should be done. Starting 
with the top event and moving down the branches, we enter a hierarchy of causes. 
Each event branches into other events. In constructing the tree, it is important to pro-
ceed slowly and deliberately down from the top event and list every direct immediate 
cause before going on to consider the next level of causes. The description used for 
each event must be carefully chosen to indicate the cause.
1. J. B. Fassell, Nuc. Sci. Eng., vol. 2, pp. 433–438, 1973; G. J. Powers and F. C. Tompkins, Jr., AIChE J., 
vol. 20, pp. 376–387, 1974; W. E. Vessey et al., NASA Fault Tree Handbook with Aerospace Applications, 
NASA, Washington DC, 2002; W. Vesely, et al., Fault Tree Handbook with Aerospace Applications, see 
www.hq.nasa.gov/offi ce/codeq/doctree/fthb.pdf. 

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
669
14
The fault tree clearly indicates where corrective action should be taken. For ex-
ample, the need for disassembling the piston and/or bearings is indicated. Also, the 
need for preventive maintenance and inspection of the battery or pull cord is called for.
In summary, FTA points out the critical areas in a complex system where further 
study in failure mode analysis and reliability engineering is required. It also can be used 
as a tool in troubleshooting a piece of equipment that will not operate. FTA is very useful 
FIGURE 14.10
Fault tree for the failure of a lawn mower engine to start.
Engine does not start
Lack of fuel
Fuel
tank
empty
Fuel
line
blocked
Worn
piston
rings
Spark
plug
failure
Wiring
failure
Magneto
failure
Carburetor
failure
Bearings
frozen
Jammed
piston
Dead
Battery
Pull
cord
broken
Broken
rod
Gasket
leaks
Lack of spark
Lack of compression
Piston does not move
No energy to tum over
1
2

670 
engineering design 
14
in accident investigations and the analysis of failures. Since preparation of a fault tree re-
quires considerable detail about the system, it is possible only after the design has been 
completed. However, it can point the way to improved design for reliability and safety.
14.7
DEFECTS AND FAILURE MODES
Failures of engineering designs and systems are a result of defi ciencies in four broad 
categories.
 
● Hardware failure—failure of a component to function as designed.
 
● Software failure—failure of the computer software to function as designed.
 
● Human failure—failure of human operators to follow instructions or respond ad-
equately to emergency situations.
 
● Organizational failure—failure of the organization to properly support the system. 
Examples might be overlooking defective components, slowness to bring corrective 
action, or ignoring bad news.
14.7.1 Causes of Hardware Failure
Failures are caused by design errors or defi ciencies in one or more of the following 
categories:
1. Design defi ciencies
Failure to adequately consider the effect of notches
Inadequate knowledge of service loads and environment
Diffi culty of stress analysis in complex parts and loadings
2. Defi ciency in selection of material
Poor match between service conditions and selection criteria
Inadequate data on material
Too much emphasis given to cost and not enough to quality
3. Imperfection in material due to manufacturing
4. Improper testing or inspection
5. Overload and other abuses in service
6. Inadequate maintenance and repair
7. Environmental factors
Conditions beyond those allowed for in design
Deterioration of properties with time of exposure to environment
Defi ciencies in the design process, or defects in the material or its processing, can 
be classifi ed in the following ways: At the lowest level is a lack of conformance to a 
stated specifi cation. An example would be a dimension “out of spec” or a strength prop-
erty below specifi cation. Next in severity is a lack of satisfaction by the customer or user. 
This may be caused by a critical performance characteristic set at an improper value, or 
it may be a system problem caused by rapid deterioration. The ultimate  defect is one that 
causes failure of the product. Failure may be an actual fracture or disruption of physical 
continuity of the part, or failure may be inability of the part to function properly.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
671
14
14.7.2 Failure Modes
The specifi c modes of failure of engineering components can usually be grouped into 
four general classes:
1. Excessive elastic deformation
2. Excessive plastic deformation
3. Fracture
4. Loss of required part geometry through corrosion or wear
The most common failure modes are listed in Table 14.16. Some of these failure 
modes are directly related to a standard mechanical property test, but most are more 
TABLE 14.16
Failure Modes for Mechanical Components
1. Elastic deformation
  d. Surface fatigue wear
2. Yielding 
  e. Deformation wear
3. Brinelling
  f. Impact wear
4. Ductile failure
  g. Fretting wear
5. Brittle fracture
 9. Impact
6. Fatigue
  a. Impact fracture
 a. High-cycle fatigue
  b. Impact deformation
 b. Low-cycle fatigue
  c. Impact wear
 c. Thermal fatigue
  d. Impact fretting
 d. Surface fatigue
  e. Impact fatigue
 e. Impact fatigue
10. Fretting
 f. Corrosion fatigue
  a. Fretting fatigue
 g. Fretting fatigue
  b. Fretting wear
7. Corrosion
  c. Fretting corrosion
 a. Direct chemical attack
11. Galling and seizure
 b. Galvanic corrosion
12. Scoring
 c. Crevice corrosion
13. Creep
 d. Pitting corrosion
14. Stress rupture
 e. Intergranular corrosion
15. Thermal shock
 f. Selective leaching
16. Thermal relaxation
 g. Erosion-corrosion
17. Combined creep and fatigue
 h. Cavitation
18. Buckling
 i. Hydrogen damage
19. Creep buckling
 j. Biological corrosion
20. Oxidation
 k. Stress corrosion
21. Radiation damage
8. Wear
22. Bonding failure
 a. Adhesive wear
23. Delamination
 b. Abrasive wear
24. Erosion
 c. Corrosive wear

672 
engineering design 
14
complex, and failure prediction requires using a combination of two or more proper-
ties. However, not all failures are related to material behavior. Table 14.17 gives some 
failures modes for common engineering components.
14.7.3 Importance of Failure
It is a human tendency to be reluctant to talk about failure or to publish much infor-
mation about failures. Spectacular system failures, like the Tacoma Narrows bridge 
or the O-ring seal on the space shuttle Challenger solid rocket booster, have caught 
the public’s attention, but most failures go undocumented.1 This is a shame, because 
much learning in engineering occurs by studying failures. Simulated service test-
ing and proof-testing of preproduction prototypes are important steps at arriving at 
a  successful product. While the literature on engineering failures is not extensive, 
there are several useful books on the subject.2 For information on conducting failure 
analysis 3 see Techniques for Failure Analysis at www.mhhe.com/dieter.
14.8
DESIGN FOR SAFETY
Safety may well be the paramount issue in product design.4 Normally we take safety 
for granted, but the recall of an unsafe product can be very costly in terms of product 
liability suits, replaced product, or tarnished reputation. The product must be safe to 
TABLE 14.17
Examples of Failure Modes in Components
Component
Failure Mode
Possible Cause
Battery
Discharged 
Extended use
Check valve
Stuck closed
Corrosion
Piping
Sagging pipes
Designed inadequate supports
Valve
Leaks
Faulty packing
Lubricant
No fl ow
Clogged by debris/no fi lter
Bolt
Threads stripped
Excessive tightening torque
1. An assortment of failures of aircraft, bridges, engineering machines and strictures, and software are 
described in Wikipedia under Engineering Failures.
2. Case Histories in Failure Analysis, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1979; H. Petroski, 
Success through Failure: the Paradox of Design, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2006; 
V. Ramachandran, et al., Failure Analysis of Engineering Structures: Methodology and Case Histo-
ries, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2005; Microelectronics Failure Analysis Desk Reference, 
5th ed., ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2004. A. Sofronas, Analytical Troubleshooting of Pro-
cess Machinery and Pressure Vessels, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2006.
3. Extensive information on conducting a failure analysis can be found in ASM Handbook, Vol 11: Fail-
ure Analysis and Prevention, 2002, pp. 315–556.
4. C. O. Smith, “Safety in Design,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 139–45, ASM International, Materials 
Park, OH, 1997.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
673
14
manufacture, to use, and to dispose of after use.1 Also, a serious accident in which a 
life is lost can be very traumatic to the person responsible, and possibly career ending 
to the responsible engineer.
A safe product is one that does not cause injury or property loss. Also included 
under safety is injury to the environment. Achieving safety is no accident. It comes 
from a conscious focus on safety during design, and in knowing and following some 
basic rules. There are three aspects to design for safety:
1. Make the product safe; that is, design all hazards out of the product.
2. If it is not possible to make the product inherently safe, then design in protective 
devices like guards, automatic cutoff switches, and pressure-relief valves, to miti-
gate the hazard.
3. If step 2 cannot remove all hazards, then warn the user of the product with appro-
priate warnings like labels, fl ashing lights, and loud sounds.
4. Provide training and protective clothing or devices (glasses, ear muffl ers) to the 
user or operator of the equipment.
A fail-safe design seeks to ensure that a failure will either not affect the product 
or change it to a state in which no injury or damage will occur. There are three vari-
ants of fail-safe designs.
 
● Fail-passive design. When a failure occurs, the system is reduced to its lowest-energy 
state, and the product will not operate until corrective action is taken. A circuit 
breaker is an example of a fail-passive device.
 
● Fail-active design. When failure occurs, the system remains energized and in a safe 
operating mode. A redundant system kept on standby is an example.
 
● Fail-operational design. The design is such that the device continues to provide its 
critical function even though a part has failed. A valve that is designed so that it 
will remain in the open position if it fails is an example.
14.8.1 Potential Dangers
We list here some of the general categories of safety hazards that need to be consid-
ered in design.
 
● Acceleration/deceleration—falling objects, whiplash, impact damage
 
● Chemical contamination—human exposure or material degradation
 
● Electrical—shock, burns, surges, electromagnetic radiation, power outage
 
● Environment—fog, humidity, lightning, sleet, temperature extremes, wind
 
● Ergonomic—fatigue, faulty labeling, inaccessibility, inadequate controls
 
● Explosions—dust, explosive liquids, gases, vapors, fi nely powdered materials
 
● Fire—combustible material, fuel and oxidizer under pressure, ignition source
 
● Human factors—failure to follow instructions, operator error
 
● Leaks or spills
1. For a comprehensive safety website see http://www.safetyline.net.

674 
engineering design 
14
 
● Life cycle factors—frequent startup and shutdown, poor maintenance
 
● Materials—corrosion, weathering, breakdown of lubrication, wear
 
● Mechanical—fracture, misalignment, sharp edges, stability, vibrations
 
● Physiological—carcinogens, human fatigue, irritants, noise, pathogens
 
● Pressure/vacuum—dynamic loading, implosion, vessel rupture, pipe whip
 
● Radiation—ionizing (alpha, beta, gamma, x-ray), laser, microwave, thermal
 
● Structural—aerodynamic or acoustic loads, cracks, stress concentrations
 
● Temperature—changes in material properties, burns, fl ammability, volatility
Product hazards are often controlled by government regulation. The U.S. Consumer 
Product Safety Commission is charged with this responsibility.1 Products designed for 
use by children are held to much higher safety standards than products intended to be 
used by adults. The designer must also be cognizant that in addition to providing a safe 
product for the customer, it must be safe to manufacture, sell, install, and service.
In our society, products that cause harm invariably result in lawsuits for damages 
under the product liability laws. Design engineers must understand the consequences of 
these laws and how they must practice to minimize safety issues and the threat of litiga-
tion. This topic is covered in Chap. 18, which is available at www.mhhe.com/dieter.
14.8.2 Guidelines for Design for Safety2
1. Recognize and identify the actual or potential hazards, and then design the prod-
uct so they will not affect its functioning.
2. Thoroughly test prototypes of the product to reveal any hazards overlooked in the 
initial design.
3. Design the product so it is easier to use safely than unsafely.
4. If fi eld experience turns up a safety problem, determine the root cause and rede-
sign to eliminate the hazard.
5. Realize that humans will do foolish things, and allow for it in your design. More 
product safety problems arise from improper product use than from product de-
fects. A user-friendly product is usually a safe product.
6. There is a close correspondence between good ergonomic design and a safe de-
sign. For example:
● Arrange the controls so that the operator does not have to move to manipulate 
them.
● Make sure that fi ngers cannot be pinched by levers or other features.
● Avoid sharp edges and corners.
● Point-of-operation guards should not interfere with the operator’s movement.
● Products that require heavy or prolonged use should be designed to avoid cu-
mulative trauma disorders like carpal tunnel syndrome. This means avoiding 
awkward positions of the hand, wrist, and arm and avoiding repetitive motions 
and vibration.
1. See the CPSC website, www.cpsc.gov.
2. C. O. Smith, op. cit.; J. G. Bralla, Design for Excellence, Chap. 17, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
675
14
7. Minimize the use of fl ammable materials, including packaging materials.
8. Paint and other surface fi nishing materials should be chosen to comply with 
EPA and OSHA regulations for toxicity to the user and for safety when they are 
burned, recycled, or discarded.
9. Think about the need for repair, service, or maintenance. Provide adequate ac-
cess without pinch or puncture hazards to the repairer.
10. Electrical products should be properly grounded to prevent shock. Provide elec-
trical interlocks so that high-voltage circuits will not be energized unless a guard 
is in the proper position.
14.8.3 Warning Labels
With rapidly escalating costs of product liability, manufacturers have responded by 
plastering their products with warning labels. Warnings should supplement the safety-
related design features by indicating how to avoid injury or damage from the hazards 
that could not be feasibly designed out of the product without seriously compromising 
its performance. The purpose of the warning label is to alert the user to a hazard and 
tell how to avoid injury from it.
For a warning label to be effective, the user must receive the message, understand 
it, and act on it. The engineer must properly design the label with respect to the fi rst 
two issues to achieve the third. The label must be prominently located on the product. 
Most warning labels are printed in two colors on a tough, wear-resistant material, and 
fastened to the product with an adhesive. Attention is achieved by printing Danger, 
Warning, or Caution, depending on the degree of the hazard. The message to be com-
municated by the warning must be carefully composed to convey the nature of the 
hazard and the action to be taken. It should be written at the sixth-grade level, with no 
long words or technical terms. For products that will be used in different countries, 
the warning label must be in the local language.
14.9
SUMMARY
Modern society places strong emphasis on avoiding risk, while insisting on products 
that last longer and require less service or repair. This requires greater attention to 
risk assessment in the concept of a design, in using methods for deciding on potential 
modes of failure, and in adopting design techniques that increase the reliability of 
engineered systems.
A hazard is the potential for damage. Risk is the likelihood of a hazard material-
izing. Danger is the unacceptable combination of hazard and risk. Safety is freedom 
from danger. Thus, we see that the engineer must be able to identify hazards to the 
design, evaluate the risk in adopting a technology or course of action, and understand 
when conditions constitute a danger. Design methods that mitigate a danger lead to 
safe design. One of the common ways this is achieved is by designing with respect to 
accepted codes and standards.

676 
engineering design 
14
Reliability is the probability that a system or component will perform without failure 
for a specifi ed time. Most systems follow a three-stage failure curve: (1) an early burn-in 
or break-in period, in which the failure rate decreases rapidly with time, (2) a long pe-
riod of nearly constant failure rate (useful life), and (3) a fi nal wearout period of rapidly 
increasing failure rate. The failure rate is usually expressed as the number of failures per 
1000 h, or by its reciprocal, the mean time between failures (MTBF). System reliability 
is determined by the arrangement of its components, that is, in series or parallel.
System reliability is heavily infl uenced by design. The product design specifi cation 
should contain a reliability requirement. The confi guration of the design  determines 
the degree of redundancy. The design details determine the level of defects. Early 
estimation of potential failure modes by FMEA lead to more reliable designs. Other 
methods to increase the reliability of the design are use of highly durable materials 
and components, derating of components, reduction in part count and simplicity of 
the design, and adoption of a damage-tolerant design coupled with ready inspection. 
Extensive testing of preproduction prototypes to “work the bugs out” is a method that 
works well. Methods for carrying out a root cause analysis of the reasons for a failure 
are an important means of improving the reliability of designs.
A safe design is one that instills confi dence in the customer. It is a design that will 
not incur product liability costs. In developing a safe design, the primary objective 
should be to identify potential hazards and then produce a design that is free from 
the hazards. If this cannot been done without compromising the functionality of the 
design, the next best approach is to provide protective devices that prevent the person 
from coming in contact with the hazard. Finally, if this cannot be done, then warning 
labels, lights, or buzzers must be used.
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Availability
Break-in period
Common cause failure
Derating
Design redundancy
Fail-safe design
Failure mode
Failure mode and effects analysis
Hazard
Hazard rate
Maintainability
Mandatory standard
Mean time between failure
Mean time to failure
Reliability
Risk
Root cause analysis
Safety
Safety factor
Wearout period
Weibull destribution
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Risk Assessment
Haimes, Y. Y.: Risk Modeling, Assessment, and Management, 2d ed., Wilex-Interscience, 
Hoboken, NJ, 2004.
Michaels, J. V.: Technical Risk Management, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1996.
Schwing, R. C. and W. A. Alpers, Jr. (eds.): Societal Risk Assessment: How Safe Is Enough? 
Plenum Publishing Co., New York, 1980.

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
677
14
Failures and Failure Prevention
Booker, J. D., M. Raines and K.G. Swift, Designing Capable and Reliable Products, 
Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2001.
Evan, W. M. and M. Manion: Minding Machines: Preventing Technological Disasters, 
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2003.
Evans, J. W. and J. Y. Evans (eds.): Product Integrity and Reliability in Design, Springer- 
Verlag, London, 2000.
Petroski, H.: Success through Failure: The Paradox on Design, Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, NJ, 2006.
Witherell, C. E.: Mechanical Failure Avoidance: Strategies and Techniques, McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1994.
Reliability Engineering
Bentley, J. P.: An Introduction to Reliability and Quality, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 
1993.
Ebeling, C. E.: Reliability and Maintainability Engineering, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1997.
Ireson, W. G. (ed.): Handbook of Reliability Engineering and Management, 2d ed., McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1996.
O’Connor, P. D. T.: Practical Reliability Engineering, 4th ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 
2002.
Rao, S. S., Reliability-Based Design, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1992.
Smith, D. J.: Reliability, Maintainability, and Risk, 7th ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 
2005.
Safety Engineering
Brauer, R. L. and R. Brauer, Safety and Health for Engineers, 2d ed., John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, 2005.
Covan, J.: Safety Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1995.
Hunter, T. A.: Engineering Design for Safety, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1992.
Wong, W.: How Did That Happen?: Engineering Safety and Reliability, Professional Engi-
neering Publishing Ltd., London, 2002.
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
14.1 Assume you are part of a federal commission established in 1910 to consider the risk 
to society of the expected widespread use of the motor car powered with highly fl am-
mable gasoline. Without the benefi t of hindsight, what potential dangers can you con-
template? Use a worst-case scenario. Now, taking advantage of hindsight, what lesson 
can you draw about evaluating the hazards of future technologies? Do this as a team 
exercise.
14.2 Give some examples of voluntary standards that have been adopted by the cooperat-
ing industry, and others that industries have not adopted until forced to by competitive 
pressures.

678 
engineering design 
14
14.3 A steel tensile link has a mean yield strength of – Sy = 27,000 psi and a standard devi-
ation on strength of Sy = 4000 psi. The variable applied stress has a mean value of  
–s = 13,000 psi and a standard deviation s = 3000 psi.
(a) What is the probability of failure taking place? Show the situation with carefully 
drawn frequency distributions.
(b) The factor of safety is the ratio of the mean material strength divided by the mean 
applied stress. What factor of safety is required if the allowable failure rate is 
5 percent?
(c) If absolutely no failures can be tolerated, what is the lowest value of the factor of 
safety?
14.4 A machine component has average life of 120 h. Assuming an exponential failure distri-
bution, what is the probability of the component operating for at least 200 h before failing?
14.5 A nonreplacement test was carried out on 100 electronic components with a known con-
stant failure rate. The history of failures was as follows:
 
1st failure after 
93 h
 
2nd failure after 
1,010 h
 
3rd failure after 
5,000 h
 
4th failure after 
28,000 h
 
5th failure after 
63,000 h
 
The testing was discontinued after the fi fth failure. If we can assume that the test gives 
an accurate estimate of the failure rate, determine the probability that one of the compo-
nents would last for (a) 105 h and (b) 106 h.
14.6 The failure of a group of mechanical components follows a Weibull distribution, where 
q = 105 h, m = 4, and t0 = 0. What is the probability that one of these components will 
have a life of 2 × 104 h?
14.7 A complex system consists of 550 components in a series confi guration. Tests on a 
sample of 100 components showed that 2 failures occurred after 1000 h. If the failure 
rate can be assumed to be constant, what is the reliability of the system to operate for 
1000 h? If an overall system reliability of 0.98 in 1000 h is required, what would the 
failure rate of each component have to be?
14.8 A system has a unit with MTBF = 30,000 h and a standby unit (MTBF = 20,000 h). If 
the system must operate for 10,000 h, what would be the MTBF of a single unit (constant 
failure rate) that, without standby, would have the same reliability as the standby system?
14.9 A reliability block diagram for an engineering system is given in Fig. 14.11 (on the 
following page). Determine the overall system reliability.
14.10 An electronic component has a constant failure rate of l = 100 × 10−6 per h.
(a) Calculate the MTBF measured in years.
(b) Calculate the reliability of the component after one year of service.
(c) The unavailability of the system, 
_
A, equals 1 minus A. Calculate the unavailability 
if the mean downtime, MDT, is 10 h. MDT ≈ MTTR.
(d) What is the effect on the unavailability of doubling the MTTR?

 
chapter 14: Risk, Reliability, and Safety 
679
14
14.11 Make a failure modes and effects analysis for a ballpoint pen.
14.12 List a number of reasons why the determination of product life is important in engi-
neering design.
14.13 Using the principles of mechanics of materials, what would a torsion failure look like 
in a ductile material and a brittle material?
14.14 Read one of the following detailed accounts of a failure analysis:
(a) C. O. Smith, “Failure of a Twistdrill,” Trans. ASME, J. Eng. Materials Tech., vol. 96, 
pp. 88–90, April 1974.
(b) C. O. Smith, “Failure of a Welded Blower Fan Assembly,” ibid., vol. 99, pp. 83–85, 
January 1977.
(c) 
R. F. Wagner and D. R. McIntyre, “Brittle Fracture of a Steel Heat Exchanger 
Shell,” ibid., vol. 102, pp. 384–87, October 1980.
14.15 Consult the home page of the Consumer Product Safety Commission to determine 
what products have recently received rulings. Divide the work up between teams, and 
together, prepare a set of detailed design guidelines for safe product design.
14.16 Discuss the practice of using consumer complaints to establish that a product is haz-
ardous and should be recalled.
FIGURE 14.11
Reliability block diagram for Problem 14.9.
0.92
0.85
0.85
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.90
0.95
0.82

15
680
15
15
QUALITY, ROBUST DESIGN, 
AND OPTIMIZATION
15.1
THE CONCEPT OF TOTAL QUALITY
In the 1980s many manufacturers in the United States and Western Europe became threat-
ened by the high quality of products produced by Japan. Not only were these products of 
high quality but they were competitively priced. The threat forced a frantic search for the 
“magic bullet” that enabled Japanese manufacturers to capture market share. However, 
what the investigators found was a system of continuous quality improvement, kaizen, 
using simple statistical tools, emphasizing working in teams, and focusing on delighting 
the customer. We have introduced many of these concepts throughout this text, starting 
with quality function deployment (QFD) in Chap. 3 and team methods and most of the 
quality problem-solving tools in Chap. 4. The concepts learned from the Japanese became 
known as total quality management (TQM) in the western world. More recently, the ideas 
of TQM have been extended using a more rigorous statistical approach and strong focus 
on increasing the revenue from new products in a quality methodology called Six Sigma.
An important lesson learned from Japan is that the best way to achieve high qual-
ity in a product is to design it into the product from the beginning, and then to assure 
that it is maintained throughout the manufacturing stage. A further lesson, advanced 
by Dr. Genichi Taguchi, is that the enemy of quality is variability in the performance 
of a product and in its manufacture. A robust design is one that has been created 
with a system of design tools that reduces product or process variability, while simul-
taneously guiding the performance toward a near-optimal setting. A product that is 
robustly designed will provide customer satisfaction even when subjected to extreme 
conditions in the service environment.
15.1.1 Defi nition of Quality
Quality is a concept that has many meanings depending upon your perspective. 
Quality implies the ability of a product or service to satisfy a stated or implied need. 

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
681
15
Additionally, a quality product or service is one that is free from defects or defi cien-
cies. In Sec. 3.3.1 we discussed Garvin’s 1 eight basic dimensions of quality for a man-
ufactured product. These serve as a general specifi cation of a quality product. 
In another foundational paper, Garvin 2 identifi ed the fi ve distinct approaches to-
ward the achievement of quality.
 
● The transcendent approach: This is a philosophical approach that holds that qual-
ity is some absolute and uncompromising high standard that we learn to recognize 
only through experience.
 
● Product-based approach: This is completely opposite from the transcendent ap-
proach and views quality as a precise and measurable parameter. A typical param-
eter of quality might be the number of product features, or its expected life.
 
● Manufacturing-based approach: In this view quality is defi ned by conformance to 
requirements or specifi cations. High quality is equated with “doing it right the fi rst 
time.”
 
● Value-based approach: In this view quality is defi ned in terms of costs and prices. 
A quality product is one that provides performance at an acceptable price. This ap-
proach equates quality (excellence) with value (worth).
 
● User-based approach: This approach views quality as “being in the eyes of the be-
holder.” Each individual is considered to have a highly personal and subjective view 
of quality. 
The phrase “total quality” denotes a broader concept of quality 3 than simply 
checking the parts for defects as they come off the production line. The idea of prevent-
ing defects by improved design, manufacturing, and process control plays a big role 
in total quality. We refer to the fi rst aspect as off-line quality control, while the latter 
is on-line quality control. In order for total quality to be achieved it must be made the 
number one priority of the organization. In a study in which companies were ranked 
by an index of perceived quality, the fi rms in the top third showed an average return on 
assets of 30 percent, while the fi rms in the bottom third showed an average return of 
5 percent.
Quality is meeting customer requirements consistently. To do this we must know 
who our customers are and what they require. This attitude should not be limited to 
external customers. Those we interact with are our customers. This means that a manu-
facturing unit providing parts to another unit for further processing should be just as 
concerned about defects as if the parts were shipped directly to the customer.
Total quality is achieved by the use of facts and data to guide decision mak-
ing. Thus, data should be used to identify problems and to help determine when 
and if action should be taken. Because of the complex nature of the work environ-
ment, this requires considerable skill in data acquisition and analysis with statistical 
methods.
1. D. A. Garvin, Harvard Business Review, November–December 1987, pp. 101–9.
2. D. A. Garvin, “What Does Product Quality Really Mean?” Sloan Management Review, Fall 1984, 
pp. 25–44.
3. A. V. Feigenbaum, Total Quality Control, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983.

682 
engineering design 
15
15.1.2 Deming’s 14 Points
Work by Walter Shewhart, W. Edwards Deming, and Joseph Juran in the 1920s and 
1930s pioneered the use of statistics for the control of quality in production. These 
quality control methods were mandated by the War Department in World War II for all 
ordnance production in the United States and were found to be very effective. After the 
war, with a pent-up demand for civilian goods and relatively cheap labor and materials 
costs, these statistical quality control (SQC) methods were largely abandoned as un-
necessary and an added expense. 
It was a different story in Japan, whose industry had been largely destroyed by aerial 
bombing. The Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers invited Dr. W. Edwards 
Deming to Japan in 1950 to teach them SQC. His message was enthusiastically 
received, and SQC became an integral part of the rebuilding of Japanese industry. An 
important difference between how Americans and Japanese were introduced to SQC is 
that in Japan the fi rst people converted were top management, while in America it was 
largely engineers who adopted it. The Japanese have continued to be strong advocates 
of SQC methods and have extended it and developed new adaptations. Today Japanese 
products are viewed as having quality. In Japan, the national award for industrial qual-
ity, a very prestigious award, is called the Deming Prize.
Dr. Deming viewed quality as one principle in a broader philosophy of manage-
ment, 1 as expressed by his fourteen points.
 1.  Create a constancy and consistency of purpose toward improvement of product 
and service. Aim to become competitive and to stay in business and to provide 
jobs.
 2.  Adopt the philosophy that we are in a new economic age. Western management 
must awaken to the challenge, must learn their responsibilities, and take on the 
leadership of change.
 3.  Stop depending on inspection to achieve quality. Eliminate the need for produc-
tion line inspection by building quality into the product’s design.
 4.  Stop the practice of awarding business only on the basis of price. The goal should 
be to minimize total cost, not just acquisition cost. Move toward a single supplier 
for any one item. Create a relationship of loyalty and trust with your suppliers.
 5.  Search continually for problems in the system and seek ways to improve it.
 6.  Institute modern methods of training on the job. Management and workers alike 
should know statistics.
 7.  The aim of supervision should be to help people and machines to do a better job. 
Provide the tools and techniques for people to have pride of workmanship.
 8.  Eliminate fear, so that everyone may work effectively for the company. Encourage 
two-way communication.
 9.  Break down barriers between departments. Research, design, sales, and produc-
tion must work as a team.
1. W. E. Deming, Out of Crisis, MIT Center for Advanced Engineering Study, Cambridge, MA, 1986; 
M. Tribus, Mechanical Engineering, January 1988, pp. 26–30.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
683
15
10.  Eliminate the use of numerical goals, slogans, and posters for the workforce. 
Eighty to 85 percent of the causes of low quality and low productivity are the fault 
of the system, 15 to 20 percent are because of the workers.
11.  Eliminate work standards (quotas) on the factory fl oor and substitute leadership. 
Eliminate management by objective, management by numbers, and substitute 
leadership.
12. Remove barriers to the pride of workmanship.
13.  Institute a vigorous program of education and training to keep people abreast of 
new developments in materials, methods, and technology.
14.  Put everyone in the company working to accomplish this transformation. This is 
not just a management responsibility—it is everybody’s job.
15.2
QUALITY CONTROL AND ASSURANCE
Quality control1 refers to the actions taken throughout the engineering and manu-
facturing of a product to prevent and detect product defi ciencies and product safety 
hazards. The American Society for Quality (ASQ) defi nes quality as the totality of 
features and characteristics of a product or service that bear on the ability to satisfy 
a given need. In a narrower sense, quality control (QC) refers to the statistical tech-
niques employed in sampling production and monitoring the variability of the prod-
uct. Quality assurance refers to those systematic actions that are vital to providing 
satisfactory confi dence that an item or service will fulfi l defi ned requirements. 
Quality control received its initial impetus in the United States during World War II 
when war production was facilitated and controlled with QC methods. The traditional 
role of quality control has been to monitor the quality of raw materials, control the 
dimensions of parts during production, eliminate imperfect parts from the production 
line, and assure functional performance of the product. With increased emphasis on 
tighter tolerance levels, slimmer profi t margins, and stricter interpretation of liabil-
ity laws by the courts, there has been even greater emphasis on quality control. The 
heavy competition for U.S. markets from overseas producers who have emphasized 
quality has placed even more emphasis on QC by U.S. producers.
15.2.1 Fitness for Use
An appropriate engineering defi nition of quality is to consider that it means fi tness for 
use. The consumer may confuse quality with luxury, but in an engineering context qual-
ity has to do with how well a product meets its design and performance specifi cations. 
1. J. A. Defeo, ed., Juran’s Quality Handbook, 6th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2010; F. M. Gryna and 
R. C. H. Chura, Juran’s Quality Planning and Analysis for Enterprise Quality, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 2007.

684 
engineering design 
15
The majority of product failures can be traced back to the design process. It has been 
found that 75 percent of defects originate in product development and planning, and 
that 80 percent of these remain undetected until the fi nal product test or in service.1 
The particular technology used in manufacturing has an important infl uence on 
quality. We saw in Chap. 13 that each manufacturing process has an inherent capabil-
ity for maintaining tolerances, generating a shape, and producing a surface fi nish. This 
has been codifi ed into a methodology called conformability analysis.2 This technique 
aims, to identify the potential process capability problems in component manufacture 
and assembly and to estimate the level of potential failure costs for a given design.
As computer-aided applications pervade manufacturing, there is a growing trend 
toward automated inspection. This permits a higher volume of part inspection and re-
moves human variability from the inspection process. An important aspect of QC for 
both manual and automated inspection is the design of inspection fi xtures and gaging.3 
The skill and attitude of production workers can have a great deal to do with quality. 
Where there is pride in the quality of the product, there is greater concern for quality on 
the production fl oor. A technique used successfully in Japan and meeting with growing 
acceptance in the United States is the quality circle, in which small groups of produc-
tion workers meet regularly to suggest quality improvements in the production process.
Management must be solidly behind total quality or it will not be achieved. There 
is an inherent confl ict between achieving quality and wanting to meet production sched-
ules at minimum cost. This is another manifestation of the perennial confl ict between 
short- and long-term goals. There is general agreement that the greater the autonomy of 
the quality function in the management structure, the higher the level of quality in the 
product. Most often the quality control and manufacturing departments are separate, 
and both the QC manager and the production manager report to the plant manager.
Field service comprises all the services provided by the manufacturer after the 
product has been delivered to the customer: equipment installation, operator training, 
repair service, warranty service, and claim adjustment. The level of fi eld service is an 
important factor in establishing the value of the product to the customer, so that it is 
a real part of the fi tness-for-use concept of quality control. Customer contact by fi eld 
service engineers is one of the major sources of input about the quality level of the 
product. Information from the fi eld “closes the loop” of quality assurance and pro-
vides needed information for redesign of the product.
15.2.2 Quality-Control Concepts
A basic tenet of quality control is that variability is inherent in any manufactured 
product. There exists an economic balance between reducing the variability and the 
1. K. G. Swift and A. J. Allen, “Product Variability, Risks, and Robust Design,” Proc. Instn. Mech. 
Engrs., vol. 208, pp. 9–19, 1994.
2. K. G. Swift, M. Raines, and I. D. Booker, “Design Capability and the Costs of Failure,” Proc. Instn. 
Mech. Engrs., vol. 211, Part B, pp. 409–23, 1997.
3. C. W. Kennedy, S. D. Bond, and E. G. Hoffman, Inspection and Gaging, 6th ed., Industrial Press, Inc., 
New York, 1987.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
685
15
cost of manufacture.1 Statistical quality control regards part of the variability as inher-
ent in the materials and process, and it can be changed only by changing those factors. 
The remainder of the variability is due to assignable causes that can be reduced or 
eliminated if they can be identifi ed. 
There are four basic questions in establishing a QC policy for a part: (1) What do 
we inspect? (2) How do we inspect? (3) When do we inspect? (4) Where do we inspect?
What to Inspect
The objective of inspection is to focus on a few critical characteristics of the product 
that are good indicators of performance. These are the critical-to-quality parameters. 
This is chiefl y a technically based decision. Another decision is whether to emphasize 
nondestructive or destructive inspection. Obviously, the chief value of an NDI technique 
is that it allows the manufacturer to inspect a part that will actually be sold. Also, the 
customer can inspect the same part before it is used. Destructive tests, like tensile tests, 
are done with the assumption that the results derived from the test are typical of the 
population from which the test samples were taken. Often it is necessary to use destruc-
tive tests to verify that the nondestructive test is measuring the desired characteristic.
How to Inspect
The basic decision is whether the characteristic of the product to be monitored will 
be measured on a continuous scale (inspection by variables) or whether the part passes 
or fails some go/no-go test. The latter situation is known as measurement by attri-
butes. Inspection by variables uses the normal, lognormal, or some similar frequency 
distribution. Inspection by attributes uses the binomial and Poisson distributions.
When to Inspect
The decision on when to inspect determines the QC method that will be em-
ployed. Inspection can occur either while the process is running (process control) 
or after it has been completed (acceptance sampling). A process control approach is 
used when the inspection can be done nondestructively at low unit cost. An important 
benefi t of process control is that the manufacturing conditions can be continuously 
adjusted on the basis of the inspection data to reduce the percent defectives. Accep-
tance sampling often involves destructive inspection at a high unit cost. Since not all 
parts are inspected, it must be expected that a small percentage of defective parts will 
be passed by the inspection process. The development of sampling plans2 for various 
acceptance sampling schemes is an important aspect of statistical quality control. 
Where to Inspect
This decision has to do with the number and location of the inspection steps in the 
manufacturing process. There is an economic balance between the cost of inspection 
and the cost of passing defective parts to the later stages of the production sequence or 
1. I. L. Plunkett and B. G. Dale, Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 26, pp. 1713–26, 1988.
2. See MIL-STD-105E and MIL-STD-414. See http://www.sqconline.com/acceptance-sampling-plans.
html.

686 
engineering design 
15
to the customer. The number of inspection stations will be optimal when the marginal
cost of another inspection exceeds the marginal cost of passing on some defective 
parts. Inspection operations should be conducted before production operations that 
are irreversible, that is, operations that are very costly or where rework is impossible.
Inspection of incoming raw material to a production process is one such place. Steps
in the process that are most likely to generate fl aws should be followed by an inspec-
tion. In a new process, inspection operations might take place after every process step;
but as experience is gathered, the inspection would be maintained only after steps that 
have been shown to be critical.
15.2.3 Newer Approaches to Quality Control
The success of the Japanese in designing and producing quality products has led to
new ideas about quality control. Rather than fl ooding the receiving dock with inspec-
tors who establish the quality of incoming raw material and parts, it is cheaper and
faster to require the supplier to provide statistical documentation that the incoming
material meets quality standards. This can only work where the buyer and seller work 
environment in an of cooperation and trust.
In traditional QC an inspector makes the rounds every hour, picks up a few parts,
takes them back to the inspection area, and checks them out. By the time the results
of the inspection are available it is possible that bad parts have been manufactured
and it is likely that these parts have either made their way into the production stream
or have been placed in a bin along with good parts. If the latter happens, the QC staff 
will have to perform a 100 percent inspection to separate good parts from bad. We end
up with four grades of product—fi rst quality, second quality, rework, and scrap. To 
achieve close to real-time control, inspection must be an integral part of the manufac-
turing process. Ideally, those responsible for making the parts should also be respon-
sible for acquiring the process performance data so that they can make appropriate
adjustments. This has resulted in using electronic data collectors to eliminate human
error and to speed up analysis of data.
15.2.4 Quality Assurance
Quality assurance is concerned with all corporate activities that affect customer satis-
faction with the quality of the product. There must be a quality assurance department 
with suffi cient independence from manufacturing to act to maintain quality. This
group is responsible for interpreting national and international codes and standards in
terms of each purchase order and for developing written rules of operating practice.
Emphasis should be on clear and concise written procedures. A purchase order will
generate a great amount of in-plant documentation, which must be accurate and be de-
livered promptly to each workstation. Much of this paper fl ow has been computerized,
but there must be a system by which it gets on time to the people who need it. There
must also be procedures for maintaining the identity and traceability of materials and
semifi nished parts while in the various stages of processing. Defi nite policies and pro-
cedures for dealing with defective material and parts must be in place. There must be

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
687
15
a way to decide when parts should be scrapped, reworked, or downgraded to a lower 
quality level. A quality assurance system must identify which records should be kept 
and must establish procedures for accessing those records as required.
Quality control is not something that can be put in place and then forgotten. There 
must be procedures for training, qualifying, and certifying inspectors and other QC
personnel. Funds must be available for updating inspection and laboratory equipment 
and for the frequent calibration of instruments and gauges.
15.2.5 ISO 9000
An important aspect of quality assurance is the audit of an organization’s quality
system against written standards.1 The most prevalent quality standard is ISO 9000,
and its companion standards, which are issued by the International Organization for 
Standards (ISO). ISO 9000 is required by companies doing business in the European
Union, and since it is a worldwide marketplace, companies around the world have be-
come ISO 9000 certifi ed. Certifi cation to ISO 9000 is accomplished by submitting to 
an audit by an accredited ISO registrar.
The system of standards that make up ISO 9000 is listed in Table 15.1. ISO 9001 is the 
most complete since it extends from design to fi eld service.2 Clause 4.4, Design Control,
lays out many of the issues discussed in this text, as seen from the outline in Table 15.2. 
15.3
STATISTICAL PROCESS CONTROL
Collecting manufacturing performance data and keeping charts on this data is com-
mon practice in industrial plants. Walter Shewhart 3 showed that such data could be
interpreted and made useful through a simple but statistically sound method called a 
control chart. 
1. D. Hoyle, ISO 9000: Quality System Assessment Handbook, 5th ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Oxford, 2006.
2. F. P. Dobb, ISO 9001:2000 Registration Step-by-Step, Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2004.
3. W. A. Shewhart, Economic Control of Quality in Manufactured Product, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., 
New York, 1931.
TABLE 15.1 
ISO 9000 Standards
Standard
Subject
ISO 9000
Guidelines for Selection and Use
ISO 9001 
Quality Assurance in Design, Production, Installation, and Servicing
ISO 9002
Quality Assurance in Production, Installation, and Servicing
ISO 9003
Quality Assurance in Final Inspection
ISO 9004
Guidelines for Implementation

688 
engineering design 
15
15.3.1 Control Charts
The use of the control chart is based on the viewpoint that every manufacturing pro-
cess is subject to two sources of variation: (1) chance variation, also called com-
mon causes of variation, and (2) assignable variation, or that due to special causes. 
Chance variation arises from numerous factors in the operation of the process that 
are individually of small importance. These can be considered the “noise” in the pro-
cess. They are an expected but uncontrollable variability. An assignable variation is 
a variation that can be detected and controlled. It is due to a special cause like poorly 
trained operators or worn production tooling. The control chart is an important qual-
ity control1 tool for detecting the existence of assignable causes. 
In constructing a control chart, a process is sampled at regular time intervals and 
a variable appropriate to the product is measured on each sample. Generally the sam-
ple size n is small, between 3 and 10. The number of samples, k, is typically over 20. 
The theory behind the control chart is that the samples should be chosen such that 
all of the variability in the samples should likely be due to common causes and none 
should be due to special causes. Thus, when a sample shows atypical behavior, it can 
be assumed to be due to a special cause. There are two approaches generally used in 
selecting samples: (1) all items in each sample represent parts made near the time of 
sampling, or (2) the sample is representative of all the parts made since the last sample 
was taken. The choice between these two selection methods is based on the engineer’s 
opinion of which would be more likely to detect the special cause of variation that is 
highest on the “suspect list.”
E X A M P L E 1 5 .1
Consider a commercial heat-treating operation in which bearing races are being quenched 
and tempered in a conveyor-type furnace on a continuous 24-hour basis. Every hour the 
1. D. Montgomery, Introduction to Statistical Quality Control, 6th ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 
2009.
TABLE 15.2 
Topics Covered in ISO 9001, 
Clause 4.4, Design Control
Subclause
Topic
4.4.1
General
4.4.2 
Design and development planning
4.4.3
Organizational and technical interfaces
4.4.4
Design input
4.4.5
Design output
4.4.6
Design review
4.4.7
Design verifi cation
4.4.8
Design validation
4.4.9
Design changes

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
689
15
Rockwell hardness 1 is measured on 10 bearing races to determine whether the product 
conforms to the specifi cations. The mean of the sample, x, approximates the process
mean μ. The range of sample values, R = xmax −xmin, typically is used to approximate 
the process standard deviation, σ. The variable hardness is assumed to follow a normal
σ
frequency distribution.
If the process is in statistical control, the values of mean and range will not vary 
much from sample to sample, but if the process is out of control then they will vary 
signifi cantly. Control limits need to be drawn to establish how much variation constitutes
out-of-control behavior indicative of the presence of an assignable cause.
Usually the control chart for R is drawn fi rst to make certain that the variation from 
sample to sample is not too great. If some points on the R are out of the control limits, 
then the control limits on the x chart will be infl ated. Figure 15.1 shows the control chart 
based on range. The centerline of the R chart is −R and is calculated by averaging the
ranges of the k samples.
k
R
R
=∑
1
1
k
i
i
k
 
(15.1)
0
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
2
4
6
8
Sample number
Rockwell C hardness
Rockwell C hardness
LCL
10
12
14
x
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
2
4
6
8
Sample number
UCL
R
LCL
10
12
14
R
UCL
x
FIGURE 15.1
Control charts for R (top) and ¯x (bottom).
x
1. The Rockwell hardness test measures the depth of penetration, on an arbitrary scale, of a hard indenter 
into a metal surface.

690 
engineering design 
15
The upper control limit, UCL, and the lower control limit, LCL, are determined by
D R
D R
UCL
LCL
4
3
=
=
(15.2)
The constants D3 and D4 can be found in Table 15.3. These can be used only if the process
variable is normally distributed. Examination of the range control chart shows that two points 
are outside of the control limits. Based on the assumption of a normal distribution, 0.27 per-
cent of the observations would be expected to fall outside of these ±3σ limits if these were 
σ
due to common causes. Therefore, we must examine these points to determine if there are
assignable causes for them. Sample 1 was done fi rst thing on Monday morning, and a strip
chart was found that determined that the furnace had not reached its proper temperature. This
was an operator error, and these data were dropped for assignable cause. No reason could be
found for sample 10 being beyond the UCL. This casts some doubt on the results, but this set 
of data was also dropped when calculating the control chart based on mean values.
The centerline of the x control chart is “x
“ double bar,” the grand average of the 
x
k
sample means.
x
x
=∑
1
1
k
i
i
k
(15.3)
Again, the UCL and LCL are set at ±3σ about the mean. If we knew the population
mean and standard deviation, this would be given by UCL =
3
μ
3(
)
n
σ
+
, where the term 
in parentheses is the standard error of the mean. Since we do not know these parameters,
the approximations for the control limits is
UCL
LCL
=
=
x
A
+
R
x
A
−
R
2
2
 
(15.4)
Note that the upper and lower control limits depend not only on the grand mean but also
on the sample size, through A2, and the mean of the range.
The –x control chart in Fig. 15.1 shows many excursions of the mean outside of the con-
–x
trol limits even after the control limits have been recalculated to eliminate the two out-of-
control samples from the range chart. It is concluded that this particular batch of steel does
not have suffi cient homogeneity of alloy content to respond consistently to heat treatment 
within such narrow specifi cation limits. If this is unexpected, then the process should be
investigated to see if there was some special cause for the lack of quality control.
Sample size, n
D3
D4
B3
B4
A2
A3
d2
c4
2
0
3.27
0
3.27
1.88
2.66
1.13
0.798
4
0
2.28
0 
2.27
0.73
1.63
2.06
0.921
6
0
2.00
0.030
1.97
0.48
1.29
2.53
0.952
8
0.14
1.86
0.185
1.82
0.37
1.10
2.70
0.965
10
0.22
1.78
0.284
1.72
0.27
0.98
2.97
0.973
12
0.28
1.71
0.354
1.65
0.22
0.89
3.08
0.978
TABLE 15.3
Factors for Use in Determining Control Limit for Control Charts

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
691
15
15.3.2 Other Types of Control Charts 
The  –R and –x charts were the fi rst types used for quality control. The range was chosen
–x
to measure variability because of its ease of calculation in a period before electronic 
calculators made it quick and easy to calculate standard deviations. Also, for small 
sample sizes the range is a more effi cient statistic than the standard deviation.
Today it is much more convenient to use standard deviation in control charts.
The average standard deviation –s of k samples is given by
k
s
k
si
i
k
=
=∑
1
1
 
(15.5)
Equation (15.5) represents the centerline of the s chart. The upper and lower control 
limits are set at the ±3-sigma limits for the sample standard deviation according to
Equation (15.6).
UCL
and
a
LCL =
and
a
LCL
B s
4
3
and
a
LCL
B
 
(15.6)
A control chart often is used to detect a shift in the process mean during a pro-
duction run. A succession of 6 to 10 points above or below the centerline of the chart 
is an indication of a shift in the mean. The sensitivity in detecting a mean shift can be 
increased by taking the deviation of each sample from the centerline and adding these 
in a cumulative way for each succeeding sample to form a CUSUM chart.1
The preceding discussion of control charts was based on a variable measured on 
a continuous quantitative scale. Often in inspection it is quicker and cheaper to check 
the product on a go/no-go basis. The part is either “not defective” or “defective” based 
on a gage or predetermined specifi cation. In this type of attribute testing, we deal
with the fraction or proportion of defects in a sample. The p chart, based on the bino-
mial distribution, deals with the fraction of defective parts in a sample over a succes-
sion of samples. The c chart, based on the Poisson distribution, monitors the number 
of defects per sample. Other important issues in statistical quality control are the de-
sign of sampling plans and the intricacies of sampling parts on the production line.2
15.3.3 Determining Process Statistics from Control Charts
Because control charts are commonly established for manufacturing processes, they
are a useful source of process statistics for determining the process capability index, 
Sec. 15.5. The grand average x of the means of k samples, Eq. (15.3), is the best esti-
k
mate,  ˆμ for the true process mean, 
μ
μ.
1. W. Navidi, Statistics for Engineers and Scientists, 2d ed., pp. 782–84, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008.
2. D. H. Besterfi eld, Quality Control, 5th ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1998; A. Mitra, 
Fundamentals of Quality Control and Improvement, 2d ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1998.

692 
engineering design 
15
The estimate of the process standard deviation is given by Eq. (15.7), depend-
ing on whether the R chart or s chart has been used to measure the variability in the
process.
R
d
s
c
ˆ
ˆ
2
4c
σ
σ
or
=
σ
or
(15.7)
All of the equations for determining the process parameters are based on the assump-
tion that they follow a normal distribution.
15.4
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
Four basic costs are associated with quality.
●Prevention—those costs incurred in planning, implementing, and maintaining a
quality system. Included are the extra expense in design and manufacturing to en-
sure the highest-quality product.
●Appraisal—costs incurred in determining the degree of conformance to the quality
requirements. The cost of inspection is the major contributor.
●Internal failure—costs incurred when materials, parts, and components fail to 
meet the quality requirements for shipping to the customer. These parts are either 
scrapped or reworked.
●External failure—costs incurred when products fail to meet customer expectations.
These result in warranty claims, loss of future business, or product liability suits.
Simply collecting statistics on defective parts and weeding them out of the assembly 
line is not suffi cient for quality improvement and cost reduction. A proactive effort 
must be made to determine the root causes of the problem so that permanent correc-
tions can be made. Among the problem-solving tools described in Sec. 4.6, the Pareto
chart and cause-and-effect diagram are most commonly used in cause fi nding.
15.4.1 Pareto Chart
In 1897 an Italian economist, Vilfredo Pareto, studied the distribution of land own-
ership in Italy and found that 80 percent of the land was owned by 20 percent of 
the population. This was published and became known as Pareto’s law. Shortly after 
World War II, inventory control analysts observed that about 20 percent of the items
in the inventory accounted for about 80 percent of the dollar value. In 1954 Joseph 
Juran generalized Pareto’s law as the “80/20 rule”; that is, 80 percent of sales are
generated by 20 percent of the customers, 80 percent of the product defects are caused 
by 20 percent of the parts, and so on. While there is no widespread validation of the 
80/20 rule, it is widely quoted as a useful axiom. Certainly Juran’s admonition “to
concentrate on the vital few and not the trivial many” is excellent advice in quality
improvement, as in other aspects of life.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
693
15
15.4.2 Cause-and-Effect Diagram
Cause-and-effect analysis uses the “fi shbone diagram” or Ishikawa diagram,1 Fig. 15.2, 
to identify possible causes of a problem. Poor quality is associated with four catego-
ries of causes: (operator) man, machine, method, and material. The likely causes of 
the problem are listed on the diagram under these four main categories. Suggested
causes of the problem are generated by the manufacturing engineers, technicians, and
production workers meeting to discuss the problem. The use of the cause-and-effect 
diagram provides a graphical display of the possible causes of the problem. 
E X A M P L E 1 5 . 2
A manufacturing plant was producing injection-molded automobile grilles.2 The process 
was newly installed, and the parts produced had a number of defects. Therefore, a quality
improvement team consisting of operators, setup people, manufacturing engineers, pro-
duction supervisors, quality control staff, and statisticians was assembled to improve the 
situation. The fi rst task was to agree on what the defects were and how to specify them. 
Then a sampling of 25 grilles was examined for defects. Figure 15.3a shows the control chart 
(see Sec. 15.3.1 for more details on control charts) for the grilles produced by the process. It 
shows a mean of 4.5 defects per part. The pattern is typical of a process out of control.
A Pareto diagram was prepared to show the relative frequency of the various types of 
defects, Fig. 15.4. This was based on the data in Fig. 15.3a. It shows that black spots (de-
graded polymer patches on the surface) are the most prevalent type of defect. Therefore, it 
was decided to focus attention on this defect.
Focusing on the causes of the black spots resulted in the “fi shbone” diagram shown 
in Fig. 15.2. The causes are grouped under the four Ms of manufacturing. Note that for 
Training
Poor design
Poor maintenance
Improper flight geometry
Speed too high
Vent
tube
Poor
maintenance
Attitude
Check
ring
Man
Machine
Cleaning of vent
Purging procedure
Lot-to-lot
variation
Multiple suppliers
Varying proportion
of virgin/regrind
Effect
Black
spots
Poor process control
Grade
Screw
Method
Material
FIGURE 15.2
Cause-and-effect (Ishikawa) diagram for black spot defects on automobile grille. (From Tool 
and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., vol. 4, p. 2–23, 1987, courtesy of Society 
of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI.)
1. K. Ishikawa, Guide to Quality Control, 2d ed., UNIPUB, New York, 1982.
2. This example is based on Tool and Manufacturing Engineer’s Handbook, 4th ed., vol. 4, pp. 2–20 to
2–24, Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1987.

694 
engineering design 
15
0
5
10
Number of defects per unit
Sample number
(a)
15
20
25
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
LCL = 2.5
u = 4.5
UCL = 6.5
0
5
10
Number of black spot defects per unit
Sample number
(b)
15
20
25
Changed screw
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
LCL = 0.4
u = 2.5
UCL = 4.6
0
5
10
Number of black spot defects per unit
Sample number
(c)
15
20
25
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
LCL = 0.4
u = 2.5
UCL = 4.6
Changed vent tube design
FIGURE 15.3
Control chart for the number 
of defects for injection-molded
grilles: (a) process out of control;
(b) process after injection screw
was changed; (c) process after 
new vent system was installed. 
(From Tool and Manufacturing
Engineers Handbook, 4th ed.,
vol. 4, p. 2–22, 1987, courtesy 
of Society of Manufacturing
Engineers, Dearborn, MI.)

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
695
15
some items, like the injector screw, the level of detail is greater. The team decided that the 
screw had been worn through too much use and needed to be replaced.
When the screw was changed, the black spots completely disappeared (see control 
chart in Fig. 15.3b). Then after a few days the black spots reappeared at about the same
level of intensity as before. Thus, it must be concluded that the root cause of black spots 
had not been identifi ed. The quality team continued to meet to discuss the black spot 
problem. It was noted that the design of the vent tube on the barrel of the injection mold-
ing machine was subject to clogging and was diffi cult to clean. It was hypothesized that 
polymer either accumulated in the vent tube port, became overheated and periodically 
broke free and continued down the barrel, or it was pushed back into the barrel during 
cleaning. A new vent tube design that minimized these possibilities was designed and 
constructed, and when installed the black spots disappeared, Fig. 15.3c.
Having solved the most prevalent defect problem the team turned its attention to 
scratches, the defect with the second-highest frequency of occurrence. A machine operator 
proposed that the scratches were caused by the hot plastic parts falling on the metal lacings
of the conveyor belt. He proposed using a continuous belt without metal lacings. However, 
this type of belt cost twice as much. Therefore, an experiment was proposed in which the
metal lacings were covered with a soft latex coating. When this was done the scratches dis-
appeared, but after time they reappeared as the latex coating wore away. With the evidence
from this experiment, the belt with metal lacings was replaced by a continuous vulcanized 
belt, not only on the machine under study but for all the machines in the shop. 
15.5
PROCESS CAPABILITY
In Section 13.4.5 we discussed how important it is to select a manufacturing process 
that is able to make a part within the required tolerance range. Not only is knowledge
about process capability important when setting tolerances, but it is important infor-
mation to have when deciding which outside supplier should get the contract to make 
the part. In this section we show how statistical information about the parts produced 
by a machine or process can be used to determine the percentage of parts that fall out-
side of a specifi ed tolerance band.
Process capability is measured by the process capability index, Cp
C .
Cp
Acceptable part v
r
ariatio
r
n
Machine or process variatio
r
n
Tolerance
3 ˆ
USL
LSL
3 ˆ
( 3 ˆ)
USL
LSL
6 ˆ
σ
σ
3
σ
σ
)
6
=
=
±
=
−(
=
 (15.8)
Black
spots
Scratches Splay
Type of defect
Frequency
Sinks
Flowlines
FIGURE 15.4
Pareto diagram for defects in automotive 
grille. (From Tool and Manufacturing En-
gineers Handbook, 4th ed., vol. 4, p. 2–22, 
1987, courtesy of Society of Manufacturing 
Engineers, Dearborn, MI.)

696 
engineering design 
15
Equation 15.8 applies to a design parameter that is normally distributed in a pro-
cess that is in a state of statistical control. Data from a control chart is usually used
to describe how the process is performing (see Sec. 15.3). For a parameter such as a 
CTQ dimension, the mean of the population is approximated by ˆμ and the variability,
μ
measured by the standard deviation, by ˆσ . The limits on the tolerance are given by the
σ
upper specifi cation limit, USL, and the lower specifi cation limit, LSL. This is not the
usual case unless careful adjustments are made to the machine, but it is the ideal to
be achieved because it results in the greatest capability without reducing the process
standard deviation. The limits on machine variation are usually set at ±3σ, which
σ
gives 0.27% defects when Cp
C = 1 and the target mean of the process is centered be-
tween the LSL and the USL. 
Figure 15.5 shows three situations of the distributions of the design variable of the
part produced by the process compared with the upper and lower limits of the tolerance.
Figure 15.5a shows the situation where the process variability (spread) is greater than 
the acceptable part variation (tolerance range). According to Eq. 15.8, Cp
C ≤ 1, and the 
process is not capable. To make it capable the variability in the process will have to
be reduced, or the tolerance will have to be loosened. Figure 15.5b is the case where 
the tolerance range and the process variability just match, so Cp
C = 1. This is a tenuous 
situation, for any shift of the process mean, for example, to the right, will increase the
number of defective parts. Finally, in Fig. 15.5c, the process variability is much less 
FIGURE 15.5
Examples for different process capability situations.
LSL
LSL
(b)
USL
USL
LSL
USL
(c)
Process is not capable.
Process is capable.
Process is marginally capable.
Cp
C < 1.0
Cp
C > 1.0
Cp
C  = 1.0
(a)
x
x
x

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
697
15
than the tolerance range. This provides a considerable margin of safety because the
process mean could move quite a bit before the distribution reaches the USL or LSL. 
For mass production, where the percentage of defects is critical, the acceptable level 
of Cp
C is required to exceed 1.33.
E X A M P L E 1 5 . 3
(a)  A machine spindle has a specifi cation (tolerance) on its diameter of 1.500 ± 0.009
inches. If Cp
C = 1.0, what is the standard deviation of the spindles being produced by
the cylindrical grinder?
CP
1.0
1.509
1.491
6 ˆ
ˆ
(0.018)
6(1.0)
0.003 inches
σ
σ
=
=
1 0
−
=
=
(b)  What would the standard deviation have to be to achieve a process capability index
of 1.33?
1.33
0.018
6 ˆ
ˆ
0.018
7.98
0.00226
σ
σ
=
=
σ
=
With a Cp
C value of 1.33, the process mean is four standard deviations from each 
specifi cation limit. This is considered good manufacturing practice. 
E X A M P L E 1 5 . 4
If Cp
C = 1.33 and the process mean is centered within the tolerance range, how many over-
sized parts would be expected in grinding the spindle described in Example 15.3b? (Note:
this is the same type of problem discussed in Example 14.1.)
We can visualize this problem with the help of Fig.15.5c. Using the standard normal 
variable, z, 
z
x
USL
ˆ
ˆ
1.509
1.500
0.00226
3.982
μ
σ
μ
σ
=
−
≈
−
=
−
=
The z value is far out on the right end of the z distribution. Most tables stop at about z =
3.9, but using the NORMDIST function in Excel gives 0.999966. This is the area under 
the curve from −∞ to 3.982. Therefore, the area under the very small piece of the right tail
is 1 −0.999966 = 0.000034 or 0.0034 percent or 34 ppm (parts per million).
The problem asked for the percentage of oversized parts, but there also will be parts 
with undersized diameters. Since the z distribution is symmetrical, the total percentage 
of defects (over and undersized) is 0.0068 or 68 defective parts for every million parts 
produced.
In the previous examples the process mean was centered midway between the up-
per and lower specifi cation limits. This is not easy to achieve and maintain in practice.
If the process starts out centered, there is a tendency for the mean to move off center 
with time due to tool wear and process changes. The midpoint of the tolerance range
(USL + LSL)/2 equals m (the target for the process mean). The distance between the ac-
tual process mean, ˆμ, and the midpoint is ˆμ −m, where m ≤ˆμ ≤ USL or LSL ≤ˆμ ≤m.

698 
engineering design 
15
The parameter k is the ratio of the deviation of the actual process mean from m to one-
half of the tolerance range. The value of k varies from 0 to 1.
k
k
m
ˆ
(USL
LSL)/2
(USL
LSL)/2
ˆ
(USL
LSL)/2
μ
μ
μ
μ
(USL
S )/
=
−
−
=
+ LSL)/2
LSL)/2
−
(15.9)
The process capability index when the mean is not centered should be calculated
by Cpk
C
.
k
C
minimum USL
ˆ
3 ˆ
, ˆ
LSL
3 ˆ
pk
μ
σ
μ
σ
=
−
−
μ μ
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦ 
(15.10)
Cpk
C
defi nes the process capability by the lesser of the ranges from the mean to the 
k
specifi cation limit. Cp
C  and Cpk
C
are related through the equation
k
C
k C
pk
p
(
)
 
(15.11)
When k equals zero, the mean is centered and
k
Cpk
C
= Cp
C .
Table 15.4 shows how the percentage of good parts and defective parts varies 
with the number of process standard deviations, “sigmas,” that can be accommodated
within the tolerance range. It also shows the dramatic increase in defective parts that 
results from a 1.5 sigma shift of the process mean. A shift of the process mean by this
amount is considered to be typical of the average manufacturing process.
E X A M P L E 1 5 . 5
The process mean has moved 1.5  ˆσ from the center of the tolerance range. From Example 15.3,
σ
ˆσ = 0.00226 inches. The shift 
=
k = 1.5(0.00226) 
=
= 0.003 inches toward the USL.
=
Now ˆμ = 1.500 + 0.003 = 1.503. From Eq. (15.10):
C
C
pk
pk
USL
ˆ
3 ˆ
1.509
1.503
3(0.00226)
2.655
ˆ
LSL
3 ˆ
1.503 1.491
3(0.00226)
1.770
1
2
μ
σ
μ
σ
=
−
=
−
=
=
−
=
−
=
TABLE 15.4 
Effect of Shift in Process Mean on Defect Rate
Process Centered
Process Mean 1.5 Sigma  from Center
Tolerance 
range*
Cp
C
Percent good
parts
Defective 
parts ppm
Percent good
parts
Defective parts 
ppm
± 3 sigma
1.00
99.73
2,700
93.32
697,700
± 4 sigma
1.33
99.9932
68
99.605
3,950
± 6 sigma
2.00
99.9999998
0.002
99.99966
3.4
*Indicates the number of times the process sigma fi ts within the tolerance range (specifi cation limits). ppm is
parts per million. 10,000 ppm = 1 percent.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
699
15
The calculation shows that Cpk
C
1 ≠Cpk
C
2, so the process mean is not centered. However, the 
process capability index of 1.77 shows that the process is capable. To determine the per-
centage of expected defective parts, we use the standard normal variable z.
z
z
USL
Lz
S
SL
L
USL
ˆ
1.509
1.503
0.00226
2 655 and
LSL
ˆ
ˆ
1.491 1.503
0.00226
5.31
μ
σ
μ
σ
−
−
=
z
−
=
−
= −
The probability of parts falling outside the tolerance range is given by 
P z
z
(
5.31)
(
P
2.655)
1
(0
0.99605)
0.0039
≤−
≥
z
P
−
1
+
=
0.99605)
Thus, the probability is approximately 0.0039 or 0.39% or 3950 ppm. While the defect 
rate still is relatively low, it has increased from 68 ppm when the process was centered in 
the middle of the tolerance range, Example 15.4.
15.5.1 Six Sigma Quality Program
Table 15.4 shows that the percentage of good parts is exceedingly high if the pro-
cess variability is so low that ±6 standard deviations (a width of 12  ˆσ) will fi t within 
σ
the specifi cation limits, Fig. 15.5c. This is the origin of the name of the quality pro-
gram called Six Sigma that has been pursued vigorously by many world-class corpora-
tions. It is generally recognized that achieving the 2 parts per billion defect level that 
is shown in Table 15.4 is not realistic, since most processes show some mean shift. 
Therefore, the practical six sigma goal is usually stated to be the 3.4 ppm of defective 
parts that is given in Table 15.4. Even that goal is exceedingly diffi cult and rarely, if 
ever, attained.
Six sigma can be viewed as a major extension of the TQM process described in
Chap. 4. Six Sigma incorporates the problem-solving tools of TQM with many others 
discussed in this text such as QFD, FMEA, reliability, and Design of Experiments, as 
well as extensive tools for statistical analysis.1 Compared with TQM, Six Sigma has 
more of a fi nancial focus than a customer focus, with emphasis on cutting cost and 
improving profi t. Six Sigma has stronger emphasis on training of special teams, using 
a more structured approach, and setting stretch goals.2 As seen above, the idea of Six 
Sigma came from the concept of process capability, so it is no surprise that a major 
focus is on reducing process defects by systematically reducing process variability.
However, with the strong emphasis on cost reduction that has evolved, many of the 
most spectacular results of Six Sigma projects have come from process simplifi cation 
and reducing non–value-added activities. 
Six Sigma uses a disciplined fi ve-stage process with the acronym DMAIC to 
guide improvement processes.
1. R. C. Perry and D. W. Bacon, Commercializing Great Products with Design for Six Sigma, Pearson 
Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2007.
2. G. Wilson, Six Sigma and the Development Cycle, Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2005.

700 
engineering design 
15
●Defi ne the Problem: During this stage the team works to identify the customers
involved and to determine their needs. It is necessary to determine that the problem
is important and traceable to either customer needs or business goals. The team
defi nes the scope of the project, its time frame, and the potential fi nancial gains. 
These are recorded in a team charter.
●Measure: During the second stage the team develops metrics, which allow them 
to evaluate the performance of the process. This task requires accurate measure-
ment of current process performance so it can be compared with the desired perfor-
mance. At this stage it is important to begin to understand those process variables
that cause signifi cant variations in the process.
●Analyze: The team analyzes the data taken in the previous stage to determine the
root causes of the problem and identify any non–value-added process steps. The
team should determine which process variables actually affect the customer, and
by how much. They should examine possible combinations of variables on the pro-
cess and how changing each process variable affects process performance. Process 
modeling is often used to advantage in this phase.
●Improve: This phase pertains to solution generation and implementation. It involves
selecting the solution that best addresses the root cause. Tools like cost/benefi t 
analysis using fi nancial tools such as net present value are employed. The develop-
ment of a clear implementation plan and its communication to management are es-
sential at this stage of the process.
●Control: This fi nal stage institutionalizes the change and develops a monitoring system
so that the gains of the improvement are maintained over time. Aim to mistake-proof 
the revised process. Part of the plan should be to translate the opportunities discovered
by the project beyond the immediate organization to the corporation as a whole. The
project should be documented thoroughly so that in the future another Six Sigma team
may use the results to initiate another improvement project using the same process.
15.6
TAGUCHI METHOD
A systematized statistical approach to product and process improvement has devel-
oped in Japan under the leadership of Dr. Genichi Taguchi.1 This took a total quality
emphasis but developed quite unique approaches and terminology. It emphasizes mov-
ing the quality issue upstream to the design stage and focusing on prevention of de-
fects by process improvement. Taguchi has placed great emphasis on the importance 
of minimizing variation as the primary means of improving quality. Special attention 
is given to the idea of designing products so that their performance is insensitive to
changes in the environment in which the product functions, also called noise. The pro-
cess of achieving this through the use of statistically designed experiments has been 
called robust design (see Sec. 15.7).
1. G. Taguchi, Introduction to Quality Engineering, Asian Productivity Organization, Tokyo, 1986,
available from Kraus Int. Publ., White Plains, NY; G. Taguchi, Taguchi on Robust Technology Develop-
ment, ASME Press, New York, 1993.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
701
15
15.6.1 Quality Loss Function
Taguchi defi nes the quality level of a product to be the total loss incurred by society 
due to the failure of the product to deliver the expected performance and due to harm-
ful side effects of the product, including its operating cost. This may seem a backward 
defi nition of quality because the word quality usually denotes desirability, while the
word loss conveys the impression of undesirability. In the Taguchi concept some loss
is inevitable because of the realities of the physical world from the time a product 
is shipped to the customer and the time it is put in use. Thus, all products will incur 
some quality loss. The smaller the loss, the more desirable the product.
It is important to be able to quantify this loss so that alternative product designs
and manufacturing processes can be compared. This is done with a quadratic loss 
function (Fig. 15.6a):
L y
k y
( )y
)
y
m 2
= k y
 
(15.12)
where L(y) is the
y
quality loss when the quality characteristic is y, m is the target value
for y, and k is a constant, the quality loss coeffi cient.
k
Figure 15.6a shows the loss function for the common situation where the speci-
fi cation on a part is set at a target value, m, with a bilateral tolerance band ±Δ. The
conventional approach to quality considers a part with all dimensions falling within 
the tolerance range to be a good part, while one with any dimension outside of the 
USL-LSL region is a defective part. The analogy can be made to the goalposts in foot-
ball, where any kick that went through the uprights is a score, no matter how close it 
came to the upright. In football, no extra points are awarded for a kick that goes right 
between the middle of the goal posts.
Taguchi argues that this conventional approach is not realistic for defi ning qual-
ity. While it may be reasonable in football to award the same score so long as the ball 
falls in the interval 2Δ, for a quality engineering approach where variability is the 
enemy of quality, any deviation from the design target is undesirable and degrading to 
quality. Moreover, defi ning the quality loss function as a quadratic instead of a linear 
expression emphasizes the importance of being close to the target value. 
It is evident from Fig. 15.6a that y exceeds the tolerance Δ when L(y) = A. A
is the loss incurred when a product falls outside of the tolerance range and is re-
jected, or when a part in service needs to be repaired or replaced. When this occurs, 
y
m + Δ
USL
. Substituting into Eq. (15.12),
L
A
k m
k
k
A
(
)
m
[(
)
]
m
/
2
2
k
2
Δ = A
+ Δ
=
]
m
Δ
=
Δ
A/
Substituting into Eq. (15.12) gives:
L y
A y
( )y
(
)
y
m
2
2
= Δ
(15.13)

702 
engineering design 
15
This is the form of the quality loss equation that is most often used for the case where
the highest quality (lowest loss) is achieved when the quality characteristic is as close
as possible to the target value, and it is symmetrical about the target. Note that L(y) 
y = 0
only when y = m. A CTQ dimension on a part is an example of a nominal-is-better de-
sign parameter.
Two other common situations are shown in Fig. 15.6, along with the appropriate equa-
tion for the loss function. Figure 15.6b illustrates the case where the ideal value is zero and 
the smallest deviation from this target produces the highest quality. An example would be
if y represented pollution from an automobile exhaust. Figure 15.6c shows the opposite
situation, where the largest deviation from zero would produce the lowest loss function.
Design for the strength of a part would fall in this category.
E X A M P L E 1 5 . 6
A power supply for an electronic product must deliver a nominal output voltage of 
115 volts. When the output voltage varies from the nominal by more than 20 volts, the
customer will experience degraded performance or the product will be damaged and
repairs will be necessary at an average cost of $100. What is the loss if the product is
shipped with a power supply having an output of 110 volts? From this statement of the 
problem we may write:
m
y
A
k
A
L
k y
m
115 volts
110
20 volts
$100
/
100 / (20)
$0.25/volts
(
0)
(
k
)
$0.25(110 115)
$6.25
2
2
100 / (20)
2
2
$0 25(110 115)
=
y
Δ =
=
k
Δ =
/
2
=
y
(
k
=
−
$0 25(110
=
A
A
L(y)
L(y)
L(y) =
(y – m)2
A
2
y
m
(a) Nominal-the-best
m –
m +
y
0 
L(y) =
y2
y
A
2
(b) Smaller-the-better
A
L(y)
y
0 
L(y)
1
=
y2
y
A
2
(c) Larger-the-better
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 15.6
Plots of the loss function curve for three common situations.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
703
15
This is the customer’s perceived quality loss when the power supply delivers 110 instead 
of 115 volts.
E X A M P L E 1 5 .7
Suppose the manufacturer could recalibrate the power supply at the end of the production
line to bring it closer to the target voltage. Whether this should be done, from an eco-
nomic point of view, depends upon whether the cost of repair is less than the customer’s
perceived quality loss. In this case, let A = cost of rework = $3 per unit. How great should 
the deviation from target be before the manufacturer should rework the power supply? 
The loss to the customer is given in Example 15.6.
L y
y
y
m
L y
( )y
0.25(
)
y
m and
( )y
$3 at the decision point
2
= 0 25(y
−
m
Δ
=
3
0.25(
)
m
m
0. 5
3
0.25
12
3.46 volts
2
2
= 0 25(m
Δ
=
Δ
0.25
0 25
Δ =
=
=
12
Providing that the output voltage is within 3.5 volts of the target (115 v) the manufacturer 
should not spend $3 per unit to recalibrate the unit. This value is the manufacturer’s eco-
nomic tolerance limit. Beyond this point the customer’s loss increases beyond acceptable
limits.
The average quality loss of a sample of products, obtained by summing the indi-
vidual losses and dividing by their number, is given by:1
L y
k
y
m
( )y
) ]
2
2)
= k
−
 
(15.14)
where −L(y) is the average quality loss
 σ 2 is the population variance on y due to common causes in the process. It 
usually is approximated by the sample variance
–y is the mean of all
–
yi in the sample, or ˆμ
 (–y − m)
m 2 is the square of the deviation of –y from the target value
–
 m, due to
assignable variation
Equation (15.14) is an important relationship because it breaks the quality loss into the 
component of the loss that is due to product or process variability and the amount that 
is due to the mean of the sample being displaced from the target value.
E X A M P L E  1 5 . 8
A manufacturing process has a standard deviation of 0.00226 inches and a mean of 1.503 
inches (see Example 15.5). The specifi cation for the CTQ dimension of the part is 1.500 ±
0.009 inches. The part can no longer be assembled into a subsystem if y exceeds 1.5009 
and it is reworked at a cost of $16.
1. W. Y. Fowlkes and C. M. Creveling, Engineering Methods for Robust Product Design, Chap. 3,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1995.

704 
engineering design 
15
(a) What is the average quality loss for parts made from this process?
First we need to fi nd the quality loss coeffi cient, k, for the process.
k
A
L y
k
m
/
$16/(0.009)
197,531 $/in.
( )y
[ ˆ
) ]
197,531[(0.00226)
( .503 1.500) ]
197,531[5.108 10
9 10 ]
$2.787
2
2
$16/(0 009)
2
2
2
ˆ
)
2
2
(1 503 1 500)
6
9 1
6
6
9 10
σ
μ
[
(
=
Δ
A/
=
=
$16/(0 009)
= k
=
m) ]
−
(1.503
(1 503
=
×
197,531[5.108
+9
=
−6
9 10
Note that the quality loss due to the shift of the mean is about twice that due to
process variability.
(b)  If the process mean is centered with the target mean for the part, what is the quality
loss factor?
Now (  ˆμ  
 − m)
m = (1.500 −1.500) = 0 and the quality loss factor is due entirely due to 
variation of the process. –L(y)y = 197,531(5.108 × 10−6) = $1.175
As we will see in Sec. 15.7, the usual approach using the Taguchi method is to
fi rst search for choices of the design parameters that minimize the product’s suscep-
tibility to variation, and then having found the best combination, adjust the process
conditions to bring the product mean and the process mean into coincidence.
15.6.2 Noise Factors
The input parameters that affect the quality of the product or process may be clas-
sifi ed as design parameters and disturbance factors. The former are parameters that 
can be specifi ed freely by the designer. It is the designer’s responsibility to select the
optimum levels of the design parameters. Disturbance factors are the parameters that 
are either inherently uncontrollable or impractical to control.
Taguchi uses the term noise factors to refer to those parameters that are either too 
diffi cult or too expensive to control when a product is in service or during manufac-
ture of its components. The noise factors can be classifi ed into four categories:
●Variational noise is the unit-to-unit variation that nominally identical products will 
exhibit due to the differences in their components or their assembly.
●Inner noise is the long-term change in product characteristics over time due to dete-
rioration and wear.
●Design noise is the variability introduced into the product due to the design pro-
cess. This consists mostly of the tolerance variability that practical design limita-
tions impose on the design.
●External noise, also called outer noise, represents the disturbance factors that pro-
duce variations in the environment in which the product operates. Examples of ex-
ternal noise factors are temperature, humidity, dust, vibration, and the skill of the 
operator of the product.
The Taguchi method is unusual among methods of experimental investigation in that 
it places heavy emphasis on including noise factors in every experimental design.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
705
15
Taguchi was the fi rst to articulate the importance of considering external noise di-
rectly in design decisions.
15.6.3 Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Whenever a series of experiments is to be carried out, it is necessary to decide what 
response or output of the experiment will be measured. Often the nature of the experi-
ment provides a natural response. For example, in the control chart in Fig. 15.1, which 
evaluated the effectiveness of a heat-treating process for hardening steel bearings, a 
natural response was the Rockwell hardness measurement. The Taguchi method uses 
a special response variable called the signal-to-noise ratio, S/N. The use of this re-
N
sponse is somewhat controversial, but its use is justifi ed on the basis that it encom-
passes both the mean (signal) and the variation (noise) in one parameter, just as the 
quality loss function does.1
Following are three forms of the S/N ratio corresponding to the three forms of the
N
loss function curves shown in Fig. 15.6.
For the nominal-is-best type of problem,
∑
∑
μ
σ
μ
∑
μ
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
∑
−
=
S N
n
n
y
/
1
=
N
0 log
l
1
1
(
)
μ
−
y
n
i
i
n
2⎞
l 1
=
2
∑(
)
μ
1
 
(15.15)
where
and n is the number of external noise observation combinations used for each design
parameter matrix (control factors) combination. For example, if four tests are made to 
allow for noise for each combination of the control parameters, then n = 4.
For the smaller-the-better type of problem,
S N
n
y
/
1
N
0 log l
i
2
∑
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠ 
(15.16)
For the larger-the-better type of problem, the quality performance characteristic 
is continuous and nonnegative. We would like y to be as large as possible. To fi nd the
S/S N
/ , we turn this into a smaller-the-better problem by using the reciprocal of the per-
N
formance characteristic.
∑
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
S N
n
y
/
1
= −
N
0 log l
l
∑
i
2
(15.17)
1. Dr. Taguchi was an electrical engineer with the national telephone system of Japan, so the concept of 
signal-to-noise ratio, the ratio of signal strength to unwanted interference in a communications circuit, 
was very familiar to him.

706 
engineering design 
15
15.7
ROBUST DESIGN
Robust design is the systematic approach to fi nding optimum values of design factors
that lead to economical designs with low variability. The Taguchi method achieves
this goal by fi rst performing parameter design, and then, if the outcomes still are not 
optimum, by performing tolerance design.
Parameter design 1 is the process of identifying the settings of the design parame-
ters or process variables that reduce the sensitivity of the design to sources of variation. 
This is done in a two-step process. First, control factors are identifi ed. These are de-
sign parameters that primarily affect the S/N ratio but not the mean. Using statistically 
planned experiments, we fi nd the level of the control factors that minimize the vari-
ability of the response. Second, once the variance has been reduced, the mean response
can be adjusted by using a suitable design parameter, known as the signal factor.r
15.7.1 Parameter Design
Parameter design makes heavy use of planned experiments. The approach involves 
statistically designed experiments that are based on fractional factorial designs.2 With
factorial designs only a small fraction of the total number of experiments must be per-
formed when compared with the conventional approach of varying one parameter at a
time in an exhaustive testing program. The meaning of a fractional factorial design is
shown in Fig. 15.7. Suppose we identify three control factors P1, P2, and P3 that infl u-
ence the performance of the design. We want to determine their infl uence on the design
variable. The response is measured at two levels of the design parameters, one low 
(1) and one high (2). In the conventional approach of varying one factor at a time, this
would require 23 = 8 tests as illustrated in Fig. 15.7a. However, if we use a fractional
factorial Design of Experiment (DoE), essentially the same information is obtained
with half as many tests, as illustrated in Fig. 15.7b. All common fractional factorial 
designs are orthogonal arrays. These arrays have the balancing property that every set-
ting of a design parameter occurs with every setting of all other design parameters the
same number of times. They keep this balancing property while minimizing the num-
ber of test runs. Taguchi presented the orthogonal arrays in an easy-to-use form that 
uses only parts of the fractional factorial test plan. The trade-off is that the number of 
tests is minimized, but detailed information about interactions is lost.
Figure 15.8 shows two commonly used orthogonal arrays. The columns represent 
the control factors, A, B, C, and D, and the rows represent the setting of the param-
eters for each experimental run. The L4 array deals with three control factors at two
levels, while the L9 array considers four factors each at three levels. Note that the L9
array reduces the full experiment of 34 = 81 runs to only 9 experimental runs. This 
1. The terminology is a bit tenuous. The process called parameter design is fi rmly established in the Ta-
guchi method for robust design. This work is generally conducted in the parametric design stage of the
embodiment phase of the design process.
2. W. Navidi, op. cit., pp. 735–38.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
707
15
reduction is accomplished by confounding the interaction effects (AB, etc.) with the 
main effects (A, B, etc.). Note also the balance between the levels of the control fac-
tors. Each level for each control factor appears in the same number of runs. For ex-
ample, level 1 of B appears in runs 1 , 4, and 7; level 2 occurs in runs 2, 5, and 8; while 
level 3 occurs in runs 3, 6, and 9. This balance between control factor levels allows
averages to be computed that isolate the effect of each factor.
The choice of which orthogonal array to use depends on the number of control 
factors and noise factors.1 The decision of whether to use an array with factors at two 
or three levels depends on whether you are seeking more resolution in the results, 
P2
P2
P1
(a)
(b)
Test conduct
T
ed
Test omit
T
te
t d
P1
P3
P3
FIGURE 15.7
Designed experiment plan. Three factors P tested at two levels. (a) All test combinations
considered. (b) Fractional factorial design.
1. G. Taguchi, System of Experimental Design: Engineering Methods to Optimize Quality and Minimize
Cost, 2 vols., Quality Resources, White Plains, NY, 1987; M. S. Phadke, Quality Engineering Using Ro-
bust Design, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1989; W. Y. Fowlkes and C. M. Creveling, op. cit., 
Appendix C.
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
2
3
1
3
1
2
1
2
3
3
1
2
2
3
1
1
1
2
2
1
L4 Array
L9 Array
Run No.
Run
No.
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
FIGURE 15.8
Orthogonal arrays; left, the L4 array and right, the L9 array.

708 
engineering design 
15
especially if you feel the responses will be nonlinear. Of course, the number of control 
and noise factors determines the resources needed for the investigation.
Suppose y1, y2 . . . y9 are the results of the response measured in each of the nine 
runs. Let –yB1 be the response averaged over those runs where B is at level 1 in the L9 
array;  –yB2 averaged over those runs where B is at level 2, and so on. Then we may
write:
y
y
y
y
y
y
(
)
y
y /3
(
)
y
y /3
(
)
y
y /3
B
B
B
1
1y
4
7y
2
2y
5
8y
3
3y
6
9y
(y
(y
(y
 
(15.18)
Similar equations would be developed for –yAi
y , –yCi, and  –yDi.
The Taguchi design of experiments usually consists of two parts. The fi rst part 
is a design parameter matrix from which the effects of the control parameters are 
determined through the use of a suitable orthogonal array. The second part is the
noise matrix, a smaller orthogonal array consisting of noise parameters. Often the
fi rst matrix is called the inner array and the noise matrix is termed the outer array.
It is common to use an L9 array with nine runs for the inner array and an L4 array
with four runs for the outer array. Thus, for run 1 in the L9 array [all factors at the 
low (1) level] there are four trials, one for each combination of factors in the noise
matrix, the L4 array. For run 2 there are another four trials, and so on, so that a total
of 9 × 4 = 36  test conditions will be evaluated. The responses are evaluated for each 
of the four trials in the fi rst run and statistics like the mean and standard deviation 
are determined. This evaluation is performed for each of the nine runs for the design
parameter matrix.
The creation of a robust design using the Taguchi Method proceeds in six steps:
1. Defi ne the problem, including the selection of the parameter to be optimized and 
the objective function.
2. Select the design parameters—often called the control factors—and the noise fac-
tors. The control factors are parameters under the control of the designer that may
be calculated or determined experimentally. The noise factors are those param-
eters that contribute to the variation caused by the environment.
3. Design the experiment by selecting the appropriate fractional factorial array (see
Fig. 15.8), the number of levels to be used, and the range of the parameters that 
correspond to these levels.
4. Conduct the experiments according to the DoE. These may be actual physical ex-
periments or computer simulations.
5. Analyze the experimental results by calculating the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) as 
shown in Sec. 15.6.3. If the analysis does not give a clear optimum value, then 
repeat steps 1 through 4 with new values of the design levels, or perhaps, with a 
change in the control parameters.
6. When the method gives a set of optimal parameter values, perform a confi rming 
experiment to validate the results.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
709
15
E X A M P L E 1 5 . 9
In Example 4.1 in Sec. 4.6 we showed how to use the TQM tools to fi nd the root cause in a 
design problem concerned with a failed indicator light in a prototype of a new game box. 
In the example we found that the root cause of poor solder joints was the use of improper 
solder paste, which consists of solder balls and fl ux. We decide to improve the situation by
using the Taguchi method to establish the best conditions for making strong solder joints. 
We decide that four control parameters are important and that there are three main noise
parameters. Thus, it is appropriate to employ the L9 orthogonal array for the parameter 
matrix and the L4 array for the noise matrix as shown in Fig. 15.8.
Selection of Control Factors and Range of Factors for the L9 Orthogonal Array
Control Factor
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
A—solder ball size
30 micron
90 micron
150 micron
B—screen print diameter
0.10 mm
0.15 mm
0.20 mm
C—type fl ux
Low activity
Moderate activity
High activity
D—temperature
500°F
550°F
600°F
The control factors listed above fall into the category of variational noise factors. The 
objective of this study is to fi nd the process conditions where the part-to-part variation in 
these factors is minimized.
Selection of Noise Factors for the L4 Orthogonal Array
Noise Factors
Level 1
Level 2
A—shelf life of paste
New can
Opened 1 yr ago
B—surface cleaning method
Water rinse
Chlorocarbon solvent
C—cleaning application
Horizontal spray
Immersion
The fi rst noise factor is an inner noise factor, while the other two are outer noise factors.
We now conduct the experiments according to the experimental design. For example, 
run 2 in L9 is executed four times to include the noise matrix. In the fi rst trial the condi-
tions would be: 30 micron solder ball, 0.15 mm screen diameter, fl ux with moderate activ-
ity, 550°F temperature, a new can of paste, water rinse, and horizontal spray. The last three 
factors are from run 1 of the L4 (noise) array. In the fourth trial of run 2 the conditions for 
L9 would be identical, but the noise factors would change to using a can of paste opened
one year ago, a chlorocarbon cleaning agent, and horizontal spray for cleaning. For each of 
the four trials of run 2, we measure a response that represents the objective function that 
we are attempting to optimize. In this case, the response is the shear strength of the solder 
joint measured at room temperature. For the four trials, we average the strength measure-
ments and determine the standard deviation. For run 2, the results are:
y
n
(4.175
4.301
3.019
3.3134) / 4
3.657 ksi
and
1
0.584
2
2
∑
σ
(
)
y
y
i
2
2y
i
=
+
(4.175
+
+
3.019
=
=
−
=

710 
engineering design 
15
In robust design the appropriate response parameter is the signal-to-noise ratio. Because
we are trying to fi nd the conditions to maximize the shear strength of the solder joints, the
larger-is-best form of the S/N is selected.
S N
n
y
/
1
N
0 log 1
1
i
2
∑
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
For each of the runs in the L9 array we calculate a signal-to-noise ratio. For run 2,
10log 1
4
1
(4.175)
1
(4.301)
1
(3.019)
1
(3.134)
10.09
run2
2
2
(4 301)
2
2
(3 134)
(
)
S N
/N
+
+
2
+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
⎧
⎨
⎧
⎩
⎨
⎫
⎬
⎫
⎭
⎬=
The following table shows the results of similar calculations for all of the runs in the pa-
rameter matrix.1
Run No.
Control Matrix
S/N
A
B
C
D
1
1
1
1
1
9.89
2
1
2
2
2
10.09
3
1
3
3
3
11.34
4
2
1
2
3
9.04
5
2
2
3
1
9.08
6
2
3
1
2
9.01
7
3
1
3
2
8.07
8
3
2
1
3
9.42
9
3
3
2
1
8.89
Next, it is necessary to determine the average response for each of the four control pa-
rameters at each of its three levels. We have noted previously that this result is obtained
by averaging over those runs where A is at level 1, or where C is at level 3, etc. From the
preceding table, it is evident that the average S/N for factor B at level 2 is (10.09 + 9.08 +
9.42)/3 = 9.53. Performing this calculation for each of the four factors at the three levels 
creates the response table shown below.
1. Note that these numbers are to illustrate the design method. They should not be considered to be valid 
design data.
Response Table
Average S/N
Level
A
B
C
D
1
10.44
9.00
9.44
9.29
2
9.04
9.53
9.34
9.05
3
8.79
9.75
9.49
9.93

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
711
15
The average S/N ratios are plotted against test level for each of the four control pa-
rameters as shown in Fig. 15.9. These linear graphs show that factor A, solder ball size, 
and factor B, diameter of the holes in the print screen, have the greatest infl uence on the
shear strength of the solder joints. Also, factor C, activity of the fl ux, is not an important 
variable. As a result of these graphs, we conclude that the optimum settings for the control 
parameters are:
Control Parameter
Optimum Level
Parameter Setting
A—solder ball size
1
30 micron
B—screen print diameter
3
0.20 mm
C—type of fl ux
—
No strong trend 
Prefer moderate 
activity
D—temperature
3
600°F
Note that these experimental conditions are different from any of the nine runs in the 
control matrix. To verify this result we perform an additional set of four trials at the above 
test conditions. The validity of the optimization is confi rmed when we calculate a S/N of 
11.82, which is larger than any of the S/N values measured at the 36 test points.
Example 15.9 used a relatively small number of experiments to study a number 
of design variables (four control parameters and three noise factors) to provide a new 
set of control parameters that are closer to an optimum than an informed guess, and 
which are robust to the noise factors.
15.7.2 Tolerance Design
Often, as in Example 15.9, the parameter design results in a design optimized for ro-
bustness and with a low variability. However, there are situations when the variabil-
ity is too large and it becomes necessary to reduce tolerances to decrease variability. 
Typically, analysis of variance (ANOVA) is used to determine the relative contribution
of each control parameter so as to identify those factors that should be considered for 
tolerance tightening, substituting an improved material, or some other means of im-
proving quality. Since these methods often incur additional cost, the Taguchi method 
of tolerance design provides careful methods for balancing increased quality (lower 
S/N
11
10
9
8
1
2
3
Level
Factor A
S/N
11
10
9
8
1
2
3
Level
Factor B
S/N
11
10
9
8
1
2
3
Level
Factor C
S/N
11
10
9
8
1
2
3
Level
Factor D
FIGURE 15.9
Linear graphs showing the S/N for the four control parameters.

712 
engineering design 
15
quality loss) with cost. This tolerance design methodology is beyond the scope of this 
text, but an excellent, readable source is available.1
Taguchi’s methods of quality engineering have generated great interest in the 
United States as many major manufacturing companies have embraced the approach. 
While the idea of loss function and robust design is new and important, many of the 
statistical techniques have been in existence for over 50 years. Statisticians point out 2 
that less complicated and more effi cient methods exist to do what the Taguchi meth-
ods accomplish. However, it is important to understand that before Taguchi system-
atized and extended these ideas into an engineering context, they were largely unused 
by much of industry. The growing acceptance of the Taguchi method comes from its 
applicability to a wide variety of industrial problems with a methodology that does not 
require a high level of mathematical skills to achieve useful results.
15.8
OPTIMIZATION METHODS
The example described in the previous section is a search for the best combination of 
design parameters using a statistically designed set of experiments when the desired 
outcome is clear. There is more than one solution to a design problem, and the fi rst 
solution is not necessarily the best. Thus, the need for optimization is inherent in the 
design process. A mathematical theory of optimization has become highly developed 
and is being applied to design where design functions can be expressed mathemati-
cally. The applicability of the mathematical methods usually depends on the exis-
tence of a continuously differentiable objective function. Where differentiable equa-
tions cannot be developed, numerical methods, aided by computer-based computation, 
are used to carry out optimization. These optimization methods require considerable 
depth of knowledge and mathematical skill to select the appropriate optimization 
technique and work it through to a solution.
Optimization has always been a goal of engineering design, but designers have 
not had the computational capability to perform true optimization in the mathematical 
sense until the last 10 years, when methods for fi nding near-optimal solutions were 
developed. These methods fall into the following broad categories.3
 
● Evolution: There is a close parallel between technological evolution and biological 
evolution. Most designs in the past have been optimized by an attempt to improve 
upon existing similar designs. Survival of the resulting variations depends on the 
natural selection of user acceptance.
 
● Intuition: The art of engineering is the ability to make good decisions without hav-
ing exact mathematical justifi cation. Intuition is knowing what to do without know-
ing exactly why one does it. The gift of intuition seems to be closely related to the 
1. C. M. Creveling, Tolerance Design: A Handbook for Developing Optimal Specifi cations, Addison-
Wesley Longman, Reading, MA, 1997.
2. R. N. Kackar, Jnl of Quality Tech., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 176–209, 1985.
3. J. N. Siddall, Trans. ASME, J. Mech. Design, vol. 101, pp. 674–81, 1979.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
713
15
unconscious mind. The history of technology is full of examples of engineers who 
used intuition to make major advances. Although the knowledge and tools available 
today are so much more powerful, there is no question that intuition continues to
play an important role in the development of good designs. This intuition is often in
the form of remembering what worked in the past.
●Trial-and-error modeling: This refers to the usual situation in engineering de-
sign where it is recognized that the fi rst feasible design is not necessarily the 
best. Therefore, the design model is exercised for a few iterations in the hope 
of fi nding an improved design. This works best when the designer has suffi cient 
experience to make an informed choice of initial design values. The parametric 
design of a spring in Sec. 8.6.2 is an example of this approach. However, this 
mode of operation is not true optimization. Some refer to this approach as sat-
isfi cing, as opposed to optimizing, to mean a technically acceptable job done 
rapidly and presumably economically. Such a design should not be called an 
optimal design.
●Numerical algorithm: This approach to optimization, in which mathematically 
based strategies are used to search for an optimum, has been enabled by the ready 
availability of fast, powerful digital computation. It is currently an area of active
engineering research.
By the term optimal design we mean the best of all feasible designs. Optimization 
is the process of maximizing a desired quantity or minimizing an undesired one. Op-
timization theory is the body of mathematics that deals with the properties of maxima 
and minima and how to fi nd maxima and minima numerically. In the typical design 
optimization situation, the designer has defi ned a general confi guration for which the 
numerical values of the independent variables have not been fi xed. An objective func-
tion1 that defi nes the overall value of the design in terms of the n design variables,
expressed as a vector x, is established.
f
f
x
x
(
,
x
, . . .
)
n
1
2x
,
 
(15.19)
Typical objective functions can be expressed in terms of cost, weight, reliability, and
material performance index or a combination of these. By convention, objective func-
tions are usually written to minimize their value. However, maximizing a function
f(f x( ) is the same as minimizing –
x
f– (f x( ).
x
Generally when we are selecting values for a design we do not have the freedom 
to select arbitrary points within the design space. Most likely the objective function
is subject to certain constraints that arise from physical laws and limitations or from 
compatibility conditions on the individual variables. Equality constraints specify re-
lations that must exist between the variables.
h
h
x
x
j
p
(
,
x
, . . .
)
0;
1
j
to
j
jh
( )
n
1
2x
,
h
x
x
(x
(15.20)
1. Also called the criterion function, the payoff function, or cost function.

714 
engineering design 
15
For example, if we were optimizing the volume of a rectangular storage tank, where
x1 = l1, x2 = l2, and x3 = l3, then the equality constraint would be volume V = l1, l2, l3.
The number of equality constraints must be no more than the number of design vari-
ables, p ≤n.
Inequality constraints, also called regional constraints, are imposed by specifi c 
details of the problem.
g
x
m
( )
x
(
,
x
, . . .
)
0;
1
i
to
i
ig
n
1
2x
,
= g
x
x
(
,
x
, . . .
ig
2x
(15.21)
There is no restriction on the number of inequality constraints.1 A type of inequal-
ity constraint that arises naturally in design situations is based on specifi cations.
Specifi cations defi ne points of interaction with other parts of the system. Often a 
specifi cation results from a decision to carry out a suboptimization of the system by
establishing a fi xed value for one of the design variables.
A common problem in design optimization is that there often is more than one
design characteristic that is of value to the user. One way to handle this case in for-
mulating the optimization problem is to choose one predominant characteristic as the
objective function and to reduce the other characteristics to the status of constraints.
Frequently they show up as rather “hard” or severely defi ned specifi cations. In reality,
such specifi cations are usually subject to negotiation (soft specifi cations) and should
be considered to be target values until the design progresses to such a point that it is
possible to determine the penalty that is being paid in trade-offs to achieve the speci-
fi cations. Siddal 2 has shown how this may be accomplished in design optimization
through the use of an interaction curve.
E X A M P L E 1 5 .10
The example helps to clarify the defi nitions just presented. We wish to design a cylindri-
cal tank to store a fi xed volume of liquid V. The tank will be constructed by forming and
V
welding thin steel plate. Therefore, the cost will depend directly on the area of plate that 
is used.
The design variables are the tank diameter D and its height h. Since the tank has a
cover, the surface area of the tank is given by
A
D
Dh
2(
/4)
2
π
π
/ ) +
D /4)
2
π D /4)
2
We choose the objective function f(f x) to be the cost of the material for constructing the tank.
x
f(f x( )x = Cm
C A = Cm
C (πD
π
2/2 + πDh
π
), where Cm
C is the cost per unit area of steel plate.
An equality constraint is introduced by the requirement that the tank must hold a speci-
fi ed volume:
V
D h/4
2
π
1. It is conventional to write Eq. (15.21) as ≤ 0. If the constraint is of the type ≥ 0, convert to this form by 
multiplying through by −1.
2. J. N. Siddall and W. K. Michael, Trans. ASME, J. Mech. Design, vol. 102, pp. 510–16, 1980.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
715
15
Inequality constraints are introduced by the requirement for the tank to fi t in a specifi ed 
location or to not have unusual dimensions.
D
D
D
h
h
h
min
max
≤
≤
D
≤h
min
h
ma
h
x
There are no universal optimization methods for engineering design. If the prob-
lem can be formulated by analytical mathematical expressions, then using the ap-
proach of calculus is the most direct path. However, most design problems are too 
complex to use this method, and a variety of optimization methods have been devel-
oped. Table 15.5 lists most of these methods. The task of the designer is to understand 
whether the problem is linear or nonlinear, unconstrained or constrained, and to select 
the method most applicable to the problem. Brief descriptions of various approaches 
to design optimization are given in the rest of this section. For more depth of under-
standing about optimization theory, consult the various references given in Table 15.5.
Linear programming is the most widely applied optimization technique when con-
straints are known, especially in business and manufacturing production situations.
However, most design problems in mechanical design are nonlinear; see Example 15.10.
TABLE 15.5
Listing of Numerical Methods Used in Optimization Problems
Type of Algorithm
Example
Reference (see footnotes)
Linear programming
Simplex method
1
Nonlinear programming
Davison-Fletcher-Powell
2
Geometric programming
3
Dynamic programming
4
Variational methods
Ritz 
5
Differential calculus
Newton-Raphson
6
Simultaneous mode design
Structual optimization
7
Analytical-graphical methods
Johnson’s MOD
8
Monotonicity analysis
9
Genetic algorithms
10
Simulated annealing
11
1. W. W. Garvin, Introduction to Linear Programming, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1960.
2. L. T. Biegler, Nonlinear Programming, Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 
Philadelphia, 2010.
3. C. S. Beightler and D. T. Philips: Applied Geometric Programming, John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, 1976.
4. S. E. Dreyfus and A. M. Law, The Art and Theory of Dynamic Programming, Academic Press, 
New York, 1977.
5. M. H. Denn, Optimization by Variational Methods, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1969.
6. F. B. Hildebrand, Introduction to Numerical Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1956.
7. L. A. Schmit (ed.), Structural Optimization Symposium, ASME, New York, 1974.
8. R. C. Johnson, Optimum Design of Mechanical Elements, 2d ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1980.
9. P. Y. Papalambros and D. J. Wilde, Principles of Optimal Design, 2d ed., Cambridge University 
Press, New York, 2000.
10. D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithm, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1989.
11. S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi, “Optimization by Simulated Annealing,” Science, 
vol. 220, pp. 671–79, 1983.

716 
engineering design 
15
x
A
B
C
D
E
F
f(x)
FIGURE 15.10
Different types of extrema 
in the objective function 
curve.
15.8.1 Optimization by Differential Calculus
We are all familiar with the use of the calculus to determine the maximum or mini-
mum values of a mathematical function. Figure 15.10 illustrates various types of ex-
trema that can occur. A characteristic property of an extremum is that the derivative
of the function is 0 at that point. f(f x( ) is momentarily stationary at the point. The famil-
x
iar condition for a stationary point is
df
dx
( )
x
0
=
 
(15.22)
If the curvature is negative, then the stationary point is a maximum. The point is a
minimum if the curvature is positive.
d f
dx
( )
x
0 indicates a local maximum
2
2
≤
 
(15.23)
d f
dx
( )
x
0 indicates a local minimum
2
2
≥
 
(15.24)
Both point B and point E are mathematical maxima. Point 
E
B, which is the smaller 
of the two maxima, is called a local maximum. Point E is the global maximum and
E
Point C is the global minimum. Point
C
D is a point of infl ection. At an infl ection point, 
the slope is zero and the curve is horizontal, but the second derivative is zero. When 
d 2f
2 (f x( )/
x dx
/
2 = 0, higher-order derivatives must be used to fi nd a derivative that becomes
nonzero. If the zero-valued derivative’s order is odd (e.g., 3rd or 5th derivative), the 
point is an infl ection point, but if the derivative’s order is even it is a local optimum. 
Point F is not a minimum point because at point F the objective function is not con-
F
tinuous; the point F is only a cusp in the objective function. Using the derivative of the 
F
function to infer maxima or minima only works with a continuous function.
We can apply this simple optimization technique to the tank problem described in
Example 15.10. The objective function, expressed in terms of the equality constraint 
V = πD
π
2h/4, is
f
C
D
C
Dh
C
D
C
D
VD
2
2
4
m
m
C
2
m
C
m
C
2
2
2
π
Cm
C
π
π
π
+
Cm
C π
=
+
m
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
−
 
(15.25)

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
717
15
df
dD
C
D
C V
D
( )
x
0
4
m
C
m
C
2
π
=
=
0
−
(15.26)
D
V
V
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
=
4
1 084
1 3
1 3
π
.
(15.27)
The value of diameter established by Eq. (15.27) results in minimum cost because 
the second derivative of Eq. (15.26) is positive. Note that while some problems yield
to analytical expressions in which the objective function is a single variable, most 
engineering problems involve objective functions with more than one design variable.
Lagrange Multiplier Method
The Lagrange multipliers provide a powerful method for fi nding optima in multi-
variable problems involving equality constraints. We have the original objective func-
tion f(f x( )x = f(f x( , y, z) subject to the equality constraints 
z
h1 = h1(x, y,
(
z) and 
z
h2 = h2(x, y,
(
z).
z
We establish a new objective function, the Lagrange expression (LE)
LE
f x y
y
h x y
)
,
x y z,
(
)
,y z,
(
)
,
x y z,
1 1
2
2h
λ
λ
h x
(
)
,
x y z,
1 1h
=
+
f
)
,
x y z,
(15.28)
where λ1 and λ2
λ  are the Lagrange multipliers. The following conditions must be satis-
fi ed at the optimum point.
LE
x
LE
y
LE
z
LE
LE
0
0
LE
0
0
LE
0
1
2
λ
λ
1
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
=
      (15.29)
E X A M P L E 1 5 .11
This example illustrates the determination of the Lagrange multipliers for use in optimi-
zation.1 A total of 300 linear feet of tubes must be installed in a heat exchanger in order to
provide the necessary heat-transfer surface area. The total dollar cost of the installation 
includes: (1) the cost of the tubes, $700; (2) the cost of the shell 25D2.5L; (3) the cost of 
the fl oor space occupied by the heat exchanger = 20DL. The spacing of the tubes is such 
that 20 tubes must fi t in a cross-sectional area of 1 ft2 inside the heat exchanger tube shell.
The purchase cost C is taken as the objective function. The optimization should de-
C
termine the diameter D and the length of the heat exchanger L to minimize the purchase 
L
cost. The objective function is the sum of three costs.
C
D
L
DL
D
00
25
20
2.5
(15.30)
The optimization of C is subject to the 
C
equality constraint based on total length and
t
cross-sectional area of the tube shell.
1. W. F. Stoecker, Design of Thermal Systems, 2d ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1980.

718 
engineering design 
15
Total ft3 of tubes × 20 tubes/ft2 = total length (ft).
D L
L
D
4
20
300
5
300
5
2
2
2
π
π
λ
D L
300
2
π
×
=
20
=
λ
300
−
The Lagrange equation is: LE
D
L
DL
L
D
700
25
20
300
5
2 5
2
λ
π
=
+
700
+
+
DL
20
−
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
LE
D
D
L
L
D
2.5(25)
20
2
60
0
1 5
3
λ π
∂
∂
=
+
D
L
2.5(25)
=
+2
3
λ
 
(15.31)
LE
L
D
D
25
20
0
2 5
λ
∂
∂
=
+
D
25
+
=
λ
 
(15.32)
LE
L
D
300
0
2
λ
π
5
∂
∂
=
−
L
=
(15.33)
L
D
D
D
D
D
D
From Eq. (15.33),
60 ; Fro
F m Eq. (15.32)
25
2
D
0
Substituting into Eq. (15.31) :
62.5
60
20
60
2
60
0
2
2 5
1.5
2
2
D
20
3
π
λ
π
π
D
π
(
)
D
25
2
D
0
2 5
=
; Fro
F m Eq (15 32)
25D
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠+
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠+2
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠=
D
D
12.5
20
(1.6
)
1.37ft
1 5
0.666
=
D
=
Substituting into the functional constraint between D and L gives 
L
L = 10.2 ft. Substituting
the optimum values for D and L into the equation for the objective function, Eq. (15.30),
gives the optimum cost as $1538.
This is an example of a closed form optimization for a single objective function with
two design variables, D and L, and a single equality constraint.
By their nature, design problems tend to have many variables, many constraints
limiting the acceptable values of some variables, and many objective functions to de-
scribe the desired outcomes of a design. A feasible design is any set of variables that 
simultaneously satisfi es all the design constraints and fulfi lls the minimum require-
ments for functionality. An engineering design problem is usually underconstrained,
meaning that there are not enough relevant constraints to set the value of each vari-
able. Instead, there are many feasible values for each constraint. That means there
are many feasible design solutions. As pointed out in the discussion of morphological
methods (see Sec. 6.6), the number of feasible solutions grows exponentially as the
number of variables with multiple possible values increases.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
719
15
15.8.2 Search Methods
When it becomes clear that there are many feasible solutions to a design problem, it 
is necessary to use some method of searching through the design space to fi nd the 
best one. Finding the globally optimal solution (the absolute best solution) to a design 
problem can be diffi cult. There is always the option of using brute calculation power 
to identify all design solutions and evaluate them. Unfortunately, design options reach 
into the thousands, and design performance evaluation can require multiple, compli-
cated objective functions. Together, these logistical factors make an exhaustive search 
of the problem space impossible. There are also design problems that do not have one 
single best solution. Instead they may have a number of sets of design variable values
that produce the same overall performance by combining different levels of the per-
formance of one embedded objective function. In this case, we seek a set of best solu-
tions. This set is called a Pareto Set.
We can identify several classes of search problems. A deterministic search is one 
in which there is little variability so all problem parameters are known. In a stochastic
search, there is a degree of randomness in the search process that can lead to different 
solutions. We can have a search involving only a single variable or the more compli-
cated and more realistic situation involving a search over multiple variables. We can
have a simultaneous search, in which the conditions for every experiment are speci-
fi ed and all the observations are completed before any judgment regarding the location
of the optima is made, or a sequential search, in which future experiments are based
on past outcomes. Many search problems involve constrained optimization, in which
certain combinations of variables are forbidden. Linear programming and dynamic
programming are techniques that deal well with situations of this nature.
Golden Section Search
The golden section search is an effi cient search method for a single variable with 
the advantage that it does not require an advance decision on the number of trials. The
search method is based on the fact that the ratio of two successive Fibonacci numbers
Fn
F −1/F
/
n
F = 0.618 for all values of n > 8. A Fibonacci series, named after a 13th century
mathematician, is given by Fn
F = Fn
F −2
−+ Fn
F −1 where F0
F = 1 and F1 = 1.
n
Fn
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
7
8
9
1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55
. . .
This same ratio was discovered by Euclid, who called it the golden mean. He defi ned
it as a length divided into two unequal segments such that the ratio of the length of the
whole to the larger segment is equal to the ratio of the length of the larger segment 
to the smaller segment. The ancient Greeks felt 0.618 was the most pleasing ratio of 
width to length of a rectangle, and they used it in the design of many of their buildings.
In using the golden section search, the fi rst two trials are located at 0.618L from
L
either end of the range of x that needs to be explored, Fig. 15.11. The goal is to fi nd 
x
the minimum value of the function or response. In the fi rst trial, x1 = 0.618L = 6.18 and
x2 = (1 −0.618)L = 3.82. If y2 > y1, the region to the left of x2 is eliminated since we are
searching for a minimum value of x and the assumption is that the function is unimodal.
x

720 
engineering design 
15
For the second trial, the search interval L2 is from x = 3.82 to 10, a distance of 
6.18 units. The values of the two points are x3 = 0.618(6.18) + 3.82 = 7.64 (from 0 to the 
right) and x4 = 10 − 6.18(0.618) = 10 − 3.82 = 6.18 from x = 0. Note that x4 = x1, so only one 
new data point is required. Once again, if y4 > y3, we can eliminate the region to the left 
of y4. The new search interval is 3.82 units wide. The process is continued, placing a search 
point at 0.618 times the search interval, from both ends of the interval, until we reach as 
close to the minimum as is desired. Note that the golden section search cannot deal with 
functions that have multiple extrema between their limits. If this is suspected to occur, then 
start the search at one end of the domain and proceed in equal intervals across the limits.
Multivariable Search Methods
When the objective function depends on two or more variables, the geometric 
representation is a response surface (Fig. 15.12a). It usually is convenient to work with 
Trial 1
Trial 2
x2 = 3.82
y = f(x)
x1 = 6.18
6.18
0
2
4
6
8
10
x
L1
x3 = 7.64
x4 = 6.18
0
2
4
6
8
10
x
L2
FIGURE 15.11
Example of use of the golden section search.
y = 100
x2
y
x1
y = 90
0
x2
y = 100
y = 90
x1
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 15.12
(a) Contour lines on surface created by x1x2; (b) contour lines projected onto x1x2 plane.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
721
15
3
4
5
2
1
6
9
8
7
x1
x2
FIGURE 15.13
Procedure for a lattice search.
contour lines produced by the intersection of planes of constant y with the response 
surface and projected on the x1x2 plane (Fig. 15.12b).
Lattice Search
In the lattice search, which is an analog to the single-variable search, a two-
dimensional grid lattice is superimposed over the projections of the contours 
(Fig. 15.13). In the absence of special knowledge about the location of the maximum, 
the starting point is selected near the center of the region, at point 1. The objective 
function is evaluated for points 1 through 9 surrounding point 1. If point 5 turns out 
to be the largest value, it becomes the central point for the next search. The procedure 
continues until the location reached is one at which the central point is greater than 
any of the other eight points. Frequently, a coarse grid is used initially and a fi ner grid 
is used after the maximum is approached.
Univariate Search
The univariate search is a one-variable-at-a-time method. All of the variables 
are kept constant except one, and it is varied to obtain an optimum in the objective 
function. That optimal value is then substituted into the function, and the function is 
 optimized with respect to another variable. The objective function is optimized with 
respect to each variable in sequence, and an optimal value of a variable is substituted 
into the function for the optimization of the succeeding variables. This requires inde-
pendence between the variables.
Figure 15.14a shows the univariate search procedure. Starting at point 0 we move 
along x2 = constant to a maximum at point 1 by using a single-variable search tech-
nique. Then we move along x1 = constant to a maximum at point 2 and along x2 = con-
stant to a maximum at 3. We repeat the procedure until two successive moves are less 
than some specifi ed value. If the response surface contains a ridge, as in Fig. 15.14b, 
then the univariate search can fail to fi nd an optimum. If the initial value is at point 1, 

722 
engineering design 
15
it will reach a maximum at x1 = constant at the ridge, and that will also be a maximum
for x2 = constant. A false maximum is obtained.
An alternating single-variable search, as shown in Fig. 15.14, is sometimes used
with the aid of a spreadsheet on a computer 1 when there are several design variables.
The search procedure is to cycle through the design variables one at a time, selecting
one variable for adjustment while holding the other variables constant. The objective
function for variable 1 is fi rst optimized using the golden section search, then variable
2, then 3, and so on. The cycle of variable searches will need to be repeated several
times. The optimum is detected when running through a cycle of changes in design
variables produces very little improvement in the value of the objective function.
Gradient Methods
A common local search method is to follow the steepest ascent (hill climbing)
up the response surface. Imagine that we are walking at night up a hill. In the dim
moonlight we can see far enough ahead to follow the local steepest slope. Thus, we
would tend to climb in a direction normal to the contour lines in short segments and
adjust the direction of climb as the terrain comes progressively into view. The gradi-
ent method does this with mathematics. We change the direction of the search to the
direction of maximum slope, but we must do this in fi nite straight segments.
The gradient method starts with a best guess location and determines the direc-
tion with the gradient vector which by defi nition is normal to the local contour line.
The gradient vector is expressed in terms of partial derivatives of the function describ-
ing the surface and the unit vectors i, j, and k.
i
j
k
f
y z
f
x
f
y
f
z
,
)z
∇
=
f x
f
y
,x
, )z
∂
∂
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
 
(15.34)
0
1
2
3
(a)
x1
x2
1
Ridge
(b)
x1
x2
FIGURE 15.14
Univariate search procedures.
1. J. R. Dixon and C. Poli, Engineering Design and Design for Manufacture, pp. 18-13 to 18-14, 
Fieldstone Publishers, Conway, MA, 1995.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
723
15
If the objective function is in analytical form, the partial derivatives can be ob-
tained by calculus. If not, a numerical procedure such as the fi nite-difference method 
must be used. An important consideration is the choice of the step length. Too short a 
step makes the process very slow, while too large a step makes a zigzag path because 
it overshoots the changes in the direction of the gradient vector. The relative simplic-
ity of hill climbing makes it a frequent choice when the time available to search is 
limited. The chief disadvantage is that steepest ascent will only fi nd a local maxi-
mum. The method is also dependent upon the starting point of the search. Gradient 
descent uses the same approach to fi nd a local minimum by using steps proportional 
to the negative of the gradient vector.
15.8.3 Nonlinear Optimization Methods
The methods discussed previously are not practical optimization techniques for en-
gineering design problems with a large number of design variables and constraints. 
Numerical methods are needed to fi nd solutions. The solution process starts with the 
best estimate of the optimum design. The objective function and the constraint func-
tions, as well as their derivatives, are evaluated at that point. Then the design is moved 
to a new point, and to another, and so on, until optimality conditions or some other 
stopping criteria are met.
Mutivariable Optimization
Multivariable optimization of nonlinear problems has been a fi eld of great activ-
ity, and many computer-based methods are available. Space permits mention of only a 
few of the more useful methods. Because an in-depth understanding requires consid-
erable mathematics for which we do not have space, only a brief word description can 
be given. The interested student is referred to the text by Arora.1
Methods for unconstrained multivariable optimization are discussed fi rst. New-
ton’s method is an indirect technique that employs a second-order approximation of 
the function. This method has very good convergence properties, but it can be an inef-
fi cient method because it requires the calculation of n(n + 1)/2 second-order deriva-
tives, where n is the number of design variables. Therefore, methods that require the 
computation of only fi rst derivatives and use information from previous iterations to 
speed up convergence have been developed. The DFP (Davidon, Fletcher, and Powell) 
method is one of the most powerful methods.2
Optimization of nonlinear problems with constraints is a more diffi cult area. A 
common approach is to successively linearize the constraints and objective function 
of a nonlinear problem and solve using the technique of linear programming. The 
name of the method is sequential linear programming (SLP). A limitation of SLP is a 
lack of robustness. A robust computer algorithm is one that will converge to the same 
solution regardless of the starting point. The challenge of achieving robustness is 
1. J. S. Arora, Introduction to Optimum Design, 2d ed., Elsevier Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 2004.
2. R. Fletcher and M. J. D. Powell, Computer J., vol.6, pp.163–80, 1963; Arora, op. cit., pp. 324–327.

724 
engineering design 
15
improved by using quadratic programming (QP) in determining the step size.1 There 
is general agreement that the class of sequential quadratic programming (SQP) al-
gorithms is the best overall choice for nonlinear multivariable optimization as they 
provide balance between effi ciency (minimal CPU time) and robustness.
Many computer programs for doing multivariable optimization have been devel-
oped. A search of wikipedia under the heading of constrained nonlinear optimization 
found 80 entries.
 
● Because FEA is often used to search over a design space, many fi nite element soft-
ware packages now come with optimization software. Vanderplaats Research and 
Development Inc. (www.vrand.com) was an early pioneer in the optimization of 
structures and provides optimization software linked with fi nite element analysis.
 
● iSIGHT, sold by Engineous Software (www.engenious.com), is popular in industry 
because of its broad capabilities and easy-to-use GUI interface.
Both Excel and MATLAB offer optimization tools. The Microsoft Excel Solver uses a 
generalized reduced gradient algorithm to fi nd the maximum or minimum in nonlin-
ear multivariable optimization problems.2 For further information, go to www.offi ce.
microsoft.com and search for Excel Solver.
E X A M P L E 1 5 .1 2 Excel Solver
The Excel Solver probably is the most-used optimization software program. In Section 8.6.2 
we showed the iterative calculations used in a “cut and try” procedure to arrive at optimal 
dimensions for a helical compression spring. The time to carry out the needed design deci-
sions and “run the numbers” with an electronic calculator was about 45 minutes. This ex-
ample shows how a somewhat better result could be obtained in less than 15 minutes with 
the Solver function in Microsoft Excel.
In Sec. 8.6.2 the fi rst design task was to determine the diameter of the spring wire, d, 
and the outside diameter of the coil spring, D, to withstand an axial force of 820 lb with-
out yielding. The chief constraint was that the inside diameter, ID, of the spring must be at 
least 2.20 in. to permit the tie rod to pass easily through the spring.
Figure 15.15 on the left shows the Excel worksheet after completion of the optimiza-
tion process. At the top is the equation expressing d in terms of D. This is in cell C6. An 
initial value of D = 3.00 was chosen for cell C5.
Turning now to the Solver dialog box, an absolute reference for cell C6 ($C$6) is 
placed in the Set Target Cell fi eld. The Solver is set to minimize the value of the wire 
diameter, d, as the coil diameter, D, is changed in $C$5. All of this is subject to the con-
straint $C$9 > 2.20. 
The optimum values of d and D are given in the spreadsheet. As discussed in 
Sec. 8.6.2, a fi gure of merit (f.o.m.) for this design is Dd 2Nt, where a smaller f.o.m. is better. 
The optimized design gives a f.o.m. of 9.38, which is better than the best value of 11.25 in 
iteration 3, but not as good as the 8.5 found when using the stronger and more expensive 
Q&T wire (see Iteration 10, Table 8.5).
MATLAB has a number of optimization capabilities in its Optimization Toolbox, 
Table 15.6. For more information on these functions, enter MATLAB and at the com-
mand prompt and type help followed by the name of the function. 
1. J. S. Arora, op. cit., Chaps. 8 and 10.
2. J. S. Arora, op. cit., pp. 369–73.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
725
15
For examples in the use of these functions, see Arora1 and Magrab.2
Multiobjective Optimization
Multiobjective optimization refers to the solution of problems with more than 
one objective function. The design objectives in these problems are inherently in con-
fl ict. Consider a shaft loaded in torsion with the two design objectives of maximizing 
strength and minimizing weight (cost). As the diameter of the shaft is reduced to de-
crease weight, the stress is increased, and vice versa. This is the classical problem of 
design trade-off. During the optimization process the designer reaches a point where 
1. J. S. Arora, op. cit., Chap. 12.
2. E. B. Magrab, et al. An Engineer’s Guide to MATLAB, 2d ed., Chap. 13, S. Azarm, “Optimization,” 
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2005.
FIGURE 15.15
Excel worksheet on left, and Solver dialog box on right.
Class of Problem
MATLAB 
Function
Comments
Linear programming
linprog 
Nonlinear optimization
 Single-objective, unconstrained
  Multiple variables
fminuc
fminsearch
Can be set for steepest descent
Uses Nelder-Mead Simplexsearch which 
does not require gradients
 Single-objective, constrained
  Single variable
fminbnd
  Multiple variables
fmincon
Uses gradient based on fi nite diff.
 Multiobjectives
fminimax
TABLE 15.6
Optimization Functions Provided by MATLAB

726 
engineering design 
15
it is no longer possible to improve both design objectives. Such a point is referred to 
as a Pareto point, and the locus of these points defi nes the Pareto frontier, Fig. 15.16b.
All points on a Pareto frontier have the same objective function value even though 
the variable values are different. To solve such problems, the optimization method 
fi nds the set of Pareto solutions. The actual decision maker can be queried for his or 
her preferences, and the designer can rank order the preferences.
15.8.4 Other Optimization Methods
Monotonicity Analysis
Monotonicity analysis is an optimization technique that may be applied to de-
sign problems with monotonic properties, that is, where the change in objective 
function and constraints steadily increases (or decreases) over the design space. 
This is a situation that is very common in design problems. Engineering designs 
tend to be strongly defi ned by physical constraints. When these specifi cations and 
restrictions are monotonic in the design variables, then monotonicity analysis can 
often show the designer which constraints are active at the optimum. An active con-
straint refers to a design requirement that has a direct impact on the location of the 
optimum. This information can be used to identify the improvements that could be 
achieved if the feasible domain were modifi ed, which would point out directions for 
technological improvement. 
The ideas of monotonicity analysis were fi rst presented by Wilde.1 Subsequent 
work by Wilde and Papalambros has applied the method to many engineering prob-
lems2 and to the development of a computer-based method of solution.3
Feasible domain
Feasible
domain
Pareto frontier
(a)
(b)
x2
x1,x2
f1,f2
x1
f1
f2
FIGURE 15.16
Feasible domains in (a) the design variable space and (b) the objective function space with its 
Pareto frontier.
1. D. J. Wilde, Trans. ASME, Jnl. of Engr for Industry, vol. 94, pp. 1390–94, 1975.
2. P. Papalambros and D. J. Wilde, Principles of Optimal Design, 2d ed., Cambridge University Press, 
New York, 2000.
3. S. Azarm and P. Papalambros, Trans. ASME, Jnl. of Mechanisms, Transmissions, and Automation in 
Design, vol. 106, pp. 82–89, 1984.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
727
15
Dynamic Programming
Dynamic programming is a mathematical technique that is well suited for the 
optimization of staged processes. The word dynamic in the name of this technique 
has no relationship to the usual use of the word to denote changes with respect to 
time. Dynamic programming is related to the calculus of variations and is not related 
to linear and nonlinear programming methods. The method is well suited for alloca-
tion problems, as when x units of a resource must be distributed among N activities in 
integer amounts. It has been broadly applied within chemical engineering to problems 
like the optimal design of chemical reactors. Dynamic programming converts a large, 
complicated optimization problem into a series of interconnected smaller problems, 
each containing only a few variables. This results in a series of partial optimizations 
that require a reduced effort to fi nd the optimum. Dynamic programming was devel-
oped by Richard Bellmann1 in the 1950s. It is a well-developed optimization method.2
Genetic Algorithms
Genetic algorithms (GA) are a form of computational design that uses simulated 
biological evolution as its search strategy. Genetic algorithms are stochastic in that there 
are probabilistic parameters that govern the GA’s operation. GAs are also iterative be-
cause they involve many cycles of generating designs and checking for the best options.
Genetic algorithms mimic biological evolution. The basic idea of genetic algo-
rithms is to transform the problem into one solved by evolution as defi ned in the natu-
ral sciences. Under evolution by natural selection, the fi ttest (i.e., best suited to thrive 
in the environment) members of a population survive and produce offspring. It’s likely 
that the offspring inherit some of the characteristics that led to their parents’ survival. 
Over time, the average fi tness of a population increases as natural selection acts. The 
principles of genetics allow random mutation in a small percentage of the population. 
This is how some new characteristics arise over time.
The most unique contribution of genetic algorithms is the representation of each 
design as a string of binary computer code. The creation of new designs for a next 
generation is complex because several rules are used to mimic the action of genetic 
inheritance. Using binary computer code to represent designs enables computational 
shortcuts in manipulating designs to offset the complexity and allow iterations of tens 
of generations of populations of 100 designs each. Genetic algorithms are not widely 
used in mechanical design optimization, but their potential is so great that one expects 
them to increase in popularity. To fi nd more information on all aspects of genetic 
algorithms (e.g., research papers, MATLAB codes), visit the site for the International 
Society for Genetic and Evolutionary Computation at www.isgec.org.
For a review of current design optimization methodologies and references, see 
A. Van der Velden, P. Koch, and S. Tiwari, Design Optimization Methodologies, ASM 
Handbook, Vol. 22B, pp. 614–624, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 2010.
1. R. E. Bellman, Dynamic Programming, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1957.
2. G. L. Nernhauser, Introduction to Dynamic Programming, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1960; E. V. 
Denardo, Dynamic Programming Models and Applications, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1982.

728 
engineering design 
15
Evaluation Considerations in Optimization
We have presented optimization chiefl y as a collection of computer-based math-
ematical techniques. However, of more importance than knowing how to manipu-
late the optimization tools is knowing where to use them in the design process. In 
many designs a single design criterion drives the optimization. In consumer prod-
ucts it usually is cost, in aircraft it is weight, and in implantable medical devices it 
is power consumption. The strategy is to optimize these “bottleneck factors” fi rst. 
Once the primary requirement has been met as well as possible, there may be time 
to improve other areas of the design, but if the fi rst is not achieved, the design will 
fail. In some areas of design there may be no rigid specifi cations. An engineer who 
designs a talking, walking teddy bear can make almost any trade-off he or she 
wants between cost, power consumption, realism, and reliability. The designers and 
market experts will work together to decide the best combination of characteristics 
for the product, but in the end the four-year-old consumers will decide whether it is 
an optimal design.
15.9
DESIGN OPTIMIZATION
It has been a natural development to combine computer-aided-engineering (CAE) 
analysis and simulation tools with computer-based optimization algorithms.1 Link-
ing optimization with analysis tools creates CAE design tools by replacing traditional 
trial-and-error approaches with a systematic design-search approach. This extends the 
designer’s capability from being able with FEA to quantify the performance of a par-
ticular design to adding information about how to modify the design to better achieve 
critical performance criteria.
Figure 15.17 shows a general framework for CAE-based optimal design. Start-
ing with an initial design (size and shape parameters), a numerical analysis simula-
tion, such as FEA, is performed on the design to compute the performance measures, 
such as von Mises stress, and the sensitivity of the performance measures with re-
spect to the design parameters. Then an optimization algorithm computes new design 
 parameters, and the process is continued until an optimum design is achieved. Often 
this is not a mathematical optimum but a set of design variables for which the objec-
tive function shows appreciable improvement.
Most FEA packages offer optimization routines that integrate design simula-
tion, optimization, and design-sensitivity analysis into a comprehensive design envi-
ronment. The user inputs preliminary design data and specifi es acceptable variables 
and required constraints. The optimization algorithm generates successive models, in  
conjunction with remeshing routines, until it ultimately converges on an optimized 
design. For example, structural optimization of a turbine wheel design resulted in a  
12 percent reduction in mass and a 35 percent reduction in stress.
1. D. E. Smith, “Design Optimization,” ASM Handbook, vol. 20, pp. 209–18, ASM International, Mate-
rials Park, OH, 1997.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
729
15
15.10 
SUMMARY
This chapter presents many of the modern views about design. The overarching concept 
is that quality is built into products during design. Manufacturing cannot compensate 
for errors in design. Second, we have emphasized that variability during manufacture 
and in service is the the challenge to a quality design. We aim for a robust design that is 
less sensitive to process variations and to extreme conditions in service.
Quality must be viewed as a total system from the perspective called total quality 
management (TQM). TQM places the customer at the center and solves problems with 
a data-driven approach using simple but powerful tools (see Sec. 4.6). It emphasizes 
continuous improvement where large changes are achieved by many small improve-
ments made over time.
Statistics plays a signifi cant role in achieving quality and robustness. A control 
chart shows whether the variability of a process is within reasonable bounds. The pro-
cess capability index Cp, tells whether the selected tolerance range is easily achievable 
by a particular manufacturing process.
New ways of looking at quality have been introduced by Taguchi. The loss func-
tion provides a better way of looking at quality than the traditional upper and lower 
Initial design
CAE Design
Numerical
analysis
Performance
measures
Optimization
Convergence?
Optimal design
No
Yes
Sensitivity
analysis
FIGURE 15.17
General framework for CAE-based design optimization. (From D. E. Smith, ASM Handbook, 
Vol. 20, p. 211. Used with permission.)

730 
engineering design 
15
tolerance limits around a mean value. The signal-to-noise parameter (S/N) provides a 
powerful metric to search for design situations that minimize variability. Orthogonal 
experimental designs provide a useful and widely adopted methodology to fi nd the 
design or process conditions that are most robust.
The search for optimum conditions has been a design goal for many years. A wide 
selection of optimization methods is described in Sec. 15.8. 
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Design optimization
Equality constraint
Genetic algorithm
Golden section search
Inequality constraint
ISO 9000
Lattice search
Loss function
Multiobjective optimization
Noise factors
Objective function
Process capability index
Quality
Quality assurance
Quality control
Range
Robust design
Signal-to-noise ratio
Six Sigma quality
Statistical process control
Steepest descent search
Taguchi method
Univariate search
Upper control limit
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Quality
Besterfi eld, D. H.: Total Quality Management, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 
2003.
Gevirtz, C. D.: Developing New Products with TQM, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1994.
Kolarik, W. J.: Creating Quality, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995.
Summers, D. C. S.: Quality, 5th ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2009.
Robust Design
Ealey, L. A.: Quality by Design, 2nd ed., ASI Press, Dearborn, MI, 1984.
Fowlkes, W. Y., and C. M. Creveling: Engineering Methods for Robust Product Design, Addi-
son-Wesley, Reading MA, 1995.
Roy, K. R.: A Primer on the Taguchi Method, 2nd ed., Society of Manufacturing Engineers, 
Dearborn, MI, 2010.
Wu, Y., and A. Wu: Taguchi Methods for Robust Design, ASME Press, New York, 2000.
Optimization
Arora, J. S.: Introduction to Optimum Design, 3rd ed., Elsevier Academic Press, San Diego, 
CA, 2011.
Papalambros, P. Y., and D. J. Wilde: Principles of Optimal Design, 2nd ed., Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, New York, 2000.
Park, G. J.: Analytic Methods for Design Practice, Spriner-Verlag, London, 2007.
Ravindran, A., Ragsdell, K. M., and G. V. Reklaitis: Engineering Optimization, 2nd ed., John 
Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2006.

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
731
15
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
 15.1 Discuss as a class how Deming’s 14 points could be applied to higher education.
 15.2  Divide into teams and use the TQM problem-solving process introduced in Sec. 4.6 to 
decide how to improve the quality in several of your courses (one course per team).
 15.3  Discuss the concept of quality circles. What would be involved in implementing a qual-
ity circle program in industry? How could the concept be applied to the classroom?
 15.4  Use the concept of statistical hypothesis testing to identify and classify the errors that 
can occur in quality-control inspection.
 15.5  Dig deeper into the subject of control charts and fi nd some rules for identifying out-of-
control processes.
 15.6  For the control chart shown in Fig. 15.1, determine Cp. Note: Hardness is only recorded 
to the nearest 0.5 RC.
 15.7  A product has specifi cation limits of 120 ± 10 MN and a target value of 120 MN. The 
standard deviation of the products coming off the process line is 3 MN. The mean 
value of strength is initially 118 MN, but it shifts to 122 MN and then 125 MN without 
any change in variability. Determine Cp and Cpk.
 15.8  The equations in Sec. 15.5 for process capability index are for parameters that have 
two-sided tolerances about the target value. What if your design parameter was frac-
ture toughness, KIc. What would the equation for Cp be when you are only concerned 
with a one-sided tolerance below the target value?
 15.9  A grinding machine is grinding the root of gas turbine blades where they attach to the 
disk. The critical dimension at the root must be 0.450 ± 0.006 in. Thus, a blade falls out 
of specs in the range 0.444 to 0.456 and has to be scrapped at a cost of $120.
(a) 
What is the Taguchi loss equation for this situation?
(b) 
Samples taken from the grinder had the following dimensions: 0.451; 0.446; 
0.449; 0.456; 0.450; 0.452; 0.449; 0.447; 0.454; 0.453; 0.450; 0.451.
 
What is the average loss function for the parts made on the machine?
15.10  The weather strip that seals the door of an automobile has a specifi cation on width of 
20 ± 4 mm. Three suppliers of weather strip produced the results shown below.
Supplier
Mean Width 
Variance s2
Cpk
A
20.0
1.778
1.0
B
18.0
0.444
1.0
C
17.2
0.160
1.0
 
 Field experience shows that when the width of the weather strip is 5 mm below the 
target, the seal begins to leak and about 50 percent of the customers will complain and 

732 
engineering design 
15
insist that it be replaced at a cost of $60. When the strip width exceeds 25 mm, door 
closure becomes diffi cult and the customer will ask to have the weather strip replaced. 
Historically, the three suppliers had the following number of parts out of spec in deliv-
eries of 250,000 parts: A: 0.27%; B: 0.135%; C: 0.135%.
(a) 
Compare the three suppliers on the basis of loss function.
(b) 
Compare the three suppliers on the basis of cost of defective units.
15.11  Part of the pollution control system of an automobile engine consists of a nylon tube 
inserted in a fl exible elastomeric connector. The tubes had been coming loose, so an 
experimental program was undertaken to improve the robustness of the design. The ef-
fectiveness of the design was measured by the pounds of force needed to pull the nylon 
tube out of the connector. The control factors for this design were:
A—interference between the nylon tube and the elastomer connector
B—wall thickness of the elastomer connector
C—depth of insertion of the tube in the connector
D—the percent, by volume, of adhesive in the connector pre-dip
The environmental noise factors that conceivably could affect the strength of the bond 
had to do with the conditions of the pre-dip that the end of the connector was im-
mersed in before the tube was inserted. There were three:
X—time the predip was in the pot 24 h and 120 h
Y—temperature of the predip 72°F and 150°F
Z—relative humidity 25% and 75%
(a) 
Set up the orthogonal arrays for the control factors (inner array) at three levels 
and the noise factors (outer array). How many runs will be required to complete 
the tests?
(b) 
The calculated S/N ratio for the pull-off force of the tube for the nine experimen-
tal conditions of the control matrix are, in order: (1) 24.02; (2) 25.52; (3) 25.33; 
(4) 25.90; (5) 26.90; (6) 25.32; (7) 25.71; (8) 24.83; (9) 26.15. What type of S/N 
ratio should be used? Determine the best settings for the design parameters.
15.12  Conduct a robust design experiment to determine the most robust design of paper air-
planes. The control parameters and noise parameters are given in the following table.
Control Parameters
Parameter
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Weight of paper (A)
One sheet
Two sheets
Three sheets
Confi guration (B)
Design 1
Design 2
Design 3
Width of paper (C)
4 in
6 in
8 in
Length of paper (D)
6 in
8 in
10 in

 
chapter 15: Quality, Robust Design, and Optimization 
733
15
Noise Parameter
Parameter
Level 1
Level 2
Launch height (X
( )
Standing on ground
Standing on chair
Launch angle (Y)
Horizontal to ground
45° above horizontal
Ground surface
Concrete
Polished tile
 
 All planes are launched by the same person in a closed room or hallway with no air 
currents. When launching a plane, the elbow must be touching the body and only the 
forearm, wrist, and hand are used to send the plane into fl ight. Planes are made from 
ordinary copy paper. The class should decide on the three designs, and once this is de-
cided, the designs will not be varied throughout the experiment. The objective function 
to be optimized is the distance the plane fl ies and glides to a stop on the fl oor, mea-
sured to the nose of the plane.
15.13  We want to design a hot-water pipeline to carry a large quantity of hot water from 
the heater to the place where it will be used. The total cost is the sum of four items: 
(1) the cost of pumping the water, (2) the cost of heat lost from the pipe, (3) the cost of 
the pipe, (4) the cost of insulating the pipe.
(a)  By using basic engineering principles, show that the system cost is
C
K D
K
K D
K x
p
h
D
K
m
i
K
1
1
ln[
]
D
D
+
/
x
+
K p
+
+
K D
mD
 
where x is the thickness of insulation on a pipe of inside diameter 
x
D.
(b)  If Kp
K = 10.0, Kh
K = 2.0, Km
K = 3.0, and Ki
K = 1.0 and initial values of x and 
x
D are equal
to 1.0, fi nd the values of D and x that will minimize the system cost. Use an alternating
x
single-variable search.
15.14
 Find the maximum value of y = 12x −x2 with the golden section search method for an
original interval of uncertainty of 0 ≤x ≤10. Carry out the search until the difference
between the two largest calculated values of y is 0.01 or less. Do the same problem
using the Excel Solver.

16
734
16
ECONOMIC DECISION MAKING
16.1
INTRODUCTION
Throughout this book we have repeatedly emphasized that the engineer is a decision 
maker and that engineering design is a process of making a series of decisions over 
time. We also have emphasized from the beginning that engineering involves the ap-
plication of science to real problems of society. In this authentic context, one cannot 
escape the fact that economics may play a role as big as, or bigger than, that of techni-
cal considerations in the decision making process of design.
The major engineering infrastructure that built this nation—the railroads, ma-
jor dams, and waterways—required a methodology for predicting costs and balanc-
ing them against alternative courses of action. In any engineering project, costs and 
revenues will occur at various points of time in the future. The methodology for 
handling this class of problems is known as engineering economy or engineering 
economic analysis. Familiarity with the concepts and approach of engineering econ-
omy generally is considered to be part of the standard engineering toolkit. Indeed, an 
examination on the fundamentals of engineering economy is required for professional 
engineering registration in all disciplines in all states.
The chief concept in engineering economy is that money has a time value. Pay-
ing out $1.00 today is more costly than paying out $1.00 a year from now. A dollar 
invested today is worth a dollar plus interest a year from now. Engineering economy 
recognizes the fact that the use of money is a valuable asset. Money can be rented in 
the same way one can rent an apartment, but the charge for using it is called interest 
rather than rent. This time value of money makes it more profi table to push expenses 
into the future and bring revenues into the present as much as possible.
Before proceeding into the mathematics of engineering economy, it is important 
to understand where engineering economy sits with regard to related disciplines like 
economics and accounting. Economics generally deals with broader and more global 
issues than engineering economy, such as the forces that control the money supply and 

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
735
16
trade between nations. Engineering economy uses the interest rate established by the
economic forces to solve more specifi c and detailed problems. However, it usually is a
problem concerning alternative costs in the future. The accountant is more concerned
with determining exactly, and often in great detail, what costs have been incurred in
the past. One might say that the economist is an oracle, the engineering economist is a
fortune teller, and the accountant is a historian.
16.2
MATHEMATICS OF TIME VALUE OF MONEY
If we borrow a present sum of money or principal P at a simple interest rate i, the
annual cost of interest is I = Pi. If the loan is repaid in a lump sum F at the end of 
F
n
years, the amount required is
F
P
nI
P
nPi
P
ni
(1
)
=
+
P
= P
= P
 
(16.1)
where F = future worth
 
P = present worth
I = annual cost of interest
i = annual interest rate
n = number of years
If we borrow $1000 for 6 years at 10 percent simple interest rate, we must repay at the
end of 6 years:
F
P
ni
(1
)
$1000[1 6(0.10)]
$1600
=
+
P(1
=
+
$1000[1
=
Therefore, we see that $1000 available today is not equivalent to $1000 available in
6 years. Actually, $1000 in hand today is worth $1600 available in only 6 years at 
10 percent simple interest.
We can also see that the present worth of $1600 available in 6 years and invested
at 10 percent is $1000.
P
F
ni
1
$1600
1 0.6
$1000
= +
=
+
=
In making this calculation we have discounted the future sum back to the present 
time. In engineering economy the term discounted refers to bringing dollar values
d
back in time to the present.
16.2.1 Compound Interest
You are aware from your personal banking experiences that fi nancial transactions
usually use compound interest. In compound interest, the interest due at the end of 

736 
engineering design 
16
a period is not paid out but is instead added to the principal. During the next period,
interest is paid on the total sum.
F
P
Pi
P
i
F
P
i
i
P
i
F
P
i
P
P
i
n
F
P
i
First period:
r
(1
)
Second period:
(1
)
(
iP 1
)i
[ (
P 1
)](1
)i
(1
)
Third period:
r
(1
)
(
i
1
)i
[(1
)i ](1
)i
(1
)
th pe iod:
(1
)
n
F
n
1F
2
F
2
3F
2
2
(
iP 1
)i
2
3
P
i
](1
)i
(1
)
=
+
P
= P
=
+
P(1
iP
= [P
i
+
=
+
P(1
iP
iP
= P
i
+
= P
 
(16.2)
We can write Eq. (16.2) in a short notation that is convenient to use when the engi-
neering economy relationships become more complex.
F
P
i
F
i
(1
)
(
P
/ ,
P , )
n
n
F
n
=
+
P(1
 
(16.3)
In Eq. (16.3) the function (F
( /
F P, i, n
/
) has the meaning: Find the equivalent amount 
n
F
given the amount P compounded at an interest rate i for n interest periods.
E X A M P L E 16 .1 How long will it take money to double if it is compounded annually at 
a rate of 10 percent per year?
F
P
P
n
F
F
( /
F PP,10, ) but
2 ,
P
(we want to fin
f d the
t
doubling time)
2
(
P
P
/ ,
P 10, )
n
=
P
P
n
F
(F P 10
Therefore, the answer is found in a table of single-payment compound-amount factors at 
the year n for which (F/P) = 2.0. Examining the table in Appendix F2 at www.mhhe.com/
dieter, we see that, for n = 7, F/P = 1.949 and, for n = 8, (F/P) = 2.144. Linear extrapola-
tion gives us (F/P,10,7.2)
P
= 2.000. We can generalize the result to establish the fi nancial
rule of thumb that the number of years to double an investment is 72 divided by the inter-
est rate (expressed as an integer).
Usually in engineering economy, n is given in years and i is an annual interest 
rate. However, in banking circles the interest may be compounded at periods other 
than one year. Compounding at the end of shorter periods, such as daily, raises the
effective interest rate. If we defi ne r as the nominal annual interest rate and
r
p as the
number of interest periods per year, then the interest rate per interest period is i = r/r p/
and the number of interest periods in n years is pn. Using this notation, Eq. (16.2)
becomes
F
P
r
p
1
p
n
+
1
= P
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
(16.4)
Note that when p = 1, the above expression reduces to Eq. (16.2). Standard com-
pound interest tables that are prepared for p = 1 can be used for other than annual
periods. To do so, use the table for i = r/r p/  and for a number of years equal to p × n.
Alternatively, use the interest table corresponding to n years and an effective rate of 
yearly return equal to (1 + r/r p/ )p − 1.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
737
16
TABLE 16.1 
Infl uence of Compounding Period on Effective Rate of Return
Frequency of 
Compounding
No. Annual 
Interest Periods p
Interest Rate 
for Period, %
Effective Rate of 
Yearly Return, %
Annual 
1
12.0
12.0
Semiannual
2
6.0
12.4
Quarterly
4
3.0
12.6
Monthly
12
1.0
12.7
Continuously
∞
0
12.75
Table 16.1 shows the infl uence of the number of interest periods per year on the 
effective rate of return.
16.2.2 Cash Flow Diagram
Engineering economy was developed to deal with fi nancial transactions taking place 
at various times in the future. This can be best understood in terms of cash fl ows.
Some of these will be cash infl ows (receipts), like revenue from sale of products, re-
duction in operating cost, sale of used machinery, or tax savings. Others will be cash
outfl ows (disbursements), such as the costs incurred in designing a product, the oper-
ating costs in making the product, and the periodic maintenance costs in keeping the 
factory running. The net cash fl ow is given by
Net cash flow
f
cash inflows
f
(receipts)
cash outflows (disbursements)
=
−
cash inflows
f
(receipts)
(16.5)
Cash fl ows occur frequently and take place at varying times within the time pe-
riod of the problem. In the cash fl ow diagram, Fig. 16.1, the horizontal axis represents 
time and the vertical axis is cash fl ow. Cash infl ows are positive and are represented 
by arrows above the x-axis. Cash outfl ows are negative and are below the x-axis.
It has been mentioned that engineering economy is chiefl y concerned with assist-
ing decision making about future fi nancial decisions in an engineering project. Since 
FIGURE 16.1
Cash fl ow diagram.
0
1
2
3
Present
Years
Time
Disbursements (costs)
4
5
6
Receipts (income)

738 
engineering design 
16
future prediction of cash fl ows is likely to be imprecise, it is not worth carefully locat-
ing each cash fl ow on the diagram in time. Instead, the end-of-period convention is
used in which the cash fl ows within a period are assumed to occur at the end of the
interest period.
16.2.3 Different Types of Annual Transactions
In many situations we are concerned with a uniform series of receipts or disburse-
ments occurring equally at the end of each period. Examples are the payment of a
debt on the installment plan, setting aside a sum that will be available at a future date
for replacement of equipment, and a retirement annuity that consists of a series of 
equal payments instead of a lump sum payment. We will let A be the equal end-of-the-
period payment that makes up the uniform annual series.
Figure 16.2 shows that if an annual sum A is invested at the end of each year for 
3 years, the total sum F at the end of 3 years will be the sum of the compound amount 
F
of the individual investments A
F
A
i
A
(1
)
(
A 1
)i
2
=
+
A(1
(
A 1
and for the general case of n years,
F
A
i
A
i
A
(1
)
(
A 1
)i
(1
)
(
A 1
)i
which simplifie
f s to
i
n 1
2
(
A 1 i n
(
A 1
)i
2
=
+
A(1
(
A 1(
A 1(
A 1
+i
i
(
A 1 i
F
A
i
i
(1
)
1
n
+ i)
 
(16.6)
Equation (16.6) gives the future sum of n uniform payments of A when the interest 
rate is i. This equation may also be written:
F
A
A i n
( /
F AA, ,i
)
n
F
 
(16.7)
where (F
( /
F A
/ , i, n) is the uniform-series compound amount factor that converts a series
n
A to a future worth F.F
By solving Eq. (16.6) for A, we have the uniform series of end-of-period payments 
factor, that, at compound interest i, provide a future sum F.F
A
F
i
i
(1
)
1
n
+ i)
 
(16.8)
0
=
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
+
0
1
2
3
+
0
1
2
3
FIGURE 16.2
Equivalence of a uniform annual series.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
739
16
This type of calculation often is used to set aside money in a sinking fund to provide
d
funds for replacing worn-out equipment, or for investing money to send a child to
college.
A
F
F i n
( /
A FF, ,i
)
(16.9)
where (A
( /F
/ ,F i, n) is the sinking fund factor. It sets up a future fund
n
F by investing 
F
A
each interest period n at a rate i.
By combining Eq. (16.2) with Eq. (16.6), we develop the relation for the present 
worth of a uniform series of payments A:
P
A
i
i
i
A
A i n
(1
)
1
(1
)
( /
P A, ,i
)
n
n
+ i)
=
(16.10)
Solving Eq. (16.10) for A gives the important relation for capital recovery:
A
P i
i
i
P
P i n
(1
)
(1
)
1
( /
A P, ,i
)
n
n
+ i)
=
  
(16.11)
where (A
( /P
/ ,P i, m) is the capital recovery factor. The
m
A in Eq. (16.11) is the annual pay-
ment needed to return the initial capital investment P plus interest on that investment 
at a rate i over n years.
Capital recovery is an important concept in engineering economy. It is important 
to understand the difference between capital recovery and sinking fund. Consider the 
following example:
E X A M P L E  16 . 2 What annual investment must be made at 10 percent to provide funds
for replacing a $10,000 machine in 20 years?
A = F (A/F
(
, 10, 20)
F
= $10,000(0.01746) = $174.60 per year put into the sinking fund
What is the annual cost of capital recovery of $10,000 at 10 percent over 20 years?
A = P(A/F
(
, 10, 20)
F
= $10,000(0.011746) = $1174.60 per year for capital recovery
We see that (A/P
(
,P i, n) = (A/F
(
,F i, n) + i
 
0.11746 = 0.01746 + 0.10000
Annual cost of capital recovery = annual cost of sinking fund + annual interest cost
$1174.60 = $174.60 + 0.10 ($10,000)
With a sinking fund we put away each year a sum of money that, over n years, 
together with accumulated compound interest, equals the required future amount F.F
With capital recovery we put away enough money each year to provide for replace-
ment in n years plus we charge ourselves interest on the invested capital. The use of 
capital recovery is a conservative but valid economic strategy. The amount of money 
invested in capital equipment ($10,000 in Example 16.2) represents an opportunity 
cost, since we are forgoing the revenue that the $10,000 could provide if invested in 
interest-bearing securities.

740 
engineering design 
16
A summary of the compound interest relationships among F, P, and A is given in
Table 16.2. Table 16.2 gives relationships for a uniform series of payments or receipts.
Two other series often used in engineering economy are a gradient series in which
the cash fl ow increases (or decreases) by a fi xed increment at each time period, and
a geometric series in which the cash fl ow changes by a fi xed percentage at each time
period.
The last column in Table 16.2 shows how the compound interest factors can be
obtained directly from Microsoft Excel, where i is the interest rate for the period ex-
pressed as a decimal, and Nper is the number of periods. When 
N
i is the annual interest 
rate, then Nper is the number of years.
N
Consider an arithmetic gradient which changes each year by a constant amount G.
The  magnitude of G is the difference between the value in year 2 and year 1; G starts
in the second year, the base year. Equation (16.13) converts the gradient that occurs
over n years to a present worth P located on the cash fl ow diagram at year zero.
P
G
i
i
i
i
n
(1
)
1
(1
)
(1
)i
n
n
n
(1
)i
=
+i)
−
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
 
(16.12)
Equation (16.13) converts an annual gradient G to an equivalent annual uniform
series A. If the gradient starts at year 2 and goes for n years the uniform series will
start at year 1 and spread over n years.
A
G i
n
i
1
(1
)
1
n
−
G
+i)
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦ 
(16.13)
TABLE 16.2 
Summary of Compound Interest Factors
Item Conversion Algebraic Relation
Factor
Factor Name
EXCEL Factor
1
P to F
F
P
i
(1
)n
=
+
(F/P, i, n) Single payment, 
compound amount factor
= FV(i, Nper, 0, 1, 0)
2
F to P
P
F
i
(1
)n
=
+
(P/F, i, n) Single payment, present 
worth factor
= PV(i, Nper, 0, 1, 0)
3
A to P
P
A
i
i
i
(1
)
1
(1
)
n
n
=
+
−
+
(P/A, i, n) Uniform payment, present 
worth factor
= PV(i, Nper, 1, 0, 0)
4
P to A
A
P i
i
i
(1
)
(1
)
1
n
n
=
+
+
−
(A/P, i, n) Capital recovery factor 
= PMT(i, Nper, 1, 0, 0)
5
A to F
F
A
i
i
(1
)
1
n
=
+
−
(F/A, i, n) Uniform series, compound 
amount factor
= FV(i, Nper, 1, 0, 0)
6
F to A
A
F
i
i
(1
)
1
n
=
+
−
(A/F, i, n) Sinking fund factor
= PMT(i, Nper, 0, 1, 0)

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
741
16
Using symbolic notation, as shown in Table 16.2, simplifi es writing the equations 
and aids in making calculations. For example, many compound interest tables do not 
contain a table for determining A (sinking fund factor) when F is known. However, us-
F
ing the symbolic factors this can be obtained by simply multiplying factors. 
A
F
F
P
P
( /
A FF)
(
F
/ )
F ( /
A P)
F
F
(A F)
 
(16.14)
16.2.4 Irregular Cash Flows
Payment at the Beginning of the Interest Period
In working with a uniform series of payments or receipts, A, it is conventional
practice to assume that A occurs at the end of each period. However, sometimes a se-
ries of payments begin immediately so that the payments are made at the beginning of 
each time period, Ab.
As Fig. 16.3 shows, this is equivalent to increasing each annual payment by the 
interest earned in one period of the accumulation of interest. Thus, Eq. (16.6) would 
be written as
F
A
i
i
i
(1
) (1
)
1
b
n
=
+
A (1
b
+ i)
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
(16.15)
Payments in Alternate Years
The left side of Fig. 16.4 shows uniform payments in alternate years with i =
10%. One approach to fi nding the present value, P, would be to consider this as three
future payments and determine P as follows:
P
F
F
P
F
100( /
P F, 10, 2)
100( /
P F, 10, 4)
( /
P FF, 10, 6)
82.64
68.30
56.45
$207.39.
F
( /
P F
+
=
P
F
( /
P F, 10, 6)
+
+
68.30
=
Ab = 100
100 100 100 100
110 = A
i = 10%
110
110
110
110
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
=
FIGURE 16.3
A uniform series paid at the beginning of the interest period, and the equivalent series paid at 
the end of the period.
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
100
100
47.62 47.62 47.62 47.62 47.62 47.62

i = 10%
FIGURE 16.4
Conversion of payments every two years into annual payments.

742 
engineering design 
16
An alternative approach is to consider the fi rst annual payment to be a future pay-
ment over two years and determine the annual payment (sinking fund factor) to
 produce $100. This would then be an annual payment paid over six years, since the
payments are at the end of every two years, for six years total. A = 100 (A/F
(
, 10, 2)
F
=
100(0.4762) = $47.62 and is represented by the diagram on the right side of Fig. 16.4. 
The equivalent present value of $207.39 is calculated as follows. 
P
A
47.62( /
P A,10,6)
47.62(4.3553)
$207.39
=
A
/
P A 10 6)
=
Uniform Payments Not Extending to Time Zero
Consider the uniform payments, A, extending from years 4 to 10 in Fig. 16.5 to 
fi nd the present value, P = A(P
( /
P A
/ , i, 7). This present value is located at the end of year 
3, because the compound interest equations for the P/
P A
/  factor assume that P will be 
determined one interest period prior to the fi rst A in the series. Then to fi nd the pres-
ent value at time zero, P3 must be discounted to the present. P = F(P
( /
P F
/ ,F i, 3) where 
F = P3.
16.3
COST COMPARISON
Having discussed the usual compound interest relations, we now are in a position to 
use them to make economic decisions. A typical decision is which of two courses of 
action is less expensive when the time value of money is considered. Generally the 
rate of interest to be used in these calculations is set by the minimum attractive rate of 
return, MARR. This is the lowest rate of return a company will accept for investing
its money. The MARR is established by the corporate fi nance offi cer based on cur-
rent market opportunities for investing money or on the importance of the project to 
advancing the company.
16.3.1 Present Worth Analysis
When the two alternatives have a common time period, a comparison on the basis of 
present worth is advantageous.
FIGURE 16.5
Finding present values of a uniform series that does not extend to time zero.
0
1
2
3
4
5
A
6
7
8
9
10

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
743
16
E X A M P L E 16 . 3 Two machines each have a useful life of 5 years. If money is worth 
10 percent, which machine is more economical?
A
B
Initial cost
$25,000
$15,000
Yearly maintenance cost
2,000
4,000
Rebuilding at end of third
year
—
3,500
Salvage value
3,000
Annual benefi t from better 
quality production
500
2000
500
2000
500
2000
500
2000
500
2000
500
3000
25,000
Machine A
Time
0
4000
15,000
4000
4000
3500
4000
4000
Machine B
0
Time
From the cost diagrams shown above we see that the cash fl ows defi nitely are different for 
the two alternatives. To place them on a common basis for comparison, we discount all 
costs back to the present time.
P
P A
P F
P
P A
P F
A
B
25,000
(2000
500)( / , 10, 5)
3000( / , 10, 5)
25,000
1500(3.791)
3000(0.621)
$28,823
15,000
4000( / , 10, 5)
3500( / , 10, 3)
15,000
4000(3.791)
3500(0.751)
$32,793
=
+
−
−
=
+
−
=
=
+
+
=
+
+
=
Machine A is more economical because it has the lower cost on a present worth basis. 
In this example we considered both (1) costs plus benefi ts (savings) due to reduced scrap 
rate and (2) resale value at the end of the period of useful life. Thus, we really determined 

744 
engineering design 
16
the net present worth for each alternative. We should also point out that present worth 
analysis is not limited to the comparison of only two alternatives. We could consider any
number of alternatives and select the one with the smallest net present worth of costs.
In Example 16.3, both alternatives had the same life. Thus, the time period was
the same and the present worth could be determined without ambiguity. Suppose we
want to use present worth analysis for the following situation:
We cannot directly compare PA
P and PB
P  because they are based on different time
periods. One way to handle the problem would be to use a common 6-year period, in
which we would replace machine A three times and replace machine B twice. This
procedure works when a common multiple of the individual periods can be found eas-
ily, but a more direct approach is to convert the present worth based on a period n1 to
an equivalent P based on n2 by 1
P
P
P i n
P i n
( /
A PP, ,i
)
( /
A PP, ,i
)
n
n
P
P
P
P
1
2
2
1n
 
(16.16)
For our example, we convert PB
P  from a 3-year time period to a 2-year period.
P
P
P i n
P i n
P
P
( /
A PP, ,i
)
( /
A PP, ,i
)
31,334 ( /
A PP, 10, 3)
( /
A PP, 10, 2)
31,334 0.40211
0.57619
$21,867
B
B
P
P
P
P
1
2
2
1
B
=
P
=
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞=
18,000
Machine A
PA = $24,529 (for i = 10% and n = 2)
0
1
4000
2
4000
500
25,000
Machine B
PB = $31,334 (for i = 10% and n = 3)
0
1
3000
2
3000
3
3000
1500
1. For a derivation of Eq. (16.16), see F. C. Jelen and J. H. Black, Cost and Optimization Engineering, 
2nd ed., p. 28, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
745
16
Since PA
P = $24,529, machine B is the more economical when compared on the basis of 
present worth for equal time periods. 
16.3.2 Annual Cost Analysis
In the annual cost method, the cash fl ow over time is converted to an equivalent uni-
form annual cost or benefi t. In this method no special procedures need be used if the
time period is different for each alternative, because all comparisons are on an annual 
basis (n( = 1).
Example
Machine A
Machine B
First cost
$10,000
$18,000
Estimated life
20 years
35 years
Estimated salvage
0 
$3000
Annual cost of operation
$4000
$3000
A
P
A
A
10,000( /
A P, 10, 20)
4000
10,000(0.1175)
4000
$5175
(18,000
000
3000)( / ,
P 10, 35)
3000(0.10)
3000
$4855
A
B
+
P
( /
A P, 10, 20)
=
+
10,000(0.1175)
=
+
+
3000(0.10)
=
Machine B has the lower annual cost and is the more economical. Note that in cal-
culating the annual cost of capital recovery for machine B we used the difference
between the fi rst cost and the salvage value; for it is only this amount of money that 
must be recovered. However, although the salvage value is returned to us, we are re-
quired to wait until the end of the useful life of the machine to recover it. Therefore, 
a charge for the annual cost of the interest on the investment tied up in the salvage
value is made as part of the annual cost analysis.
Perhaps a more direct way to handle the case of machine B in the preceding ex-
ample is to determine the equivalent annual cost based on the cash disbursements 
minus the annual benefi t of the future resale value. The result is the same.
A
P
F
18,000( /
A P, 10, 35)
3000
3000( /
A F, 10, 35)
18,000(0.1037)
3000
3000(0.0037)
$4855
B
P
( /
A P
=
+
18,000(0.1037)
−
=
3000(0 0037)
16.3.3 Capitalized Cost Analysis
Capitalized cost is a special case of present worth analysis. The capitalized cost 
of a project is the present value of providing for that project in perpetuity (n(
= ∞). 
The concept was originally developed for use with public works, such as dams and 

746 
engineering design 
16
waterworks, that have long lives and provide services that must be maintained indefi -
nitely. Capitalized cost subsequently has been used more broadly in economic deci-
sion making because it provides a method that is independent of the time period of the
various alternatives.
Since capitalized cost is the present worth when n = ∞ we can use Eq. (16.16), and
by setting n2 = ∞and n1 = n, after simplifi cation the capitalized cost K for a present 
K
value is
K
P
i
i
P
P i n
(1
)
(1
)
1
(
/
K P, ,i
)
n
n
+
+i)
=
(16.17)
To fi nd the capitalized cost for a series of uniform payments A, start with the rela-
tionship between P and A.
P
A
i
i
i
(1
)
1
(1
)
n
n
+i)
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦If we divide the numerator and denominator by (1 + i)n
P
A
i
i
1
1
(1
)n
−
+
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎢
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎥
⎦
 and as n approaches ∞the equation reduces to P
A
i
=
.
Capitalized cost is P when n = ∞, so
K = A/i 
(16.18)
16.3.4 Using Excel Functions for Engineering Economy Calculation
The compound interest factors needed for engineering economy calculations
can be determined on a calculator or looked up in the tables in all engineering
economy textbooks.1 Microsoft Excel provides an extensive menu of time value 
of money functions and other fi nancial functions. When combined with the com-
putational features of Excel and its “what if” capability, this makes an excellent 
general-purpose tool for engineering economic decision making. Table 16.3 gives
a brief description of the most common functions for compound interest calcula-
tions. For details on using the functions, see the help pages in Excel or engineer-
ing economy texts.2
2. L. T. Blank and A. J. Tarquin, op. cit., Appendix A.
1. Several tables of F, P, and A and their combinations are given in the Appendix to this chapter.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
747
16
16.4
DEPRECIATION
Capital equipment suffers a loss in value over time. This may occur by corrosion or 
wear, deterioration, or obsolescence, which is a loss of economic effi ciency because
of technological advances. Therefore, a company should lay aside enough money each 
year to accumulate a fund to replace the obsolete or worn-out equipment. This allow-
ance for loss of value is called depreciation. Depreciation is an accounting expense on 
the income statement of the company. It is a noncash expense that is deducted from 
gross profi ts as a cost of doing business. In a capital-intensive business, depreciation 
can have a strong infl uence on the amount of taxes that must be paid.
Taxable income
total income
allowabl
a e expenses
depreciatio
r
n
−
total income
−
The basic questions to be answered about depreciation are: (1) what is the time
period over which depreciation can be taken, and (2) how should the total depre-
ciation charge be spread over the life of the asset? Obviously, the depreciation 
charge in any given year will be greater if the depreciation period is short (a rapid 
write-off).
The U.S. tax laws permit two methods for determining depreciation: straight-
line depreciation and the MACRS method. The Economic Recovery Act of 1981
introduced the accelerated cost recovery system (ACRS) as the required deprecia-
tion method for tax purposes in the United States. This was modifi ed in the 1986 
Tax Reform Act for Modifi ed Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS). The 
TABLE 16.3 
Useful Excel Functions for Compound Interest Calculations
Function
Description
FV(i, n, A, PV, type)
Calculates future value, FV, given int. rate per period, no. of 
periods, constant payment amount, A, present value PV, type = 0 
end of period payment; type = 1, beginning of period payment
PV(i, n, A, FV, type)
Calculates present value PV, given i, n, periodic payments (−) or 
income (+) and future single payments or receipts
NPV(i, Incl, Inc2 . . .)
Calculates net present value, NPV, of a series of irregular future 
incomes (+) or expenses (−) at periodic interest i
PMT(i, n, PV, FV, type)
Calculates uniform payments A based on either a present value 
and/or a future value
RATE(n, A, PV, FV, type, g)
Calculates interest rate per period. g requires a guess for i, 
about 10%
NOMINAL(effect i, npery)
Calculates the nominal annual interest rate given the effective 
rate and number of compounding periods per year, npery
EFFECT(non i, npery)
Calculates the effective interest rate given the nominal interest 
rate and npery

748 
engineering design 
16
statute sets depreciation recovery periods based on the expected useful life. Some
examples are:
●Special manufacturing devices; some motor vehicles: 3 years
●Computers; trucks; semiconductor manufacturing equipment: 5 years
●Offi ce furniture; railroad track; agricultural buildings: 7 years
●Durable-goods manufacturing equipment; petroleum refi ning: 10 years
●Sewage treatment plants; telephone systems: 15 years
Residential rental property is recovered in 27.5 years and nonresidential rental prop-
erty in 31.5 years. Land is a nondepreciable asset, since it is never used up.
16.4.1 Straight-Line Depreciation
In straight-line depreciation an equal amount of money is set aside yearly. The annual
depreciation charge D is
D
n
C
C
n
initial cost
salvage value
i
s
C
=
=
(16.19)
where n is the recovery period in years.
The book value of the asset changes over time. The book value is the initial cost 
minus the sum of the depreciation charges that have been made. For straight-line
depreciation, the book value B at the end of the jth year is
B
C
j
n (
)
C
C
j
i
C
i
s
C
−
C
 
(16.20)
where n is the recovery period.
16.4.2 Modifi ed Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS)
In MACRS the annual depreciation is computed using the relation
D
qCi  
(16.21)
where q is the recovery rate obtained from Table 16.4 and Ci
C is the initial cost. In 
MACRS the value of the asset is completely depreciated even though there may be
a true salvage value. The recovery rates are based on starting out with a declining-
balance method (see any engineering economy text) and switching to the straight-line
method when it offers a faster write-off. MACRS uses a half-year convention that as-
sumes that all property is placed in service at the midpoint of the initial year. Thus,
only 50 percent of the fi rst year depreciation applies for tax purposes, and a half year 
of depreciation must be taken in year n + 1.
Table 16.5 compares the annual depreciation charges for these two methods of 
calculation.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
749
16
16.5
TAXES
Taxes are an important factor to be considered in engineering economic decisions. 
The chief types of taxes that are imposed on a business fi rm are:
1. Property taxes: Based on the value of the property owned by the corporation (land, 
buildings, equipment, inventory). These taxes do not vary with profi ts and usually 
are not too large.
TABLE 16.4 
Recovery Rates q Used in MACRS Method
Recovery Rate, q, %
Year
n = 3
n = 5
n = 7
n = 10
n = 15
 1
33.3
20.0
14.3
10.0
5.0
 2
44.5
32.0
24.5
18.0
9.5
 3
14.8
19.2
17.5
14.4
8.6
 4
7.4
11.5
12.5
11.5
7.7
 5
11.5
8.9
9.2
6.9
 6
5.8 
8.9
7.4
6.2
 7
8.9
6.6
5.9
 8
4.5
6.6
5.9
 9
6.5
5.9
10
6.5
5.9
11
3.3
5.9
12–15
5.9
16
3.0
n = recovery period, years
TABLE 16.5 
Comparison of Depreciation Methods
Ci = $6000, Cs = $1000, n = 5
Year
Straight 
Line
MACRS
1
1000
1200
2
1000
1920
3
1000
1152
4
1000
690
5
1000
690
6
—
348

750 
engineering design 
16
2. Sales taxes: Imposed on sales of products. Sales taxes usually are paid by the retail 
purchaser, so they generally are not relevant to engineering economy studies of a
business.
3. Excise taxes: Imposed on the manufacture of certain products like gasoline, to-
bacco, and alcohol. Also usually passed on to the consumer.
4. Income taxes: Imposed on corporate profi ts or personal income. Gains resulting 
from the sale of capital property also are subject to income tax.
Generally, federal income taxes have the most signifi cant impact on engineering
economic decisions. Although we cannot delve into the complexities of tax laws, it is
important to incorporate the broad aspects of income taxes into our analysis.
The income tax rates are strongly infl uenced by politics and economic conditions.
The United States as of 2011 has a corporate graduated tax schedule as follows:
Taxable Income
Tax Rate
$1–$50,000
0.15
$50,001–$75,000
0.25
$75,001–$100,000
0.34
$100,001–$335,000
0.39
$335,001–$10 M
0.34
$10M–$15M
0.35
$15M–$18.3M
0.38
Over $18.3 M
0.35
Most states and some cities and counties also have an income tax. For simplicity in
economic studies a single effective tax rate is often used. This commonly varies from
35 to 50 percent. Since state taxes are deductible from federal taxes, the effective tax
rate is given by
Effectiv
f
e tax rate
state ate
(1
state rate)(federal rate)
= state rate
 
(16.22)
The chief effect of corporate income taxes is to reduce the rate of return on a
project or venture.
After-tax rate of return = before-tax rate of return × (1 −income tax rate)
r = i(1 − t) 
(16.23)
where t is the effective tax rate from Eq. (16.22).
t
Note that this relation is true only when there are no depreciable assets. For 
the usual case when we have depreciation, capital gains or losses, or investment tax
credits, Eq. (16.23) is a rough approximation. The importance of depreciation in re-
ducing taxes is shown in Fig. 16.6. The depreciation charge appreciably reduces the 
gross profi t, and thereby the taxes. However, since depreciation is retained in the cor-
poration, it is available for growing the enterprise.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
751
16
E X A M P L E 16 . 4 High-Tech Pumps has a gross income in 1 year of $15 million. Op-
erating expenses (salaries and wages, materials, etc.) are $10 million. Depreciation is 
$2.6 million. Also, this year there is a depreciation recapture of $800,000 because a spe-
cialized CNC machine tool that is no longer needed is sold for more than its book value. 
(a( ) Compute the company’s federal income taxes. (b) What is the average federal tax rate? 
(c) If the state tax rate is 11 percent, what is the total income taxes paid?
c
(a( )  Taxable income (TI) = gross income − operating expenses − depreciation + deprecia-
tion recapture
TI
15
10
2.6
0.8
$3.2M
Taxes
(TI range)(marginal rate)
(50,000)0.15
(25,000)0.25
(25,000)0.34
(235,000)0.39
(3.2M
0.335M)0.34
7500
6250
8500
91,650
974,100
$1,088,000
=
−
15
−
+
2.6
=
=
+
(50,000)0.15
+
+
+
(235,000)0.39
−
=
+
7500
+
+
8500
+
=
974,100
(b) Average federal tax rate
1,088,000
3,200,000
0.34
=
=
(c) From Eq. (16.22)
c
Effective tax rate
0.11
(1
0.11)(0.34)
0.11
0.3026
0.4126
=
+
0.11
−
=
0 11)(0 34)
+
=
0.3026
Total income taxes = 32,2000,000(0.4126) = $1,320,320
Note that including state taxes makes a difference.
Consider a depreciable capital investment Cd
C = Ci −Cs
C . At the end of each year 
depreciation amounting to Df
D C
f
d
C is available to reduce the taxes by an amount
d
Df
D C
f
d
C t, 
where t is the tax rate.
t
Cd
0
1
Df1Cdt
2
Df2f Cdt
3
Df3f Cdt
n
Dfnf Cdt
FIGURE 16.6
Distribution of corporate revenues.
Revenues
Gross profit
Operations
expenses
Depreciation
Net profit
Taxes

752 
engineering design 
16
Note that the fractional depreciation charge each year Df
D  may vary from year to year 
f
depending on the method used to establish the depreciation schedule. See, for exam-
ple, Table 16.5. The present value of this series of costs and benefi ts is
P
C
C t
D
r
D
D
D
d
d
C
f
f
D
f
f
D
nf
−
C
+
+
+
+ ⋅⋅⋅+
1
2
f
f
f
f
+
3f
1
1
2
3
+
1
(
)
1
r
+
(
)r
+
1
r
+
1
(1+
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
r n)
 
(16.24)
The exact evaluation of the term in brackets will depend on the depreciation method 
selected.
E X A M P L E 16 . 5 A manufacturing company of modest size is considering an invest-
ment in energy-effi cient electric motors to reduce its large annual energy cost. The initial
cost would be $12,000, and over a 10-year period it is estimated that the fi rm would save
$2200 annually in electricity costs. The salvage value of the motors is estimated at $2000.
Determine the after-tax rate of return.
Solution
First we will establish the before-tax rate of return. We need to determine the cash fl ow
for each year. Cash fl ow, in this context, is the net profi t or savings for each year. We shall
use straight-line depreciation to determine the depreciation charge. Table 16.6 shows the
cash fl ow results. The before-tax rate of return is the interest rate at which the before-tax
cash fl ow savings just equals the purchase cost of the motors.
A i
F i
12,000
2200( /
P AA, ,i 10)
2000( /
P F, ,i 10)
=
A i
2200( /
P AA, i
We fi nd the rate of return by trying different values of i in the compound interest tables. 
For i = 14 percent, 
12,000
2200(5.2161)
2000(0.2697)
11,475
539
12,014
=
+
2200(5.2161)
=
+
11,475
=
Therefore, the before-tax rate of return is very slightly more than 14 percent. To fi nd the
after-tax rate of return, we use the after-tax cash fl ow in Table 16.6. From Eq. (16.23) we
estimate the after-tax rate of return to be 7 percent.
F i
F i
i
12,000
1600( /
P FF, ,i 10)
2000( /
P F, ,i 10)
For
6
i
%:
12,000
1600(7.3601)
2000(0.5584)
11,776
1117
12,893
toolow
=
F i
1600( /
P F, i
=
6%:
12 000
+
=
+
11,776
=
i
i
For
8
i
%:
12,000
1600(6.7101)
2000(0.4632)
10,736
926
11,662
too high
Interpolatin
r
g between 6 and 8 %:
6
i
%
2%12,893 12,000
12,893 11,662
6%
2%(0.72)
6
1.44
7.44%
=
8%:
12 000
+
=
+
10,736
=
6%
−
−
=
+
6%
=
+
6
=

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
753
16
Tax Considerations
For tax purposes the expenditures that a business incurs are divided into two 
broad categories. Those for facilities and production equipment with lives in excess 
of one year are called capital expenditures; they are said to be “capitalized” in the 
accounting records of the business. Other expenses for running the business, such as 
labor and material costs, direct and indirect costs, and facilities and equipment with a 
life of one year or less, are ordinary business expenses. Usually they total more than 
the capital expenses. In the accounting records, they are said to be “expensed.” The 
ordinary expenses and depreciation are directly subtracted from the gross income to 
determine the taxable income.
When a capital asset is sold, a capital gain or loss is established by subtracting the 
book value of the asset from its selling price. If a capital asset is sold for more than 
its current book value, this establishes an income called depreciation recapture. Both 
capital gains and depreciation  capture must be added to the gross income. Frequently 
in our modern history, capital gains have received special treatment by being taxed at 
a rate lower than for ordinary income.
Investment in capital is a vital step in the innovation process that leads to in-
creased national wealth. Therefore, the federal government frequently uses the tax 
system to stimulate capital investment. This most often takes the form of a tax credit, 
usually 7 percent but varying with time from 4 to 10 percent. This means that 7 per-
cent of the purchase price of qualifying equipment can be deducted from the taxes 
that the fi rm owes the U.S. government. Moreover, the depreciation charge for the 
equipment is based on its full cost.
16.6
PROFITABILITY OF INVESTMENTS
One of the principal uses for engineering economy is to determine the profi tability of 
proposed projects or investments. The decision to invest in a project generally is based 
on three different sets of criteria.
Profi tability: Determined by techniques of engineering economy to be discussed 
in this section. Profi tability is an analysis that estimates how rewarding in mon-
etary terms an investment will be.
TABLE 16.6 
Cash Flow Calculations for Example 16.5
Year
Before-Tax 
Cash Flow
Depreciation
Taxable 
Income
50% 
Income Tax
After-Tax 
Cash Flow
0
−12,000
−12,000
1 to 9
2,200
1000
1200
−600
1,600
10
2,200
1000
1200 
−600
1,600
Salvage value
2,000
2,000

754 
engineering design 
16
Financial analysis: How to obtain the necessary funds and what it will cost. Funds 
for investment come from three broad sources: (1) retained earnings of the cor-
poration, (2) long-term commercial borrowing from banks, insurance compa-
nies, and pension funds, and (3) the equity market through the sale of stock.
Analysis of intangibles: Legal, political, or social consideration or issues of a 
corporate image often outweigh fi nancial considerations in deciding on which 
project to pursue. For example, a corporation may decide to invest in the mod-
ernization of an old plant because of its responsibility to continue employment 
for its employees when investment in a new plant 1000 miles away would be 
economically more attractive.
However, in our free-enterprise system a major goal of a business fi rm is to maxi-
mize profi t. It does so by committing its funds to ventures that appear to be profi table. 
If investors do not receive a suffi ciently attractive profi t, they will fi nd other uses for 
their money, and the growth—even the survival—of the fi rm will be threatened.
Four methods of evaluating profi tability are commonly used. Accounting rate of 
return and payback period are simple techniques that are readily understood, but they 
do not take time value of money into consideration. Net present value and discounted 
cash fl ow are the most common profi tability measures in which time value of money 
is considered. Before discussing them, however, we need to look a bit more closely at 
the concept of cash fl ow.
Cash fl ow measures the fl ow of funds into or out of a project. Funds fl owing in 
constitute positive cash fl ow; funds fl owing out are negative cash fl ow. The cash fl ow 
for a typical plant construction project is shown in Fig. 16.7. 
Strictly speaking depreciation is not a cash fl ow component, since it is not a real 
fl ow of cash. In industries with billions of dollars of installed capital equipment, de-
preciation plays a major role in reducing the taxable investment. As we will see, de-
preciation is important in calculations of cash fl ow after taxes (CFAT). From the point 
of view of the tax collector, taxable income (TI) is given by
 
TI = gross income − operating expenses − depreciation
= GI − OE − D 
(16.25)
From the view point of engineering economy analysis, depreciation enters only as 
it affects taxes. Therefore, cash fl ow before taxes (CFBT) is given by
CFBT = gross income − operating expenses − capital investment + salvage value
= GI − OE − P + S 
(16.26)
Depreciation affects the cash fl ow after taxes (CFAT) through its role on taxable in-
come. To determine CFAT Eq. (16.25), is fi rst multiplied by the effective tax rate te, 
Eq. (16.22) to give the taxes that have been paid and then this is subtracted  from 
CFBT to give CFAT.
 
CFAT = (GI − OE − P + S) − (GI − OE − D)te 
(16.27)
Table 16.7 shows a step-by-step procedure for determining CFAT.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
755
16
FIGURE 16.7
Typical costs in the cycle of a plant investment. 
Plant start-up
Negative cash flow
Working
capital
Capital
investment
Plant
operation
Payback period
Breakeven
point
Land &
working capital
recovery
Plant
shutdown
Time
Total
cumulative
profit
Positive
cash flow
Capital recovery
Profitability
Plant
investment
Land
R & D
$–   Cash flow   $+
0
TABLE 16.7 
Calculation of Cash Flow After Taxes (CFAT)
(1) Revenue (over 1-year period)
$500,000
(2) Operating costs
360,000
(3) (1) − (2) = gross margin
140,000
(4) Annual depreciation charge
60,000
(5) (3) − (4) = taxable income
80,000
(6) (5) × 0.35 = income tax
28,000 
(7) (5) − (6) = net income after taxes
52,000
Net cash fl ow (after taxes)  
  (7) + (4) = 52,000 + 60,000
112,000
The same result for cash fl ow after taxes will be found 
using Eq.(16.27)

756 
engineering design 
16
16.6.1 Rate of Return
The rate of return on the investment (ROI) is the simplest measure of profi tability. It 
is calculated from a strict accounting point of view without consideration of the time
value of money. It is a simple ratio of some measure of profi t or cash income to the
capital investment. There are a number of ways to assess the rate of return on the capi-
tal investment. ROI may be based on (1) net annual profi t before taxes, (2) net annual
profi t after taxes, (3) annual cash income before taxes, or (4) annual cash income after 
taxes. These ratios, usually expressed as percents, can be computed for each year or 
on the average profi t or income over the life of the project. In addition, capital invest-
ment sometimes is expressed as the average investment. Thus, although the ROI is a
simple concept, it is important in any given situation to understand clearly how it has
been determined.
E X A M P L E 16 . 6 An initial capital investment is $360,000 and has a 6-year life. Working
capital is $40,000. Total net profi t after taxes over 6 years is estimated at $167,000. Find
the ROI.
Solution
Annual net profit
f
167,000
6
$28,000
ROI on initial capital investment
28,000
360,000
40,000
0.07
=
=
=
+
=
16.6.2 Payback Period
The payback period is the period of time necessary for the cash fl ow to fully recover 
the initial total capital investment (Fig. 16.7). Although the payback method uses cash
fl ow, it does not include a consideration of the time value of money. Emphasis is on
rapid recovery of the investment. Also, in using the method, no account is taken of 
cash fl ows or profi ts recovered after the payback period.
Consider the payback period example shown in Table 16.8. By the payback period
criterion, project A is more desirable because it recovers the initial capital investment 
in 3 years. However, project B, which returns a cumulative cash fl ow of $110,000, ob-
viously is more profi table overall.
16.6.3 Net Present Worth
In Sec. 16.3, as one of the techniques of cost comparison, we introduced the criterion
of net present worth (NPW).
Net present worth
present worth of benefits
f
present worth
r
of cost
−
present worth of benefits
f

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
757
16
By this technique the expected cash fl ows (both + and −) through the life of the project 
are discounted to time zero at an interest rate representing the minimum acceptable 
return on capital, MARR. The project with the greatest positive value of NPW is pre-
ferred. NPW depends upon the project life, so strictly speaking the net present worths 
of two projects should not be compared if the projects have different service lives.
Obviously, the value of NPW will be dependent upon the interest rate used for the 
calculation. Low interest rates will tend to make NPW more positive, for a given set of 
cash fl ows, and large values of interest will push NPW in a negative direction. There 
will be some value of i for which the sum of the discounted cash fl ows equals zero; 
NPW = 0. This value of i is called the internal rate of return, IRR.
16.6.4 Internal Rate of Return
In the beginning of this chapter we considered calculation methods that determined 
what sum of money at the present time, when invested at a given interest rate, is equiv-
alent to a larger sum at a future time. Now with the internal rate of return, we fi nd 
what interest rate makes the present sum and the future sum equivalent. This value 
of interest rate is called the internal rate of return, IRR. This is the rate of return for 
which the net present value equals zero.
If, for example, the internal rate of return is 20 percent, it implies that 20 percent 
per year will be earned on the investment in the project, in addition to which the 
project will generate suffi cient funds to repay the original investment. Depreciation 
is considered implicitly in NPW and IRR calculations through the defi nition of cash 
fl ow as discussed earlier in this chapter.
Because the decision on profi tability is expressed as a percentage rate of return in 
the IRR method, it is more readily understood and accepted by engineers and business 
people than the NPW method, which produces a sum of money as an answer. In the 
TABLE 16.8
Payback Period Example
Cash Flow
Year
Project A
Project B
0
$ −100,000
$ −100,000
1
50,000
0
2
30,000 
10,000
3
20,000
20,000
4
10,000
30,000
5
0
40,000
6
0
50,000
7
0
60,000
$10,000
$110,000
Payback period
3 years
5 years

758 
engineering design 
16
NPW method it is necessary to select an interest rate for use in the calculations, and
that may be a diffi cult and controversial thing to do. But by using the IRR method,
we compute a rate of return from the cash fl ows. One situation in which NPW has an 
advantage is that individual values of NPW for a series of subprojects may be added
to give the NPW for the complete project. That cannot be done with the rate of return
developed from IRR analysis.
E X A M P L E 16 .7 A machine has a fi rst cost of $10,000 and a salvage value of $2000 after 
a 5-year life. Annual benefi ts (savings) from its use are $5000, and the annual cost of op-
eration is $1800. The tax rate is 50 percent. Find the IRR rate of return.
Solution
Using straight-line depreciation, the annual depreciation charge is
D
C
C
n
i
s
C
10,000
2,000
5
$1600
=
=
−
=
The annual cash fl ow after taxes is the sum of the net receipts and depreciation.
a
(
)
CF
(5000
1800)(1
0.50)
1600(0.50)
1600
800
$2400
=
−
(5000
−
+
0.50)
=
+
1600
=
Year
Cash Flow
0
−10,000
1
2,400
2
2,400
3
2,400
4
2,400
5
2,400 + 2,000 (Cs
C )
A i
F i
NPW
0
10,000
2400( /
P A, ,i 5)
2000( /
P F, ,i 5)
=
0
−
+
10,000
If i = 10 percent, NPW = +340; if i = 12 percent, NPW = −214. Thus, we have the IRR 
bracketed, and interpolating gives
i
10%
(12% 10%)
340
340
214
10
2 340
564
10
1.2
11.2%
=
+
10%
−
+
=
+
10
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞=
+
10
=
The IRR function in Microsoft Excel can be used to quickly determine the in-
ternal rate of return. To use IRR, the net benefi ts or costs (−) are entered in a col-
umn of cells, one for each period. Enter a 0 for any period where there is no cash
fl ow. Finally, enter a guess as the starting point for the calculation. For example:
=IRR(A2:A8,5)

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
759
16
It is an important rule of engineering economy that each increment of investment 
t
capital must be justifi ed on the basis of earning the minimum required rate of return.
E X A M P L E  16 . 8  A company has the option of investing in one of the two machines de-
scribed in the following table. Which investment is justifi ed?
Machine A
Machine B
Initial cost Ci
$10,000
$15,000
Useful life
5 years
10 years
Salvage value Cs
C
$2,000
0
Annual benefi ts
$5,000
$7,000
Annual costs
$1,800
$4,300
Solution
Assume a 50 percent tax rate and a minimum attractive rate of return of 6 percent. The 
conditions for machine A are identical with those in Example 16.7, for which i = 11.2 per-
cent. Calculation of the IRR for machine B shows it is slightly in excess of the minimum 
rate of 6 percent. However, that is not the proper question. Rather, we should ask whether 
the increment of investment ($15,000
t
− $10,000) is justifi ed. In addition, because machine
B has twice the useful life of machine A, we should place them both on the same time 
basis (see Table 16.9).
A i
F i
F i
NPW
0
5000
300( /
P AA, ,i 10)
8000( /
P F, ,i 5)
2000( /
P FF, ,i 10)
=
0
−
−
5000
−
F i
/
P F
,i 5)
But, even at i
percent,
r
1
4
=
 NPW = −2009, and there is no way that the extra investment in 
machine B can be justifi ed economically.
TABLE 16.9 
Cash Flow, Example 16.8
Year
Machine A
Machine B
Difference, B - A
0
−10,000
−15,000
−5,000
1
2,400
2,100 
−300
2
2,400
2,100
−300
3
2,400
2,100
−300
4 
2,400
2,100
−300
5
2,400 − 10,000 + 2,000
2,100
−300 + 8,000
6
2,400
2,100
−300
7
2,400
2,100
−300
8
2,400
2,100
−300
9
2,400
2,100
−300
10
2,400 + 2,000
2,100
−300 − 2,000

760 
engineering design 
16
When only costs—not income (or savings)—are known, we can still use the IRR 
method for incremental investments, but not for a single project. We assume that the
lowest capital investment is justifi ed without being able to determine the internal rate
of return, and we then determine whether the additional investment is justifi ed.
E X A M P L E 16 . 9 On the basis of the data in the following table, determine which ma-
chine should be purchased.
Machine A
Machine B
First cost
$3000
$4000
Useful life
6 years
9 years
Salvage value
$500
0
Annual operating cost
$2000
$1600
Solution
This solution will be based on cash fl ow before taxes. To place the machines on a com-
mon time frame, we use a common life of 18 years.
A i
F i
F i
F i
F i
NPW
0
1000
400( /
P A, ,i 18)
2500( /
P F, ,i 6)
2500( /
P FF, ,i 12)
4000( /
P FF, ,i 9)
500( /
P F, ,i 18)
=
0
−
+
1000
+
F i
/
P F
,i 6)
−
F i
4000(P F
Trial and error shows that i ≈ 47 percent, which clearly justifi es purchase of machine B.
We have presented information on the four most common techniques for evaluat-
ing the profi tability of an investment. The rate-of-return method has the advantage
of being simple and easy to use. However, it ignores the time value of money and the
consideration of cash fl ow. The payback period also is a simple method, and it is par-
ticularly attractive for industries undergoing rapid technological change. Like the rate-
of-return method, it ignores the time value of money, and it places an undue emphasis 
on projects that achieve a quick payoff. The net present worth method takes both cash
fl ow and time value of money into account. However, it suffers from the problem of 
ambiguity in setting the required rate of return, and it may present problems when
TABLE 16.10
Cash Flow for Example 16.9
Year
Machine A
Machine B
Difference, B - A
 0
−3000
−4000
−1000
 1 to 5
−2000
−1600
+400
 6
−2000 − 2500
−1600
+400 + 2500
 7 to 8
−2000
−1600
+400
 9
−2000
−1600 − 4000
+400 − 4000
10, 11
−2000
−1600
+400
12
−2000 − 2500
−1600
+400 + 2500
13 to 17
−2000
−1600 
+400
18
−2000 + 500
−1600
+400 − 500

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
761
16
projects with different service lives are compared. Internal rate of return has the ad-
vantage of producing an answer that is the real internal rate of return. The method 
readily permits comparison between alternatives, but it is assumed that all cash fl ows 
generated by the project can be reinvested to yield a comparable rate of return.
16.7
OTHER ASPECTS OF PROFITABILITY
Innumerable factors affect the profi tability of a project in addition to the mathemati-
cal expressions discussed in Sec. 16.6. The purpose of this section is to round out our 
consideration of the crucial subject of profi tability.
We need to realize that profi t and profi tability are not the same concept. Profi t is 
measured by accountants, and its value in any one year can be manipulated in many 
ways. Profi tability is inherently a long-term parameter of economic decision making. 
As such, it should not be infl uenced much by short-term variations in profi ts. In re-
cent years there has been a strong trend toward undue emphasis on quick profi ts and 
short payoff periods that work to the detriment of long-term investment in engineering 
projects.
Estimation of profi tability requires the prediction of future cash fl ows, which in 
turn requires reliable estimates of sales volume and sales price by the marketing staff, 
and of material price and availability. The quadrupling of crude oil prices in 2005 was 
a dramatic example of how changes in raw material costs can greatly infl uence profi t-
ability predictions. Similarly, trends in operating costs must be looked at carefully, es-
pecially with respect to whether it is more profi table to reduce operating costs through 
increased investment, as with automation.
A number of technical decisions are closely related to investment policy and prof-
itability. At the design stage it may be possible to ensure a level of product superiority 
that is more than that needed by the current market. Later, when competitors enter the 
market, the superiority would prove useful, but it is not achieved without an initial 
cost to profi tability. Economics generally favor building as large a production facility 
as the market can absorb. However, this increased profi tability is achieved at some 
risk to maintaining continuity of production should the facility be down for repairs. 
Thus, there often is a trade-off between the increased reliability of having a number of 
smaller production facilities over which to spread the operating risk and a single large 
facility with somewhat higher profi tability.
The profi tability of a particular product line can be infl uenced by decisions of 
cost allocation. Such factors as overhead, utility costs, transfer prices between divi-
sions of a large corporation, or scrap value often require arbitrary decisions for al-
location between various products. Thus, the situation often favors certain products 
and discriminates against others because of cost allocation policies. Sometimes cor-
porations take a position of milking an established product line with a limited future 
(a “cash cow”) in order to stimulate the growth of a new and promising product line. 
Another profi t decision is whether to charge a particular item as a current expense or 
capitalize it to make a future expense. In a period of infl ation there is strong pressure 
to increase present profi tability by deferring costs into the future by capitalizing them. 

762 
engineering design 
16
It is argued that a fi xed dollar amount deferred into the future will have less conse-
quence in terms of future dollars.
The role of the government in infl uencing profi tability is very great. In the broader 
sense the government creates the general economic climate through its policies on
money supply, taxation, and foreign affairs. It provides subsidies to stimulate selected
parts of the economy. Government’s regulatory powers have had an increasing infl u-
ence on profi tability in such areas as pollution control, occupational health and safety,
consumer protection and product safety, use of federal lands, antitrust, minimum
wages, and working hours.
16.8
INFLATION
Since engineering economy deals with decisions based on future fl ows of money, it 
is important to consider infl ation in the total analysis. Ten dollars in purchases and
services in 1980 would require $27 to buy the same items in 2011. While the infl ation 
rate, f, in the United States for consumer goods has typically been below 5 percent in 
the past 20 years, in the early 1980s there were three years of double-digit infl ation.
Infl ation exists when prices of goods and services are increasing so that a given
amount of money buys less and less as time goes by. Interest rates and infl ation are
directly related. The basic interest rate is about 2 to 3 percent higher than the infl ation
rate. Thus, in a period of high infl ation, not only does the dollar purchase less each
month but the cost of borrowing money also rises.
Price changes may or may not be considered in an economic analysis. For mean-
ingful results, costs and benefi ts must be computed in comparable units. It would not 
be sensible to calculate costs in 2012 dollars and benefi ts in 2017 dollars.
Infl ation is measured by the change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI), as de-
termined by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.1 The CPI is
reported monthly, based on a survey of the price of a “market basket” of goods and
services purchased by consumers. In 1984 the CPI was re-centered at 100, and items
for price volatile areas such as food and energy were removed, to create the Core CPI.
The CPI in January 2011 was 220, compared with 100 in 1984. This means that it 
would take $220 in 2011 dollars to purchase the same goods and services as in 1984.
For design purposes the CPI is less important than the Producer Price Index (PPI), 
which is discussed in Sec. 17.10.1.
E X A M P L E 16 .10 The CPI in 1984 was 100.0, and in 2011 it was 220.2. Find the rate of 
infl ation over this period of 27 years.
F
P
P i n
P i
F
i
( /
F PP, ,i
)
220.2
100( /
F PP, ,i 27)
( / ,
P
, 27)
2.202
=
P
P i n
(F P
)
220 2
=
and on interpolation between i = 0.02 and 0.03 we fi nd i = 0.0291.
1. www.bls.gov/cpi/cpifaq.htm

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
763
16
Another way to fi nd the infl ation rate is to use the equation for annualized return.
n
Annualized return
current value
orginal value
1
220.2
100.0
1.0297 1.000
0.0297
3.0%
1
1
27
=
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎠
−
= ⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
=
−
1 0297
=
=
0 0297
 
(16.28)
Money in one time period t1t  can be brought to the same value as money in another 
time period t2t by the equation
1
2
1
2
t
t
t
t
1
Dollars in period
Dollars in period
Inflation rate between
d
=
(16.29)
It is useful to defi ne two situations: then-current money and constant-value money.
Let the dollars in period t1t  be constant-value dollars. Constant-value represents equal
purchasing power at any future time. Current money, in time period t2t , represents or-
dinary money units that decline in purchasing power with time. For example, if an
item cost $10 in 1998 and infl ation was 3 percent during the previous year, in constant 
1997 dollars, the cost is equal to $10/1.03 = $9.71.
There are three different rates to be considered when dealing with infl ation.
Ordinary or infl ation-free interest rate i: This is the rate at which interest is
earned when effects of infl ation have been ignored. This is the interest rate we 
have used up until now in this chapter.
Market interest rate if i : This is the interest rate that is quoted on the business news
every day. It is a combination of the real interest rate i and the infl ation rate f.
This is also called the infl ated interest rate.
Infl ation rate f: This is a measure of the rate of change in the value of the currency.
Consider the equation for the present worth of a future sum F in current dollars.
F
F must be fi rst discounted for the real interest rate and then for the infl ation rate.
F
P
F
i
f
F
i
f
if
F
(1
1
)
1
(1
)
(1
)
i
n
n
f )
n
f
n
=
+i
=
+i
+
=
 
(16.30)
where ifi = i + f + if is the market interest rate, also called the infl ated interest rate.
f
E X A M P L E 16 .11 A project requires an investment of $10,000 and is expected to re-
turn, in future, or “then current,” dollars, $2500 at the end of year 1, $3000 at the end of 
year 2, and $7000 at the end of year 3. The monetary (ordinary) interest rate is 10 percent, 
and the infl ation rate is 6 percent per year. Find the net present worth of this investment 
opportunity.

764 
engineering design 
16
Solution
The infl ated interest rate is 0.10 + 0.06 + (0.10)(0.06) = 0.166; for simplicity we shall use 
if = 0.17.
Current-Dollars Approach
Year
Cash Flow
(P/F, 17, n)
Present Worth
0
−10,000
1.00
−10,000
1
2,500
0.8547
2,137
2
3,000
0.7305
2,191
3
7,000
0.6244
4,971
NPW =  −711
Constant-Value-Dollars Approach
Year
Cash Flow*
(P/F, 10, n)
Present Worth
0
−10,000
1.00
−10,000
1
2,358
0.9091
2,144
2
2,670
0.8264
2,206
3
5,877
0.7513
4,415
NPW =  −1,235
*Adjusted by fi nding present worth in infl ated dollars by 
dividing each cash fl ow in current dollars by (1 + 0.06)n.
In the current-dollars approach the infl ated interest rate is used to discount the cash
fl ows to the present time. For the constant-dollars approach the cash fl ow is adjusted by
[constant (real) $] = [current (actual) $] (1 + f )−n.
The difference in the NPWs found by the two treatments is due to using an approximate
combined discount rate instead of the more accurate value of ifi = 0.166. However, the 
approximation is justifi ed in view of the uncertainty in predicting the rate of infl ation. It 
should be noted that, for this example, the NPW is +$10 if infl ation is ignored. That em-
phasizes the fact that neglecting the infl uence of infl ation overemphasizes the profi tability.
When profi tability is measured by the internal rate of return i, the inclusion of the
infl ation rate f results in an effective rate of return 
f
i′ based on constant-value money.1



f
i
i

f
i f
i
f
1
(
i
1
)i (1
)
i
+
)i (1
−
i
i f
−
(16.31)
Equation (16.31) shows that as a fi rst approximation, the internal rate of return is re-
duced by an amount equivalent to the average infl ation rate.
1. F. A. Holland and F. A. Watson, Chem. Eng., pp. 87–91, Feb. 14, 1977.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
765
16
Interest rates are quoted to investors in current money i, but investors generally
expect to cover any infl ationary trends and still receive an acceptable return. In other 
words, investors hope to obtain a constant-value interest rate i′. If the calculation is
′
to be made with constant-value money, discounting should be done with the normal 
interest rate i. If calculations are in terms of current money, then the discount rate 
should be ifi = i + f.
Note that tax allowance for depreciation has a reduced benefi t when constant 
money is used for profi tability evaluations. By law, depreciation is defi ned in terms of 
current money. Therefore, under high infl ation when constant-money conditions are 
appropriate, a full tax credit for depreciation is not achieved.
Another effect of infl ation is that it increases the cash fl ow because the prices 
received for goods and services rise as the value of money falls. Even when con-
stant-value money is used, the yearly cash fl ows should display the current money 
situation.
16.9
SENSITIVITY AND BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS
A sensitivity analysis determines the infl uence of each factor in a valuation on the 
fi nal result. Therefore, it determines which factors are most critical in the economic 
decision. Since there is a considerable degree of uncertainty in predicting future 
events like sales volume, salvage value, and rate of infl ation, it is important to see how 
much the economic analysis depends on the magnitude of the estimates. To perform 
a sensitivity analysis, one factor is varied over a reasonable range and the others are 
held at their mean (expected) value. The amount of computation involved in a sensitiv-
ity analysis of an engineering economy problem can be considerable, but the use of 
computers has made sensitivity analysis a much more practical endeavor.
A break-even analysis often is used when there is particular uncertainty about 
one of the factors in an economic study. The break-even point is the value for the fac-
tor at which the project is just marginally justifi ed.
E X A M P L E 16 .1 2 Consider a $20,000 investment with a 5-year life. The salvage value 
is $4000, and the minimal acceptable return is 8 percent. The investment produces an-
nual benefi ts of $10,000 at an operating cost of $3000. Suppose there is considerable un-
certainty as to whether the new machinery will survive 5 years of continuous use. Find 
the break-even point, in terms of life, at which the project just becomes economically 
viable.
Solution
Using the annual cost method,
A
n
P
$10,000
3000
(20,000
4000)( / ,
P 8, )
4000(0.08)
0
( /
A PP, 8, )
n
6680
16,000
0.417
−
−
3000
−
n
−
A
4000)(
P 8
)
=
=

766 
engineering design 
16
and interpolating in the interest tables gives us n = 2.8 years. Thus, if the machine does
not last 2.8 years, the investment cannot be justifi ed.
Break-even analysis frequently is used in problems dealing with staged construc-
tion. The usual problem is to decide whether to invest more money initially in unused
capacity or to add the needed capacity at a later date when needed, but at higher unit 
costs.
E X A M P L E 16 .1 3  A new plant will cost $100 million for the fi rst stage and $120 million 
for the second stage at n years in the future. If it is built to full capacity now, it will cost 
$140 million. All facilities are expected to last 40 years. Salvage value is neglected. Find
the preferable course of action.
Solution
The annual cost of operation and maintenance is assumed to be the same for a two-stage
construction and full-capacity construction. We shall use a present worth (PW) calcula-
tion with a 10 percent interest rate. For full-capacity construction now, PW = $140 million
($140M). For two-stage construction
F
n
n
n
n
n
PW
$100M
$120M( /
P FF, 10, )
5 years: PW
100
120(0.6201)
$174M
10 years: PW
100
120(0.3855) $146M
20 years: PW
100
120(0.1486)
$118M
30 years: PW
100
120(0.0573)
$107M
=
+
$100M
=
=
5 years: PW
+
=
120(0.6201)
=
=
10 years: PW
+
=
120(0.3855)
=
=
20 years: PW
+
=
120(0.1486)
=
=
30 years: PW
+
=
120(0.0573)
These results are plotted in Fig. 16.8. The break-even point (12 years) is the point at 
which the two alternatives have equivalent cost. If the full capacity will be needed before
12 years, then full-capacity construction now would be the preferred course of action.
FIGURE 16.8
Break-even plot for 
 Example 16.13.
Full capacity now
PW of cost, $
5
0
50M
10
15
20
Year
Break-even point
12 years
Two-stage construction
25
30
100M
150M
200M

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
767
16
16.10
UNCERTAINTY IN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
In the preceding sections we discussed the fact that engineering economy deals chiefl y 
with decisions based on future estimates of costs and benefi ts. Since none of us has a 
completely clear crystal ball, such estimates are likely to contain considerable uncer-
tainty. In all of the examples presented so far in this chapter we have calculated best 
estimates of the future values without taking into account uncertainty.
Now that we are willing to recognize that estimates of the future may not be very
precise, there are some ways by which we can guard against the imprecision. The sim-
plest procedure is to supplement your estimated most likely value with an optimistic value 
and a pessimistic value. The three estimates are combined into a weighted mean value by
Weighted mean value
optimistic value
4(most likely value)
pessimistic value
6
=
4(most likely value)
(16.32)
In Eq. (16.32) the distribution of values is assumed to be represented by a beta fre-
quency distribution. The mean value determined from the equation is used in the eco-
nomic analysis.
The next level of improved modeling would be to associate a probability with cer-
tain factors in the economic analysis. In a sense, by this approach we are transferring
the uncertainty from the value itself to the selection of the probability.
E X A M P L E 16 .14 The expected life of a piece of mining equipment is highly uncer-
tain. The machine costs $40,000 and is expected to have $5000 salvage value. The new 
machine will save $10,000 per year, but it will cost $3000 annually for operations and
maintenance. The service life is estimated to be:
3 years, with probability
0.3
4 years, with probability
0.4
5 years, with probability
0.5
=
=
=
Solution
For 3-year life: (based on capital recovery)
A
Net annual cost
(10,000
3000)
(40,000
5000)( / ,
P 10, 3)
5000(0.10)
7000
35,000(0.4021)
500
8573
−
(10 000
−
(40 000
−
=
−
7000
−
=
500
−
For 4-year life:
f
Net annual cost
7000
35,000(0.3155)
500
4542
For 5-year life:
f
Net annual cost
7000
35,000(0.2638)
500
2733
Expected value of net annual cost
(
E AC)
AC
(
P AC)
8573(0.3)
[ 4542(0.4)] [ 2733(0.3)]
5207
=
−
7000
−
=
500
−
=
−
7000
−
=
500
−
E
∑
×
AC
=
−8573(0.3)
−
+
4542(0.4)]
−
=
2733(0 3)]
−

768 
engineering design 
16
16.11
BENEFIT-COST ANALYSIS
An important class of engineering decisions involves the selection of the preferred
system design, material, purchased subsystem, and so on etc., when economic re-
sources are constrained. The methods of making cost comparisons and profi tability
analysis described in Secs. 16.3 and 16.6 are important decision-making tools in this
type of situation.
Frequently, comparisons are based on a benefi t-cost ratio, which relates the de-
sired benefi ts to the capital investment required to produce the benefi ts. This method
of selecting alternatives is most commonly used by governmental agencies for deter-
mining the desirability of public works projects. A project is considered viable when
the net benefi ts associated with its implementation exceed its associated costs. Benefi ts
are advantages to the public (or owner), expressed in terms of dollars. If the project in-
volves disadvantages to the owner, these disbenefi ts must be subtracted from the ben-
efi ts. The costs to be considered include the expenditures for construction, operation,
and maintenance, less salvage. Both benefi ts, disbenefi ts, and costs must be expressed
in common monetary terms by using the present worth or annual cost concept.
Benefit-
f
cost ratio (BCR)
benefits
f
disbenefits
f
costs
=
−
 
(16.33)
A design or project for which BCR < 1 does not cover the cost of capital to create 
the design. Generally, only projects for which BCR > 1 are acceptable. The benefi ts
used in the BCR would be factors like improved component performance, increased
payload through reduced weight, and increased availability of equipment. Benefi ts are
defi ned as the advantages minus any disadvantages, that is, the net benefi ts. Likewise,
the costs are the total costs minus any savings. The costs should represent the initial
capital cost as well as costs of operation and maintenance.
In problems of choosing between several alternatives, the incremental or marginal 
benefi ts and costs associated with changes beyond a base level or reference design
should be used. The alternatives are ranked with respect to cost, and the lowest-cost 
situation is taken as the initial reference. This is compared with the next higher-cost 
alternative by computing the incremental benefi t (Benefi ts of Alternative 2 −Benefi ts 
of Alternative 1) and incremental cost (Costs of Alternative 2 −Costs of Alternative 1).
If ΔB/ΔC < 1, then alternative 2 is rejected because the fi rst alternative is superior.
C
Alternative 1 now is compared with alternative 3. If ΔB/ΔC > 1, then alternative 1 is 
C
rejected and  alternative 3 becomes the current best solution. Alternative 3 is compared
with number 4, and if ΔB/ΔC < 1, then alternative 3 is the best choice. We should note
C
that this may not be the alternative with the largest overall benefi t-cost ratio.
E X A M P L E 16 .1 5  You are asked to recommend a site for a small dam to generate hydro-
electric power. The construction cost at various sites is given in the following table. These
vary with topography and soil conditions. Each estimate includes $3M for the turbines 
and generators. The annual benefi ts from the sale of electricity vary between sites be-
cause of stream velocity.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
769
16
We require an annual return of 10 percent. The life of the dam is infi nite for purposes 
of calculation, so this is treated as a capitalized cost, Sec. 16.3.3. The hydroelectric ma-
chinery (H
( -
H E) has a 40-year life.
Site
Construction 
Cost, $M
Cost of 
Machinery, $M
Cost of 
Dam, $M
Annual
Income, $M
A
9
3
6
1.0
B
8
3
5
0.9
C
12
3
9
1.25
D
6
3
3
0.5
Since the benefi t (income) is on an annual basis, we have to convert the cost to an annual 
basis. Also, we are going to make our decision on an incremental basis. We construct 
Table 16.11, placing the alternatives in order of increasing annual cost of capital recovery 
(from left to right).
For example, the annual cost of capital recovery for site A is given by A = PD
P i +
PH-E
P
(A/P
(
, 10, 40) where PD
P  is the cost of the dam construction and PH-E
P
is the cost of the
E
hydroelectric equipment.
Site A Annual costof capital recovery
6,000,000(0.10)
3,000,000(0.1023)
600,000
306,900
$907,000
= 6,000,000(0.10)
=
+
600,000
=
We note that when compared to not building a dam (zero cost and benefi t), ΔB/ΔC for 
C
site D is less than 1.0. The ΔB/ΔC for the next-lowest-cost dam site, B, is greater than 1.0,
C
so it is selected in comparison to not building a dam. The benefi t-cost ratio for sites A and
C also is greater than 1.0, but now, having found a low-cost qualifying site (B), we need to 
determine whether the increment in benefi ts and costs is better than B. We see that on a
ΔB/ΔC basis, A and C are not better choices than B. Therefore, we select site B.
C
TABLE 16.11
Site Benefi t-Cost Analysis, Example 16.15
D
B
A
C
Annual cost of capital 
recovery ($1000)
607
807
907
1207
Annual benefi ts 
($1000)
500
900
1000
1250
Comparison
D to do
 nothing
B to do
 nothing
A to B
C to B
Δ capital recovery
607
807 
100
400
Δ annual benefi ts
500
900
100
350
ΔB/ΔC
0.82
1.11
1.00
0.87
Selection
Do nothing
B
B
B

770 
engineering design 
16
When used in a strictly engineering context to aid in the selection of alternative ma-
terials, the benefi t-cost ratio is a useful decision-making tool. However, it often is used
with regard to public projects fi nanced with tax monies and intended to serve the overall
public good. There is a psychological advantage to the BCR concept over the internal rate
of return in that it avoids the connotation that the government is profi ting from public 
monies. Here questions that go beyond economic effi ciency become part of the decision
process. Many of the broader issues are diffi cult to quantify in monetary terms. Of even
greater diffi culty is the problem of relating monetary cost to the real values of society.
Consider the case of a hydroelectric facility. The dam produces electricity, but it 
also will provide fl ood control and an area for recreational boating. The value of each
of the outputs should be included in the benefi ts. The costs include the expenditures
for construction, operation, and maintenance. However, there may be social costs like
the loss of virgin timberland or a scenic vista. Great controversy surrounds the assign-
ment of costs to environmental and aesthetic issues and are included in the broad topic 
of Design for Sustainability (see Chap. 10).
Although benefi t-cost analysis is a widely used methodology, it is not without 
problems. The assumption is that costs and benefi ts are relatively independent. Basi-
cally, it is a deterministic method that does not deal with uncertainty in a major way.
As with most techniques, it is best not to try to push it too far. Although the quantita-
tive ratios provided by Eq. (16.33) should be used to the greatest extent possible, they 
should not preempt the utilization of common sense and good judgment.
16.12 
SUMMARY
Engineering economy is a methodology that promotes rational decision making about 
the allocation of amounts of money at various points in time and in various ways—for 
example, as a uniform series over time or a single payment in the future. As such, en-
gineering economy accounts for the time value of money.
The basic engineering economy relationship is the compound interest formula
that relates the future sum F to the present sum 
F
P over n years at an interest rate i.
F
P
i
(1
)n
=
+
P(1
If P is solved for in this equation, we are discounting the future sum F back to the
F
present time. If the money occurs as equal end-of-the-period amounts A, then
F
A
i
i
(1
)
1
n
+ i)
If this equation is solved for A, it gives the annual payment to provide a sinking fund
to replace worn-out equipment. More important is the annual payment to return the
initial capital investment plus paying interest on the principal P tied up in the invest-
ment, where CRF is the capital recovery factor.
A
P i
i
i
P
(1
)
(1
)
1
(
)
CRF
C
n
n
+ i)
=

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
771
16
Engineering economy allows rational decisions to be made about alternative 
courses of action involving money. To do this, each alternative must be placed on an
equivalent basis. There are four common ways of doing this.
●Present-worth analysis: All costs or receipts are discounted to the present time to 
calculate the net present worth. This method works best when the alternatives have 
a common time period.
●Annual cost analysis: The cash fl ow over time is converted to an equivalent annual
cost or benefi t. This method works well when the alternatives have different time
periods.
●Capitalized cost analysis: This is a special case of present worth analysis for a proj-
ect that exists in perpetuity (n( = ∞).
●Benefi t-cost ratio: This method analyzes the costs and benefi ts of a project on one 
of the above three bases, and then decides to fund the project if the ratio of benefi ts 
to costs is greater than 1.0.
Realistic economic analysis requires consideration of taxes, chiefl y federal income
tax. Accurate determination of the taxable income requires allowance for deprecia-
tion, the reduction in value of owned assets due to wear and tear or obsolescence.
Realistic economic analysis also requires allowance for infl ation, the decrease in the
value of currency over time.
An important use of engineering economy is in determining the profi tability of 
proposed projects or investments. This usually starts with estimating the cash fl ow to 
be generated by the project.
Cash flow
et annual cash i co e
depreciation
= net annual cash income
Two common methods of estimating profi tability are rate of return on the investment 
(ROI) and payback period.
ROI
average annual net profit
f
capital investment
working capital
=
+
Payback period is the period of time for the cumulative cash fl ow to fully recover the 
initial total capital investment. Both of these methods suffer from not considering the 
time value of money. A better method to measure profi tability is net present worth.
Net present worth
present worth of benefits
f
present worth
r
of costs
−
present worth of benefits
f
With this method the expected cash fl ows (both + and −) through the life of the 
project are discounted to time zero at an interest rate representing the minimum ac-
ceptable return on capital. The internal rate of return (IRR) is the interest rate for 
which the net present worth equals zero.
Net PW
PW(benefits
f
)
PW(costs)
0
PW(benefits
f
)
=

772 
engineering design 
16
Since there is considerable uncertainty in estimating future income streams and 
costs, engineering economic studies often estimate a range of values and utilize a 
mean value. Another approach is to place probabilities on the values and use an ex-
pected value in the analysis.
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Annual cost analysis
Benefi t-cost analysis
Capitalized cost
Capital recovery factor
Cash fl ow
Current dollars
Cash fl ow after taxes
Depreciation
Discounting to the present
Effective interest rate
Future value
Infl ation rate
Internal rate of return
MACRS
Marginal incremental return
MARR
Net present worth
Nominal interest rate
Payback period
Present value
Present worth analysis
Sinking fund factor
Time value of money
Uniform annual series
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Blank, L. T., and A. J. Tarquin: Engineering Economy, 7th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2012.
Canada, J. R., W. G. Sullivan, D. J. Kulonda, and J. A. White: Capital Investment Analysis for 
Engineering and Management, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2005.
Humphreys, K. K.: Jelen’s Cost and Optimization Engineering, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 1990.
Park, C. S.: Contemporary Engineering Economics, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 
1996.
White, J. A., K. E. Case, D. B. Pratt: Principles of Engineering Economic Analysis, 5th ed., 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2010.
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
The interest tables at www.mhhe.com/dieter are available to help you solve these problems. 
Also, note that computer spreadsheet software provides most of the fi nancial functions dis-
cussed in this chapter. It is recommended that you use a spreadsheet to solve the problems.
16.1. (a) 
 Calculate the amount realized at the end of 7 years through annual deposits of 
$1000 at 10 percent compound interest.
(b) What would the amount be if interest were compounded semiannually?
16.2. A young woman purchases a used car. After down payment and allowances, the amount 
to be paid is $8000. If money is available at 10 percent, what is the monthly payment to 
pay off the loan in 4 years? What would it be at 4 percent interest?

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
773
16
16.3. A new machine tool costs $15,000 and has a $5000 salvage value at the end of 5 years. 
The interest rate is 10 percent. The annual cost of capital recovery is the annual depre-
ciation charge (use straight-line depreciation) plus the equivalent annual interest charge. 
Work this out on a year-by-year basis and show that it equals the number obtained 
quickly by using the capital recovery factor.
16.4. A father desires to establish a fund for his new child’s college education. He estimates 
that the current cost of a year of college education is $20,000 and that the cost will esca-
late at an annual rate of 4 percent.
(a) 
What amount is needed on the child’s eighteenth, nineteenth, twentieth, and 
twenty-fi rst birthdays to provide for a 4-year college education?
(b) If a rich aunt gives $10,000 on the day the child is born, how much in additional 
funds must be set aside at 4 percent on each of the fi rst through seventeenth birth-
days to build up the college fund?
16.5. A major industrialized nation manages its fi nances in such a way that it runs an annual 
trade defi cit with other countries of $100 billion. If the cost of borrowing is 10 percent, 
how long will it be before the debt (accumulated defi cit) is one trillion dollars ($1000B)? 
If nothing is done, how long will it take to accumulate the second $1000B debt?
16.6. Machine A costs $8500 and has annual operating costs of $4500. Machine B costs 
$7000 and has an annual operating cost of $4800. Each machine has an economic life 
of 10 years. If the minimum required rate of return is 10 percent, compare the advan-
tages of machine A by
(a) 
present worth method,
(b) annual cost method, and
(c) 
rate of return on investment.
16.7. Make a cost comparison between two conveyor systems for transporting raw materials.
System A
System B
Installed cost
$25,000
$15,000
Annual operating cost
6,000
11,000
 
The service life of each system is 5 years and the write-off period is 5 years. Use 
straight-line depreciation and assume no salvage value for either system. At what rate of 
return after taxes would B be more attractive than A?
16.8. A resurfaced fl oor costs $5000 and will last 2 years. If money is worth 10 percent, how 
long must a new fl oor costing $19,000 last to be economically justifi ed? Use the capital-
ized cost method for your analysis.
16.9. You are concerned with the purchase of a heat-treating furnace for the gas carburizing 
of steel parts. Furnace A will cost $325,000 and will last 10 years; furnace B will cost 
$400,000 and will also last 10 years. However, furnace B will provide closer control on 
case depth, which means that the heat treater can shoot for the low side of the specifi ca-
tion range on case depth. That will mean that the production rate for furnace B will be 
2740 lb/h compared with 2300 lb/h for furnace A. Total yearly production is required 

774 
engineering design 
16
to be 15,400,000 lb. The cycle time for furnace A is 16.5 h, and that for furnace B is 
13.8 h. The hourly operating cost is $64.50 per h.
 
 
Justify the purchase of furnace B on the basis of
(a) 
payout time and
(b) discounted cash fl ow rate of return after taxes.
(c) 
Assume money is worth 10 percent and the tax rate is 50 percent.
16.10. The cost of capital has a strong infl uence on the willingness of management to invest 
in long-term projects. In the early 1990s the cost of capital in America was 10 percent 
and in Japan 4 percent. What must the return be after 2 years on a 2-year investment of 
$1 million for each of the situations to provide an acceptable return on the investment? 
Repeat the analysis for a 20-year period. Explain how your results support the opening 
sentence of this problem.
16.11. Find the present worth of a new experimental fuel cell project based on the following 
cost estimate.
 
Initial cost of equipment 
$350,000
 
Development period 
5 years
 
Fixed charges 
20 percent of initial equipment cost each year
 
Variable charges 
 $40,000 fi rst year, escalating at 6 percent each year 
  with infl ation starting at t = 0
 
MARR 
i = 10%
16.12. Determine the net present worth of the costs for a major construction project under the 
following set of conditions:
(a) 
Estimated cost $300 million over 3 years (baseline case).
(b) Project is delayed by 3 years with rate of infl ation 4 percent and interest cost 
10 percent.
(c) 
Project is delayed 6 years with rate of infl ation 4 percent and interest costs 
10 percent.
16.13. As a new professional employee you need to worry about your retirement many years 
in the future. Construct a table showing how much you need to have invested, at 
4 percent, 8 percent, and 12 percent annual rate of return, to provide each $100 of 
monthly income. Assume that infl ation will increase at 3 percent annually, so the num-
bers you calculate will be in infl ation-adjusted dollars. Calculate the monthly amount 
needed for a retirement period of 25, 30, 35, and 40 years. Assume that the investments 
are made in tax-sheltered accounts.
16.14. At what annual mileage is it cheaper to provide your fi eld representatives with cars 
than to pay them $0.55 per mile for the use of their own cars? The costs of furnishing 
a car are as follows:
 
Purchase price 
$20,000
 
Life 
4 years
 
Salvage 
$3000
 
Storage 
$400 per year
 
Maintenance 
$0.15 per mile
(a) 
Assume i = 10 percent.
(b) Assume i = 16 percent.

 
chapter 16: Economic Decision Making 
775
16
16.15. To levelize expenditures means to create a uniform end-of-year payment that will have 
the same present worth as a series of irregular end-of-year payments. To illustrate, con-
sider the estimated 5-year maintenance budget for a development lab. Develop a level-
ized cost assuming that i = 0.10 and the annual infl ation escalation will be 5 percent.
Year
Maintenance 
Budget Estimate ($)
1
25,000
2
150,000
3
60,000
4
70,000
5
300,000
16.16. The marketing department made the following estimates about four different product 
designs. Use benefi t-cost analysis to determine which design to pursue.
Design
Unit 
Manufacturing Cost
Sales Price
Est. 
Annual Sales
A
$12.50
$25.00
$250,000
B
22.00
40.00
200,000
C
15.00
25.00
250,000
D
15.00
20.00
300,000
16.17. You buy 100 shares of stock in QBC Corp. at $40 per share. It is a good buy, for 
4 years, 3 months later you sell these shares of stock for $148 per share. What is the 
annual rate of return on this fortunate investment?

17
776
17
COST EVALUATION
17.1
INTRODUCTION
An engineering design is not complete until we have a good idea of the cost required 
to build the design or manufacture the product. Generally, among functionally equiva-
lent alternatives, the lowest-cost design will be successful in a free marketplace. The 
fact that we have placed this chapter on cost evaluation toward the end of the text does 
not refl ect the importance of the subject.
Understanding the elements that make up cost is vital because competition be-
tween companies and between nations is fi ercer than ever. The world has become a 
single gigantic marketplace in which newly developing countries with very low labor 
costs are acquiring technology and competing successfully with the well-established 
industrialized nations. Maintaining markets requires a detailed knowledge of costs 
and an understanding of how new technology can lower costs.
Decisions made in the design process commit 70 to 80 percent of the cost of a 
product. It is in the conceptual and embodiment design stages that a majority of the 
costs are locked into the product. Thus, this chapter emphasizes how accurate cost 
estimates can be made early in the design process.
Cost estimates are used in the following ways:
1. To provide information to establish the selling price of a product or a quotation for 
a good or service.
2. To determine the most economical method, process, or material for manufacturing 
a product.
3. To become a basis for a cost-reduction program.
4. To determine standards of production performance that may be used to control costs.
5. To provide input concerning the profi tability of a new product.
It can be appreciated that cost evaluation inevitably becomes a very detailed and 
“nitty-gritty” activity. Detailed information on cost analysis rarely is published in 

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
777
17
the technical literature, partly because it does not make interesting reading but more 
important, because cost data are highly proprietary. Therefore, the emphasis in this 
chapter will be on the identifi cation of the elements of costs and on some of the more 
generally accepted cost evaluation methods. Cost estimation within a particular in-
dustrial or governmental organization will follow highly specialized and standard-
ized procedures particular to the organization. However, the general concepts of cost 
evaluation described here will still apply.
17.2
CATEGORIES OF COSTS
We can divide all costs into two broad categories: product costs and period costs. 
Product costs are those costs that vary with each unit of product made. Material cost 
and labor cost are good examples. Period costs derive their name from the fact that 
they occur over a period of time regardless of the amount (volume) of product that is 
made or sold. An example would be the insurance on the factory equipment or the 
expenses associated with selling the product. Another name for a product cost is vari-
able cost, because the cost varies with the volume of product made. Another name for 
period cost is fi xed cost, because the costs remain the same regardless of the volume 
of product made. Fixed costs cannot be readily allocated to any particular product or 
service that is produced.
Yet another way of categorizing costs is by direct cost and indirect cost. A direct 
cost is one that can be directly associated with a particular unit of product that is 
manufactured. In most cases, a direct cost is also a variable cost, like materials cost. 
Advertising for a product would be a direct cost when it is assignable to a specifi c 
product or product line, but it is not a variable cost because the cost does not vary with 
the quantity produced. An indirect cost cannot be identifi ed with any particular prod-
uct. Examples are rent on the factory building, cost of utilities, or wages of the shop 
fl oor supervisors. Often the line between direct costs and indirect costs is fuzzy. For 
example, equipment maintenance would be considered a direct cost if the machines 
are used exclusively for a single product line, but if many products were manufactured 
with the equipment, their maintenance would be considered an indirect cost.
Returning to the cost classifi cations of fi xed and variable costs, examples are:
Fixed costs
1. Indirect plant cost
(a) Investment costs
Depreciation on capital investment
Interest on capital investment and inventory
Property taxes
Insurance
(b) Overhead costs (burden)
Managers and supervisors not directly associated with a specifi c product or 
manufacturing process

778 
engineering design 
17
Utilities and telecommunications
Nontechnical services (offi ce personnel, security, etc.)
General supplies
Rental of equipment
2. Management and administrative expenses
(a) Share of cost of corporate executive staff
(b) Legal and auditing services
(c) Share of corporate research and development staff
(d) Marketing staff
3. Selling expenses
(a) Sales force
(b) Delivery and warehouse costs
(c) Technical service staff
Variable costs
1. Materials
2. Direct labor (including fringe benefi ts)
3. Direct production supervision
4. Maintenance costs
5. Quality-control staff
6. Intellectual property licenses
7. Packaging and storage costs
8. Scrap losses and spoilage
Fixed costs such as marketing and sales costs, legal expenses, security costs, fi nan-
cial staff expense, and administrative costs are often lumped into an overall category 
known as general and administrative expenses (G&A expenses). The preceding list of 
fi xed and variable costs is meant to be illustrative of the chief categories of costs, but 
it is not exhaustive.
The way the elements of cost build up to establish a selling price is shown in 
Fig. 17.1. The chief cost elements of direct material, direct labor, and any other direct 
expenses determine the prime cost. To it must be added indirect manufacturing costs 
such as light, power, maintenance, supplies, and factory indirect labor. This is the fac-
tory cost. The manufacturing cost is made up of the factory cost plus general fi xed 
expenses such as depreciation, engineering, taxes, offi ce staff, and purchasing. The 
total cost is the manufacturing cost plus the sales expense. Finally, the selling price is 
established by adding a profi t to the total cost.
Another important cost category is working capital, the funds that must be pro-
vided in addition to fi xed capital and land investment to get a project started and pro-
vide for subsequent obligations as they come due. It consists of raw material on hand, 
semifi nished product in the process of manufacture, fi nished product in inventory, ac-
counts receivable,1 and cash needed for day-to-day operation. The working capital is 
1. Accounts receivable represents products that have been sold but for which your company has not yet 
been paid.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
779
17
tied up during the life of the plant, but it is considered to be fully recoverable at the 
end of the life of the project.
Break-Even Point
Separating costs into fi xed and variable costs leads to the concept of the break-
even point (BEP), Fig. 17.2. The break-even point is the sales or production volume at 
which sales and costs balance. Operating beyond the BEP results in profi ts; operating 
below the BEP results in losses. Let P be the unit sales price ($/unit), v be the variable 
cost ($/unit), and f be the fi xed cost ($). Q is the number of production units, or the 
sales volume of products sold. The gross profi t Z is given by
Z
1
Z
PQ
Q
Q
Z
Q
f
Q
f
P
v
At the break-even point,
a
Q
Q
nd
0
Therefor
f e,
BEP
BEP
BEP
(
)
Qv
f
(
)
P
v
PQ
=
Z
a
Q
nd
v
=
(17.1)
E X A M P L E 17.1 A new product has the following cost structure over one month of op-
eration. Determine the break-even point.
v
Labor cost 2.50 $/unit
Materia
r l cost 6.00 $/unit
G & A expenses $1200 Depreciation on equipment $5000
Factory e
r
xpenses $800 Sales & distribution overhead $1000
Profit
f $1.70 $/unit
Total variabl
r
e cost, ,
2.50
6.00
8.50 $/unit
=
+
2.50
=
FIGURE 17.1
Elements of cost that establish the selling price.
1. Gross profi t is the profi t before subtracting general and administrative expenses and taxes.
Direct
material
Direct
labor
Factory
expense
Prime
cost
Factory
cost
General
expense
Sales
expense
Manufacturing
cost
Total
cost
Profit
Selling
price

780 
engineering design 
17
f
P
Q
f
P
v
Total fixed
f
cost, ,f
1200
5000
800
1000
$8000
Sales price,
8.50
1.70
$10.20
8000
10.20
8.50
4706units
BEP
=
=
1200
+
+
800
=
=
+
8.50
=
=
=
−
=
What sales price would be needed for the product to break even at 1000 units?
P
f
Q
v
Q
=
8000
1000
1000
16,500
1000
16.50$ / units
BEP
BEP
(
)
8.50
=
+
=
=
17.3
THE COST OF OWNERSHIP
Having discussed the various ways to categorize costs, in this section we address the
basic contributions to the cost of a product from the viewpoint of the purchaser and
owner of the product. In the next section we examine cost from the viewpoint of the 
manufacturer of the product.1
Purchase Price
The sales price to the purchaser Sp
S  can be expressed by:
Sp
S = (nC
(
U + Cs
C + Px 
P )/n/
(17.2)
where n is the total number of product units produced over the lifetime of the product.
CU is the unit manufacturing cost, Eq. (13.9)
U
Cs
C is the total cost of selling the product (marketing, advertising, distribution, 
salaries of sales personnel, and rebates)
FIGURE 17.2
Break-even curve showing relation between fi xed and variable costs and profi t before taxes.
1. E. B. Magrab, S. K. Gupta, F. P. McCluskey, and P. A. Sandborn, Integrated Product and Process 
Design and Development, 2d ed., Chap. 3, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. 
Fixed costs
Production
Variable costs
Profit
Total cost
Sales
Break-even
point
$

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
781
17
Px
P is the sum of all the profi ts included in the distribution chain, starting with 
x
the manufacturer’s profi t and adding the markups by the distributor (whole-
saler) and retailer
From the viewpoint of the product owner, the true cost is greater than the pur-
chase price given in Eq. (17.2). Equation (17.3) lists the costs of ownership that need
to be considered for a total cost of ownership CT for 
T
np
n  units purchased in a single
transaction
CT = np
n (Sp
S + Cx
C + Co
C + Cps
C ) + Csp
C + Ct + CQ
(17.3)
where Sp
S  is the price on a per unit basis
Cx
C is product related taxes such as sales tax, import duty, or tariffs on a per unit 
x
basis
Co
C is cost of operation on a per unit basis
Cps
C  is support (technical help, maintenance contract, etc.) per unit
Csp
C is cost of spare parts to support np
n  units
Ct is cost of operator training
t
CQ is cost of certifi cation or qualifi cation (ISO 9000, UL approval, etc.)
Note that the purchase price of a product often depends on the number of units 
ordered. For large orders sellers are often willing to reduce their profi t for the sake 
making the sale.
17.4
MANUFACTURING COST
This section extends the discussion of manufacturing cost found in Sec. 13.4.6. The 
total product cost from the viewpoint of the manufacturer, CTM, is given by
 
CTM = n(CM
C + CL
C + CT + CE
C + CW + OHf
H) 
f + CD
C + CWR + CQ + OHc
H
(17.4)
As in Eq. (17.2), n is the total number of units of product sold over its lifetime. 
The fi rst four terms in parentheses are unit costs defi ned in Sec. 13.4.6 for materials, 
labor, tooling, and capital equipment. CW is the unit cost for disposal, including recy-
W
cling, for hazardous and nonhazardous waste generated in the manufacturing process, 
and OHf
H  is the factory overhead. These are all variable costs since they depend on the
f
number of products manufactured.
The remaining terms are fi xed costs. CD
C is the one-time design and development cost 
including design through detail design, costs of reliability testing, software development, 
and protection of intellectual property. CWR is manufacturer dependent life cycle costs, 
chiefl y warranty costs. CQ is defi ned in Sec. 17.2. OHc
H  is corporate overhead. Corporate 
overhead is based on the costs of running the company that are outside the manufactur-
d
ing activities. Corporate overhead can include the salaries and fringe benefi ts of corpo-
rate executives, sales and marketing personnel, accounting and fi nance, legal staff, R&D, 
corporate engineering and design staff, and the operation of the corporate headquarters 
building. These costs are allocated to income producing units in the corporation.
Component (part) costs can be divided into two categories: cost of custom parts
made according to the company’s design from semi-fi nished materials (e.g., bar stock, 

782 
engineering design 
17
sheet metal, or plastic pellets) and cost of standard parts that are purchased from sup-
pliers. Custom parts are made in the company’s own plants or outsourced to suppliers.
Standard parts comprise standard components like bearings, motors, electronic chips,
and screws, but they also include OEM subassemblies (parts made by suppliers for 
original equipment manufacturers) like diesel engines for trucks and seats and instru-
ment panels for automobiles. No matter the origin of its manufacture, the cost of mak-
ing a part includes the material cost, the cost of labor, the cost of tooling, and the cost 
of tool changing and setup. For outsourced parts, these costs are in the purchase price
of the part along with a profi t for the supplier.
The cost for manufacturing a product consists of (1) the costs of the parts, as
defi ned by the parts drawings and the bill of materials for the product, (2) the cost 
for assembling the parts into the product, and (3) overhead costs. Assembly gener-
ally requires labor costs for assembly, and often special fi xtures and other equipment.
Overhead is the cost category that accounts for those costs of manufacture that cannot 
be directly attributed to each unit of production. This is discussed in Sec. 17.5.
The profi t to the manufacturer is Profi t = Selling Price −Cost of Product as de-
scribed in Sec. 17.9. The profi t percentage (margin) is determined by the acceptance
and competition in the marketplace for the product. For unique products it may be
40 to 60 percent, but 10 to 30 percent is a more typical value.
17.5
OVERHEAD COST
Perhaps no aspect of cost evaluation creates more confusion and frustration in the
young engineer than overhead cost. Many engineers consider overhead to be a tax on
their creativity and efforts, rather than the necessary and legitimate cost it is. Over-
head can be computed in a variety of ways. Therefore, you should know something
about how accountants assign overhead charges.
An overhead cost1 is any cost not specifi cally or directly associated with the pro-
duction of identifi able goods or services. The two main categories of overhead costs
are factory or plant overhead and corporate overhead. Factory overhead includes the
d
costs of manufacturing that are not related to a particular product. Corporate over-
head is based on the costs of running the company that are outside the manufacturing
d
or production activities. Since many manufacturing companies operate more than one
plant, it is important to be able to determine factory overhead for each plant and to
lump the other overhead costs into corporate overhead.
One overhead rate may be assigned to an entire factory, but it is more common to
designate different overhead rates to departments or cost centers. How the overhead is
to be distributed is a management decision that is implemented by accountants. 
OH
Overhead
r
rate
Overhead
r
charges
Basis
=
=
OH
(17.5)
1. The term “overhead” arose in early 20th century factories where the bosses were generally located in 
second-fl oor offi ces over the factory fl oor.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
783
17
Historically, the most common basis for allocating overhead charges is direct labor 
dollars or hours. This was chosen in the beginning of cost accounting because most 
manufacturing was highly labor intensive, and labor represented the major fraction of 
the total cost. Other bases for distributing overhead charges are machine hours, mate-
rials cost, number of employees, and fl oor space.
E X A M P L E  17. 2 A modest-sized corporation operates three plants with direct labor and 
factory overhead as follows:
Cost
Plant A
Plant B
Plant C
Total
Direct labor
$750,000
400,000
500,000
1,650,000
Factory overhead
900,000
600,000
850,000
2,350,000
Total
1,650,000
1,000,000
1,350,000
4,000,000
In addition, the cost of management, engineering, sales, accounting, etc., is $1,900,000. 
Find the corporate overhead rate based on direct labor.
Corpor
r
ate overhead rate
1,900,000
1,650,000
1.15
115%
=
=
=
Then, the allocation of corporate overhead to Plant A would be $750,000(1.15) =
$862,500
In the next example of overhead costs, we consider the use of factory overhead in de-
termining the cost of performing a manufacturing operation.
E X A M P L E 17. 3 A batch of 100 parts requires 0.75 h of direct labor each in the gearcut-
ting operation. If the cost of direct labor is $20 per h and the factory overhead is 160 per-
cent, determine the total cost of processing a batch.
The cost of processing a batch is:
$1500
The factor
f
y
r overhead charge is: $1500
$2400
The cost of gear cutting for
f
a batch of 100 parts is processing cost
overhead charge =
$1500
2400
$3900. The unit cost is $39.00.
(
)
$20.00 / h
(
)
100 parts (
)
0.75 h/part
a s
(
)
1.60
=
=
+
+
=
2400
The overhead rate for a particular cost center or remanufacturing process is often 
expressed in dollars per direct labor hour ($/DLH). In Example 17.3, this is $2400/
(100 × 0.75) = 32$/DLH. The allocation of overhead on the basis of DLH sometimes 
can cause confusion as to the real cost when process improvement results in an in-
crease in manufacturing productivity.
E X A M P L E 17. 4 A change from a high-speed steel-cutting tool to a new coated WC tool 
results in halving the time for a machining operation because the new carbide tool can 
cut at a much faster speed without “losing its edge.” The data for the old tool and the new 
tool are shown in columns 1 and 2 of the following table. Because the cost of overhead 
is based on DLH, the cost of overhead apparently is reduced along with the cost of direct 
labor. The apparent savings per piece is 200 − 100 = $100. However, a little refl ection will
show that the cost elements that make up the overhead (supervision, tool room, mainte-
nance, etc.) will not change because the DLH is reduced. Since the overhead is expressed 

784 
engineering design 
17
as $/DLH, the overhead will actually double if DLH is halved. This true cost is refl ected
in column (3). Thus, the actual savings per piece is 200 −160 = $40. To take full advan-
tage of the new technology it will be necessary to fi nd creative ways to reduce the costs
contributing to overhead or fi nd a more realistic way to defi ne overhead.
(1)
Old Tool
(2)
New Tool 
(Apparent Cost)
(3)
New Tool
(True Cost)
Machining time, DLH
4
2
2
Direct labor rate, $/h
$20
$20
$20
Direct labor cost
$80
$40
$40
Overhead rate, $/DLH
$30
$30
$60
Cost of overhead
$120
$60
$120
Cost of direct labor and overhead
$200
$100
$160
In many manufacturing situations, overhead allocation based on something other 
than DLH may be appropriate. Consider a plant whose major cost centers are a ma-
chine shop, a paint line, and an assembly department. We see that it is reasonable for 
each cost center to have a different overhead rate in units appropriate to the function
that is performed.
Cost center
Est. Factory 
Overhead
Est. Number
of Units
Overhead Rate
Machine shop
$250,000
40,000 machine hours
$6.25 per machine hour
Paint line
80,000
15,000 gal of paint
$5.33 per gallon of paint
Assembly dept.
60,000
10,000 DLH
$6.00 per DLH
The preceding examples show that the allocation of overhead on the basis of DLH
may not be the best way to do it. This is particularly true of automated production sys-
tems where overhead has become the dominant manufacturing cost. In such situations,
overhead rates are often between 500 and 800 percent of the direct labor cost. In the
limit, the overhead rate for an unmanned manufacturing operation would be infi nity.
17.6
ACTIVITY-BASED COSTING
In a traditional cost accounting system, indirect costs are assigned to products using 
direct labor hours or some other unit-based measure to determine overhead cost. We 
have already seen (Example 17.4) where traditional cost accounting does not accu-
rately represent cost when a large productivity gain has been made. Other types of dis-
tortion caused by the cost accounting system are concerned with timing; for example,
the R&D costs of future products are charged to products currently being produced, 
and more complex products will require support costs in greater proportion to their 

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
785
17
production volume. For these and other reasons a new way of assigning indirect costs 
called activity-based costing (ABC) has been developed.1
Rather than assigning costs to an arbitrary reference like direct labor hours or ma-
chine hours, ABC recognizes that products incur costs by the activities that are re-
quired for their design, manufacture, sale, delivery, and service. In turn, these activities
create cost by consuming support services such as engineering design, production plan-
ning, machine setup, and product packing and shipping. To implement an ABC system
you must identify the major activities undertaken by the support departments and iden-
tify a cost driver for each. Typical cost drivers might be hours of engineering design, 
r
hours of testing, number of orders shipped, or number of purchase orders written.
E X A M P L E 17. 5 A company assembles electronic components for specialized test equip-
ment. Two products A75 and B20 require 8 and 10.5 min, respectively, of direct labor, 
which costs $16 per hour. Product A75 consumes $35.24 of direct materials and product 
B20 consumes $51.20 of direct materials.
Using a traditional cost accounting system where all overhead costs are allocated to 
direct labor hours at a rate of $230 per DLH, the cost of a unit of product would be:
Direct labor cost
direct
r
mate ial cost
overhead cost
For product A75: $16
$35.24
230
2.13
35.24
30.59
$67.96
For product B20: $16
$51.20
$230
2.80
51.20
40.25
$94.25
(
)
8/60
(
)
8/60
(
)
10.5/60
(
)
10.5/60
+
+
direct
r
material cost
+
+
$35.24
=
+
2.13
+
=
30.59
+ $51.20
+
2.80
+
=
40.25
In an attempt to get a more accurate estimate of costs, the company turns to the ABC ap-
proach. Six cost drivers are identifi ed for this manufacturing system.2
Activity
Cost Driver
Rate
Engineering
Hours of engineering services
$60.00 per hour
Production setup
Number of setups
$100.00 per setup
Materials handling
Number of components
$0.15 per component
Automated assembly
Number of components
$0.50 per component
Inspection
Hours of testing
$40.00 per hour
Packing and shipping
Number of orders
$2.00 per order
The level of activity of each cost driver must be obtained from cost records.
Product A75
Product B20
Number of components
36
12
Hours of engineering services
0.10
0.05
Production batch size
50
200
Hours of testing
0.05
0.02
Units per order
2
25
1. R. S. Kaplan and R. E. Cooper, Cost and Effect: Using Integrated Cost Systems to Drive Profi tability 
and Performance, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA, 1998.
2. In a real ABC study there would be many more activities and cost drivers than are used in this 
example.

786 
engineering design 
17
In building the cost comparison between products we start with direct labor and di-
rect material costs, using the traditional cost accounting method. Then we turn to ABC
in allocating the overhead costs. We apply the activity level of the cost drivers to the cost 
rate of the driver. For example, for Product A75,
setup
u
setup
u
unit
unit
componentst
unit
component
m
unit
orde
r
r
orde
r
r
units
unit
Engineerin
r g services
r
: 0.10 h/unit
$60/h =
/
$6.00/unit
Production setups:
100
$
1
50
2.00 $
Since number of units per setup equals batch size.
Materials handling: 36
0.15
$
5.40 $
Packing and shipping: 2.00
$
1
2
1.00 $
×
=
=
× 0.15
=
We see that by using ABC, we fi nd that product B20 is less costly to produce. This shift 
has come entirely from changing the allocation of overhead costs from DLH to cost driv-
ers based on the main activities in producing the product. B20 incurs lower overhead
charges chiefl y because it is a less complex product using fewer components and requiring
less support for engineering, materials handling, assembly, and testing.
Using ABC leads to improved product-based decisions through more accurate
cost data. This is especially important when manufacturing overhead accounts for a
large fraction of manufacturing costs. By linking fi nancial costs with activities, ABC
provides cost information to complement nonfi nancial indicators of performance like
quality. The preceding data clearly show the need to reduce the number of compo-
nents to lower the cost of materials handling and assembly. On the other hand, using
only a single cost driver to represent an activity can be too simple. More complex fac-
tors can be developed, but at a considerable cost in the complexity of the ABC system.
ABC cost accounting is best used when there is diversity in the product mix of a
company in terms of such factors as complexity, different maturity of products, pro-
duction volume or batch sizes, and need for technical support. Computer-integrated
manufacturing is a good example of a place where ABC can be applied because it has
such high needs for technical support and such low direct labor costs.
Comparison of the Two Products on 
Activity-Based Costing
A75
B20
Direct labor
2.13
2.80
Direct materials
35.24
51.20
Engineering
6.00
3.00
Production setups
2.00
0.50
Materials handling
5.40
1.80
Assembly
18.00
6.00
Testing
2.00
0.80
Packing and shipping
1.00
0.80
$71.77
$66.90

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
787
17
There is more work in using ABC than traditional cost accounting, but this is partly
compensated by the use of computer technology to accumulate the cost data. A big
advantage of ABC is that when the system is in place it points to those areas of indirect 
cost where large savings could be made. Thus, ABC is an important component of a 
total quality management program aimed at process improvement and cost reduction.
17.7
METHODS OF DEVELOPING COST ESTIMATES
The methods to develop cost evaluations fall into three categories: (1) analogy, 
(2) parametric and factor methods, and (3) methods engineering.
17.7.1 Analogy
In cost estimation by analogy, the future costs of a project or design are based on past 
costs of a similar project or design, with due allowance for cost escalation and techni-
cal differences. The method therefore requires a database of experience or published 
cost data. This method of cost evaluation commonly is used for feasibility studies of 
chemical plants and process equipment.1 When cost evaluation by analogy is used,
future costs must be based on the same state of the art. For example, it would be 
valid to use cost data on a 777 jet transport aircraft to estimate costs for a larger 777, 
but it would not be correct to use the same data to predict the cost of the Boeing 
787 because the main structures have changed from riveted aluminum construction to
autoclave-bonded polymer-graphite fi ber construction.
A concern with determining cost by analogy is to be sure that costs are being evalu-
ated on the same basis. Equipment costs often are quoted FOB (free on board) the manu-
facturer’s plant location, so delivery cost must be added to the cost estimate. Costs some-
times are given for the equipment not only delivered to the plant site but also installed in
place, although it is more usual for costs to be given FOB some from the shipping point.
17.7.2 Parametric and Factor Methods
In the parametric or statistical approach to cost estimation, techniques such as regression 
analysis are used to establish relations between system cost and key parameters of the sys-
tem, such as weight, speed, and power. This approach involves cost estimation at a high 
level of aggregation, so it is most helpful in the problem defi nition stage of conceptual 
design. For example, the cost of developing a turbofan aircraft engine might be given by
C
x
x
0.13937
1
0.7435
2
0.0775
where C is in millions of dollars,
C
x1 is maximum engine thrust, in pounds, and x2 is
the number of engines produced by the company. Cost data expressed in this empirical 
1. M. S. Peters, K. D. Timmerhaus, and R. E. West, Plant Design and Economics for Chemical Engi-
neers, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2003.

788 
engineering design 
17
form can be useful in trade-off studies in the concept design phase. Parametric cost 
studies are often used in feasibility studies of large military systems. One must be
careful not to use models of this type outside the range of data for which they apply.
Factor methods are related to parametric studies in that they use empirical rela-
tionships based on cost data to fi nd useful predictive relationships. Equation (17.6)
represents a factor method for determining the unit manufacturing cost of a part.1
C
VC
P
V
(
)
C
C
C
C
u
m
VC
V
v
cP
mp
C
c
s
C
C
ft
VC
VC
V
C
(17.6)
where Cu is the manufacturing cost to make one unit of a part
V is the volume of the part
V
Cmv
C
is the material cost per unit volume
Pc is the basic cost to process an ideal shape by a particular process
Cmp
C  is a cost factor that indicates the relative ease with which a material can be
shaped in a particular process
Cc
C is a relative cost associated with shape complexity
Cs
C is a relative cost associated with achieving minimum section thickness
Cft
C is the cost of achieving a specifi ed surface fi nish or tolerance.
t
It is important to understand that equations based on cost factors are not just made up 
in a haphazard fashion. Basic physics and engineering logic are carried as far as pos-
sible before employing empirical analysis of data. Equation (17.6) is aimed at estimat-
ing the cost to make a part in the conceptual design phase when many of the details of 
the features of the part have not been established. Its goal is to use part cost as a way
of selecting the best process to make the part by including more design details than 
are included in the model for manufacturing cost described in Sec. 13.4.6. Equation 
(17.6) recognizes that material cost is often the main cost driver in part cost, so it sep-
arates this factor from those associated with the process. Equation (17.6) introduces 
Pc, the basic cost to make an “ideal shape” by one of several common manufacturing 
processes. This factor aggregates all of the costs of production (labor, tooling, capital 
equipment, overhead) as a function of the production volume. Note that for a specifi c
company, Pc could be decomposed into an equation representing its actual cost data.
The factors in the parentheses are all factors that increase the cost over the ideal case.2
Of these, shape complexity and tolerances (surface fi nish) have the greatest effect.
Models for developing cost for manufacturing use physics-based principles to de-
termine such process parameters as the forces, fl ow rates, or temperatures involved.
Eventually empirical cost factors are needed when dealing with process details. For 
example, the number of hours for machining a metal mold to be used in injection mold-
ing is given by3 M = 5.83(x( i + xo)1.27 where xi and xo are contours of the inner and outer 
surfaces of the mold, respectively, and in turn, are given by xi or xo = 0.1 NSP
N
where NSP
N
is the number of surface patches or sudden changes in slope or curvature of the surface.
1. K. G. Swift and J. D. Booker, Process Selection, 2d ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2003.
2. Building a model by starting with an ideal case and degrading it with individual factors is a common 
approach in engineering model building. In Sec. 12.3.4 we started with an ideal endurance limit and re-
duced its value by applying factors for stress concentration, diameter, and surface fi nish.
3. G. Boothroyd, P. Dewhurst, and W. Knight, Product Design for Manufacture and Assembly, 2d ed., 
pp. 362–64, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2002.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
789
17
Factor methods of cost evaluation are used for estimating costs in the early stages 
of embodiment design and are employed in the concurrent costing software described 
in Sec. 13.9.1. For more details on parametric cost models, see the Parametric Cost 
Estimation Handbook, cost.jsc.nasa.gov/pcehhtml/pceh.htm. 
17.7.3 Detailed Methods Costing
Once the detailed design is completed and the fi nal detailed drawings of the parts and 
assemblies have been prepared, it is possible to prepare a cost evaluation to ±5 percent 
accuracy. This approach is sometimes called methods analysis, process fl ow method, 
or the industrial engineering approach. The cost evaluation requires a detailed analy-
sis of every operation to produce the part and a good estimate of the time required to 
complete the operation. A similar method is used to determine the costs of buildings 
and civil engineering projects.1
At the outset of developing the cost estimate, the following information should be 
available:
 
● Total quantity of product to be produced
 
● Schedule for production
 
● Detailed drawings and/or CAD fi le
 
● Bill of materials (BOM)
In complicated products the bill of materials may be several hundred lines. This 
makes it important that a system be in place to keep track of all parts and make sure none 
are left out of the cost analysis.2 The BOM should be arranged in layers, starting with the 
assembled product, then the fi rst layer of subassemblies, then the subassemblies feeding 
into this layer, all the way down to the individual parts. The total number of a given part 
in an assembled product is the number used at the lowest level multiplied by the number 
used at each other level of assembly. The total number of each part to be made or pur-
chased is the number per product unit times the total number of products to be produced.
Detailed methods costing analysis is usually prepared by a process planner or a 
cost engineer. Such a person must be very familiar with the machines, tooling, and 
processes used in the factory. The steps to determine cost to manufacture a part are:
1. Determine the material costs. Since the cost of material makes up 50 to 60 percent 
of the cost of many products, this is a good place to start. Usually the cost of mate-
rial is measured on a mass basis, but sometimes it is based on volume, and in other 
instances, as when machining bar stock, it might be measured per foot. Issues con-
cerning the cost of materials were discussed in Sec. 11.5 and Sec. 13.4.6.
It is important to account for the cost of material that is lost in the form of 
scrap. Most manufacturing processes have an inherent loss of material. Sprues and 
1. Historical cost data is published yearly by R. S. Means Co. and in the Dodge Digest of Building Costs. 
Also see P. F. Ostwald, Construction Cost Analysis and Estimating, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 2001.
2. P. F. Ostwald, Engineering Cost Estimating, 3d ed., pp. 295–97, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 1992.

790 
engineering design 
17
risers that are used to introduce molten material into a mold must be removed 
from castings and moldings. Chip generation occurs in all machining processes, 
and metal stamping leaves unused sheet scrap. While most scrap materials can be 
recycled, there is an economic loss in all cases.
2. Prepare the operations route sheet. The route sheet is a sequenced list of all op-
erations required to produce the part. An operation is the smallest category of 
work done on the workpiece while on one machine or in one holding device on the 
machine. Several different workpiece faces may be shaped in one operation. The 
term step is also used in place of operation. For example, an operation on an engine 
lathe might be to face the end of a bar, then rough turn the diameter to 0.610 in. and 
fi nish machine to 0.600. The process is the sequence of operations from the time 
the workpiece is taken from inventory until it is completed and placed in fi nished 
goods inventory. Part of developing the route sheet is to select the actual machine in 
the shop to perform the work. This is based on availability, the capacity to deliver 
the necessary force, depth of cut, or precision required by the part specifi cation.
3. Determine the time required to carry out each operation. Whenever a new part is fi rst 
made on a machine, there must be a setup period during which old tooling is taken out 
and new tooling is installed and adjusted. Depending on the process, this can be a pe-
riod of minutes or several days, but two hours is a more typical setup time. Each pro-
cess has a cycle time, which consists of loading the workpiece into the machine, car-
rying out the operation, and unloading the workpiece. The process cycle is repeated 
many times until the number of parts required for the batch size has been made. Often 
there is a downtime for shift change or for maintenance on the machine or tooling.
Databases of standard times to perform small elements of typical operations 
are available.1 Computer software with databases of operation times and cost calcu-
lation capability are available for most processes. If the needed information cannot 
be found in these sources, then carefully controlled time studies must be made.2 A 
sampling of standard times for elements of operations is given in Table 17.1.
An alternative to using standard times for operation elements is to calculate 
the time to complete an operation element with a physical model of the process. 
These models are well developed for machining processes3 and for other manufac-
turing processes.4 An example of the use of this method for metal cutting is given 
in Sec. 17.13.1.
4. Convert time to cost. The times for each element in each operation are added to 
fi nd the total time to complete each operation of the process. Then the time is 
multiplied by the fully loaded wage rate ($/h) to give the cost of labor. A typical 
1. P. F. Ostwald, AM Cost Evaluator, 4th ed., Penton Publishing Co., Cleveland, OH, 1988; W. Winchell, 
Realistic Cost Estimating for Manufacturing, 2d ed., Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, 
MI, 1989.
2. B. Niebel and A. Freivalds, Methods, Standards, and Work Design, 11th ed., McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 2003.
3. G. Boothroyd and W. A. Knight, Fundamentals of Machining and Machine Tools, 2d ed., Chap. 6, 
Marcel Dekker, New York, 1989.
4. R. C. Creese, Introduction to Manufacturing Processes and Materials, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1999.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
791
17
product will require parts made by different processes, and some parts purchased 
rather than made in-house. Typically, different labor rates and overhead rates pre-
vail in different cost centers of the factory.
E X A M P L E 17. 6 A ductile cast iron V-belt pulley driven from a power shaft is made in a 
batch of 600 units. The material cost is $50.00 per unit. Table 17.2 gives estimates of labor 
hours, labor rates, and overhead charges. Determine the unit product cost.
TABLE 17.1
A Sampling of Cycle-Time Elements
Operation Element
Minutes
Set up a lathe operation
78 
Set up a drilling fi xture
6
Brush away chips
0.14
Start or stop a machine tool
0.08
Change spindle speed
0.04
Index turret on turret lathe
0.03
TABLE 17.2
Process Plan for Ductile Iron Pulley (Batch Size 600 Units)
Cost Center
Operation
(1) 
Setup 
Time 
h/batch
(2) 
Cycle 
Time 
h/100 units
(3) 
Time to 
Finish 
Batch, h
(4) 
Wage 
Rate 
$/h
(5) 
Batch 
Labor 
Cost
(6) 
Batch 
Over-
head
(7) 
Labor & 
Overhead 
Per Batch
(8) 
Unit 
Cost
Outsource
Purchase 600 units, 
rough castings, 
part no. 437837
$50.00
Machine 
Shop—lathe
Total costs for 
operation
2.7
35
212.7 
$32.00 $6806
$7200
$14,006
$23.34
1. Machine faces
2. Machine V-
groove in OD
3. Rough machine 
hub
4. Finish machine 
ID of bore
Machine 
Shop—drills
1. Drill and tap 
2 holes for set 
screws
0.1
5
30.1
$28.00
$843
$1050
$1893
$3.15
Finishing 
Dept.
Total cost for 
operation
6.3
12.3
80.1
$18.50
$1482
$3020
$4502
$7.50
1. Sand blast
2. Paint
3. Install 2 set 
screws
0.06
Totals
9.1
52.3
322.9
$9131
$11,616
$20,401
$84.05

792 
engineering design 
17
The estimates of the standard costs for the elements of each operation give the cycle 
time per 100 units given in column (2). In a similar way the setup costs for a batch are 
estimated in column (1) for each cost center. Multiplying (2) by 6 (the batch size is 600) 
plus adding in the setup cost gives the time to produce a batch of 600 units. With this 
and the wage rate (4), we determine the batch labor cost, column (5). The overhead cost 
for each cost center, based on a batch of 600 units, is given in (6). Adding (5) and (6) 
gives all of the in-house costs for that batch. These costs are placed on a per-unit basis in 
(8). Note that the unit cost of $50.00 for the rough casting that was purchased from an 
outside foundry includes the overhead costs and profi t for that company. The unit costs 
for the completed part developed in Table 17.2 do not include any profi t, since that will be 
determined for the entire product for which the pulley is only one part.
Developing costs by an aggregated method is a lot of work, but computer data-
bases and calculation aids make it much less of an onerous task than in the past. As al-
ready noted, this cost analysis requires a detailed process plan, which cannot be made 
until decisions on all of the design features, tolerances, and other parameters have 
been made. The chief drawback, then, is if a part cost turns out too high it may not 
be possible to make design changes to correct the problem. As a result, considerable 
effort is being given to cost methods that are capable of determining and controlling 
costs as the design process is being carried out. This topic, design to cost, is discussed 
in Sec. 17.12.
17.8
MAKE-BUY DECISION
One of the uses of a detailed cost evaluation method such as was described in 
Example 17.6 is to decide whether it is less costly to manufacture a part in-house than 
to purchase it from an outside supplier. In that example, where the rough casting was 
bought from an outside foundry, it was decided that the volume of cast parts that will 
be used by the manufacturer does not justify the cost of equipping a foundry and hir-
ing the expertise to make quality castings.
The parts that go into a product fall into three categories related to whether they 
should be made in-house or purchased from suppliers.
 
● Parts for which there is no in-house process capability obviously need to be pur-
chased from suppliers.
 
● Parts that are critical to the quality of the product, involve proprietary manufactur-
ing methods or materials, or involve a core technical competency need to be made 
in-house.
 
● Parts other than those in the previous categories, the majority of parts, offer no 
compelling reason to either use in-house manufacture or purchase from a supplier. 
The decision is usually based on which approach is least costly to obtain quality 
parts. Today the make-buy decision is being made not just with respect to sup-
pliers in the vicinity of the manufacturer’s plant, but in locations anywhere in the 
world where low-cost labor and manufacturing skill exist. This phenomenon of 
offshoring is made possible by rapid communication via the Internet and cheap 

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
793
17
water transportation with container ships. It has led to a boom in low-cost manufac-
turing of consumer goods in China and elsewhere in Asia.
Many factors other than cost enter into a make-buy decision.
Advantages of Outsourcing
● Lower cost of manufacture provides lower prime costs (materials and labor), espe-
cially with overseas suppliers.
● Suppliers can provide special expertise in design and manufacturing that the prod-
uct developer may not have.
● Outsourcing provides increased manufacturing fl exibility due to reduction in fi xed 
costs. This lowers the breakeven point for a product.
● Manufacturing in a foreign country may result in access to a foreign market for the 
product.
Disadvantages of Outsourcing
● Outsourcing results in a loss of in-house design and manufacturing knowledge that 
is transferred to the supplier, and maybe to your competitors.
● It is more diffi cult to improve design for manufacture when in-house manufactur-
ing capability is gone.
● Possible unsatisfactory quality.
● In offshoring the supply chain is much longer. There is always a danger of delays
in supply due to delay in gaining entry into port, strikes on the docks, and severe 
weather in transit.
● Offshoring may present such issues as currency exchange, communication in a dif-
ferent language and business culture, and the added expense in coordinating with 
an external supplier.
17.9
PRODUCT PROFIT MODEL
The total cost for manufacturing n units a product was given in Eq. (17.4). Keeping
Eq. (17.4) in mind, we can develop a simple cost model of product profi tability.
(1) Net sales
(number of units sold)
(sales price)
(2) Cost of product sold
(number of units sold)
(unit cost )
terms inside ( ) in Eq. (17.4).
(3) Gross margin
(1)
(2)
Net sales
Cost of product sold
(4) Operating expenses
Terms outside ( ) in Eq. (17.4)
(5) Operating income (profit)
f
(3)
(4)
gross margin
operating expenses
Percentage profit
f
(profit/net
f
sales) 100
*
(number of units sold)
(number of units sold)
= (1)
=
−
Net sales
=
= (3)
=
−
gross margin
=
×
(profit/net
f
sales)

794 
engineering design 
17
Unit cost will be arrived at from Eq. (17.4) and by the methods discussed in Sec. 17.7. 
The number of units sold will be estimated by the marketing staff. Other costs will be 
provided by cost accounting or historical corporate records. 
Note that the profi t determined by the profi t model is not the “bottom line” net 
profi t found on the income statement of the annual report of a company. The net profi t 
is the aggregate profi t of many product development projects. To get from the op-
erating income of a company to its net profi t, many additional deductions must be 
made, the chief of which are the interest on borrowed debt and federal and state tax 
payments. 
It is convenient to build the profi t model with a computer-based spreadsheet pro-
gram. Figure 17.3 shows a typical cost projection for a consumer product. Note that 
the sales price is projected to decline slightly as other competitors come into the mar-
ket, but the sales volume is expected to increase over most of the life of the product as 
it gains acceptance through use by customers and advertising. This results in a nearly 
constant gross margin over the life of the product.
The development cost is broken out as a separate item in Fig. 17.3. The product 
was developed in a two-year period spread over 2012 to 2014. After that a modest an-
nual investment was made in small improvements to the product. It is encouraging to 
see that the product was an instant hit and recovered its development cost in 2014, the 
year it was introduced to the market. This is a strong indication that the product de-
velopment team understood the needs of the customer and satisfi ed them with its new 
product.
Considerable marketing and sales activity began the year of product introduc-
tion and are planned to continue at a high level throughout the expected life of the 
product. This is a refl ection of the competition in the marketplace and the recognition 
that a company must be aggressive in placing its products before the customer. The 
“other” category in the spreadsheet mostly comprises factory and corporate overhead 
charges.
Trade-Off Studies
The four key objectives associated with developing a new product are:
 
● Bringing the cost of the product under the agreed-upon target cost. 
 
● Producing a quality product that exceeds the expectation of the customer.
 
● Conducting an effi cient product development process that brings the product to 
market, on schedule.
 
● Completing the development process within the approved budget for the product.
A product development team must recognize that not everything will go smoothly 
during the development process. There may be delays in the delivery of tooling, costs 
for outsourced components may increase because of higher fuel costs, or several parts 
may not interface in assembly according to specifi cation. Whatever the reason, when 
faced with issues such as these, it is helpful to be able to estimate the impact of your 
plan to fi x the problem on the profi tability of your product. This is done by creating 
trade-off decision rules using the spreadsheet cost model.

17
795
FIGURE 17.3
Cost projections for a consumer product.
2012
$750,000
$1,500,000
$180.00
$178.00
$175.00
$173.00
$170.00
$168.00
$165.00
$18,150,000
$10,120,000
$8,030,000
$250,000
$2,359,500
$2,178,000
$4,787,500
$3,242,500
$24,870,000
17.87%
44.24%
$92.00
110,000
$20,160,000
$11,040,000
$9,120,000
$250,000
$2,620,800
$2,419,200
$5,290,000
$3,830,000
$21,627,500
19.00%
45.24%
$92.00
120,000
$22,490,000
$22,100,000
$11,960,000
$10,140,000
$2,873,000
$2,652,000
$5,775,000
$4,365,000
$17,797,500
19.75%
5250,000
45.88%
$92.00
$12,090,000
$10,400,000
$250,000
$2,923,700
$2,698,800
$5,872,500
$4,527,500
$13,432,500
20.13%
$93.000
130,000
130,000
$21,000,000
$11,280,000
$9,720,000
$350,000
$2,730,000
$2,520,000
$5,600,000
$4,120,000
$8,905,000
19.62%
46.29%
46.24%
$94.00
120,000
$19,580,000
$95.00
110,000
$18,000,000
$9,600,000
$10,450,000
$9,130,000
$350,000
$2,545,400
$2,349,600
$5,245,000
$3,885,000
$4,785,000
19.84%
46.63%
$8,400,000
$750,000
$2,340,000
$2,160,000
$5,250,000
$3,150,000
$900,000
17.50%
46.67%
$96.00
100,000
$1,500,000
($1,500,000)
($2,250,000)
$750,000
($750,000)
($750,000)
Sales Price
Unit Sales
Net Sales
Cost of Product Sold
Gross Margin ($)
Development Cost
Marketing
Other
Total Operating Expense
Operating Income (Profit)
Op Income (%)
Cumulative Op Income
Gross Margin (%)
Unit Cost
2013
2014
2015
2016
Year
2017
2018
2019
2020
Cumulative Sales
Cumulative Gross Margin
Cumulative Op Income
Average % Gross Margin
Average % Op Income
$141,480,000
$64,940,000
$24,870,000
45.90%
17.58%

796 
engineering design 
17
Figure 17.3 represents the baseline profi t model if everything goes according to
plan. Other cost models can easily be determined for typical shortfalls from plan. For 
example:
● A 50% cost overrun in development cost.
● A 5% cost overrun in unit cost.
● A 10% reduction in sales due to poor performance and customer acceptance.
● A 3-month delay in introducing the product into the marketplace.
Table 17.3 shows the impact on the cumulative operating income as a result of these
changes from the baseline condition.
The trade-off rule of thumb is based on the assumption that changes are linear 
and each shortfall is independent of the others. For example, if a 10 percent decrease
in sales causes a $2,957,000 reduction in cumulative operating profi t, then a 1 percent 
decrease in sales will decrease operating profi t by $295,700. Note that the trade-off 
rules apply only to the particular case under study. They are not universal rules of 
thumb.
E X A M P L E 17.7 An engineer estimated that a savings of $1.50 per unit could be made 
by eliminating the balancing operation on the fan of the product for which data is given in
Table 17.3. However, marketing estimated there would be a 5 percent loss in sales due to
increased vibration and noise of the product. Use the trade-off rules to decide whether the
cost saving is a good idea.
Potential benefi t: The unit cost is $96.00. The percentage saving is 1.50/96 = 0.0156 = 1.56%
1.56 × $765,400(per 1% change in unit cost) = $1,194,000
Potential cost: 5 × $295,700 = $1,478,500. 
Benefi t/cost is close but says that the potential cost in lost sales outweighs the savings.
On the other hand, the estimate of lost sales of 5 percent is just an educated guess. One
strategy might be to ask the engineer to do the cost saving estimate in greater detail,
and if the cost saving holds up, make a trial lot that are sold in a limited geographic area
where complaints and returns could be closely monitored. However, before doing this the
TABLE 17.3
Trade-Off Decision Rules Based on Deviation from Baseline Conditions
Type of Shortfall
Baseline 
Oper. Income
Reduced 
Oper. Income
Cumulative 
Impact on Profi t
Rule of Thumb
50% development cost 
overrun
$24,870,000 
$23,370,000
−$1,500,000
$30,000 per %
5% overrun on product 
cost
$24,870,000
$21,043,000
−$3,827,000
$765,400 per %
10% reduction in sales due 
to performance issues
$24,870,000
$21,913,000
−$2,957,000
$295,700 per %
3-month delay in product 
introduction to market
$24,870,000
$23,895,000
−$957,000
$975,000 per %

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
797
17
product made without fan balancing needs to be carefully studied for noise and vibration 
with regard to OSHA requirements.
17.9.1 Profi t Improvement
Three strategies commonly used to achieve increased profi ts are: (1) increased prices, 
(2) increased sales, (3) and reduced cost of product sold. Example 17.8 shows the 
impact of changes in these factors on the profi t using the profi t model described in the 
previous section.
E X A M P L E  17. 8 Case A is the current distribution of cost elements for the product.
Case B shows what would happen if price competition would allow a 5 percent increase in 
price without loss in units sold. The increased income goes right to the bottom line.
Case C shows what would happen if sales were increased by 5 percent. There would be
C
a 5 percent increase in the four cost elements, while unit cost remains the same. Costs 
and profi ts rise to the same degree and percentage profi t remains the same.
Case D shows what happens with a 5 percent productivity improvement (5 percent de-
crease in direct labor) brought about by a process-improvement program. The small 
increase in overhead results from the new equipment that was installed to increase pro-
ductivity. Note that the profi t per unit has increased by 10 percent.
Case E shows what happens with a 5 percent decrease in the cost of materials or pur-
E
chased components. About 65 percent of the cost content of this product is materials. 
This cost reduction could result from a design modifi cation that allows the use of a less 
expensive material or eliminates a purchased component. In this case, barring a costly 
development program, all of the cost savings goes to the bottom line and results in a 
55 percent increase in the unit profi t.
Case A
Case B
Case C
Case D
Case E
Sales price
$100
$105
$100
$100
$100
Units sold
100
100
105
100
100
Net sales
$10,000
$10,500
$10,500
$10,000
$10,000
Direct labor
$1,500
$1,500
$1,575
$1,425
$1,500
Materials
$5,500
$5,500
$5,775
$5,500
$1,225
Overhead
$1,500
$1,500
$1,575
$1,525
$1,500
Cost of product sold
$8,500
$8,500
$8,925
$8,450
$8,225
Gross margin
$1,500
$2,000
$1,575
$1,550
$1,775
Total operating expenses
$1,000
$1,000
$1,050
$1,000
$1,000
Pretax profi t
$500
$1,000
$525
$550
$775
Percentage profi t
5%
9.5%
5%
5.5%
7.75%
A fourth profi t improvement strategy, not illustrated by the example, is to upgrade the mix
of products made and sold by the company. With this approach, greater emphasis is given
to products with higher profi t margins while gradually phasing out the product lines with
lower profi t margins.

798 
engineering design 
17
17.10
REFINEMENTS TO COST ANALYSIS METHODS
Several refi nements to cost estimating methods have appeared over the years aimed at 
giving more accurate cost evaluations. In this section we discuss (1) adjustments for 
cost infl ation, (2) relationships between product or part size and cost, and (3) reduction 
in manufacturing costs because of learning.
17.10.1 Cost Indexes
Because the purchasing power of money decreases with time, all published cost data are
out of date. To compensate for this, cost indexes are used to convert past costs to current 
costs. The cost at time 2 is the cost at time 1 multiplied by the ratio of the cost indexes.
C
C
Index @ time 2
Index @ time 1
2
1
C ⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
(17.7)
The most readily available cost indexes are:
● Consumer Price Index (CPI)—gives the price of consumer goods and services
● Producer Price Index (PPI)—measures the entire market output of U.S. producers
of goods. The Finished Goods Price Index of the PPI is roughly split between du-
rable goods (not in the CPI) and consumer goods. No services are measured by the 
PPI. Both the CPI and PPI are available at www.bls.gov.
● The Engineering News Record provides indexes on general construction costs.
d
● The Marshall and Swift Index, found in Chemical Engineering magazine, provides 
an index of industrial equipment costs. The same magazine publishes the Chemical
Engineering Plant Equipment Index, which covers equipment such as heat exchang-
ers, pumps, compressors, piping, and valves.
Many trade associations and consulting groups also maintain specialized cost indexes.
E X A M P L E 17. 9 An oilfi eld diesel engine cost $5500 when it was purchased in 1982. 
What did it cost to replace the diesel engine in 1997?
C
C
I
I
5500 156.8
121.8
5500(1.29)
$7095
1997
1982
1997
1982
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
=
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠=
=
5500(1 29)
What did it cost to replace the engine in 2006 if the fi nished goods price index for oil and 
x
gas fi eld machinery was 210.3?
C
C
210.3
156.8
7095(1.34)
$9516
2006
1997
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠=
=
7095(1 34)
We see there was an average increase in price of 1.9 percent over the fi rst 15 years, and
a 3.8 percent yearly average over the last 9 years. This is a refl ection of the rapid accel-
eration of oil and gas business in the recent past. Similar calculations for the automobile
parts business would see hardly any price increase since 1997, an indication of the fi erce
competition in this relatively stagnant market.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
799
17
You should be aware of some of the pitfalls inherent in using cost indexes. First, 
you need to be sure that the index you plan to use pertains to the problem you must 
solve. The cost indexes in the Engineering News Record index would not apply to es-
d
timating costs of computer parts. Also, the indexes are aggregate values, and do not 
generally pertain to a particular geographic area or labor market. Of more basic con-
cern is the fact that the cost indexes refl ect the costs of past technology and design 
procedures.
17.10.2 Cost-Size Relationships
The cost of most capital equipment is not directly proportional to the size or capacity 
of the equipment. For example, doubling the horsepower of a motor increases the cost 
by only about one-half. This economy of scale is an important factor in engineering
design. The cost-capacity relation usually is expressed by
C
C
L
L
x
1
0
C
1
0
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
x
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
(17.8)
where C0 is the cost of equipment at size or capacity L0. The exponent x varies from 
x
about 0.4 to 0.8, and it is approximately 0.6 for many items of process equipment. For 
that reason, the relation in Eq. (17.8) often is referred to as the “six-tenths rule.” Values
of x for different types of equipment are given in Table 17.4.
x
Logically, cost indexes can be combined with cost-size relationships to provide 
for cost infl ation as well as economy of scale.
C
C
L
L
I
I
x
1
0
C
1
0
1
0
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
x
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(17.9)
The six-tenths rule applies only to large process or factory-type equipment. It 
does not apply to individual machine parts or smaller kinds of mechanical systems 
TABLE 17.4
Typical Values of Size Exponent for Equipment
Equipment
Size Range
Capacity Unit
Exponent x
Blower, single stage
1000–9000
ft3/min
0.64
Centrifugal pumps, S/S
15–40 
hp
0.78
Dust collector, cyclone
2–7000
ft3/min
0.61
Heat exchanger, shell and tube, S/S
50–100
ft2
0.51
Motor, 440-V, fan-cooled
1–20
hp
0.59
Pressure vessel, unfi red carbon steel
6000–30,000
lb
0.68
Tank, horizontal, carbon-steel
7000–16,000
lb
0.67
Transformer, 3-phase
9–45
kW
0.47
Source: R. H. Perry and C. H. Chilton, Chemical Engineers’ Handbook, 5th ed., p. 25–18, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1973.

800 
engineering design 
17
like transmissions. To a fi rst approximation, the material cost of a part, MtC, is pro-
portional to the volume of the part, which in turn is proportional to the cube of a char-
acteristic dimension, L. Thus, the material cost increases as a power of its dimension.
MtC
MtC
M
L
L
n
1
0
MtC
M
1
0
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(17.10)
where n was found for steel gears to be 2.4 in the range of diameters from 50 to
200 mm and n = 3 for diameters from 600 to 1500 mm.1
In another example of a cost growth law, the production cost, PC, for machining, 
based on time to complete an operation, might be expected to vary with the surface
area of the part, i.e., with L2.
PC
PC
L
L
p
1
0
PC
1
0
=
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(17.11)
Again, p depends on processing condition. The exponent is 2 for fi nish machining and
grinding and 3 for rough machining, where the depth of cut is much deeper.
Information about how processing cost depends on part size and geometry is very
scanty. This information is needed to fi nd better ways to calculate part cost early in
the design process as different features and part sizes are being explored.
17.10.3 Learning Curve
A common observation in a manufacturing situation is that as the workers gain expe-
rience in their jobs they can make or assemble more product in a given unit of time.
That, of course, decreases costs. This learning is due to an increase in the worker’s
level of skill, to improved production methods that evolve with time, and to better 
management practices involving scheduling and other aspects of production planning.
The extent and rate of improvement also depend on such factors as the nature of the
production process, the standardization of the product design, the length of the pro-
duction run, and the degree of harmony in worker-management relationships.
The improvement phenomenon usually is expressed by a learning curve, also 
called a product improvement curve. Figure 17.4 shows the characteristic features of 
an 80 percent learning curve. Each time the cumulative production doubles (x( 1 = 1, 
x2 = 2, x3 = 4, x4 = 8, etc.) the production time (or production cost) is 80 percent of what 
it was before the doubling occurred. For a 60 percent learning curve the production 
time would be 60 percent of the time before the doubling. Thus, there is a constant 
percentage reduction for every doubled2 production. Such an obviously exponential
1. K. Erlenspiel et al., Cost-Effi cient Design, p. 161, Springer, New York, 2007.
2. The learning curve could be constructed for a tripling curve of production or any other amount, but it 
is customary to base it on a doubling.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
801
17
curve will become linear when plotted on loglog coordinates (Fig. 17.5). Note that a
60 percent learning curve gives a greater cost reduction than an 80 percent learning 
curve.
The learning curve is expressed by
y
kx
k
n  
(17.12)
where y is the production effort, expressed either as h/unit or $/unit
k is the effort to manufacture the fi rst unit of production
k
x is the unit number, that is,
x
x = 5 or x = 45
n is the negative slope of the learning curve, expressed as a decimal. Values for 
n are given in Table 17.5.
The value for n can be found as follows: For an 80 percent learning curve,
FIGURE 17.4
An 80 percent learning curve.
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
y2 = 0.8y1
y3 = 0.8y2 = 0.64y1
y4 = 0.8y3 = 0.64y2 = 0.51y1
y1
Production time
(arbitrary units)
4
Cumulative production, units
5
6
7
8
1.0
10
100
60%
70%
80%
90%
Price or cost
Cumulative production, units
1000
10,000
100,000
0.001
0.01
0.1
1.0
FIGURE 17.5
Standard learning curves.

802 
engineering design 
17
y2 = 0.8y1 for x2 = 2x1. Then,
y
y
x
x
y
y
x
x
n
n
0.8
2
log 2
log0.8
0.0969
0.3010
0.322
n
n
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
=
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
=
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
=
= −
= −
Note that the learning curve percentage, expressed as a decimal, is P = 2n.
E X A M P L E 17.10 The fi rst of a group of 80 machines takes 150 h to build and assemble. 
If you expect a 75 percent learning curve, how much time would it take to complete the
fortieth machine and the last machine?
y
kx
k
P
n
k
y
x
x
y
y
n
For
75%,
0.415, and
150
150(
)
x
For
4
x
0
150(40
)
32.4h
For
8
x
0
150(80
)
24.3h
0415
40
0 415
80
0 415
=
n
−
=
k
0 415 and
=
=
150(40
)
=
=
150(80
)
The learning curve can be expressed as the production time in hours to produce a
particular number unit or as the cumulative average hours to make N units. The latter 
N
term is usually of more interest in cost evaluation. The distinction between these two
ways of expressing the output is shown in Table 17.6. Note that, for a given number of 
units of output, the cumulative average is greater than the unit values. However, the
TABLE 17.5
Exponent Values for Typical Learning 
Curve Percentages
Learning Curve Percentages, P
n
65
−0.624
70
−0.515
75
−0.415 
80
−0.322
85
−0.234
90
−0.152

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
803
17
learning improvement percentage (80 percent) that applies to the unit values does not 
apply to the cumulative values. Similarly, if the unit values are derived from cumula-
tive values, the constant percentage does not apply. In constructing learning curves 
from historical data we are more likely to fi nd records of cumulative total hours than 
the hours to build each unit.
The total hours, TcT , required to manufacture a cumulative total of N units is given by
N
T
y
y
y
c
N
T
y
T
y
i
i
N
y
1∑
+
y1
+
=
yN
y
=
 
(17.13)
The average time to produce N parts, 
N
TaT , is
T
T
N
aT
cT
=
(17.14)
An approximation for Eq. (17.14) when N is greater than 20 is
N
T
kN
1
aT
n

(
)
n
1
 
(17.15)
17.11
COST OF QUALITY
The four basic costs of quality were discussed in Section 15.4. In this section we give 
some relationships for determining three of these costs. The fourth cost, the preven-
tion of defects by the use of quality enhancing methods in design and manufacture, 
does not lend itself to the kind of relationships presented here. Generally there is a cost 
in staff training to provide the knowledge and practice to become expert in the use of 
the quality methods (see Sec.15.1 to 15.7), but that should be small in comparison with 
the benefi ts in customer acceptance and high quality products that will result.
TABLE 17.6
Based on an 80 Percent Learning Curve
x units
y, h/unit
Cumulative 
Total Hours
y, Cumulative 
Average h/unit
1
100.00
100.00
100.00
2
  80.00
180.00
90.00
3
  70.22
250.22
83.41
4
  64.00 
314.22
78.55
5
  59.56
373.78
74.76
6
  56.16
429.94
71.66
7
  53.44
483.38
69.05
8
  51.19
534.57
66.82

804 
engineering design 
17
Internal Failures
These are the costs when materials, parts, and modules fail to meet the require-
ments for shipping to the customer. As a result the parts will be scrapped or reworked,
and cost is incurred. Moreover, if there is a high incidence of defects, as often occurs
with complex integrated circuit chips, it is necessary to overproduce the number of 
units to achieve the needed number of parts.
The number of acceptable defect-free parts Na
N  compared to the total number of 
parts N that enter a manufacturing operation is the yield 
N
Yop
Y .
Y
N
N
op
a
=
 
(17.16)
The quantity Yop
Y
is the probability of achieving a part with zero defects from the 
particular manufacturing operation. If the manufacturing process has p independent 
operations, then the yield of the entire process is given by
Y
Y
i
p
1
proces
r
s
o
i
1
p
o
=
∏
 
(17.17)
For example, if the process involves three operations, with yields of 90, 85, and 95%, the 
process yield will be (0.90)(0.85)(0.95) = 0.73. The unit cost to make a part then would
be CU/0.73.
U
Testing Costs
A slightly more detailed expression for the cost of internal failures is1 Eq. (17.18).
This allows for a process where there is a series of tests after various operations.
C
C
C
Y
out
in
test
C
in
Y
=
 
(17.18)
where Cout
C
is the unit cost of a part that has passed the test station
t
Yin
Y  is the yield of parts as they enter the p+1 test station; this is found from 
Eq. (17.17)
Ctest is the cost of making the test on one unit
t
External Failures
A warranty is a contract between the manufacturer and the buyer that the product 
will perform as advertised. The warranty cost needs to be estimated in order that the 
cost of servicing the warranty can be properly accounted for in the price or mainte-
nance agreement for the product. For the simplest class of warranty, where the product 
is replaced or repaired free of cost to the customer, the warranty reserve amount CWR
for a time period tw is given by2
C
C
nM
C
(
)
t
WR
fc
C
w
rc
+
C f
C
 
(17.19)
1. P. Sandborn, Course Notes on Manufacturing and Life Cycle Cost Analysis of Electronic Systems,
CALCE EPSC Press, College Park, MD, 2005.
2. E. B. Magrab, S. K. Gupta, F. P. McCluskey and P. A. Sandborn, Integrated Product and Process 
Design and Development, pp. 51–52, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2010.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
805
17
where Cfc
C is fi xed cost of maintaining the warranty system
n is number of products sold
Crc
C
is average recurring cost of replacing or repairing products, on a per unit 
basis
M(tw) is the number of replacement products expected to be needed in the inter-
w
val 0 to tw, where tw is the time until actuating the warranty
M(tw) 
w = λt
λ w where λ is the constant failure rate; see Sec. 14.3.2
λ
17.12
DESIGN TO COST
Design to cost, also called target costing, is the approach in which a target value,
(sometimes called “should-cost” data), for the cost of a product is established at the 
beginning of a product development project. All design decisions are examined for 
their impact on keeping below the target cost. This is in contrast with the more usual 
practice of waiting for a complete cost analysis in the detail design phase. If this 
proves to be excessive, then the only practical recourse is to try to wring the excess 
cost out of the manufacturing process or to substitute a less expensive material, often
at the expense of quality.
The steps in accomplishing design to cost are:1
●Establish a realistic and reliable target cost. The target cost is the difference between
a realistic estimate of what the customer will pay for the product when developed 
minus the expected profi t. This requires effective and realistic market analysis and an 
agile product development process that gets the product to market in minimum time.
●Divide the target cost into subunits. The basis for dividing the total cost can be
(1) cost of subsystems and components in similar designs, (2) division according 
to competitors’ component costs, as determined from dissection of competitor 
products2, or (3) on the basis of estimates of what the customer is willing to pay for 
various functions and features of the product.
●Oversight of compliance with cost targets. A major difference in the design to cost 
approach is that the cost projections will be evaluated after each design phase as 
well as before going into production. For this to be effective there must be cost 
evaluation methods that can be applied at an earlier stage than detail design. There 
must also be a systematic way of quickly making cost comparisons.
17.12.1 Order of Magnitude Estimates
At the very early stage of product development where the market for a new product is 
being studied, comparison is usually made with similar products already on the mar-
ket. This gives bounds on the expected selling price. Often the cost is estimated with 
1. K. Ehrlenspiel et al., op. cit., pp. 44–63.
2. For details see K. T. Ulrich and S. Peterson, Management Science, vol. 44, no.3, pp. 352–369, 1998.

806 
engineering design 
17
a single factor. Weight is most commonly used. For example,1 products can be divided 
roughly into three categories:
1. Large functional products—automobile, front-end loader, tractor
2. Mechanical/electrical—small appliances and electrical equipment
3. Precision products—cameras, electronic test equipment
Products in each category cost roughly the same on a weight basis, but the cost between
categories increases by a factor of approximately 10.
A slightly more sophisticated method is to estimate cost on the basis of the percentage
of the share of the total cost that is due to materials cost.2 For example, about 70 percent 
of the cost of an automobile is material cost, about 50 percent for a diesel engine, about 
25 percent for electrical instruments, and about 7 percent for china dinnerware.
E X A M P L E 17.11 What is the total cost of a diesel engine that weighs 300 lb? The engine
is made from ductile iron that costs $2/lb. The material cost share for the engine is 0.5.
Cost
/0.5
$1200
(
)
300
$2
= (300
=
Another rule of thumb is the one-three-nine rule.3 This states the relative proportions
of material cost to manufacturing cost to selling price are in the ratio of 1:3:9. In this
rule the material cost is infl ated by 20 percent to allow for scrap and tooling costs.
E X A M P L E 17.1 2 A 2 lb part is made from an aluminum alloy costing $1.50/lb. What is
the estimated material cost, part cost, and selling price?
Material cost = 1.2
1.50 $/lb
2 lb = $3.60
Part cost = 3
material cost = 3
$3.60 = $10.80
Selling price = 3
part cost = 3
$10.80
$32.40 or
Selling price = 9
material cost = 9
$3.60 = $32.40
×
×
1.50 $/lb
×
×
material cost = 3
×
×
part cost = 3
=
×
×
material cost = 9
17.12.2 Costing in Conceptual Design
At the conceptual design stage, few details have been decided about the design. Cost-
ing methods are required that allow for direct comparison between different types of 
designs that would perform the same functions. An accuracy of ±20 percent is the goal.
Relative costs are often used for comparing the costs of different design confi gu-
rations, standard components, and materials. The base cost is usually the cost of the
lowest-cost or most commonly used item. An advantage of relative cost scales is that 
they change less with time than do absolute costs. Also, there are fewer problems with
proprietary issues with relative costs. Companies are more likely to release relative 
cost data than they are absolute costs.
1. R. C. Creese, M. Adithan, and B. S. Pabla, Estimating and Costing for the Metal Manufacturing 
Industries, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1992, p. 101.
2. R. C. Creese et al., op. cit., pp. 102–5.
3. H. F. Rondeau, Machine Design, Aug. 21, 1975, pp. 50–53.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
807
17
Parametric methods work well where designs tend to be variants of earlier 
designs. The costing information available at the conceptual design stage usually con-
sists of historical cost for similar products. For example, cost equations for two-engine 
small airplanes have been developed,1 and similar types of cost relationships exist for 
coal-fi red power plants and many types of chemical plants. However, for mechanical 
products, where there is a wide diversity of products, few such relationships have been 
published. This information undoubtedly exists within most product manufacturing 
companies.
Cost calculations in conceptual design must be done quickly and without the 
amount of cost detail used in Example 17.6. One saving grace is that not all parts in 
a product will require cost analysis. Some parts may be identical to parts in other 
products, for which the cost is known. Other parts are standard components or are 
parts that will be outsourced, and the costs are known with a fi rm quotation. An 
additional group of parts will be similar parts that differ only by the addition or 
subtraction of some physical features. The cost of these parts will be the cost of the 
original part plus or minus the cost of the operations to create the features that are 
different.
For those parts that require a cost analysis, “quick cost calculations” are used. 
The development of quick cost methods is an ongoing activity, chiefl y in Germany.2
The methods are too extensive to detail here, other than to give an example of an
equation for scaling unit manufacturing cost Cu from size L0 to size L1.
C
PCsu
n
L
L
PCt
L
L
MtC
L
L
u
1
0
0.5
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
3
=
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
+
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
+
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(17.20)
In the equation, PCsu is the processing cost for tool setup, PCt0 is the processing cost 
for making the original part based on total operation time, MtC0 is the material cost 
for the original size L0, and n is the batch size.
An intellectually satisfying approach to determining costs early in design is func-
tional costing.3 The idea behind this approach is that once the functions to be per-
formed have been determined, the minimum cost of the design has been fi xed. Since 
it is in conceptual design that we identify the needed functions and work with alterna-
tive ways of achieving them, linking functions to cost gives us a direct way of design-
ing to cost. A start has been made with standard components like bearings, electric 
motors, and linear actuators, where the technology is relatively mature and costs have 
become rather competitive. Linking function with cost is the basic idea behind value 
analysis. This is discussed in the next section.
Probably the greatest progress in fi nding ways to determine cost early in the de-
sign process is with the use of special software. A number of software programs that 
1. J. Roskam, J. Aircraft, vol. 23, pp. 554–560, 1986.
2. K. Ehrlenspiel, op. cit., pp. 430–456.
3. M. J. French, Jnl. Engr. Design, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 47–53, 1990; M. J. French and M. B. Widden, Design 
for Manufacturability 1993, DE, vol. 52, pp. 85–90, ASME, New York, 1993.

808 
engineering design 
17
incorporate quick design calculations, cost models of processes, and cost catalogs are 
available. Some sources where you can fi nd additional information are:
 
● SEER-MFG by Galorath1 uses advanced parametric modeling to estimate manu-
facturing costs early in the design process. The software is able to deal with the 
following processes: machining, casting, forging, molding, powder metals, heat 
treatment, coating, fabrication of sheet metal, composite materials, printed circuit 
boards, and assembly. SEER-H provides system-level cost analysis and manage-
ment in product development from work breakdown structure to the cost of opera-
tion and maintenance.
 
● DFM Concurrent Costing by Boothroyd Dewhurst2 was discussed in Sec. 13.10.2. 
This software requires minimum part detail to provide relative costs for process 
selection.
 
● CustomPartNet3 is the only online source that provides free cost estimation tools 
for material and process selection. Processes considered are injection molding, sand  
and die casting, and machining. They also provide a collection of special calcula-
tors called “widgets” for common design and manufacturing problems.
 
● Costimator by MTI Systems4 provides detailed cost estimates for parts made by 
machining. As one of the early suppliers in this fi eld, its software contains exten-
sive cost models, labor standards, and material cost data. It specializes in providing 
a fast, accurate, and consistent method that allows job shops to estimate cycle times 
and costs for preparing quotations.
17.13
VALUE ANALYSIS IN COSTING
Value analysis or value engineering is a problem-solving process to improve the value 
of a product for the customer.5 Value is defi ned as the worth of a part, feature, or as-
sembly related to its cost. Value analysis is often the fi rst step in a redesign of a prod-
uct, where the objective is to improve the functionality at fi xed cost, or to reduce the 
cost keeping the functionality the same. 
The value analysis methodology seeks to improve the design by fi nding answers 
to the following questions.
 
● Can we do without the part? (Use DFA analysis)
 
● Does the part do more than required?
 
● Does the part cost more than it is worth?
 
● Is there something that does the job better?
 
● Is there a less costly way to make the part?
 
● Can a standard item be used in place of the part?
1. www.galorath.com
2. www.dfma.com
3. www.custompartnet.com
4. www.mtisystems.com
5. T. C. Fowler, Value Analysis in Design, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1990.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
809
17
1. www.value-eng.org/education_publications_function_monographs.php
2. http://wendt.library.wisc.edu/miles/milesbook.html
3. M. S. Hundal, Systematic Mechanical Design, ASME Press, New York, 1997, pp. 175, 193–96.
● Can an outside supplier provide the part at less cost without affecting quality or 
delivery schedule?
The fi rst step in a value analysis study is to determine the costs of the parts and relate
these to the functions which they provide. Example 17.13 shows how to do this. For more
information on value analysis see the webpage of the Society of Value Engineers1 and
the online copy of the classic book by the originator of value analysis, Lawrence Miles.2
E X A M P L E 17.1 3 Table 17.7 shows the cost structure for a centrifugal pump.3 In this 
table the components of the pump have been classifi ed into three categories, A, B, and C, 
according to their manufacturing costs. Components in class A comprise 82 percent of the 
total cost. These “vital few” need to be given the greatest thought and attention.
We now focus attention on the functions provided by each component of the pump 
(Table 17.8). This table of functions is added to the cost structure table to create Table 17.9.
Note that an estimate has been made of how much each component contributes to each
function. For example, the shaft contributes 60 percent to transfer of energy (F2) and 
40 percent to supporting the parts (F6). Multiplying the cost of each component by the frac-
tion it serves to provide a given function gives the total cost for each function. For example,
the function support parts (F6) is provided partly by the housing, shaft, and bearings.
Cost of F6 = 0.5
0.4
1.0
$3690
(
)
5500
(
)
850
(
)
600
+
+
0.4(
)
850
=
These calculations are summarized in Table 17.10. This table shows that the expensive
functions of the pump are containing the liquid, converting the energy, and supporting the 
TABLE 17.7
Cost Structure for a Centrifugal Pump
Manufacturing 
Cost
Type of Cost, %
Cost 
Category
Part
$
%
Material
Production
Assembly
A
Housing
5500
45.0
65
25
10
A
Impeller
4500
36.8
55
35
10
B
Shaft
850 
7.0
45
45
10
B
Bearings
600
4.9
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
B
Seals
500
4.1
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
B
Wear rings
180
1.5
35
45
20
C
Bolts
50
<1
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
C
Oiler
20
<1
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
C
Key
15
<1
30
50
20
C
Gasket
10
<1
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
From M. S. Hundal, Systematic Mechanical Design, ASME Press, New York, 1997. Used 
with permission.

810 
engineering design 
17
TABLE 17.9
Cost Structure for Centrifugal Pump with Function Cost Allocation
Manufacturing 
Cost
Type of Cost, %
Cost 
Class
Part
$
%
Material
Production
Assembly
Function 
Allocation, %
A
Housing
5500
45.0
65
25
10
F1
50
F6
50
A
Impeller
4500
36.8
55
35 
10
F2
30
F3
70
B
Shaft
850
7.0
45
45
10
F2
60
F6
40
B
Bearings
600
4.9
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
F6
100
B
Seals
500
4.1
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
F1
100
B
Wear rings
180
1.5
35
45
20
F5
100
C
Bolts
50
<1
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
F4
100
C
Oiler
20
<1
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
F5
100
C
Key
15
<1
30
50
20
F2
80
F4
20
C
Gasket
10
<1
Purchased
Purchased
Purchased
F1
100
From M. S. Hundal, Systematic Mechanical Design, ASME Press, New York, 1997. Used with permission.
TABLE 17.8
Functions Provided by Each Component of the 
Centrifugal Pump
Function
Description
Components
F1
Contain liquid
Housing, seals, gasket
F2
Transfer energy
Impeller, shaft, key
F3
Convert energy 
Impeller
F4
Connect parts
Bolts, key
F5
Increase life
Wear rings, oiler
F6
Support parts
Housing, shaft, bearings
From M. S. Hundal, Systematic Mechanical Design, ASME Press. Used 
with permission.
parts. Thus, we know where to focus attention in looking for creative solutions in reduc-
ing costs in the design and manufacture of the pump.
Table 17.7 shows the cost of the parts arranged in descending order, as in a Pareto 
chart. Thus, the housing and impeller would be logical places to look for cost reduction. 
The housing shares roughly equally in providing the functions of containing liquid (F1) 
and providing structural support (F6). These are, respectively, #2 and #1, and together 
constitute 57 percent of function cost. The housing would be the prime candidate for cost 
reduction since the impeller is the most critical part in making the pump. One might con-
ceive that by using advanced casting methods like investment casting and FEA analysis 
a lighter and cheaper housing could be designed without any loss in structural rigidity of 
the pump.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
811
17
TABLE 17.10
Calculation of Function Costs for Centrifugal Pump
Function
Part
% of Part 
Cost for 
Function
Part Cost, $
Function Cost 
of Individual 
Part, $
Total 
Function Cost
$
%
F1:  Contain 
liquid
Housing
50 
5500
2750
Seals
100
500
500
Gasket
100
10
10
3260
26.7
F2:  Transfer 
energy
Impeller
30
4500
1350
Shaft
60
850
510
Key
80
15
12
1872
15.3
F3:  Convert 
energy
Impeller
70
4500
3150
3150
25.8
F4:  Connect 
parts
Key
20
15
3
Bolts
100
50
50
53
0.4
F5:  Increase 
life
Wear rings
100
180
180
Oiler
100
20
20
200
1.6
F6:  Support 
parts
Housing
50
5500
2750
Shaft
40
850
340
Bearings
100
600
600
3690
30.2
From M. S. Hundal, Systematic Mechanical Design, ASME Press, New York, 1997. Used with permission.
17.14
MANUFACTURING COST MODELS
The importance of modeling in the design process has been emphasized throughout 
this text. Modeling can show which elements of a design contribute most to the cost; 
that is, it can identify cost drivers. With a cost model it is possible to determine the 
conditions that minimize cost or maximize production (cost optimization).
17.14.1 Machining Cost Model
Extensive work has been done on cost models for metal removal processes.1 For a 
background on machining, see Sec. 13.14. Broken down into its simplest cost ele-
ments, a machining process can be described by Fig. 17.6. The time designated A is 
1. E. J. A. Armarego and R. H. Brown, The Machining of Metals, Chap. 9, Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ, 1969; G. Boothroyd and W. A. Knight, Fundamentals of Machining and Machine Tools, 
3d ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2006.

812 
engineering design 
17
the machining plus work-handling costs per piece. If B is the tool cost, including the 
costs of tool changing and tool grinding, in dollars per tool, then
nA
B
n
A
B
n
Cost/piece =
+
=
+
A
 
(17.21)
where n is the number of pieces produced per tool.
We shall now consider a more detailed cost model for turning down a bar on a
lathe (Fig. 17.7). The machining time for one cut, tc, is
t
L
V
L
f N
c
f
V eed
f
=
=
 
(17.22)
where Vfeed
V
= feed velocity, in./min
f = feed rate, in./rev
N = rotational velocity, rev/min
Equation (17.22) provides detail only for the process of turning a cylindrical bar. For 
other geometries or other processes such as milling or drilling, different expressions
would be used for L or 
L
Vfeed
V
.
The total cost of a machined part is the sum of the machining cost Cmc
C , the cost of 
the cutting tools, Ct, and the cost of the material Cm
C .
C
C
C
C
u
m
C c
t
C
m
C
+
Cm
C c
 
(17.23)
where Cu is the total unit (per piece) cost. The machining cost, Cmc
C  ($/h), depends on
the machining time tunit
t
and the costs of the machine, labor, and overhead.
t
FIGURE 17.6
Elements of a machining operation.
A
One work cycle
Number of pieces
1
LW = load workpiece
AT = advance the tool
RT = retract the tool
UW = unload workpiece
2
0
2A
Cost
UW
RT
Cut
AT
LW
UW
RT
Cut
AT
LW

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
813
17
FIGURE 17.7
Details of lathe turning.
C
W
OH
t
[
(
M 1
)
OH
(1
)]
mc
C
m
o
W
OH
)
(
p
o
unit
(
M 1
+W
(17.24)
where M is machine cost rate, $/h
M
OHm
H is machine overhead rate, decimal
W is labor rate for machine operator, $/h
OHop
H
is operator overhead rate, decimal
The machine cost includes the cost of interest, depreciation, and maintenance. It is 
found with the methods of Chap. 16 by determining these costs on an annual basis and
converting them to per-hour costs on the basis of the number of hours the machine 
is used in the year. The machine overhead cost includes the cost of power and other 
services and a proportional share of the building, taxes, insurance, and other such 
expenses.
The production time for a unit is the sum of the machining time tm and the non-
production or idle time ti.
t
t
t
unit
mt
i
+
tmt
(17.25)
The machining time tm is the machining time for one cut, tc, multiplied by the number 
of cuts.
t
t
m
ct (
)
number of cuts  
(17.26)
The idle time is given by
t
t
t
t
t
i
st et
change
hand
down
+
tst et
+
thand
 
(17.27)
where tset = total time for job setup divided by number of parts in the batch
tchange = prorated time for changing the cutting tool
t
= tool change time
tool lifef
m
×
L
N
D
Feed
Tool
Depth
of cut

814 
engineering design 
17
thand = time the machine operator spends loading and unloading the work on the 
machine
tdown
t
=  downtime lost because of machine or tool failure, waiting for material or 
tools, or maintenance operations. Downtime is prorated per units production.
An important cost component is the cost of cutting tools. Tools lose their cut-
ting edge from the extreme wear and high temperature generated at the tool-metal 
interface. The cost of tooling is the cost of cutting tools and a prorated cost of special 
fi xtures used to hold the tool bits. The cost of the cutting tool per unit piece is
C
C
t
T
t
t
C
C ool
t
m
(17.28)
where Ctool is the cost of a cutting tool, $
l
tm is the machining time (min), given by Eq. (17.26)
T is the tool life (min) given by Eq. (17.29)
T
Tool life usually is expressed by the Taylor tool life equation, which relates tool life T
to surface (tangential) velocity v. For turning in a lathe, the tangential velocity (cutting 
speed) is v = πDN
π
where 
N
πD
π  is the circumference, in./rev, and N is the rpm.
N
vT
K
p =
 
(17.29)
A log-log plot of tool life (min) versus surface velocity (ft/min) will give a straight 
line. K is the surface velocity at 
K
T = 1 min and p is the reciprocal of the negative slope.
For a cutting tool that uses an insert in a tool holder,
C
K
n
K
n
tool
C
i
i
h
h
=
+
i
- 
(17.30)
where Ki
K is the cost of one tool insert, $
ni is the number of cutting edges on a tool insert
Kh
K is the cost of a tool holder, $
nh is the number of cutting edges in the life of a tool holder
Substituting the tool life T from Eq. (17.29) into Eq. (17.28) gives
T
C
C
t
v
K
t
t
C
C ool
t
m
p
1/
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
1
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
 
(17.31)
The time needed to change tools can be signifi cant, so we separate it out as ttool from 
l
the other times listed in Eq. (17.27) and express tchange with Eq. (17.32).
t
t
t
T
change
tool
t
m
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(17.32)

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
815
17
Cutting velocity, ft/min.
Machining cost
Total unit cost
Tool cost
Cost of setup and handling
Material cost
v*
Cost per piece
FIGURE 17.8
Variation of unit cost with cutting velocity, showing an optimum cutting velocity.
The other three terms in Eq. (17.27) are independent of tool life, and are designated 
by t0. The expression for the time to machine one piece, Eq. (17.25), now can be
written as
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
T
t
t
unit
mt
i
mt
change
m
m
+
t
+
t
=
t
+
t
l
m
0
0
t
t
T
t
m
tt ool
t
+
t
l
1
0
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
t
T
t
tool
t
(17.33)
Substituting Eqs. (17.24), (17.33), and (17.28) into Eq. (17.23) gives
C
W
OH
t
t
T
t
C t
T
C
[
(
M 1
)
OH
(1
)]
1
u
m
[
(1 OH
op
m
tool
t
C
m
m
C
0
(
M 1(
M 1
+ W
+
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠+
⎡
⎣
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
+
Ct
C
m
 
(17.34)
This equation gives the cost of a unit machined piece. Both the machining time, 
tm, and the tool life, T, depend on the cutting velocity through Eqs. (17.22), (17.26), and
T
(17.29). If we plot unit cost versus cutting velocity (Fig. 17.8), there will be an opti-
mum cutting velocity to minimize cost. That is so because machining time decreases 
with increasing velocity; but as velocity increases, tool wear and tool costs increase 
also. Thus, there is an optimum cutting velocity. An alternative strategy would be to 
operate at the cutting speed that results in maximum production rate. Still another 
alternative is to operate at the speed that maximizes profi t. The three criteria do not 
result in the same operating point.

816 
engineering design 
17
The machining cost model illustrates how a physical model of the process, along 
with standard times for elements of the operation, can be used to determine realistic 
part costs. Also, the problem shows how overhead costs can be allocated to both labor 
and material costs. Compare this with the approach given in Sec 17.5 where a single 
factory overhead cost was used. 
The machining cost model is based chiefl y on physical models. When a good 
physical model is not available the process still can be broken down into discrete 
steps, with times and costs for each step. The procedure for this can be found under 
Process Cost Modeling on the website for this text (www.mhhe.com/dieter).
17.15
LIFE CYCLE COSTING
Life cycle costing (LCC) is a methodology that attempts to capture all of the costs 
associated with a product throughout its life cycle.1 A typical problem is whether it 
is more economical to spend more money in the initial purchase to obtain a product 
with lower operating and maintenance costs, or whether it is less costly to purchase a 
product with lower fi rst costs but higher operating costs. Life cycle costing goes into 
the analysis in much detail in an attempt to evaluate all relevant costs, both present 
and future.
The costs that enter into life cycle costing can be divided into fi ve categories.
 
● First costs. Purchase cost of equipment or plant.
 
● One-time costs. Cost for transportation and installation of capital equipment, train-
ing of operating personnel, startup, and hazardous material cleanup and disposal of 
equipment upon retirement.
 
● Operating costs. Wages for production or operating personnel, utilities, supplies, 
materials, disposal of hazardous materials.
 
● Maintenance costs. Cost for service, inspection, and repair or replacement of 
equipment.
 
● Other costs. Taxes and insurance.
Life cycle costing, also known as “whole life costing,” fi rst found strong advocates 
in the area of military procurement, where it is used to compare competing weapons 
systems.2 Often the cost of sustaining equipment is 2 to 20 times the acquisition cost.
Life cycle costing has been combined with life cycle assessment (see Chap. 10) of 
the costs of energy consumption and pollution during manufacture and service, and 
the costs of retiring the product when it reaches its useful life. Expansion of the cost 
models beyond the traditional bounds to include pollution and disposal is an active 
1. R. J. Brown and R. R. Yanuck, Introduction of Life Cycle Costing, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1985; W. J. Fabrycky and B. S. Blanchard, Life-Cycle Cost and Economic Analysis, Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1991. B. S. Dhillon, Life Cycle Costing for Engineers, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
FL, 2010; NIST-HDBK-135, Life-Cycle Costing Manual for the Federal Energy Management Program, 
February 1996, available online at www.barringer1.com, listed under Military Documents.
2. MIL-HDBK 259, Life Cycle Costs in Navy Acquisitions.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
817
17
1. N. Nasr and E. A. Varel, “Total Product Life-Cycle Analysis and Costing,” Proceedings of the 1997 
Total Life Cycle Conference, P-310, pp. 9–15, Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, 1997.
area of research that will place the design engineer in a better position to make critical 
trade-off decisions.
Typical elements in the life cycle of a product are shown in Fig. 17.9. This fi gure 
emphasizes the overlooked impact on society costs (OISC) that are rarely quantifi ed 
and incorporated into a product life cycle analysis.1 Starting with design, the actual 
costs incurred here are a small part of the LCC, but the costs committed in design 
comprise about 75 percent of the avoidable costs within the life cycle of the product. 
Moreover, it is about 10 times less costly to make a change or correct an error in 
design than in manufacturing. Acquiring the raw materials, usually by mining or oil 
extraction, and processing the materials, can create large environmental costs. These 
areas also often have considerable inventory and transportation costs. We have con-
centrated in previous sections on the costs in manufacturing and assembly of products.
The cost of ownership of a product is the traditional aspect of LCC. Equation 
(17.3) lists the chief contributors to LCC. Useful life is commonly measured by cycles 
of operation, length of operation, or shelf life. In design we attempt to extend life for 
use and service by using durable materials and reliable components. Product obsoles-
cence is dealt with through modular product architecture.
Maintenance costs, especially maintenance labor costs, usually dominate other 
use/service costs. Most analyses divide maintenance costs into scheduled or preventive 
FIGURE 17.9
Total life cycle of a product.
Product
design
Raw material
acquisition
Ecosystem
disturbance
Processes of
materials
Manufacturing
Assembly
Use/
Service
Product
retirement
Materials
recycle
Remanufacturing
Reuse
Teardown &
identification
Treatment &
disposal
Emissions

818 
engineering design 
17
maintenance and unscheduled or corrective maintenance. The mean time between 
failure and the mean time to repair are important parameters from reliability theory 
(see Sec. 14.3.6) that affect LCC. Other costs that must be projected for the operations 
and support phase are maintenance of support equipment, maintenance facility costs, 
pay and fringe benefi ts for support personnel, warranty costs, and service contracts.
Once the product has reached the limit of its useful life it enters the retirement 
stage of the life cycle. High-value-added products may be candidates for remanufactur-
ing. By value-added we mean the cost of materials, labor, energy, and manufacturing 
operations that have gone into creating the product. Products that lend themselves to 
recycling are those with an attractive reclamation value, which is determined by market 
forces and the ease with which different materials can be separated from the product. 
Reuse components are subsystems from a product that have not spent their useful life 
and can be reused in another product. Materials that cannot be reused, remanufactured, 
or recycled are discarded in an environmentally safe way. This may require labor and 
tooling for disassembly or treatment before disposal.
E X A M P L E 17.14 Life Cycle Costing
The costs and income for a product development project to design and make a short-
turning-radius lawnmower are given in the following chart. It is assumed that the product 
will be obsolete 10 years after the start of the development project. The corporate rate of 
return is 12 percent and its tax rate is 35 percent. Use the concepts of the time value of 
money presented in Chap. 16 to fi nd the net present value (NPV) of the project and the 
average annual profi t margin based on sales.
Category
Yr
1
Yr
2
Yr
3
Yr
4
Yr
5
Yr
6
Yr
7
Yr
8
Yr
9
Yr
10
Avg.
1. Development costs
0.8 
1.90
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.2
2. Cost of product sold
12.0
13.5
15.0
16.1 16.8
16.0
15.2
15.3
14.8
3. Sales & marketing
2.1
3.0
3.5
2.8
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.6
2.8
4. G&A plus overhead
0.8
1.5
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.7
5.  Special production 
equipment, P
4.1
6. Salvage value, S
0.5
7. Depreciation on equip.
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
8. Environ. cleanup
1.1
9. Net sales
28.2
31.3
36.2
39.8 40.0
39.1
38.0
35.0
35.95
All fi gures in millions of dollars.
Present Value of Costs
 
(1)  PV of development costs = 0.8(P/F,12,1) + 1.90 (P/F,12,2) + 0.4(P/A,12,5)(P/F,12,2) + 
0.2(P/A,12,3)(P/F,12,7) = $3.47M
 
(2) PV of cost of product sold = 14.8(P/A,12,8)(P/F,12,2) = $58.7M
 
(3) PV of sales and marketing costs = 2.8(P/A,12,8)(P/F,12,2) = $11.17M

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
819
17
*Item (7) gives the PV of 9 years of depreciation charges. These charges reduced the annual income on 
which taxes were paid at a 35% rate. This represents a savings of 0.35 × Item(7).
 
(4) PV of G&A and overhead
V
= 1.7(P
( /
P A
/ ,12,8)(P
( /
P F
/ ,12,2)
F
= $6.73M
 
(5)  Annual straight-line depreciation charge on (5), year 2 through 10 = (P
(
−S)/n/
=
(4.1 − 0.5)/9 = 0.40.
(7) PV of depreciation
V
= 0.4(P
( /
P A
/ ,12,9)(P
( /
P F
/ ,12,1)
F
= $1.90M
(8) PV of cost of environmental cleanup
V
= 1.1(P
( /
P F
/ ,12,10) 
F
= $0.35M
Present value of total costs = 3.47 + 58.70 + 11.17 + 6.73 + 1.90 + 0.35 = $82.32
Present Value of Income or Savings
(9) Present value of net sales = 35.95(P
( /
P A
/ ,12,8)(P
( /
P F
/ ,12,2)
F
= $130.8M
 
 Present value of sale of equipment for salvage PV = 0.5(P
( /
P F
/ ,12,10)
F
= $0.16M
 
Present value of tax reduction (0.35)(1.90) = $0.66M*
 
Present value of total income or savings =
Net present value = present value of income −present value of costs = 131.6 − 82.3 =
$ 49.3M over 10 years, or an average of $ 4.93M per year
Annual profi t margin = 4.93/35.95 = 13.7% per year
Note that an average of annual income and cost was used to simplify calculation. The use 
of a spreadsheet would have given more accurate numbers, but this is not warranted by 
the precision of the estimates.
Example 17.14 is typical of life cycle analysis for a product development project. 
Another common application is estimating the LCC costs for a major capital purchase. 
Since there is no income stream in this type of application, the selection would be 
based on the alternative that minimized the LCC. Using the cost of ownership model 
in Eq. (17.3) we divide the costs into nonrecurring costs (SP
S , C
P
x
C , Ct, and CQ) that only
appear at year one and recurring costs (Co
C , Cps
C , and Csp) that occur out into the future. 
The nonrecurring costs have been discussed in Sec. 17.11.
The cost of operating the equipment, Co
C , depends on staffi ng levels as recom-
mended by the supplier, the pay level of the operator, and the hours of operation.
The cost of support, Cps
C , is chiefl y the cost of maintenance, which depends greatly 
on the criticality of the operation and reliability of the equipment. For corrective main-
tenance, the number of maintenance events in a year can be estimated from the mean 
time between failure (MTBF). See Sec. 14.3.1 and 14.3.6 for discussion of MTBF.
Number of maintenance events = (scheduled operating hrs/year)/MTBF 
(17.35)
The cost of corrective maintenance equals (number of maintenance events) × mean 
time to repair (MTTR) × (hourly labor cost). The cost of preventive maintenance is
based on a monthly estimate of the labor cost.
The cost of spare parts, Csp
C , is not an inconsequential cost in many situations.
This involves the purchase of the spares, the cost of money tied up in their purchase, 

820 
engineering design 
17
the cost of warehousing them in storage, and the cost of transporting them to the site 
of the repair. Often the cost of lost production from inoperable machines is the largest 
cost of all. Each of these costs represents a row that would be added to a present value 
calculation such as shown in Example 17.14.
17.16
SUMMARY
Cost is a primary factor of design that no engineer can afford to ignore. It is important 
to understand the basics of cost evaluation so that you can produce high-functioning, 
low-cost designs. Cost buildup begins in conceptual design and continues through em-
bodiment and detail design.
To be cost literate you need to understand the meaning of such concepts as non-
recurring costs, recurring costs, fi xed costs, variable costs, direct costs, indirect costs, 
overhead, and activity-based costing.
Cost estimates are developed by three general methods.
1. Cost estimation by analogy with previous products or projects. This method re-
quires past experience or published cost data. Because this uses historical data, 
the estimates must be corrected for price infl ation using cost indexes, and for dif-
ferences of scale using cost-capacity indexes. This method is often used in the 
conceptual phase of design.
2. The parametric or factor approach uses regression analysis to correlate past costs 
with critical design parameters like weight, power, and speed, Software programs 
that use parametric relationships and cost databases are becoming increasingly 
useful for the calculation of costs in conceptual and embodiment design.
3. A detailed breakdown of all the steps required to manufacture a part with an as-
sociated cost of materials, labor, and overhead for each step for each operation is 
needed to determine the cost to produce the part. This method is generally used in 
the fi nal cost estimates in the detail design stage.
Costs may sometimes be related to the functions performed by the design. This 
is a highly desired situation because it allows optimization of the design concept with 
respect to cost.
Manufacturing costs generally decrease with time as more experience is gained 
in making a product. This is known as a learning curve.
Computer cost models are gaining in use as a way to pinpoint the steps in a manu-
facturing process where cost savings must be achieved. Simple spreadsheet models 
are useful for determining product profi tability and making trade-offs between as-
pects of the business situation.
Life cycle costing attempts to capture all the costs associated with a product 
throughout its life cycle, from design to retirement from service. Originally LCC fo-
cused only on the costs incurred in using a product, such as maintenance and repair, 
but more and more LCC is attempting to capture the costs that affect society from 
environmental issues and issues of energy use.

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
821
17
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Creese, R. C., M. Aditan, and B. S. Pabla: Estimating and Costing for the Metals Manufactur-
ing Industries, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1992.
Ehrlenspiel, K, A. Kiewert, and U. Lindemann: Cost-Effi cient Design, Springer, New York, 
2007.
Malstrom, E. M. (ed.): Manufacturing Cost Engineering Handbook, Marcel Dekker, New 
York, 1984.
Michaels, J. V., and W. P. Wood: Design to Cost, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1989.
Ostwald, P. F.: Engineering Cost Estimating, 3d ed., Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1992.
Ostwald, P. F. and T. S. McLaren, Cost Analysis and Estimating for Engineering and Manage-
ment, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2004.
Winchell, W. (ed.): Realistic Cost Estimating for Manufacturing, 2d ed., Society of Manufac-
turing Engineers, Dearborn, MI, 1989.
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
 17.1. In an environmental upgrade of a minimill making steel bar, it is found that a purchase 
must be made for a large cyclone dust collector. It is the time of the year for capital 
budget submissions, so there is no time for quotations from suppliers. The last unit of 
that type was purchased in 1985 for $35,000. It had a 100 ft3/min capacity. The new 
installation in 2012 will require 1000 ft3/min capacity. The cost escalation for this kind 
of equipment has been about 5 percent per year. For budget purposes, estimate what it 
will cost to purchase the dust collector.
 17.2. Many consumer items today are designed in the United States and manufactured over-
seas where labor costs are much lower. A middle range athletic shoe from a name brand 
manufacturer sells for $70 in the U.S. The shoe company buys the shoe from an off-
shore supplier for $20 and sells it to the retailer for $36. The profi t margin for each unit 
in the chain is: supplier—9 percent; shoe company—17 percent; retailer—13 percent. 
Estimate the major categories of cost breakdown for each unit in the chain. Do this as 
a team problem and compare the results for the entire class.
Activity-based costing
Break-even point
Cost commitment
Cost index
Design to cost
Fixed cost
Functional costing
General & administrative 
costs
Indirect costs
Learning curve
Life cycle costs
Make-buy decision
Overhead cost
Period costs
Prime cost
Product costs
Target costing
Value analysis
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS

822 
engineering design 
17
 17.3. The type of tooling to make for a manufacturing process depends on the expected total 
quantity of parts. Tooling made from standard components and less wear-resistant ma-
terials (soft tooling) can be made more quickly and cheaply than conventional tooling 
made from hardened steel (hard tooling). Use the concept of break-even point to deter-
mine the production quantity for which soft tooling can be justifi ed. The following cost 
data applies:
Soft Tooling
Hard Tooling
Tooling cost
CS   $600 
CH $7500
Setup cost
SS     $100
SH   $60
Unit part cost
Cps $3.40
CpH $0.80
 
The total production run is expected to be 5000 units. Parts are made in batches 
of 500.
 17.4. A manufacturer of small hydraulic turbines has the annual cost data given here. Calcu-
late the manufacturing cost and the selling price for a turbine.
Raw material and components costs
$2,150,000
Direct labor
950,000
Direct expenses
60,000
Plant manager and staff
180,000
Utilities for plant
70,000
Taxes and insurance
50,000
Plant and equipment depreciation
120,000
Warehouse expenses
60,000
Offi ce utilities
10,000
Engineering salaries (plant)
90,000
Engineering expenses (plant)
30,000
Administrative staff salaries
120,000
Sales staff, salaries and commissions
100,000
Total annual sales: 60 units
Profi t margin: 15%       
 17.5. A jewel case for a compact disc is made from polycarbonate ($2.20 per lb) by a ther-
moplastic molding process. Each CD case uses 20 grams of plastic. The parts will 
be made in a 10-cavity mold that makes 1400 parts per hour at an operating cost of 
$20 per hour. Manufacturing overhead is 40 percent. Since the parts are sold in large 
lots, the G&A expenses are a low 15 percent. Profi t is 10 percent. What is the esti-
mated selling price of each CD case?
 17.6. Two competing processes for making high-quality vacuum melted steel are the vac-
uum arc refi ning process (VAR) and electroslag remelting (ESR). The estimated costs 
for operating each of the processes are:

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
823
17
Cost Component
VAR
ESR
Direct labor, one melter 
and one helper
$89,000
$89,000
Manufacturing overhead, 
140% direct labor
$124,600
$124,600
Melting power
0.3 kWh/lb 1000 lb/h 
10¢/kWh
0.5 kWh/lb 1250 lb/h 
10¢/kWh
Cooling water 
(annual charge)
$5,500
$6,800
Slag
—
$42,000
  
The capital cost of a VAR system is $1.3M and for an ESR system it is $0.9M. Each 
melting system has a 10-year useful life. Each uses 1000 ft2 of factory space, which 
costs $40 per ft2. Assume both furnaces operate for 15 eight-hour shifts per week for 
50 weeks in the year. Estimate the cost of melting a pound of high-grade steel for each 
process.
 17.7. The accounting department established the costs given in the following table for pro-
ducing two products, X and Z, over a given time period.
(a) 
 Give an example of typical costs that would be put in each of the 10 cost catego-
ries listed.
(b)  Determine the overhead and unit cost for each product in terms of direct labor 
cost.
(c) 
 Determine the overhead and unit cost for each product on the basis of direct labor 
hours (DLH).
(d)  Determine the overall overhead rate per DLH and use it to determine the unit 
cost of product X.
(e) 
 Determine the overhead and unit cost for each product on the basis of the propor-
tion of direct material costs.
Item
Product X
Product Z
Quantity
3000
5000
Machine hours
70
90
Direct labor hours (DLH)
400
600
Factory fl oor space
150
50
Labor 
Rate $/h
Labor 
Amount, h
Material 
Cost $/unit
Material 
Amount, units
Cost $
Product X
 Direct labor
18.00
400
7,200
 Direct material
6.50
3000
19,500
Product Z
 Direct labor
14.00
600
8,400
 Direct material
7.50
5000
37,500

824 
engineering design 
17
Cost Item
Product X
Product Z
Factory
Admin.
Sales
Total Cost, $
 1. Direct labor
7,200
8,400
15,600
 2. Indirect labor
3,000
3,000
 3. Direct material
19,500
37,500
57,000
 4. Indirect material
7,000
7,000
 5. Direct engineering
900
2,500
3,400
 6. Indirect engineering
1,500
1,500
 7. Direct expense
1,000
700
1,700
 8. Other factory burden
5,500
5,500
 9. Admin. expense
11,000
11,000
10. Sales and distribution
  Direct
900
1,100
2,000
  Indirect
8,000
8,000
29,500
50,200
17,000
11,000
8,000
115,700
 17.8. Determine the unit cost for making products X and Z in Prob.17.7 using activity-based 
costing. Use the cost drivers in Example 17.5, but omit automated assembly. The re-
sources used on a per-batch basis are:
Product X
Product Z
Number of components
18
30
Hours of engineering services
15
42
Production batch size
300
500
Hours of testing
3.1
5.2
Units per order
100
200
 17.9. A manufacturer of high-performance pumps has the cost and profi t data given in the 
following table. The company invests $1.2M in an aggressive two-year design and de-
velopment program to reduce manufacturing costs by 20 percent. When this is com-
pleted, what will be the impact on profi t? What business aspects need to be considered 
that are not covered by this analysis? What questions does it leave unanswered?
Existing Design
Improved Design
Sales price
$500
$500
Units sold
20,000
20,000
Revenues
$10M
$10M
Direct labor
1.5M
Materials
5.0M
Overhead
2.0M
Cost of product sold
8.5M
Gross margin
1.5M
Total operating expenses
1.0M
Pretax profi t
0.5M
% Profi t
5%

 
chapter 17: Cost Evaluation 
825
17
17.10. A company has received an order for four sophisticated space widgets. The buyer will 
take delivery of one unit at the end of the fi rst year and one unit at the end of each of 
the succeeding three years. He will pay for a unit immediately upon receipt and not 
before. However, the manufacturer can make the units ahead of time and store them at 
negligible cost for future delivery.
The chief component of cost of the space widget is labor at $25 per h. All units 
made in the same year can take advantage of an 80 percent learning curve. The fi rst 
unit requires 100,000 h of labor. Learning occurs only in one year and is not carried 
over from year to year. If money is worth 16 percent after a 52 percent tax rate, decide 
whether it would be more economical to build four units the fi rst year and store them, 
or build one unit in each of the four years.
17.11. Develop a cost model to compare the cost of drilling 1000 holes in steel plate with a 
standard high-speed steel drill and a TiN-coated H.S.S. drill. Each hole is 1 in. deep. 
The drill feed is 0.010 per rev. Machining time costs $10 per minute, and the cost of 
changing a tool is $5.
Tool Life (No. of Holes)
Price of a Drill
500 rpm
900 rpm
Std. H.S.S. drill
$12.00
750
80
TiN-coated H.S.S.
$36.00
1700
750
(a) 
Compare the costs at fi xed conditions of 500 rpm.
(b) Compare the costs at a constant tool life of 750 holes.
17.12. Determine which system is more economical on a life cycle costing basis.
System A
System B
Initial cost
$300,000
$240,000
Installation
23,000
20,000
Useful life
12 years
12 years
Operators needed
1
2
Operating hours
2100
2100
Operating wage rate
$20 per h
$20 per h
Parts and supplies cost (% of initial cost)
1%
2%
Power
8 kW at 10¢/kWh
9 kW at 10¢/kWh
Escalation of operating costs
6%
6%
Mean time between failures
600 h
450 h
Mean time to repair
35 h
45 h
Maintenance wage rate
$23 per h
$23 per h
Maintenance escalation rate
6%
6%
Desired rate of return
10%
10%
Tax rate
45%
45%
17.13. Discuss the automobile safety standards and air pollution standards in terms of the 
concept of life cycle costs.

826
18
LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES IN 
ENGINEERING DESIGN
18.1
INTRODUCTION
Engineering is not only applying scientifi c laws and principles to technical problems. 
It is focused on improving the lot of society, and as such, it brings engineers into 
the mainstream of business and industry. Almost all entry-level engineers become in-
volved, at least tangentially, with situations that call for some understanding of the law 
and situations that call for ethical judgments. Therefore, this chapter presents a brief 
overview of some legal and ethical issues in engineering. With topics as broad as law 
and ethics we can only scratch the surface, so we have chosen to focus on those issues 
that are most pertinent to engineering design.
The following are examples of where a design engineer might be concerned with 
legal and ethical issues:
 
● Preparing a contract to secure the services of a product data management fi rm.
 
● Reviewing a contract to determine whether a contractor who built an automated 
 production facility has satisfactorily fullfi lled the terms of a contract.
 
● Deciding whether it is legal and ethical to reverse engineer a product.
 
● Managing a design project to avoid the possibility of a product liability suit.
 
● Protecting the intellectual property created as part of a new product development 
activity.
 
● Deciding whether to take a job with a direct competitor that is bidding on a contract 
in the area where you are now working.
The law is a formalized code of conduct describing what society feels is the proper 
way to behave. In other words, laws refl ect what society values. As society evolves, its 
attitude toward behavior changes, and the laws change as well. Also, the advances 
in technology create new ethical issues. Ethics is the study of human conduct that 
lays out the moral ground rules. It is intimately related to the values of society. Thus, 

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
827
laws and ethics, while distinct, are not independent. Ethical conduct is the behavior 
desired by society that is separate from the minimum standards of the law. For exam-
ple, making a defective product despite taking all due care may subject you to product 
liability law, but it is not generally considered unethical.
This chapter comes with a warning label. A little knowledge can be a dangerous 
thing. Just as we would not expect a lawyer to practice engineering, so an engineer 
should not practice law. One objective of this chapter is to give you enough knowl-
edge about the legal aspects of engineering practice to recognize when you need to 
take certain actions or to know when to seek legal counsel. A second objective is to 
help you realize that the engineering profession has expectations for your conduct and 
that a true professional recognizes responsibilities to the employer, the profession, and 
 society, not just those to himself or herself.
18.2
THE ORIGIN OF LAWS
The code of American law has its origin in English common law. These laws derived 
from agreed-upon tradition and custom and were given the authority of law by deci-
sions in the courts. Since each court decision is based on the study of previous court 
cases, it is often called case law.
Statutory law is law that is created by a legislative body, either state or federal. 
These laws, known as statutes, are often codifi ed, as opposed to common law, and 
prescribe particular actions that apply to specifi c situations. Statutes may modify, re-
verse, or abolish common law doctrines. Statutes are subject to both change and ex-
tinction by legislative action.
While the two basic types of law are common law and statutory law, many po-
litical entities contribute to the body of law. Constitutional law, which is based on 
the Constitution of the United States, defi nes governmental powers, especially with 
respect to the states, and secures the rights of the individual citizen. The Congress of 
the United States and the legislatures of the states provide their own body of statutory 
law. Municipal law is a subdivision of statutory law that is produced by towns and 
cities. Municipal ordinances deal with issues like traffi c laws, zoning, and building 
codes. A large body of administrative law has been created by rulings and regulations 
of federal and state agencies other than the courts. Examples are OSHA and the EPA. 
Although cases involving administrative law are usually handled within the agency, 
disputes are fi nally resolved through the regular court system.
The purpose of the legal system is to protect and make life easier for each member 
of society. The rule of law is important not only in criminal matters, but as it affects 
other aspects of society like politics and the economy. The legal system is divided into 
criminal law and civil law. Criminal law deals with crimes against society such as 
murder, arson, larceny, bribery, perjury, and embezzlement. Civil law cases are con-
cerned with the law of property, the law of contracts, and the law of torts. In this brief 
chapter on the law we discuss only the latter two categories. Most of us who watch 
television are familiar with criminal law, but the majority of cases are concerned with 
civil law. There are several important distinctions between the two forms of legal 

828 
engineering design 
practice. In criminal law, emphasis is placed on whether the defendant is innocent or 
guilty. The defendant is assumed innocent until proven guilty. The defendant must be 
found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt by a unanimous verdict of a jury of his peers. 
The penalty for being found guilty is imprisonment or in extreme cases, death.
The issue of guilt or innocence is not at question in a civil case. Here the question 
is which of the parties failed to live up to an agreement or acted improperly in a way 
that caused someone damage. In a civil trial the jury is not required to be unanimous 
in its verdict, and it is only necessary to reach the verdict based on the preponderance 
of the evidence, as opposed to the higher standard in a criminal case. The winner in a 
civil case is usually awarded monetary damages or custody of the disputed property.
18.3
CONTRACTS
A contract is a promise by one person to another to do or not to do something. The only 
promises that the law will enforce are contracts. The three elements of a contract are:
Contract = offer + acceptance + consideration
An offer is an expression made by one person (the promisor) that leads another 
person to reasonably expect that the promisor wishes to create an agreement. The 
offer must be clear, defi nite, and specifi c, with no room for serious misunderstanding. 
An acceptance of the offer is necessary to make a contract legally binding. Both the 
offer and the  acceptance must be voluntary acts. A contract cannot be forced on any-
one. A contract is not enforceable by law unless it contains an agreement to exchange 
promises with value, the consideration. For example, if A and B enter into a contract 
in which A promises to pay B $1000 for modifying a CAD software package, both the 
money and the service are considerations.
18.3.1 Types of Contracts
Contracts can take many forms. They may be classifi ed as express or implied,  bilateral 
or unilateral. Also, a contract may be either written or verbal. Examples of contracts are 
purchase contracts, leases, a contract to perform a service, or an employment contract.
 
● An express contract is a contract in which all of the terms are agreed upon and 
 expressed in words, either written or oral. An oral contract, once made, can be just 
as legal as a written contract, but it is much more diffi cult to prove and enforce. 
Moreover, many states have statutes of fraud that require written documentation for 
certain contracts to be enforceable.
 
● An implied contract is a contract in which the agreement between parties is inferred by 
the legal system wholly or in part by their actions. For example, Jim goes to the local 
convenience store, where he has an account. He picks up a Sunday  New York Times and 
holds it up so the clerk sees him take it and the clerk nods in return as he leaves the store 
with the paper. Jim has made an implied contract to pay for the newspaper.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
829
 
● A bilateral contract is a contract in which two parties have both made a promise to 
each other. A promise is made in return for a promise. Each party is both a promi-
sor and a promisee.
 
● A unilateral contract is one in which the promisor does not receive a promise as con-
sideration for her promise but instead agrees to pay if she receives an act or service. 
For example, Mrs. Jones says to Johnny Smith, “I promise to pay you $100 tomorrow 
if you will clean out my basement and garage today.” Johnny immediately goes to 
work. This constitutes acceptance of the offer and creates a unilateral contract.
If more than one promisor or promisee is involved, the contract can take different 
forms (Table 18.1). The chief implication is with respect to the liabilities incurred by 
the different parties.
An engineer will have to deal with contracts in a number of different situations. 
Contracts for the purchase or sale of property are common. On taking a job you may 
be asked to sign a contract stating that all technical ideas that you develop belong to 
the company, even those conceived while not on the job. These contracts are often 
negotiable at the time of employment and are something to consider when you are 
looking for employment. In technical dealings between companies, one of the parties 
may be asked to sign a confi dentiality agreement. This is a contract in which one of 
the parties agrees to not disclose, make use of, or copy a design or product that the 
other party is about to disclose.
18.3.2 General Form of a Contract
In general, every business contract should contain the following information:
1. Introduction to the agreement. Include title and date.
2. Name and address of all parties. If one of the parties is a corporation, it should be 
so stated.
3. Complete details of the agreement. State all promises to be performed. Include 
such details as specifi cations and expected outcomes. Give details on promises of 
payments, including amounts, timing of payments, and interest.
TABLE 18.1
Types of Contracts when There Is More than One Promisor or Promisee
Type of Contract
Number of Parties
Liability
Joint
Two or more persons promise the 
same performance as a single 
party
All promisors are liable for the complete 
fulfi llment of the contract
Several 
Separate promises made by more 
than one promisor
Each promisor is liable for his or her 
individual promise
Joint and several
Two or more parties make a joint 
contract but also state that they 
are individually liable for 
completion of contract
All promisors face cumulative liability

830 
engineering design 
4. Include supporting documents such as technical information, drawings, specifi ca-
tions, and statements of any conditions on which the agreement depends.
5. Time and date of the start of the work and of the expected completion.
6. Terms of payment.
7. Damages to be assessed in case of nonperformance. Statement of how disputes are 
to be arbitrated.
8. Other general provisions of the agreement.
9. Final legal wording. Signatures of parties, witnesses, and notary public.
18.3.3 Discharge and Breach of Contract
A contract is said to be discharged when the agreement has been performed to the 
satisfaction of both parties. The contracting parties can agree at any time that the 
contract has been discharged. It can be discharged if it becomes impossible to per-
form due to circumstances beyond the control of the contracting parties, for exam-
ple, force majeure. A force majeure (greater force) clause in a commercial contract 
excuses a party from performing its obligations due to causes beyond  their control, 
such as war or natural disasters. However, extreme diffi culty in executing the con-
tract does not discharge it even if it becomes more costly to carry out than originally 
anticipated.
A breach of contract occurs when one party fails to perform his or her part of the 
contract. A legal injury is said to have occurred, and the injured party can sue in court 
for damages.1
1. Another way to settle legal disputes is through arbitration. The United States has become a highly 
 litigious society. In 1995 Americans fi led more than 14.8 million civil lawsuits and paid $121.7B in legal 
fees (National Center for State Courts, Research Department). The number of civil cases fi led with federal 
courts increased fi vefold between 1962 and 2005. However, only 1.7 percent of the cases went to trial.
Gary Smith is a district salesman for Zip-R Engineering Corp., manufacturers of 
automation equipment. He submitted a proposal to ABC Mfg. Co. for 20 special-
ized robots, in response to ABC Mfg.’s request for bids. The next day, Gary was 
talking with Joe Clark, purchasing agent for ABC. During the conversation Joe 
told Gary, “Congratulations, you are a lucky guy.” Gary took this as a signal that 
he had won the contract, and that a written agreement would be entered into later. 
Because it was close to the end of the quarter, and he needed this job to make his 
sales quota, Gary booked the job. Zip-R started work on the order immediately.
One week later, ABC’s VP of Manufacturing decided to buy the robots from 
another company because of their reputation for requiring low maintenance. Can 
Zip-R recover damages for breach of contract?
The words “you are a lucky guy” spoken over the phone are too vague to con-
stitute acceptance of an agreement. Without acceptance there is no legal contract. 
Gary had no justifi cation for interpreting Joe’s vague statement as an acceptance.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
831
18.4
LIABILITY
Any party to a contract must be clear on the potential liability he or she is incurring.
Liability means being bound or obligated to pay damages or restitution. Two ways to 
incur liability are (1) breaking a contract or (2) committing a tort, such as fraud or 
negligence.
A breach of contract refers to violating a contract’s promise. Failure to deliver 
detail drawings of a new machine by the date specifi ed in the contract is a breach of 
contract. It makes no difference whether this was done intentionally or not.
Fraud is intentional deceitful action aimed at depriving another party of his 
or her rights or causing injury in some respect. Examples would be double billing a 
client or falsely certifying that a component had passed the ASME pressure vessel 
code.
Negligence is failure to exercise proper care and provide expertise in accordance 
with the standards of the profession that results in damage to property or injury to 
persons. This is the most common way for an engineer to incur liability to the public. 
For example, an engineer fails to include a major source of loading in design calcu-
lations for a public project so that the design fails. Note that being honest and well- 
intentioned does not absolve the engineer from a legal charge of negligence.
To be liable for negligence it must be proved that the defendant did not take rea-
sonable and prudent action. This is determined by a jury. One way to demonstrate 
reasonable care is to show that you acted at the current level of technological develop-
ment, that is, the state of the art. A defense allowed in some states is to prove con-
tributory negligence, that the plaintiff was also negligent or could have prevented the 
accident had due care been taken.
The degree of risk concerning negligence depends on the way the business is or-
ganized. In a sole proprietorship the owner and the business are one and the same. No 
distinction is made between the property of the business and that of the owner. Thus, 
if the business is sued for negligence, the owner is at risk of losing her own savings if 
the business does not have enough funds to pay the judgment of the court. A partner-
ship is similar to a proprietorship but has many co-owners. All general partners are 
responsible for the acts and fi nancial dealings of each other. A corporation is a legal 
entity that possesses many of the legal powers of individuals, but the corporation ex-
ists independently of the people who own and manage it. A corporation can buy and 
sell property, enter into legal agreements, and sue and be sued. The personal fi nances 
of the owners of a corporation are separate from those of the corporation.
The corporation will be held liable for the acts of an employee who commits a 
civil wrong while engaged in corporate business. For example, the corporation can be 
fi ned by the EPA for the act of an employee who discharges liquid waste into a stream. 
Generally speaking, the corporation will incur the penalties of its employees, and the 
employee, in turn, may face the wrath of the corporation. Thus, working in a corpo-
rate structure provides some degree of protection from liability, but it is not absolute 
protection. Employees of corporations have been sued in the courts for negligence. 
Moreover, the trend in the courts is toward greater accountability of corporate em-
ployees. A corporate form cannot protect a professional from professional negligence.

832 
engineering design 
18.5
TORT LAW
A tort is a civil wrong that involves damage committed against a person or his or 
her property, business, or reputation. It is a breach of the rights of an individual to 
be secure in his or her person and property and be free from harassment.1 Tort law 
is chiefl y case law of the state courts, rather than statutory law. A decision in a case 
based on tort law hinges on three questions:
 
● Have a person’s rights been infringed upon?
 
● Did the act occur as a result of negligence or actual intent on the part of the 
defendant?
 
● Did the plaintiff suffer damages as a result of the act?
Tort law deals with civil cases for which the penalty usually is monetary compen-
sation rather than confi nement. The difference between a tort and a crime is that a tort 
is a civil wrong while a crime is a wrong against society that threatens the peace and 
safety of the community. The victim of a crime may also bring a tort suit against the 
defendant to recover damages.
Tort suits involving engineers usually are concerned with one of four types of 
actions: (1) misrepresentation, (2) nuisance, (3) negligence, and (4) product liability. 
Misrepresentation is a false statement by a person of a fact that is known to be false, 
with the intent to deceive another person. When done under oath, it is called perjury. 
Misrepresentation is often claimed in a breach of contract suit. Nuisance concerns the 
annoyance or disturbance of a person such that the use of property becomes physically 
1. Engineering Law, Design Liability, and Professional Ethics, Professional Publications, Belmont, 
CA, 1983.
Bill Garrison was hired by ABC Mfg. Co. as a consultant in plastic processing. Bill 
has a chemical engineering degree and 10 years of experience. He was asked to rec-
ommend the equipment needed to convert a certain product line from metal to plastic 
parts. In particular, it was required that the production rate be at least equal to that at 
which the line made metal parts. When over $10M of new equipment was installed, it 
was found that because of longer cycle time due to curing the plastic, the plastic line 
produced only 70 percent of the number of parts as made by the metal line in a given 
time. Can ABC hold Garrison personally responsible for this development?
Garrison can be held personally responsible to ABC for damages. As a con-
sultant he acted as ABC’s agent in designing the production line. By failing to take 
proper account of the plastic curing time he showed that he had not acted with due 
care and skill. He could be liable to ABC for negligence in tort, or for breach of 
contract. In addition, it was found that his 10 years of experience was in the area of 
polymer formulation, not plastics molding and manufacturing. If it could be shown 
that he misrepresented his background in order to secure the consulting contract, 
he could also be liable for fraud.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
833
uncomfortable. Nuisances that affect the community, such as a blaring sound system 
at an open window, become a public nuisance. Negligence was defi ned in Sec. 18.4. 
Product liability is the action whereby an injured party seeks to recover damages for 
injury to person or property from a manufacturer or seller when the plaintiff  alleges 
that a defective product or design caused the injury. This rapidly growing type of tort 
suit is discussed in Sec. 18.6.
18.6
PRODUCT LIABILITY
Product liability refers to the legal actions by which an injured party seeks to recover dam-
ages for personal injury or property loss from the producer or seller of a product. Product 
liability suits are pursued under the laws of tort. In no area of U.S. law has activity in-
creased as dramatically as in personal injury product-liability civil lawsuits. These span 
the gamut from individual suits by a single plaintiff against a single company to industry-
wide class action suits with tens of thousands of plaintiffs against all asbestos manufactur-
ers. The costs associated with tort-based litigation, of which product liability and medical 
malpractice cases are the predominate share, are estimated to be over $300 billion per 
year.1 This is based on annual damage awards and plaintiff and defense legal fees. The 
authors estimate the real costs of tort-based cases to be at least twice this amount as com-
panies shift product development funding to R&D (so-called defensive R&D) aimed at 
defending product liability cases. In extreme cases product liability costs have resulted in 
the near demise of once-profi table industries. In the 1970s the annual production of piston-
engine powered light planes was from 10,000 to 15,000 per year and accounted for more 
than 100,000 jobs. In the early 1990s production was barely 500 planes per year. This 
decrease has been attributed to the high cost of product liability litigation in the industry.2
18.6.1 Evolution of Product Liability Law
Before the Industrial Revolution, product liability laws did not exist. The purchaser had 
the responsibility to buy carefully and to use the product prudently. If the product broke 
or caused damage, the manufacturer was not required by law to stand behind it, although 
the better manufacturers gave warranties with their products. Around the mid-1800s the 
concept of privity came into use. Privity means that liability could occur only between 
those who entered into a contract or a direct transaction. The courts held that the injured 
party could sue only the party in privity. Thus, if a consumer was blinded by a broken 
hammer, he or she could sue only the retailer who sold him the tool; the retailer, in turn, 
could sue only the wholesaler, who in turn could sue the manufacturer.
A signifi cant change occurred in 1916, when a court allowed an automobile 
owner to sue the manufacturer for negligence. This established the precedent that 
1. L. J. McQuillan and H. Abramyan, The Wall Street Journal, March 27, 2007, p. A18.
2. B. E. Peterman, Product Liability and Innovation, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1994, 
pp. 62–67.

834 
engineering design 
manufacturers are directly liable to consumers. Clearly, from the viewpoint of recov-
ering monetary damages it is advantageous to directly sue the manufacturer, whose 
resources are likely to be much greater than those of a local retailer. When the Uni-
form Commercial Code was made law in the 1960s, it stated that there is an implied 
warranty of the fi tness of products for their purposes and intended uses.
Also in the early 1960s the case law evolved to what is now called strict prod-
uct liability. Previously, manufacturers or sellers were liable only when they could be 
proved negligent or unreasonably careless in what they made or how they made it. It 
had to be proved that a reasonable manufacturer using prudence would have exercised 
a higher standard of care. However, today in most states a standard of strict liability 
is applied. Under this theory of law the plaintiff must prove that: (1) the product was 
defective and unreasonably dangerous, (2) the defect existed at the time the product 
left the defendant’s control, (3) the defect caused the harm, and (4) the harm is ap-
propriately assignable to the identifi ed defect. Thus, the emphasis on responsibility for 
product safety has shifted from the consumer to the manufacturer of products.
A related issue is the use for which the product is intended. A product intended to 
be used by children will be held to a stricter standard than one intended to be operated 
by a trained professional. Under strict liability a manufacturer may be held liable even 
if a well-designed and well-manufactured product injured a consumer who misused or 
outright abused it.
18.6.2 Goals of Product Liability Law
Only 100 years ago it was the practice in American and British law to not respond to 
accidental losses. It was generally held that the accident victim, not the manufacturer, 
should bear the economic burdens of injury. Starting in the mid-20th century, the law 
began to assume a more active role. Product liability law evolved to serve four basic 
societal goals: loss spreading, punishment, deterrence, and symbolic affi rmation of 
social values.1 Loss spreading seeks to shift the accidental loss from the victim to 
other parties better able to absorb or distribute it. In a product liability suit the loss is 
typically shifted to the manufacturer, who theoretically passes this cost on to the con-
sumer in the form of higher prices. Often the manufacturer has liability insurance, so 
the cost is spread further, but at the price of greatly increased insurance rates.
Another goal of product liability law is to punish persons or organizations respon-
sible for causing needless loss. It is important to recognize that under liability law the 
designer, not just the company, may be held responsible for a design defect. In extreme 
cases, the punishment may take the form of criminal penalties, although this is rare. 
More common is the assessment of punitive damages for malicious or willful acts. 
A third function is to prevent similar accidents from happening in the future, that is, 
deterrence. Substantial damage awards against manufacturers constitute strong incen-
tives to produce safer products. Finally, product liability laws act as a kind of sym-
bolic reaffi rmation that society values human safety and quality in products.
1. D. G. Owen, The Bridge, Summer, 1987, pp. 8–12.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
835
18.6.3 Negligence
A high percentage of product litigation alleges engineering negligence. Negligence 
is the failure to do something that a reasonable person, guided by the considerations 
that ordinarily regulate human affairs, would do. In product liability law, the seller is 
liable for negligence in the manufacture or sale of any product that may reasonably 
be expected to be capable of infl icting substantial harm if it is defective. Negligence in 
design is usually based on one of three factors:
1. That the manufacturer’s design has created a concealed danger.
2. That the manufacturer has failed to provide needed safety devices as part of the 
design of the product.
3. That the design called for materials of inadequate strength or failed to comply with 
accepted standards.
Another common area of negligence is failure to warn the user of the product 
concerning possible dangers involved in the product use. This should take the form 
of warning labels fi rmly affi xed to the product and more detailed warnings of restric-
tions of use and maintenance procedures in the brochure that comes with the product.
18.6.4 Strict Liability
Under the theory of strict liability, it is not necessary to prove negligence on the part 
of the manufacturer of the product, nor is it necessary to prove breach of warranty or 
privity of contract. The defect itself, regardless of how it got there, is suffi cient to cre-
ate liability under the tort laws. The fact that the injured party acted carelessly or in 
bad faith is not a defense under strict liability standards. The courts have acted so as 
to require the manufacturer to design its products in a way as to anticipate foreseeable 
use and abuse by the user.
Under most court decisions, defects divide into manufacturing defects and  design 
defects.1 Failure to conform with stated specifi cations is an obvious manufactur-
ing defect. A manufacturing defect also exists when the product does not satisfy user 
 requirements. Finally, a manufacturing defect exists when a product leaves the assem-
bly line in a substandard condition, differs from the manufacturer’s intended result, or 
differs from other, ostensibly identical units of the same product line.
A design defect exists if the product fails to perform as safely as an ordinary con-
sumer would expect. The criteria by which a defective and unreasonably dangerous 
product2 may be tested in litigation are:
1. The usefulness and desirability of the product
2. The availability of other and safer products to meet the same need
3. The likelihood of injury and its probable seriousness
1. C. O. Smith, “Product Liability and Design,” ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, pp. 146–51.
2. H. R. Piehler, A. D. Twerski, A. S. Weinstein, and W. A. Donaher, Science, vol. 186, p. 1093, 1974.

836 
engineering design 
4. The obviousness of the danger
5. Common knowledge and normal public expectation of the danger
6. The avoidability of injury by care in use of the warnings
7. The ability to eliminate the danger without seriously impairing the usefulness of 
the product or making the product unduly expensive
18.6.5 Design Aspects of Product Liability
Court decisions on product liability coupled with consumer safety legislation have 
placed greater responsibility for product safety on the designer. The following aspects 
of the design process should be emphasized to minimize potential problems from 
product liability.
1. Take every precaution to assure that there is strict adherence to industry and gov-
ernment standards. Conformance to standards does not relieve or protect the man-
ufacturer from liability, but it certainly lessens the possibility of product defects.
2. All products should be thoroughly tested before being released for sale. An  attempt 
should be made to identify the possible ways a product can become unsafe (see 
Sec. 14.5), and tests should be devised to evaluate those aspects of the design. 
When failure modes are discovered, the design should be modifi ed to remove the 
potential cause of failure.
3. The fi nest quality-control techniques available will not absolve the manufacturer 
of a product liability if, in fact, the product being marketed is defective. However, 
the strong emphasis on product liability has placed renewed emphasis on quality 
engineering as a way to limit the incidence of product liability.
4. Make a careful study of the relationships between your product and upstream 
and downstream components. You are required to know how malfunctions up-
stream and downstream of your product may cause failure to your product. You 
should warn users of any hazards of foreseeable misuses based on these system 
relationships.
5. Documentation of the design, testing, and quality activities can be very impor-
tant. If there is a product recall, it is necessary to be able to pinpoint products by 
serial or lot number. If there is a product liability suit, the existence of good, com-
plete records will help establish an atmosphere of competent behavior. Documen-
tation is the single most important factor in winning or losing a product liability 
lawsuit.
6. The design of warning labels and user instruction manuals should be an integral 
part of the design process. The appropriate symbols, color, and size and the precise 
wording of the label must be developed after joint meetings of the engineering, 
legal, marketing, and manufacturing staffs. Use international warning symbols. 
7. Create a means of incorporating legal developments in product liability into the 
design decision process. It is particularly important to get legal advice from the 
product liability angle on innovative and unfamiliar designs.
8. There should be a formal design review before the product is released for produc-
tion. (See Sec. 9.4.)

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
837
18.6.6 Business Procedures to Minimize Risk of Product Liability
In addition to careful consideration of the preceding design factors, a number of busi-
ness procedures can minimize product liability risk.
1. There should be an active product liability and safety committee responsible for an 
effective product liability loss control and product safety program. This commit-
tee should have representatives from the advertising, engineering, insurance, legal, 
manufacturing, marketing, materials, purchasing, and quality-control departments 
of the corporation.
2. Insurance protection for product liability suits and product recall expenses should 
be obtained.
3. Develop a product usage and incident-reporting system just as soon as a new 
product moves into the marketplace. It will enable the manufacturer to establish 
whether the product has good customer acceptance and to detect early signs of pre-
viously unsuspected product hazards or other quality defi ciencies.
18.6.7 Problems with Product Liability Law
Product liability has grown so rapidly that certain problems have developed in the 
implementation of the law.1 There has been a dramatic shift in the doctrine of product 
liability law from negligence to strict liability, but the law has proved incapable of 
defi ning the meaning of strict liability in a useful fashion. The rules of law are vague, 
which gives juries little guidance, and as a result verdicts appear capricious and with-
out any defi nitive pattern. Another problem concerns the computation of damages 
once liability is established. There is great uncertainty and diversity in awarding dam-
ages for pain and suffering. Our adversarial legal system and juries’ unfamiliarity 
with even the rudiments of technical knowledge lead to high legal costs and exorbitant 
awards.
The great increases in the number of product liability claims and the dollars 
awarded by the courts have brought pressure on the U.S. Congress to bring some re-
straint to the situation before we become a no-fault economy. Advocates of reform 
point to product liability insurance costs and damage awards as a signifi cant factor 
in reducing American competitiveness. National product liability legislation has been 
introduced in Congress to ease the situation. It aims at making tort law on product 
liability uniform in all the states and on speeding up product liability disputes. It pro-
poses a limit on joint and several liability, a doctrine by which a defendant responsible 
for only a small portion of harm may be liable for an entire judgment award. It also 
calls for a limit on a product seller’s liability to cases in which the harm was proxi-
mately caused by the buyer’s own lack of reasonable care or a breach of the seller’s 
warranty.
1. D. G. Owen, op. cit.

838 
engineering design 
18.7
PROTECTING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
The protection of intellectual property by legal means has become a topic of gen-
eral interest and international diplomatic negotiations. There are two confl icting 
 motivations for this: (1) creations of the mind are becoming more valuable in the 
Information Age, and (2) modern information technology makes it easy to transfer 
and copy such information. We saw in Sec. 5.9 that intellectual property is protected 
by patents, copyrights, trademarks, and trade secrets. These entities fall within the 
area of property law, and as such they can be sold or leased just like other forms of 
property.1
The functional features of a design can be protected with utility patents. A util-
ity patent protects not only the specifi c embodiments of the idea shown in the patent 
application but functional equivalents as well. A well-written patent is the best protec-
tion for a valuable idea. For the criteria of patentability refer to Sec. 5.9. If an idea is 
worth patenting, it is worth hiring an experienced patent attorney to do the job well.
A different type of patent, the design patent, covers the ornamental aspects of 
a product such as its shape, confi guration, or surface decoration.2 Design patents are 
easier to obtain than utility patents, and they are easier to enforce in court. If a com-
petitive design has essentially the same overall appearance, then it is in violation of 
your patent. A design patent can have only one claim, which is a serious disadvantage, 
because it means that every unique aspect of a product’s design requires a separate 
patent. This can be expensive.
A copyright has only limited usefulness in protecting product designs. This form 
of intellectual property is primarily intended to protect writing and creative works 
like plays and movies.
1. H. B. Rockman, Intellectual Property Law for Engineers and Scientists, John Wiley & Sons, 
Hoboken, NJ, 2004.
2. The name of this type of patent can be confusing. Design patents do not cover function.
A small child threw an aerosol can into a blazing fi replace. The can exploded, 
injuring the child, and the child’s father sued the manufacturer of the cleaner in 
the spray can. The manufacturer defended itself by stating that the can contained a 
label warning the user not to incinerate. The child’s father argued that the manufac-
turer should have anticipated that some cans would accidentally be incinerated and 
that some sort of fail-safe design should have been provided to prevent explosion.
The manufacturer of the spray can won the case by arguing that the presence 
of a warning label against incineration should excuse liability for the injury. This 
is a situation where the present state of technology does not provide for a safe 
means of preventing an explosion upon rapid rise in temperature. The manufac-
turer should not be held in liability so long as the users of the product have been 
clearly warned of potential dangers. In fact, the parents of the child were really 
negligent for allowing their child to play with an aerosol can near an open fi re.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
839
Trademarks are used to protect the names or symbols (logo) of products. A 
 related form of protection is known as trade dress. This consists of distinctive fea-
tures of a product like its color, texture, size, or confi guration. Trademark and trade 
dress are intended to protect the public about the source of a product—that is, to 
protect against cheap “knock-offs.” Trademark protection is achieved by registration 
with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Offi ce, or by actual use of the trademark in the 
marketplace such that it achieves market recognition. Obviously, it is easier to defend 
against a competing trademark if it is registered. A registered trademark is issued for 
20 years and can be renewed every 20 years as long as the product remains in the 
marketplace.
An innovation becomes a trade secret when a company prefers to forgo legal pro-
tection for the intellectual property. The reason for doing this is often a feeling that pat-
ents are diffi cult or costly to defend in the particular area of technology, or an unwill-
ingness to let the public know what the company is doing. If the company takes active 
steps to protect the trade secret, then the courts will protect it as a form of intellectual 
property. Process innovations are more often protected by trade secrets than product in-
novations. Companies sometimes require nondisclosure agreements from their employ-
ees and may attempt to legally prevent an employee who leaves their employ with sensi-
tive trade knowledge from working for a competitor in order to protect a trade secret.
18.8
THE LEGAL AND ETHICAL DOMAINS
We move now from considerations of the law to a discussion of ethics, and how ethi-
cal issues affect the practice of engineering design. Ethics is the study of the prin-
ciples of conduct that govern the behavior of an individual or a profession. It provides 
the framework of the rules of behavior that are moral, fair, and proper for a true pro-
fessional. Ethical conduct is behavior desired by society and is above and beyond the 
minimum standards of the law.
Former U.S. Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart said “Ethics is knowing the dif-
ference between what you have the right to do, and what is the right thing to do”. The 
connection between legal and ethical action is illustrated by Fig. 18.1. In this model1 
the solid vertical line presents a clear distinction between what is legal and illegal, as 
set forth by statute and case law. The location of the dashed horizontal line  between 
ethical and unethical behavior is much less well defi ned. The actions considered ethi-
cal depend on values, some of which are important to society, some to the profession, 
some to the employer, and some to the individual. The task of the ethical professional 
is to balance these value responsibilities. These values are clarifi ed for the professional 
and business world by various codes of ethics (see Sec. 18.9). While you would fi nd 
1. S. G. Walesh, Engineering Your Future, Chap. 11, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995; 
R. H. McCuen and J. M. Wallace, eds., Social Responsibility in Engineering and Science, Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1987.

840 
engineering design 
close agreement among engineers as to whether an action is legal or illegal, you would 
fi nd much greater disagreement as to whether some act is ethical or unethical.
Quadrant 1, legal and ethical behavior, is where you should strive to operate at all 
times. Most design and manufacturing activities fall within this quadrant. Indeed, a 
good case can be made that quality is dependent on ethical behavior. “Doing what is 
right in the fi rst place and doing what is best for all involved, when done at every level 
of the organization and in every work process, has proven to be the most effi cient way 
of conducting a business.”1
Quadrant 2, legal and unethical, is the concern of the rest of this chapter. The 
goal is to explain how to identify unethical behavior and to learn what to do about it 
when it occurs. There is a feeling that unethical behavior in the workplace is increas-
ing because of increasing workplace pressures and changing societal standards. Most 
corporations have adopted codes of ethics.2 Many have established an ethics offi ce 
and are offering ethics training to their personnel. It is interesting that the prevailing 
view about ethics instruction has changed substantially. Throughout most of the 20th 
century the common view about ethics was that you either learned ethics in the home 
when you were growing up, or it was too late. This is changing today to a view that 
ethics is a teachable subject that can be learned by just about everyone.
Quadrant 3, illegal and unethical, is the sector where “go-to-jail” cards are 
 distributed. In general, most illegal acts also are unethical.
Quadrant 4, illegal and ethical, is a relatively rare event. An example could be an 
engineer who had signed a secrecy agreement with an employer, but then found that 
the employer had been engaged in producing a product that was very hazardous to the 
general public. Unable to get attention focused on the problem within the  company, 
the engineer goes to the press to warn the public. The engineer has breached a con-
tract, but in what is believed to be a highly ethical cause. Such a person would be 
called a whistle blower; see Sec. 18.10.1.
Legal/Ethical
Illegal/Ethical
1
4
Legal/Unethical
Illegal/Unethical
2
3
FIGURE 18.1
Legal and ethical domains.
1. L. Bottorff, Quality Progress, February 1997, pp. 57–60.
2. For example, the Code of Conduct for the DuPont Corp. is given at http://www2.dupont.com/Social_
Commitment/en_US/assets/downloads/code_of_conduct/DuPont_Code_of_Conduct_English.pdf.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
841
18.9
CODES OF ETHICS
We start by making a distinction between morality and professional ethics. Morality 
refers to those standards of conduct that apply to all individuals within society rather 
than only to members of a special group. Moral values arise from our obligation to respect 
every other human. These are the standards that every rational person wants every other 
person to follow and include standards such as the following:
 
● Respect the rights of others.
 
● Show fairness in your dealings with others.
 
● Be honest in all actions.
 
● Keep promises and contracts.
 
● Consider the welfare of others.
 
● Show compassion to others.
Note that each of these standards of conduct is based on the italicized values. Moral 
values are not static. They change as the culture changes and people become better 
educated and worldly-wise. For example, 100 years ago there was little concern for the 
impact of technology on the global environment. Today, engineering designs must be 
concerned with their impact on the sustainability of the planet.
By professional ethics we mean those standards of conduct that every member of 
a profession expects every other member to follow. These ethical standards apply to 
members of that group simply because they are members of that professional group. 
Like morality, standards of ethical conduct are value-based. Some values that are per-
tinent to professional ethics include:1
 
● Honesty and truth
 
● Honor—showing respect, integrity, and reputation for achievement
 
● Knowledge—gained through education and experience
 
● Effi ciency—producing effectively with minimum of unnecessary effort
 
● Diligence—persistent effort
 
● Loyalty—allegiance to employer’s goals
 
● Confi dentiality—dependable in safeguarding information
 
● Protecting public safety and health
Note that some of these values are directed toward the employer (e.g., confi dentiality), 
some toward the customer (e.g., diligence), some toward the profession (e.g., honor), 
and some toward society (e.g., public health and safety). These values refl ect the pro-
fessional’s value obligations.
18.9.1 Profession of Engineering
The members of a profession are involved in an intellectual effort that requires special 
training that benefi ts society. Collectively, a group of people form a true profession 
1. R. H. McCuen, Ethics Education Program of the Institute for Professional Practice, Verona, NJ, 1998.

842 
engineering design 
only as long as they command the respect of the public and inspire confi dence in their 
integrity and a belief that they are serving the general welfare.
The nature of professional service varies widely. The physician, lawyer, and cler-
gyman have direct, individual relationships with their clients, but an engineer usually 
is salaried in someone else’s employ. About 95 percent of engineers work for either in-
dustry or government, and only a small, but important, percentage is in direct contact 
with the public as consulting engineers or university faculty. Thus, the service aspect 
of engineering is less obvious to the general public than in other professions.
The peculiarities of the engineering profession as compared with the professions 
of law and medicine carry over into the area of ethics. Because engineering lacks the 
homogeneous character of such professions as law and medicine, it is not surprising 
to fi nd that there is no widely accepted code of engineering ethics. Most professional 
societies have adopted their own codes, and ABET and NSPE have adopted broader-
based ethical codes.1 Again, because engineers who are employees of either business 
or government are in the great majority, they face ethical problems that self-employed 
professionals avoid. These arise from the confl ict between the engineer’s desire to 
gain a maximum profi t for the employer (and thus achieve recognition and promotion) 
and the desire to adhere to a standard of ethics that places the public welfare ahead of 
corporate profi t. For example, what can an employed engineer 2 do to expose and cor-
rect the corrupt practices of an employer? What should an engineer do if employed in 
a business atmosphere in which kickbacks and bribes are an accepted practice?
18.9.2 Codes of Ethics
Strong parallels exist between problem solving in design and in ethical decision 
making.3 In both instances, a uniquely correct solution or response is rarely possible. 
However, some solutions are better than others, and some solutions are clearly 
unacceptable.
To provide guidance on how to behave in situations with ethical implications, 
each engineering professional society has published a code of ethics. The Code of 
Ethics for the American Society of Mechanical Engineers is given in Fig. 18.2. Note 
that the code is rather brief and quite general in its statements and that it is heav-
ily oriented toward values. It is not a list of do’s and don’ts. The three fundamental 
principles identify goals for the ethical behavior of engineers. Use your knowledge as 
an engineer for the good of humanity. Do it in an honest and impartial way. Work to 
increase the competence of the profession of engineering. The 10 fundamental can-
ons get a bit more specifi c, but they still emphasize value statements and leave many 
things unsaid. This generality is intentional in well-conceived codes of ethics.
1. ABET is the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology, the professional organization that 
evaluates and accredits engineering and technology curricula in the United States. NSPE is the  National 
Society of Professional Engineers.
2. T. S. Perry, IEEE Spectrum, pp. 56–61, September 1981.
3. C. Whitbeck, Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research, Cambridge University Press, New York, 
1998, pp. 55–66.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
843
CODE OF ETHICS OF ENGINEERS
The Fundamental Principles
Engineers uphold and advance the integrity, honor and dignity of the engineering profession 
by:
 
I. 
using their knowledge and skill for the enhancement of human welfare;
 
II. 
being honest and impartial, and serving with fidelity their clients (including
 
 
 
their employers) and the public; and
 
III. 
striving to increase the competence and prestige of the engineering profession.
The Fundamental Canons
 
1. 
Engineers shall hold paramount the safety, health and welfare of the public  
 
 
 
in the performance of their professional duties.
 
2. 
Engineers shall perform services only in the areas of their competence; they  
 
 
 
shall build their professional reputation on the merit of their services and  
 
 
 
shall not compete unfairly with others.
 
3. 
Engineers shall continue their professional development throughout their  
 
 
 
careers and shall provide opportunities for the professional and ethical  
 
 
 
development  of those engineers under their supervision.
 
4. 
Engineers shall act in professional matters for each employer or clients as  
 
 
 
faithful agents or trustees, and shall avoid conflicts of interest or the
 
 
appearance of conflicts of interest.
 
5. 
Engineers shall respect the proprietary information and intellectual property  
 
 
 
rights of others, including charitable organizations and professional societies  
 
 
 
in the engineering field.
 
6. 
Engineers shall associate only with reputable persons or organizations.
 
 
Engineers shall issue public statements only in an objective and truthful  
 
 
 
manner and shall avoid any conduct which brings discredit upon the   
 
 
profession.
 
8. 
Engineers shall consider environmental impact and sustainable development  
 
 
 
in the performance of their professional duties.
 
9. 
Engineers shall not seek ethical sanction against another engineer unless  
 
 
 
there is good reason to do so under the relevant codes, policies and   
 
 
 
procedures governing that engineer’s ethical conduct.
 
10. 
Engineers who are members of the Society shall endeavor to abide by the  
 
 
 
Constitution, By-Laws and policies of the Society, and they shall disclose  
 
 
 
knowledge of any matter involving another member’s alleged violation of this  
 
 
 
code of Ethics or the Society’s  Conflicts of interest policy in a prompt,  
 
 
 
complete and truthful manner to the chair of the Committee and Ethical  
 
 
 
Standards and Review.
7.
FIGURE 18.2
The Code of Ethics of ASME International. 
http://fi les.asme.org/ASMEORG/ Governance/3675.pdf

844 
engineering design 
The canons1 present the general duties of an ethical engineer. They start by rein-
forcing the point that the safety, health, and welfare of the public is the fi rst responsi-
bility of the engineer. Next the canons charge engineers to work only in areas of their 
competence. The greater our competence, the better we will be able to protect public 
safety. Recognition of your real competencies is an important attribute. One should 
work to improve and expand their competence (canon 3), but also know when it is 
important to bring in other expertise to work on a design. After all, that is why we 
have design teams. While it is not specifi cally stated in canon 3, the wording implies 
that maintaining professional competency applies not just to technical competency but 
also to competency in knowledge of ethics and values.
Canon 4 charges engineers to act professionally with respect to the employer or 
client as faithful agents or trustees. This implies that the engineer places high impor-
tance on the values of loyalty, confi dentiality, effi ciency, and diligence. The second 
part of this canon talks about avoiding confl icts of interest, or the appearance of such 
confl ict. A person is in a position of confl ict of interest when he or she is in a posi-
tion to personally benefi t from actions under his or her infl uence, especially when 
the employer is unaware of this benefi t. For example, a design engineer who owns 
considerable stock in a startup company would be in confl ict of interest if he specifi ed 
that company’s product in his new design. Often a confl ict of interest is impossible or 
impractical to avoid. In this case, the best practice is to make it known to everyone 
involved. For example, persons serving on study committees of the National Research 
Council are asked to disclose any potential confl icts of interest. You might have large 
stock holdings in your company, yet your expertise is vital to the study that is to be un-
dertaken. Your confl ict would be made part of the public record, and you would need 
to excuse yourself from deliberations if they ever came close to your area of confl ict.
Avoiding the appearance of confl ict of interest is as important as avoiding the con-
fl ict itself. Some areas that could get you in trouble are hiring relatives or close friends, 
accepting expensive gifts from suppliers or customers, accepting a paid trip to a confer-
ence from a supplier, or owning large blocks of stock in a competitor of your company.
In another example of confl ict of interest, a law fi rm is forbidden by the code of 
ethics for lawyers to represent both parties in a dispute, even if the lawyer is asked 
to represent the second party in a case unrelated to the fi rst dispute.2 This part of 
the code arises from the adversarial nature of the legal system and the role that law-
yers play therein. It is interesting to note that none of the engineering ethics codes 
would prevent a company from designing plastics plants for two directly competing 
 companies as long as confi dentiality was upheld. This points out that codes of ethics 
can differ signifi cantly between professions.
The fi fth canon emphasizes the importance of intellectual property in engineer-
ing practice by admonishing the engineer to respect proprietary and intellectual prop-
erty. Cannon 6 is self-explanatory. Nothing is more important over the long term than 
your reputation for having high ethical standards. The old adage, we are known by the 
company we keep applies here.
1. A canon is an ecclesiastical or secular rule or law.
2. C. Whitbeck, op. cit.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
845
Canon 7 has many implications. It charges the engineer to be objective and truth-
ful in professional reports, statements, and public testimony. Engineers may express 
publicly a professional opinion on technical subjects only when that opinion is founded 
on adequate knowledge and competence in the subject matter. When making a public 
statement, any payments you may have received from interested parties to make the 
statement must be disclosed.
Canon 8 places emphasis on consideration of environmental and sustainability 
issues in the engineer’s work. This is a relatively new addition to the canon. Canon 9 
admonishes the engineer to be careful before bringing ethical charges against another 
engineer. Canon 10 reminds the engineer that a member of ASME is obligated to 
follow the other bylaws and policies of the organization. Also, it is his or her duty to 
report any observed violation of the Code of Ethics by a member.
The fundamental principles and canons are very general This enables them to be 
applied in a wide variety of situations. To assist the engineer in using the Code of Ethics, 
most professional societies publish guidelines for their interpretation. For example, we 
give some excerpts from the ASME Criteria for Interpretation of the Canons.1
 
● Canon 2. Engineers shall not request, propose, or accept professional commissions 
on a contingent basis if, under the circumstances, their professional judgments may 
be compromised.
 
● Canon 4. Engineers shall not solicit or accept fi nancial or other valuable consider-
ation, for specifying products or material or equipment suppliers, without disclo-
sure to their clients or employers.
 
● Canon 4. Engineers shall admit their own errors when proven wrong and refrain 
from distorting or altering the facts to justify their mistakes or decisions.
 
● Canon 8. Engineers shall concern themselves with the impact of their plans and 
designs on the environment. When the impact is a clear threat to health or safety of 
the public, then the guidelines for this Canon revert to those of Canon 1.
Four reasons why engineers should support their profession’s Code of Ethics can 
be presented.2 First, supporting the Code helps protect engineers from being harmed 
by what other engineers do. Second, the Code helps ensure to each engineer a work 
environment in which refusing to perform an unethical directive becomes easier to 
do. One can point to the Code in support of your position. Third, supporting the Code 
helps to make engineering a profession about which you need feel no morally justifi ed 
embarrassment. Finally, supporting the Code is the professional thing to do.
18.9.3 Extremes of Ethical Behavior
Ethical theory considers two extreme types of behavior. Altruism is a form of moral 
behavior in which individuals act for the sake of other people’s interests. Ethical altru-
ism is the view that individuals ought to act with each others’ interests in mind. This 
1. http://fi les.asme.org/asmeorg/NewsPublicPolicy/Ethics/10938.doc
2. M. Davis, Thinking Like an Engineer, Oxford University Press, New York, 1998, pp. 59–60.

846 
engineering design 
A young engineer on active duty with the Air Force discovers that a component 
used in three aircraft is overdesigned. A special adapter, costing several hundred 
 dollars, is required for every component. The original purpose of the adapter was 
to permit the component to be used with a certain aircraft, but that aircraft now has 
been phased out of service. Thus, the adapter is redundant. The engineer tries to 
get the specifi cation changed to eliminate the adapter, but she is told that the “sys-
tem” will not permit this.
The resourceful engineer then submits the proposal through the suggestion 
system of the maintenance depot where she is assigned. She receives a phone call 
from a staff member informing her that as a military offi cer she cannot receive a 
monetary award for suggestions. The advice is given that she add a civil service 
engineer to the suggestion, and that they agree to split the award.
The potential for monetary reward through the suggestion system is rather 
great, but to do as suggested would be unethical. It would be dishonest and would 
not show integrity. She submits the suggestion as originally formulated, forgoing 
an award that could exceed $100,000. Her reward, as a military offi cer, was dinner 
for two at the offi cer’s club, and the start of a career with a reputation for high ethi-
cal behavior.
1. R. H. McCuen, Issues in Engineering—Jnl. of Prof. Activities, ASCE, vol. 107, no. E12, pp. 111–120, 
April 1981.
2. It is also safe to say that every engineering student has had to face an ethical dilemma with adhering 
to their university’s code of academic integrity in their undergraduate career.
is the viewpoint best summarized by the Golden Rule: Do unto others as you would 
have others do unto you. Egoism is a form of moral behavior in which individuals act 
for their own advantage. Ethical egoism is the view that individuals ought always to 
act to satisfy their own interests.1 Most day-to-day practice of engineering is done in 
the individual’s self-interest and is not in confl ict with the codes of ethics. However, 
the codes of ethics are meant to alert the practicing professional that he or she has 
 altruistic obligations that must be properly balanced with self-interest.
18.10
SOLVING ETHICAL CONFLICTS
It is probably safe to say that every engineer must resolve at least one ethical dilemma 
over the duration of his or her career.2 If the engineer mishandles the situation, his 
or her career can be damaged even in cases where he or she is trying to do the right 
thing. Therefore, it is important to know how to handle ethical confl icts and to have 
thought about confl ict resolution before being confronted by a problem. A diffi cult 
problem for engineers arises from their dual obligation to serve both their employer 
and society diligently and with loyalty. The vast majority of businesses aim to be 

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
847
TABLE 18.2
Procedure for Solving Ethical Confl icts
I. Internal appeal option
A. Individual preparation
1. Maintain a record of the event and details
2. Examine the company’s internal appeals process
3. Be familiar with the state and federal laws that could protect you
4. Identify alternative courses of action
5. Decide on the outcome that you want the appeal to accomplish
B. Communicate with your immediate supervisor
1. Initiate informal discussion
2. Make a formal written appeal
3. Indicate that you intend to begin the company’s internal process of appeal
C. Initiate appeal through the internal chain of command
1. Maintain formal contacts as to where the appeal stands
2. Formally inform the company that you intend to pursue an external solution
II. External appeal option
A. Individual actions
1. Engage legal counsel
2. Contact your professional society
B. Contact with your client (if applicable)
C. Contact the media
R. H. McCuen, Hydrologic Analysis and Design, 2d ed., Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1998.
honest and responsible corporate citizens, but the confl ict between profi t and societal 
good is potentially always present. What should you do when confronted by an ethical 
confl ict where it is obvious that you have competing value responsibilities?
Ethical decision making is not easy. However, the chances for successfully resolv-
ing an ethical confl ict can be greatly increased by following a systematic procedure. 
Table 18.2 presents one set of guidelines that will help ensure meeting one’s profes-
sional responsibilities. Except under the unusual circumstances of imminent danger to 
the public, it is important that all internal procedures should be explored before seeking 
options outside of the organization. The process of seeking resolution to an ethical con-
fl ict within the organization is usually handled through an appeals process within man-
agement or by the complaint process through the offi ce of the ombudsman or the ethics 
offi cer. Seeking resolution outside of the organization is usually called whistleblowing. 
Table 18.2 gives a step-by-step procedure for resolving an ethical confl ict, or any con-
fl ict for that matter, through an internal appeals process and external to your company.
The steps that the individual should take in preparation for disclosure of unethi-
cal behavior are straightforward. Once you have studied and documented the facts 
and formulated a plan for appeal, you should discuss the matter with your immediate 
supervisor. Failure to fully communicate your concerns to your immediate  supervisor 

848 
engineering design 
or secretly going over his or her head to higher levels is viewed as disloyalty and will 
be viewed negatively by all involved, even your supervisor’s superior. It will also de-
crease the likelihood of a favorable resolution of the confl ict. Often the value issue 
will be resolved by communicating with the immediate supervisor. However, if after 
fully discussing the issue with your supervisor, you feel that your supervisor is not 
willing or able to take appropriate action, then inform your supervisor in writing of 
your intention to appeal beyond that level.
The process of appealing an ethical confl ict within the company is usually similar 
to the process of interacting with your immediate supervisor on the issue. You should 
have the facts and a plan of how you would like to see the issue resolved. Formal steps 
should follow informal discussions, and steps within the appeal chain should not be 
 bypassed. If the internal appeal does not resolve the ethical confl ict, then you should 
notify the company that you intend to continue with an external review of the problem.
Before going public legal advice should be obtained. A lawyer can identify 
courses of action and legal pitfalls in your external appeal. While lawyers understand 
the legal issues, they may not have the technical background to evaluate the technical 
adequacy of your arguments. For this reason it might be helpful to involve an engi-
neering professional society as an impartial judge of your arguments. Engineering so-
cieties vary widely in their willingness to become involved in these kinds of activities.
If your company worked for a client in the issue about which you are concerned, 
then the client should be approached before going public. The client may pressure 
your company to resolve the issue internally, or the client may provide the resources to 
obtain an unbiased review of the issue.
The last resort is public disclosure by contacting the press and news TV. This is 
often called whistleblowing.
18.10.1 Whistleblowing
Whistleblowing is the act of reporting on unethical conduct within an organization to 
someone outside of the organization in an effort to discourage the organization from 
continuing the activity. In the usual case the charges are made by an employee or 
former employee who has been unable to obtain the attention of the organization’s 
management about the problem. Sometimes whistleblowing is confi ned to within the 
organization, where the whistleblower’s supervision is bypassed in an appeal to higher 
management. An important issue is to determine the conditions under which engineers 
are justifi ed in blowing the whistle. DeGeorge 1 suggests that it is morally permissible 
for engineers to engage in whistleblowing when the following conditions are met:
1. The harm that will be done by the product to the public is considerable and serious.
2. Concerns have been made known to their superiors, and getting no satisfaction 
from their immediate superiors, all channels have been exhausted within the cor-
poration, including the board of directors.
1. R. T. DeGeorge, Business and Prof. Ethics Jnl., vol. 1, pp. 1–14, 1981.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
849
3. The whistleblower must have documented evidence that would convince a reason-
able, impartial observer that his or her view of the situation is correct and the com-
pany position is wrong.
4. There must be strong evidence that releasing the information to the public would 
prevent the projected serious harm.
Clearly a person engaging in whistleblowing runs considerable risk of being la-
beled a malcontent or of being charged with disloyalty, and possibly being dismissed. 
The decision to blow the whistle requires great moral courage.1 Federal government 
employees have won protection under the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, but pro-
tection under state laws or active support from the engineering professional societ-
ies is still spotty. OSHA maintains an Offi ce of Whistleblowers Protection for issues 
dealing with safety and health in the workplace. Some farsighted companies have es-
tablished the offi ce of ombudsman or an ethics review committee to head off and 
solve these problems internally before they reach the whistleblowing stage. Additional 
information can be found on the web pages of the National Whistleblower Center.2
18.10.2 Case Studies
Ethics is best taught by looking at real-life situations through case studies. From time 
to time major incidents occur that catch the public’s attention, and these are recorded 
for posterity in the engineering ethics texts. Prominent examples are the space shut-
tle Challenger tragedy,3 the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) 4 control system fail-
ure, and the meltdown of the Chernobyl nuclear reactor.5 Entire areas of technology 
and society are the subjects of continuing ethical discussions—for example, genetic 
 engineering. Environmental issues 6 and questions of scientifi c fraud and integrity in 
doing research 7 are also prominent areas for discussion.
While these major incidents and cutting-edge activities get most of the atten-
tion, the likelihood that the average engineer will be involved heavily in such cases is 
small. A more typical ethical situation would be:
 
● Should I authorize the release of production parts that are only marginally out of 
specifi cation?
 
● Should I condone the use of pirated design software?
1. For examples of actions against whistleblowers and advice on how to protect yourself, see IEEE Spec-
trum, April 2004, p. 53. Also see T. Devine and T. F. Maassarani, The Corporate Whistleblower’s Sur-
vival Guide, Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2011.
2. www.whistleblowers.org
3. R. L. B. Pinkus et al., Engineering Ethics: Lessons Learned from the Space Shuttle, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, New York, 1997; C. Whitbeck, op. cit., Chap. 4.
4. S. H. Unger, Controlling Technology: Ethics and the Responsible Engineer, 2d ed., John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 1994, pp. 20–25.
5. S. H. Unger, op. cit., pp. 77–91.
6. P. A. Vesilind and A. S. Gunn, Engineering, Ethics, and the Environment, Cambridge University 
Press, New York, 1998.
7. C. Whitbeck, op. cit., Chaps. 6, 7, 9, 10.

850 
engineering design 
 
● What should I do about the fact that my boss has infl ated my credentials on the 
 résumé that went out with the last proposal?
The Center for Engineering Ethics of the National Academy of Engineering pro-
vides an Online Ethics Center (http://onlineethics.org) that consolidates many other 
ethics sites. This is an excellent source of ethics case studies. While well organized, 
the volume of information offered can be overwhelming at fi rst glance, so we offer 
suggestions for the fi rst-time visitor to this site. 
Select Resources, and then click Topics. Under Professional Practice select 
Cases. The fi rst selection, Teaching Engineering Ethics: A Case Study Approach is 
a good place to start because it presents cases on topics likely to be encountered by 
engineers early in their careers. A major feature is that each ethical quandary is an-
swered by four or fi ve experienced engineers. The diversity of answers shows how 
ethical questions do not always have a common answer. Another useful selection is 
Numerical Design Problems with Ethical Content. 
Another path to interesting case studies is Topics followed by Employment and 
Legal Issues. Of particular interest are Advice from the Texas Instruments Ethics 
Offi ce and Mini-Cases from Lockheed Martin Corporation. It is worth looking at 
both of these sites since overlapping topics have been removed. These sites include 
legal issues as well as ethical ones and are typical of the kind of understanding that 
large corporations expect from their employees.
The categories of professional practice and employment and legal issues have 
been discussed fi rst because they deal with ethical issues that young engineers are 
likely to encounter early in their careers. Four other main categories can be found 
A consulting engineer is hired by the county to investigate a bridge collapse. In the 
course of his investigation he examines a bridge of similar design and fi nds that it 
is only marginally safe. He contacts the county engineer to tell him about this dis-
covery. The county offi cial tells him that they know about this condition and that 
they hope to repair it in the next budget year. However, they must keep the second 
bridge open because to close it would increase the response time of emergency ve-
hicles by about 30 minutes. What should the consulting engineer do?
He goes back to the marginal bridge and makes a more thorough investigation, 
taking photographs and measurements. He fi nds the situation more dangerous than 
he fi rst thought. Back at the offi ce he makes some calculations and prepares a brief 
 report. He asks for a meeting with the county engineer and lays out the case for 
closing the bridge. The county engineer is impressed, but points out the political 
implications of closing the bridge. He suggests a joint meeting with the county su-
pervisor. They meet with the county supervisor, who is impressed with the severity 
of the situation, and the spirit of civic duty shown by the engineer. They agree to 
post the bridge to forbid general traffi c, but to leave it open to emergency vehicles. 
The county supervisor schedules a press conference to which he invites the con-
sulting engineer as an honored guest.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
851
under Topics: (1) Environment, Safety, and Sustainability deals with professional 
responsibility for safety and public well-being; (2) Responsible Research, respon-
sible conduct in doing research (important for graduate students and their advisors); 
(3) Emerging Technologies, ethical issues for new technologies like synthetic biol-
ogy, nanomaterials, and information technology; and (4) Diversity Issues, ethical is-
sues surrounding members of underrepresented groups in engineering and research.
We have initially directed the reader to collections of case studies because we feel 
they are the best way to understand the application of moral and ethical values to en-
gineering problems. Each of the major categories under Topics has a section devoted 
to Essays and Articles and Other Resources (websites) that should be consulted for 
more general information than is found in the case studies.
18.11 
SUMMARY
Engineering is a profession that is critical to the advancement of society. How engi-
neers do their jobs determines what kind of world future generations will enjoy. Thus, 
the practice of engineering without question will involve you in making ethical judg-
ments. Most will be small in nature, involving your relationship with your manage-
ment and your fellow engineers, but others could be momentous, affecting the safety 
of a city.
The law is a formalized code of conduct describing what society feels is the 
proper way to behave. Statutory law is created by a federal or state legislative body. 
Case law arises from the decisions of the courts. Ethics is the study of human conduct 
that lays out the moral ground rules based on society’s values. Ethical conduct is the 
behavior that is desired by society and is separate from the minimum standards of 
the law.
Engineers should be familiar with contracts and liability, especially product 
 liability. A contract is an agreement between two parties to do or not to do something. 
It consists of an offer, an acceptance of the offer, and a consideration, the exchange of 
something of value. A contract is discharged when the agreement has been performed 
to the satisfaction of both parties. A breach of contract occurs when one party fails to 
perform its part of the contract.
Liability means being bound or obligated to pay damages or restitution. Two com-
mon ways of incurring liability are breaching a contract or committing a tort. A tort is 
a civil wrong committed against a person, or the business, property, or reputation that 
causes damage. Common examples of torts are fraud, misrepresentation, negligence, 
and product liability.
Product liability is the legal action by which an injured party seeks to recover 
damages for personal injury or property loss from the producer or seller of a prod-
uct. The law under which product liability is tried has evolved to a standard of strict 
product liability. Under this theory of law, the plaintiff must prove that: (1) the prod-
uct was defective and unreasonably dangerous, (2) the defect existed at the time the 
product left the defendant’s control, (3) the defect caused the harm, and (4) the harm is 

852 
engineering design 
appropriately assignable to the identifi ed defect. Previously, manufacturers were liable 
only when they could be proved negligent or unreasonably careless.
To protect against product liability suits, the design procedures described in 
Secs. 13.8, 14.4 through 14.8 must be followed. In addition, documentation of these 
design methods and of testing and quality activities is vital. There should be an active 
product safety committee to see that every step is taken to ensure the design and pro-
duction of safe products. Finally, it may be a wise business decision to obtain insur-
ance protection for product liability suits and product recall expenses.
While the boundary between legal and illegal acts is generally well defi ned by 
the law, the distinction between what is ethical and what is unethical is much less 
well defi ned. Professional engineering societies provide guidance by means of codes 
of ethics. Different individuals respond differently, depending on their value systems. 
Engineering is a profession, and as such, you are bound by the ethical standards of 
the profession. It does not matter whether you have individually made that agreement. 
The profession expects you to behave in a certain ethical way. These rules of conduct 
are laid down in the code of ethics of each professional engineering society. The exis-
tence of a code of ethics is important to you because it gives you an authoritative stan-
dard to fall back on if you are engaged in a serious ethical confl ict in the workplace.
Table 18.3 suggests typical ethical questions associated with different steps in the 
product design process.1
It is not inconceivable that you will be involved in a serious ethical confl ict some-
time in your career. Ethical confl ict often arises from the competing value respon-
sibilities that engineers have, such as loyalty and diligence to both their employer 
and the good of society. If such a confl ict does arise, it is important to try to resolve 
the disagreement internally in your organization. Follow to the letter the prescribed 
TABLE 18.3
Typical Ethical Questions Associated with Product Design
Steps in Product Design
Possible Ethical Questions
Market study
Is the study unbiased, or has it been embellished to attract investors or 
management support?
Conceptual design
Will the product be useful, or will it be just a gimmick?
Embodiment design
Does the design team have suffi cient expertise to properly judge 
whether computer programs are giving reliable results? Have any 
patents been violated?
Detail design
Has checking of results been done?
Manufacturing
Is the workplace safe and free of environmental hazards? Is enough 
time allowed to do quality work?
Product use
Is the product safe to use? Are users informed of possible hazards?
Retirement from service
Has the design allowed for recycling or reuse?
1. M. W. Martin and R. Schinzinger, Ethics in Engineering, 3d ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996.

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
853
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Law and the Engineer
Blinn, K. W.: Legal and Ethical Concepts in Engineering, Prentice Hall, Englewod Cliffs, NJ, 
1989.
Liuzzo, A, and J. G. Bonnice: Essentials of Business Law, 6th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 
2007.
Engineering Law, Design Liability, and Professional Ethics, Professional Publication, 
 Belmont, CA, 1983.
Product Liability
Brown, S., I. LeMay, J. Sweet, and A. Weinstein, eds.: Product Liability Handbook: Preven-
tion, Risk, Consequence, and Forensics of Product Failure, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New 
York, 1990.
Hunziker, J. R., and T. O. Jones: Product Liability and Innovation, National Academy Press, 
Washington, DC, 1994.
Smith, C. O.: Products Liability: Are You Vulnerable? Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1981.
Engineering Ethics
Budinger, T. F., and M. D. Budinger: Ethics of Emerging Technology, John Wiley & Sons, 
Hoboken, NJ, 2006.
Davis, M.: Thinking Like an Engineer: Studies in the Ethics of a Profession, Oxford  University 
Press, Oxford, 1998.
Harris, C. E., M. S. Pritchard, and M. Rabins: Engineering Ethics: Concepts and Cases, 
3d ed., Thomson-Wadsworth Publishing Co., Belmont, CA, 2005.
Martin, M. W.: Ethics in Engineering, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2005.
Unger, S. H.: Controlling Technology. Ethics and the Responsible Engineer, 2d ed., John 
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1994.
Whitbeck, C.: Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research, Cambridge University Press, 
New York, 1998.
NEW TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Altruism
Canons of ethics
Code of ethics
Confl ict of interest
Express contract
Fraud
Implied contract
Intellectual property
Liability
Negligence
Product liability
Statutes
Strict liability
Tort law
Trade dress
Utility patent
Values
Whistleblower
appeal procedure, and document everything. If you must go outside of the organiza-
tion, obtain competent legal counsel.

854 
engineering design 
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
 18.1. John Williams, a professional engineer, agrees to testify as an expert witness for the 
fi rm of Jones & Black in a court case. In return, the fi rm promises to pay Williams 
$1500 plus expenses for his services.
(a) 
Is this a lawful contract? State the reasons for your decision.
(b)  Suppose Williams agrees to accept $2500 if Jones wins, but only expenses if 
Jones loses. Is this a lawful contract? State your reasons.
 18.2. ABC Electric agreed by fax on Monday to buy 100 fractional-horsepower motors for 
$3000 from Amalgamated Electric. On Wednesday the purchasing agent from ABC 
calls and says he is canceling the order. Amalgamated says the motors have already 
been shipped and they want their money.
(a) 
What is the legal responsibility of ABC Electric in this transaction?
(b) Would it have been any different if the motors had not already been shipped?
 18.3. A car designer specifi ed steel bolts of the highest quality and strength when designing 
a connection for the front-end steering rods. The manufacturer of the bolts used an 
 inadequate sampling plan for inspecting the bolts, and several defective bolts caused 
failure of the steering mechanism. Several deaths resulted, and there was a major 
product recall. Discuss the liability of the designer, the auto company, and the bolt 
manufacturer.
 18.4. Read the story of the failure of the General Electric refrigerator with the revolution-
ary rotary compressor (Wall Street Journal, May 7, 1990, p. A1, A5). What lessons 
does this teach us about product design? What implications does it have for product  
liability?
 18.5. Aristotle put forth the precept that humanity should follow four virtues: (1) prudence, 
(2) justice, (3) fortitude, and (4) temperance. Defi ne each virtue broadly and give ex-
amples of ethical behavior for each virtue.
 18.6. Make a list of business practices that signal whether an organization is an ethical cor-
poration. What role does the CEO of the corporation play in this?
 18.7. We are in a period where the desire for steady increase in corporate earnings, driven to 
a large degree by the stock market, sometimes causes management to require layoffs 
even when profi ts are good. Discuss the ethics of this from the viewpoint of both cor-
porate management and the individual engineer.
 18.8. Imagine what it would be like if there were no codes of ethics for engineers. What 
would be the consequences?
 18.9. A trend in sports equipment has been to improve the players’ performance by intro-
ducing new products. Examples are the graphite-composite shaft and titanium head in 
golf drivers, lighter-weight composite tennis rackets with a larger “sweet” spot, and an 
aluminum baseball bat with built-in damping. Discuss the ethics of compensating for 
personal inadequacies in performance with technology in competitive sports. 

 
chapter 18: Legal And Ethical Issues In Engineering Design 
855
18.10. Discuss the ethics of the following situation: You are a design engineer for the Ajax 
Manufacturing Co., a large multiplant producer of plastic parts. As part of your em-
ployment, you were required to sign a secrecy agreement that prohibits divulging in-
formation that the company considers proprietary.
Ajax has modifi ed a standard piece of equipment that greatly increases the effi -
ciency in cooling viscous plastic slurries. The company decides not to patent the devel-
opment but instead to keep it as a trade secret. As part of your regular job assignment, 
you work with this proprietary equipment and become thoroughly familiar with its 
enhanced capabilities.
Five years later you leave Ajax and go to work for a candy manufacturer as chief 
of production. Your new employer is not in any way in competition with Ajax. You 
quickly realize that Ajax’s trade secret can be applied with great profi t to a completely 
different machine used for cooling fudge. You order the change to be made. Discuss 
the ethics.
18.11. Discuss the ethics in the following situation: You have been on the job for nine months 
as an assistant research engineer working with a world-famous authority on heat trans-
fer. It is an ideal job, because you are learning a great deal under his sympathetic tute-
lage while you pursue an advanced degree part-time.
You are asked to evaluate two new fl ame-retardant paints A and B. Because of 
late delivery of some constituents of paint A, the test has been delayed and your boss 
has been forced to make a tentative recommendation of paint A to the design group. 
You are asked to make the after-the-fact tests “for the record.” Much to your surprise, 
the tests show that your boss was wrong and that formulation B shows better fl ame 
resistance. However, a large quantity of paint A already has been purchased. Your boss 
asks you to “fudge the data” in favor of his original decision, and since there is reason-
able possibility that your data were in error, you reluctantly change them to favor his 
decision. Discuss the ethics.
18.12. A new development in the intellectual property arena is the presence of “patent trolls.” 
These are small organizations, usually just a clever inventor and a patent attorney, who 
buy up patents or hold the inventor’s patents in a fast-moving area of technology, such 
as information technology. The trolls have no plans to make a product based on their 
patents. Instead they lie in wait, hoping to snare an unwitting manufacturer that in-
fringes on one of their patents and to demand an outrageous royalty payment. Research 
in Motion, RIM, the producer of the hand-held wireless device called Blackberry, was 
sued in 2005 by a troll named NTF.
Find out more about what happened in the case of RIM versus NTF and identify 
the societal issues involved with patent trolls.

A
Appendix A
AREA UNDER THE CUMULATIVE 
DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION FOR Z

A
z
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
− 3.6
.0002
.0002
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
− 3.5
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
−3.4
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0002
− 3.3
.0005
.0005
.0005
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0003
− 3.2
.0007
.0007
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0005
.0005
.0005
− 3.1
.0010
.0009
.0009
.0009
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0007
.0007
− 3.0
.0013
.0013
.0013
.0012
.0012
.0011
.0011
.0011
.0010
.0010
− 2.9
.0019
.0018
.0018
.0017
.0016
.0016
.0015
.0015
.0014
.0014
− 2.8
.0026
.0025
.0024
.0023
.0023
.0022
.0021
.0021
.0020
.0019
− 2.7
.0035
.0034
.0033
.0032
.0031
.0030
.0029
.0028
.0027
.0026
− 2.6
.0047
.0045
.0044
.0043
.0041
.0040
.0039
.0038
.0037
.0036
− 2.5
.0062
.0060
.0059
.0057
.0055
.0054
.0052
.0051
.0049
.0048
− 2.4
.0082
.0080
.0078
.0075
.0073
.0071
.0069
.0068
.0066
.0064
− 2.3
.0107
.0104
.0102
.0099
.0096
.0094
.0091
.0089
.0087
.0084
− 2.2
.0139
.0136
.0132
.0129
.0125
.0122
.0119
.0116
.0113
.0110
− 2.1
.0179
.0174
.0170
.0166
.0162
.0158
.0154
.0150
.0146
.0143
− 2.0
.0228
.0222
.0217
.0212
.0207
.0202
.0197
.0192
.0188
.0183
− 1.9
.0287
.0281
.0274
.0268
.0262
.0256
.0250
.0244
.0239
.0233
− 1.8
.0359
.0351
.0344
.0336
.0329
.0322
.0314
.0307
.0301
.0294
− 1.7
.0446
.0436
.0427
.0418
.0409
.0401
.0392
.0384
.0375
.0367
− 1.6
.0548
.0537
.0526
.0516
.0505
.0495
.0485
.0475
.0465
.0455
− 1.5
.0668
.0655
.0643
.0630
.0618
.0606
.0594
.0582
.0571
.0559
− 1.4
.0808
.0793
.0778
.0764
.0749
.0735
.0721
.0708
.0694
.0681
− 1.3
.0968
.0951
.0934
.0918
.0901
.0885
.0869
.0853
.0838
.0823
− 1.2
.1151
.1131
.1112
.1093
.1075
.1056
.1038
.1020
.1003
.0985
− 1.1
.1357
.1335
.1314
.1292
.1271
.1251
.1230
.1210
.1190
.1170
− 1.0
.1587
.1562
.1539
.1515
.1492
.1469
.1446
.1423
.1401
.1379
− 0.9
.1841
.1814
.1788
.1762
.1736
.1711
.1685
.1660
.1635
.1611
− 0.8
.2119
.2090
.2061
.2033
.2005
.1977
.1949
.1922
.1894
.1867
− 0.7
.2420
.2389
.2358
.2327
.2296
.2266
.2236
.2206
.2177
.2148
− 0.6
.2743
.2709
.2676
.2643
.2611
.2578
.2546
.2514
.2483
.2451
− 0.5
.3085
.3050
.3015
.2981
.2946
.2912
.2877
.2843
.2810
.2776
− 0.4
.3446
.3409
.3372
.3336
.3300
.3264
.3228
.3192
.3156
.3121
− 0.3
.3821
.3783
.3745
.3707
.3669
.3632
.3594
.3557
.3520
.3483
− 0.2
.4207
.4168
.4129
.4090
.4052
.4013
.3974
.3936
.3897
.3859
− 0.1
.4602
.4562
.4522
.4483
.4443
.4404
.4364
.4325
.4286
.4247
− 0.0
.5000
.4960
.4920
.4880
.4840
.4801
.4761
.4721
.4681
.4641
0
z
 
appendix a: Area Under the Cumulative Distribution Function for z 
A-2

A-3 
engineering design 
A
0
z
z
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.0
.5000
.5040
.5080
.5120
.5160
.5199
.5239
.5279
.5319
.5359
0.1
.5398
.5438
.5478
.5517
.5557
.5596
.5636
.5675
.5714
.5753
0.2
.5793
.5832
.5871
.5910
.5948
.5987
.6026
.6064
.6103
.6141
0.3
.6179
.6217
.6255
.6293
.6331
.6368
.6406
.6443
.6480
.6517
0.4
.6554
.6591
.6628
.6664
.6700
.6736
.6772
.6808
.6844
.6879
0.5
.6915
.6950
.6985
.7019
.7054
.7088
.7123
.7157
.7190
.7224
0.6
.7257
.7291
.7324
.7357
.7389
.7422
.7454
.7486
.7517
.7549
0.7
.7580
.7611
.7642
.7673
.7704
.7734
.7764
.7794
.7823
.7852
0.8
.7881
.7910
.7939
.7967
.7995
.8023
.8051
.8078
.8106
.8133
0.9
.8159
.8186
.8212
.8238
.8264
.8289
.8315
.8340
.8365
.8389
1.0
.8413
.8438
.8461
.8485
.8508
.8531
.8554
.8577
.8599
.8621
1.1
.8643
.8665
.8686
.8708
.8729
.8749
.8770
.8790
.8810
.8830
1.2
.8849
.8869
.8888
.8907
.8925
.8944
.8962
.8980
.8997
.9015
1.3
.9032
.9049
.9066
.9082
.9099
.9115
.9131
.9147
.9162
.9177
1.4
.9192
.9207
.9222
.9236
.9251
.9265
.9279
.9292
.9306
.9319
1.5
.9332
.9345
.9357
.9370
.9382
.9394
.9406
.9418
.9429
.9441
1.6
.9452
.9463
.9474
.9484
.9495
.9505
.9515
.9525
.9535
.9545
1.7
.9554
.9564
.9573
.9582
.9591
.9599
.9608
.9616
.9625
.9633
1.8
.9641
.9649
.9656
.9664
.9671
.9678
.9686
.9693
.9699
.9706
1.9
.9713
.9719
.9726
.9732
.9738
.9744
.9750
.9756
.9761
.9767
2.0
.9772
.9778
.9783
.9788
.9793
.9798
.9803
.9808
.9812
.9817
2.1
.9821
.9826
.9830
.9834
.9838
.9842
.9846
.9850
.9854
.9857
2.2
.9861
.9864
.9868
.9871
.9875
.9878
.9881
.9884
.9887
.9890
2.3
.9893
.9896
.9898
.9901
.9904
.9906
.9909
.9911
.9913
.9916
2.4
.9918
.9920
.9922
.9925
.9927
.9929
.9931
.9932
.9934
.9936
2.5
.9938
.9940
.9941
.9943
.9945
.9946
.9948
.9949
.9951
.9952
2.6
.9953
.9955
.9956
.9957
.9959
.9960
.9961
.9962
.9963
.9964
2.7
.9965
.9966
.9967
.9968
.9969
.9970
.9971
.9972
.9973
.9974
2.8
.9974
.9975
.9976
.9977
.9977
.9978
.9979
.9979
.9980
.9981
2.9
.9981
.9982
.9982
.9983
.9984
.9984
.9985
.9985
.9986
.9986
3.0
.9987
.9987
.9987
.9988
.9988
.9989
.9989
.9989
.9990
.9990
3.1
.9990
.9991
.9991
.9991
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9993
.9993
3.2
.9993
.9993
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9995
.9995
.9995
3.3
.9995
.9995
.9995
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9997
3.4
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9998
3.5
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
3.6
.9998
.9998
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
Appendix A (Continued)

B-1
B
Appendix B
VALUES OF t STATISTIC

B
B-2
 
 
One-tail α
One-tail α
0.10
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.005
0.001
0.10
0.05
0.025
0.01
0.005
0.001
Two-tail α
Two-tail α
v
0.20
0.10
0.05
0.025
0.01
0.002
v
0.20
0.10
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.002
1
3.078
6.314
12.706
31.821
63.657
318.300
19
1.328
1.729
2.093
2.539
2.861
3.579
2
1.886
2.920
4.303
6.965
9.925
22.327
20
1.325
1.725
2.086
2.528
2.845
3.552
3
1.638
2.353
3.182
4.541
5.841
10.214
21
1.323
1.721
2.080
2.518
2.831
3.527
4
1.533
2.132
2.776
3.747
4.604
7.173
22
1.321
1.717
2.074
2.508
2.819
3.505
5
1.476
2.015
2.571
3.305
4.032
5.893
23
1.319
1.714
2.069
2.500
2.807
3.485
6
1.440
1.943
2.447
3.143
3.707
5.208
24
1.318
1.711
2.064
2.492
2.797
3.467
7
1.415
1.895
2.365
2.998
3.499
4.785
25
1.316
1.708
2.060
2.485
2.787
3.450
8
1.397
1.860
2.306
2.896
3.355
4.501
26
1.315
1.706
2.056
2.479
2.779
3.435
9
1.383
1.833
2.262
2.821
3.250
4.297
27
1.314
1.703
2.052
2.473
2.771
3.421
10
1.372
1.812
2.228
2.764
3.169
4.144
28
1.313
1.701
2.048
2.467
2.763
3.408
11
1.363
1.796
2.201
2.718
3.106
4.025
29
1.311
1.699
2.045
2.462
2.756
3.396
12
1.356
1.782
2.179
2.681
3.055
3.930
30
1.310
1.697
2.042
2.457
2.750
3.385
13
1.350
1.771
2.160
2.650
3.012
3.852
40
1.303
1.684
2.021
2.423
2.704
3.307
14
1.345
1.761
2.145
2.624
2.977
3.787
60
1.296
1.671
2.000
2.390
2.660
3.232 
15
1.341
1.753
2.131
2.602
2.947
3.733
80
1.292
1.664
1.990
2.374
2.639
3.195
16
1.337
1.746
2.120
2.583
2.921
3.686
100
1.290
1.660
1.984
2.365
2.626
3.174
17
1.333
1.740
2.110
2.567
2.898
3.646
∞
1.282
1.645
1.960
2.326
2.576
3.090
18
1.330
1.734
2.101
2.552
2.878
3.611
Reprinted, with permission, from L. Blank, Statistical Procedures for Engineering, Management and Science, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1980.
The t distribution
Given v, the table gives (a) the 
one-tail t0 value with α of the area 
about it, that is, P (t  t0)  α, or 
(b) the two-tail t0 and t0 values 
with α/2 in each tail, that is, 
P(t   t0)  P(t  t0)  α
0
t0
f(t)
t
α
(a) One-tail α
0
2
+t0
− t0
f(t)
t
α
(b) Two-tail α
2
α

C-1
C
Appendix C
MATERIALS COMMONLY USED 
IN ENGINEERING COMPONENTS

C
C-2
Metals are indicated by their SAE/AISI designation, e.g., 1040, or their ASTM Speci-
fi cation, e.g., A36. Plastics are indicated by their common name or abbreviation. The 
most commonly used material is given fi rst in the list.
Component
Materials
Aircraft structural parts
Aluminum alloys 2024, 6061, 7075; Ti alloy 6-4; graphite-epoxy 
composites
Automotive engine block
Gray cast iron; A356 cast aluminum alloy
Automobile interior
ABS, polypropylene plastics
Automobile bodies
1005 steel; A619 drawing quality; A620 special killed, DQ steel
Automobile exhaust
409 stainless steel
Bearing
52100 high C-Cr steel; 440C stainless steel; bronze, nylon
Beverage container
1100 aluminum; 1005 steel; PET plastics
Biomedical devices 
Ti-6Al-4V; 316L stainless steel; Co-Cr-Ni-Mo alloy; tantalum
Boat hulls (small)
6061 aluminum; fi berglass/epoxy composite
Bolts
1020, 1040, 4140 steel
Bridge structure
A36 steel
Cabinets and housings
1010 steel sheet; 356 die cast aluminum; polypropylene; polyethylene; 
epoxy
Chemical/food processing
304 stainless steel; CP titanium
Compact discs
Polycarbonate plastic
Computer case
ABS plastic; AZ81 magnesium alloy
Crankshaft
Forged 1040 steel; ductile cast iron
Cutting tool
High-speed steel (M2); cemented carbide (W-Co)
Dies for molding
O1 tool steel
Electrical contacts
Phosphor bronze; tungsten; palladium-silver-copper
Electrical wiring
OFHC copper; 1100 aluminum
Engine cylinder liners
Gray cast iron
Fixtures
O1 and A2 tool steel; fi lled epoxy; 6061 aluminum
Gaskets, O-rings
Neoprene; natural rubber; soft metal sheets
Gears
Carburized 4615 steel; fl ame-hardened 1045 steel; 4340 Q&T steel;
ductile iron; powder metallurgy steel; nylon
Heat exchanger parts
316 stainless steel; CP titanium
Hoses
Neoprene; Buna A (NPR); nylon
Machine parts (general)
A36 steel; 1020 steel
Machine structural parts
A284 steel; 1020 steel
Machine tool base
Gray cast iron; ductile iron; 1020 steel
Nails and wire
1010 steel
Pressure vessels
4340 steel Q&T; carbon fi ber/polymer composite
Shafts, light duty
1040 cold drawn bar; 1141 (free-mach. steel) plus surface hardening
Shafts, heavy duty
4140 or 4340 Q&T; 8620 plus carburized surface
Springs, coil
1080 steel (music wire); 9255 steel Q&T
Truck/railcar frames
A27 and A656 steel
Truck/railcar sides
6061 aluminum
Valve bodies
Ductile cast iron; cast stainless steel

I-1
NAME INDEX
Abramyan, H., 833
Ackerson, L. G., 166
Adams, J. L., 199
Adcock, K., 275
Adithan, M., 806, 821
Agassant, J. F., 533
Åkerlind, U., 533, 586
Albus, W. A., 629
Allen, A. J., 582, 684
Allenby, B. R., 411, 414, 419, 423, 
430, 436
Alpers, W. A., Jr., 676
Altshuller, G., 229–30, 231, 232, 
235, 239, 240, 241
Alvarado, P. J., 428
Anderson, B. B., 97
Anderson, D. M., 562, 573, 625
Anderson, J. R., 214
Anderson, T. L., 488
Anthony, L. J., 189
Armarego, E. J. A., 811
Arora, J. S., 723, 724, 725, 730
Ashby, M. F., 423, 430, 436, 438, 
441, 442, 450, 451, 456, 463, 
465, 467, 469, 470, 483, 536, 
538, 539, 544, 552, 608
Asimow, M., 6, 7, 14, 36
Atkinson, H. V., 547
Augustine, N. R., 323
Avallone, A. E., 382
Avenas, P., 533
Azapagic, A., 436
Azarm, S., 725, 726
Backofen, W. A., 533
Bacon, D. W., 699
Baker, S. W., 398
Bar-Cohen, Y., 211
Bard, J. F., 155
Barkey, M., 500, 504
Barra, Ralph, 126, 155
Barrett, C. A., 487
Barsom, J. M., 488
Bauert, F., 218
Baumeister, T., 382
Bayer, R. G., 514
Beauregard, M. R., 662
Beer, D. F., 409
Beer, F. P., 274
Beightler, C. S., 715
Beitz, W., 33, 218, 219, 239, 300, 
318, 327, 382
Bellman, R. E., 727
Benhabib, B., 625
Bentley, J. P., 677
Benyus, J. M., 211, 412
Berins, M. L., 516
Bernstein, W. Z., 430
Bertoline, G. R., 313, 357
Besterfi eld, D. H., 691, 730
Bickell, B. A., 115
Bickell, K. D., 115
Biegler, L. T., 715
Black, J. H., 744
Black, J. T., 533, 597
Blair, M., 533
Blanchard, B. S., 31, 656, 816
Blanding, D. L., 325
Blanding, S. L., 270
Blank, L. T., 746, 772
Blass, V. D., 420
Blessing, L., 218
Blinn, K. W., 853
Bloch, H. P., 657
Bloch, S. C., 24
Blodgett, O. W., 607
Blumrich, J. F., 1
Bond, S. D., 684
Bonenberger, P. R., 562, 602
Bonnice, J. G., 853
Booker, J. D., 545, 546, 554, 559, 
582, 603, 677, 684, 788
Boothroyd, G., 534, 565, 568, 570, 
585, 600, 626, 788, 790, 811
Bottorff, L., 840
Bourell, D. L., 472
Bowers, K. S., 196
Box, G. E. P., 378
Boyle, W., 63
Bralla, J. G., 367, 562, 564, 593, 
626, 674
Bras, B., 434
Brassard, M., 127, 155
Brauer, R., 677
Brauer, R. L., 677
Breen, D. H., 616
Brenner, F. C., 176
Brissaud, D., 434
Brooman, E. W., 549
Brown, R. H., 811
Brown, R. J., 816
Brown, S., 853
Brundtland, G. H., 417
Brusaw, C. T., 409
Budinger, M. D., 853
Budinger, T. F., 853
Budinski, K. G., 442, 457, 483
Budinski, M. K., 442, 457
Note: Page numbers in italics are references in web chapter.

I-2 
engineering design 
Budynas, R. G., 382, 500, 523, 
602, 607
Buede, D. M., 248
Bürdek, B. E., 358
Burge, D. A., 182
Burgess, J. H., 361
Buzan, T., 195, 211
Caddell, R. M., 533
Cahn, R. W., 458
Callister, W. D., 441
Camp, R. C., 96
Campbell, J., 533, 590
Canada, J. R., 772
Carreau, P. J., 533
Carson, R., 413
Case, K. E., 772
Catoen, B., 584
Cebon, D., 441, 465, 467
Chal, J., 534
Chandra, U., 609, 611
Charles, J. A., 483
Chen, W., 248, 295
Chenot, J-L, 533
Chertow, M. R., 411, 413
Chilton, C. H., 799
Chironis, N. P., 327
Choi, J-K., 430
Chow, W., 562
Chryssolouris, G., 535
Chura, R. C. H., 683
Clark, K. B., 52
Clarke, Dana W., Sr., 235
Clausing, D., 116
Clausing, D. P., 279
Cleland, D. I., 155
Clemen, R. T., 295
Clements, J. D., 155
Cogorno, G. R., 357
Cohen, L., 83, 116
Collins, A. F., 193
Collins, J. A., 321, 332, 335
Cooper, R. E., 785
Cooper, R. G., 39, 59, 62, 67
Courtney, T. H., 441
Covan, J., 677
Cox, W., 656
Crane, F. A. A., 483
Creese, R. C., 625, 790, 806, 821
Creveling, C. M., 703, 707, 712
Cross, N., 242, 295
Culley, S., 163
Cunningham, C. E., 656
D’Arcy, T. W., 211
Dale, B. G., 685
Davenport, T. H., 159
Davis, J., 229
Davis, J. D., 74, 85, 98, 107, 108, 
109, 258
Davis, J. R., 164
Davis, M., 845, 853
Day, R. G., 116
De Bono, E., 208, 242
Decker, E., 478
Decker, J., 74, 85, 98, 107, 108, 
109, 229, 258
Deep, B., 478
Defeo, J. A., 683
DeGeorge, R. T., 848
Delmas, M., 420
Deming, W. E., 682
Denardo, E. V., 727
Denn, M. H., 715
Denton, A. A., 615
Derby, B., 523
de Steiguer, J. E., 436
Devine, T., 849
Devore, J., 638
Dewhurst, P., 568, 585, 626, 788
DeWolf, J. T., 274
Dhillon, B. S., 816
Diefendorf, R. J., 519
Dieter, G. E., 446, 523, 545, 
626
Dillman, D. A., 77
Dixon, J. R., 10, 311, 312, 325, 
328, 382, 453, 722
Doane, D. V., 616
Dobb, F. P., 687
Domb, E., 232, 236
Dominowski, R. L., 201
Donaher, W. A., 835
Dowling, N. E., 446, 494, 495, 
500, 523
Drake, P. J., Jr., 341
Dreyfus, S. E., 715
Dring, T., 406
Duff, J. M., 313
Duncan, J. L., 533
Dym, C. I., 33, 295
Dym, C. L., 267
Ealey, L. A., 730
Ebeling, C. E., 677
Eberle, R., 203
Edison, T., 197
Edwards, L., 539, 554
Eggert, R. J., 33, 328
Ehrlenspiel, K., 508, 805, 807, 
821
Eisenberg, A., 409
El-Hofy, H., 534
Elkington, J., 422
Elliott, P., 511
Ellis, R., 409
Endean, M., 539, 554
Eppinger, S. D., 43, 67, 76, 115, 
242
Eppinger, S. H., 306
Erhard, G., 516, 520
Erlenspiel, K., 800
Esawi, A. M. K., 552, 608
Evan, W. M., 677
Evans, J. W., 677
Evans, J. Y., 677
Fabrycky, W. J., 816
Fabrycky, W. K., 31
Farag, M. M., 473, 483
Farnum, N., 638
Farvolden, P., 196
Fassell, J. B., 668
Fatem, A., 499
Feigenbaum, A. V., 681
Feldhusen, J., 218, 382
Ferguson, B. L., 590
Finke, R., 196, 197, 198, 200, 
201
Finkelstein, L., 409
Fischer, B. R., 347, 351, 356
Fischer, C. E., 601
Fisher, F. E., 662
Fisher, J. R., 662
Fitzgerald, D. P., 432
Fletcher, A. J., 617
Fletcher, R., 723
Folger, H. S., 155
Folger, S. S., 208
Forbes, P., 211
Forman, E. H., 286
Fowler, T. C., 808
Fowlkes, W. Y., 703, 707, 730
Fredriksson, H., 533, 586
Freivalds, A., 790
French, M. J., 211, 242, 807
Freud, S., 194
Freudenrich, C., 427
Frey, D. D., 267, 279
Frick, L., 457
Friedman, T. L., 159
Fuchs, H. O., 499
Furness, J. A. G., 483
Galbraith, J. R., 53
Garvin, D. A., 82, 681
Garvin, W. W., 715
Gass, S. I., 286

 
name index 
I-3
Gearing, Brian, 127
Gelatt, C. D., 715
Gerard, D. A., 477
German, R. M., 534
Gevirtz, C. D., 730
Gido, J., 155
Githens, G. D., 155
Glegg, G. L., 3
Gleitner, F. K., 657
Globerson, S., 155
Gogas, C. G., 533
Goldberg, D. E., 145, 409, 715
Goldman, J., 127
Gooch, S., 409
Gordon, W. J. J., 209
Gottfried, B. S., 24
Gowan, D. B., 211
Graedel, T. E., 430, 436
Graham, A., 126
Graham, J. D., 632
Gray, T., 421
Gray, T. G. F., 607
Green, L. C., 632
Griffi ths, A. A., 488
Groover, M. P., 533
Grote, K. H., 218, 382
Gruenwald, G., 516
Gryna, F. M., 683
Gugliotta, G., 63
Guha, R., 413
Guinta, L. R., 116
Gunn, A. S., 849
Gupta, F. P., 780
Gupta, S. K., 33, 804
Haimes, Y. Y., 676
Hales, C., 409, 657
Hallett, W., 93
Hammer, W., 659
Handwerker, C., 430
Harper, C. A., 458
Harpster, R. A., 665
Harrington-Mackin, D., 155
Harris, C. E., 853
Harris, R., 206
Hashemi, J., 441
Hassen, P., 458
Hatamura, Y., 315, 327, 382
Hathaway, R., 500, 504
Haugen, E. B., 634, 637, 641
Hauser, J. R., 59, 115
Hayes, R. H., 52
Hazelrigg, G., 215
Heckel, Richard W., 398
Henzold, G., 356, 357
Herder, P. M., 279
Herrmann, J. W., 432
Heywood, R. B., 499
Hiatt, J. M., 126
Hildebrand, F. B., 715
Hill, Percy H., 8, 9
Hills, D. A., 523
Hinckley, C. M., 579, 580
Hirtz, J., 219
Hoff, R., 409
Hoffman, E. G., 684
Holland, F. A., 764
Hosfortd, W. F., 533
Hout, T. M., 81
Hoyle, D., 687
Huang, G. Q., 380
Hubbard, M., 89
Hull, D., 519
Humphreys, K. K., 772
Hundal, M. S., 809, 810, 811
Hunter, J. S., 378
Hunter, T. A., 677
Hunter, W. G., 378
Hunziker, J. R., 853
Ireson, W. G., 677
Irwin, G. R., 488, 489
Ishikawa, K., 693
Iverson, N., 402
Janis, I. L., 246
Jardine, A. K. S., 656
Jawahir, I. S., 599
Jelen, F. C., 744
Johnson, R. C., 715
Johnson, T. C., 479
Johnston, E. R., 274
Jones, D. R. H., 523
Jones, T. O., 853
Jordan, P. S., 358
Joseph, J. G., 89
Joshi, P. H., 534
Judge, N., 548
Juran, Joseph, 682, 692
Juvinall, R. C., 274, 319, 499
Kackar, R. N., 712
Kalpakjian, S., 533
Kaplan, R. S., 785
Kastsikopoulos, K., 279
Kates, R. W., 436
Katzenbach, J. R., 119, 155
Keeney, R. L., 246, 257
Keller, R. T., 65
Kennedy, C. W., 684
Kennedy, M. E., 97
Kennedy, Robert F., Jr., 421
Kepner, C. H., 248
Kern, R. F., 462, 483
Kiewert, A., 821
Kilby, Jack, 2
Kiley, M. P., 478
Kim, H., 430
King, B., 116
Kirkpatrick, S., 715
Kletz, T., 629
Knight, H. J., 182
Knight, W., 568, 626
Knight, W. A., 585, 600, 788, 
790, 811
Knight, W. W., 534
Koch, G. H., 487, 509
Koenigsberger, F., 499
Kohser, R., 597
Kolarik, W. J., 126, 730
Konold, W. G., 182
Koshal, D., 625
Kramer, E. J., 458
Krikor, G., 127
Krings, H. F., 90
Kuhn, H. A., 545
Kulonda, D. J., 772
Kuo, S., 534
Kurtz, M., 483
Kutz, M., 431, 434, 436, 625
Lacey, D., 264
Lacoursiere, R. B., 121
Landes, J. D., 490
Lange, K., 533
Lave, L. B., 630
Law, A. M., 715
Lawrance, W. W., 629, 630
LeBlanc, S. E., 155, 208
Lechter, M. A., 182
Lee, Y-L, 500, 504
Lehnerd, A. P., 115
Leiserowitz, A. A., 436
LeMay, I., 853
Lerner, Leonid, 235
Levy, P., 193
Lewalski, Z. M., 359, 360
Lewis, K. E., 248, 295
Lindemann, U., 821
Lipman, C., 649
Little, A., 219
Little, P., 33, 295
Liu, A., 489
Liu, A. F., 505
Liuzzo, A., 853
London, M., 207
Lord, C. R., 189
Lowe, A., 163

I-4 
engineering design 
Lumsdaine, E., 195, 206, 242
Lumsdaine, M., 195, 206, 242
Maassarani, T. F., 849
Mabro, R., 415
MacGran, E., 232
MacLeod, R. A., 189
Magrab, E. B., 24, 33, 725, 780, 
804
Malkin, S., 534
Mallick, P. K., 458
Malloy, R. A., 520, 619
Malstrom, E. M., 821
Mangonon, P. L., 442, 483
Manion, M., 677
Mann, L., 246
Mantel, S. J., 155
March, A., 358
Marciniak, Z., 533
Marder, A. R., 549
Maresco, J., 74, 85, 98, 107, 108, 
109, 229, 258
Margolis, J. M., 458
Mariampolski, H., 80
Marshek, K. M., 274
Martin, M. W., 852, 853
Maslow, A. H., 81
McAdams, D., 219
McBee, S., 74, 85, 98, 107, 108, 
109, 229, 258
McCluskey, F. P., 33, 780, 804
McCormick, E. J., 361
McCuen, R. H., 839, 841, 846, 847
McDermott, R. E., 662
McLaren, T. S., 821
McMahon, C., 163
McMichael, A. J., 419
McMurrey, D., 409
McQuillan, L. J., 833
Melcher, J., 198
Meredeth, J. R., 155
Mermigis, L., 196
Messler, R. W., 534
Mestral, George de, 210
Meyer, M. H., 115
Michael, W. K., 714
Michaels, J. V., 676, 821
Mielnik, E., 533
Mikulak, R. J., 662
Miller, B. A., 447
Miller, Joe, 232
Mills, N., 516
Millwater, H. R., 637, 661
Mischke, C. R., 332, 334, 337, 
647, 650
Mitra, A., 691
Modarres, M., 629, 632
Monteleone, J. J., 270
Montgomery, D., 688
Montgomery, D. C., 378
Moore, J. H., 294
Morgan, D., 375
Morrell, R., 457
Morris, P. E., 193
Morton, W. R., 479
Moss, E., 478
Moss, M. A., 367
Moss, T. R., 662
Muccio, E. A., 516, 533, 618
Munson, B. R., 264
Murakami, Y., 489
Myatt, D. J., 330
Nair, I., 212
Nakui, S., 105
Nasr, N., 817
Navidi, W., 656, 691, 706
Nayler, G. H. F., 164
Nelson, D. H., 351, 355
Nernhauser, G. L., 727
Newell, Allen, 213
Niebel, B., 790
Nisbet, J. K., 602
Nisbett, J. K., 500, 523, 607
Noorani, R., 372, 373, 376
Norman, D. A., 366
Novak, J. D., 211
O’Connor, P., 377
O’Connor, P. D. T., 677
Okiishi, T. H., 264
Okubo, H., 89
Orloff, M. A., 229, 242
Osborn, Alex, 202, 207
Osif, B. A., 189
Ostwald, P. F., 789, 790, 821
Otto, K., 67, 219, 220
Otto, K. H., 261
Otto, K. N., 242
Owen, D. G., 834, 837
Pabla, B. S., 806, 821
Packard, David, 179
Pade, C., 211
Pahl, Gerhard, 33, 218, 219, 239, 
300, 318, 327, 382
Palm, W. J. III, 24
Pan, J., 500, 504
Papalambros, P. Y., 715, 726, 730
Pareto, V., 692
Paris, P. C., 489
Park, C. S., 772
Park, G. J., 730
Parmley, R. O., 327, 534
Parris, T. M., 436
Pattin, C., 657
Pearce, R., 533
Pegels, C. C., 126
Perry, R. C., 699
Perry, R. H., 799
Perry, T. S., 842
Peterman, B. E., 833
Peters, M. S., 787
Peters, S. T., 458
Peterson, P. G., 97
Peterson, S., 805
Petroski, H., 672, 677
Petschow, U., 211
Phadke, M. S., 707
Philips, D. T., 715
Phillips, S., 74, 85, 98, 107, 108, 
109, 229, 258
Piehler, H. R., 835
Pilkey, D. F., 499
Pilkey, W. D., 499
Pinkus, R. L. B., 849
Pissarskoi, E., 211
Piwonka, T. S., 587
Pludek, V. R., 506, 511
Pluempitiwiriyawej, C., 127
Plunkett, I. L., 685
Pojasek, R. B., 421
Poli, C., 10, 311, 312, 328, 382, 
453, 626, 722
Pook, L., 495
Pope, J. E., 382
Powell, M. J. D., 723
Powers, G. J., 668
Praizler, N. C., 116
Pratt, D. B., 772
Pritchard, M. S., 853
Prusak, L., 159
Pugh, S., 100, 116, 261, 279, 286, 
295
Quinn, R., 74, 85, 98, 107, 108, 
109, 229, 258
Rabins, M., 853
Radack, D. V., 186
Ragsdell, K. M., 730
Raiffa, H., 248, 257
Raines, M., 677, 684
Rajagopal, K. R., 521
Ramachandran, V., 672

 
name index 
I-5
Ramani, K., 430
Ramanujan, D., 430
Rao, S. S., 677
Rasmussen, N., 632
Ravindran, A., 730
Redford, A. H., 534
Reed, J. S., 534
Rees, H., 584
Reinertsen, D. G., 51, 52, 53, 67, 115
Reklaitis, G. V., 730
Revie, R. W., 458
Rickinson, B. A., 547
Ritter, D., 127, 155
Roberge, P. R., 506
Roberts, E. B., 64
Roberts, M. J., 632
Rockman, H. B., 838
Rodman, S., 239
Rolfe, S. T., 488
Rondeau, H. F., 806
Rosato, Dominic V., 458, 516
Rosato, Donald V., 458, 516
Rosato, Marlene G., 458, 516
Rosenau, M. D., 155
Roskam, J., 807
Ross, W. A., 313
Rowe, W. D., 632
Roy, K. R., 730
Ruiz, C., 499, 523
Ruud, C. O., 615
Sa, C-Y., 596
Saaty, T. L., 286, 291
Sachs, E., 375
Sage, A. P., 31
Salvendy, G., 362
Sandborn, P. A., 33, 780, 804
Sanders, M. S., 361
Sanford, R. J., 488
Sater-Black, K., 402
Saxena, A., 494
Schaeffer, J. C., 487
Schey, J. A., 374, 533, 541, 543, 
551, 554, 592, 593, 594, 609
Schinzinger, R., 852
Schmid, S. R., 533
Schmidt, L. C., 248, 295, 432
Schmit, L. A., 715
Schneider, G., Jr., 351, 355
Scholtes, P. R., 155
Schooler, J. W., 198
Schuring, D. J., 264
Schwing, R. C., 629, 676
Sclater, N., 327
Seepersad, C. C., 433
Semiatin, S. L., 545
Sergent, J., 533
Shabecoff, P., 413
Shackelford, J. F., 441
Shafer, S. M., 155
Shah, T., 163
Shaw, M. C., 534
Shelnutt, J. W., 195
Shercliff, H., 441
Sheth, N. J., 649
Shewhart, W., 682, 687
Shiba, S., 126
Shigley, J. E., 332, 334, 337
Shingo, S., 578
Shtub, A., 155
Shukia, A., 488
Shulyak, L., 229, 235, 239
Siddall, J. N., 634, 712, 714
Siebert, C. A., 616
Sih, G. G., 489
Silverberg, L. C., 275
Silverberg, L. M., 89, 92, 270
Simon, H. A., 9, 193, 213
Skakoon, J. G., 322, 324, 325, 382
Slanat, P., 77
Slobodan, P., 436
Slocum, Michael, 232
Smialek, J. L., 487
Smith, C. O., 654, 672, 674, 835, 
853
Smith, D. E., 728, 729
Smith, D. J., 632, 633, 677
Smith, D. K., 119, 155
Smith, George, 63
Smith, P. G., 52, 67, 115
Smith, Steven, 196, 197, 198, 
200, 201
Smith, W. E., 441
Smyth, M. M., 193
Sofronas, A., 672
Sors, L., 499
Spencer, J., 607
Spendolini, M. J., 96
Sperry, Roger, 194
Spivak, S. M., 176
Stalk, G., Jr., 81
Stamatis, D. H., 662
Stanton, N., 361
Starkey, C. V., 295
Starr, C., 632
Steele, C., 264
Stefi k, B., 66
Stefi k, M., 66
Stephens, R. R., 499
Stephenson, D. A., 599
Stevens, T. L., 533
Stoecker, W. F., 715, 717
Stoll, H. W., 33, 371, 382, 562, 574
Stone, R., 219
Strong, A. B., 458, 516, 533
Strunk, W., 398
Subrahamanian, E., 279
Suchy, I., 593
Suess, M. E., 462, 483
Suh, Nam P., 215, 242
Sullivan, W. G., 772
Summers, D. C. S., 730
Suresh, S., 495
Sutherland, J., 430
Sutton, M. M., 155
Sweet, J., 853
Swift, K. G., 545, 546, 554, 559, 
582, 603, 677, 684, 788
Szirtes, T., 264
Szucs, E., 264
Szykman, S., 219
Tada, H., 489
Tadmor, Z., 533
Taguchi, G., 340, 700, 701, 704, 
705, 706, 707
Tague, N. R., 127, 155
Tarquin, A. J., 746, 772
Telenko, C., 433
Terninko, J., 236
Terrago, P. J., 182
Thompson, G., 207
Thomure, R., 478
Thorpe, J. F., 302
Thurston, D., 430
Thurston, D. L., 257
Timmerhaus, K. D., 787
Tompkins, F. C., Jr., 668
Touloukian, Y. S., 458
Trammell, C. J., 97
Tran, C. M., 89, 92, 270, 275
Tregoe, B. B., 248
Trent, E. M., 534
Tribus, M., 682
Trimble, D. C., 126
Tsai, L. W., 210
Tuckman, B., 121
Turczynski, J., 478
Tuttle, B. L., 203
Twerski, A. D., 835
Ullman, D. G., 5, 33, 116, 242, 
259, 312, 313, 323, 364, 371, 639
Ulrich, K. T., 43, 67, 76, 115, 242, 
306, 461, 805

I-6 
engineering design 
Unger, S. H., 849, 853
Urban, G. L., 59, 115
Varel, E. A., 817
Vecchi, M. P., 715
Vesilind, P. A., 849
Vessey, W. E., 668
Vogel, S., 211
von Gleich, A., 211
Vrsek, G., 393, 409
Wagoner, R. H., 533
Wahl, A. M., 333
Wainer, H. A., 64
Wainwright, S. A., 211
Walden, D., 126
Waldron, K. J., 302
Waldron, M. B., 302
Walesh, S. G., 839
Wall, R. A., 189
Wallace, J. M., 839
Wallace, K., 218, 318
Ward, T., 196, 197, 198, 200, 
201
Watson, F. A., 764
Watson, S. R., 248
Weatherford, L. R., 294
Wei, R. P., 505
Weibull, W., 647
Weinstein, A. S., 835, 853
Weisberg, R. W., 242
Wenk, E., Jr., 30, 31, 629
Wesner, J. W., 126
West, M. A., 155
West, R. E., 787
Wheelwright, S. C., 52
Whitbeck, C., 842, 844, 849, 
853
White, E. B., 398
White, J. A., 772
Whitney, D. E., 325
Wiebe, E. N., 313
Wijnia, Y., 279
Wilde, D. J., 715, 726, 730
Wilder, L., 409
Williams, J. G., 521
Wilson, C. C., 97
Wilson, G., 699
Winchell, W., 790, 821
Wineman, A. S., 521
Wirsching, P. H., 637, 661
Witherell, C. E., 677
Wong, W., 677
Wood, K., 67, 219, 220, 242
Wood, W. P., 821
Woodford, D. A., 487
Woodson, T. T., 397
Wright, P. K., 534
Wu, A., 730
Wu, Y., 730
Yam, K. L., 368
Yanuck, R. R., 816
Young, D. F., 264
Young, W. B., 609
Young, W. C., 382
Zahavi, E., 499
Zairi, M., 96
Zhang, G., 342
Zhao, F., 430
Zlotin, B., 236
Zusman, A., 236
Zwicky, F., 226
Zwokinski, P., 434

SUBJECT INDEX
A227 steel, 334, 338
A229 steel, 337–38
abrasive wear, 512, 513
absolute comparisons, 259–60
absolute importance of character-
istics, 105
absolute worst-case approach, 657
abstracting services, 166–67
Academic Search Premier 
database, 167
academic theses, 169
accelerated cost recovery system, 
747–48
accelerated testing, 377–78
acceptable risks, 633
acceptance (contract), 828
acceptance sampling, 685
accuracy of information, 201
“action checks” for teams, 125
active constraints, 726
active redundancy, 653, 655
activities in critical path method, 
151–52
activity-based costing, 784–87
adaptive design, 5, 302
adhesive wear, 512–13, 515
adjournment stage for teams, 122
adjustable connections, 323
adjustable fi t, 366
administration and control, 528
administrative law, 827
Advanced Search options, 170, 
183
advanced tolerance analysis, 
351–52
advice, seeking, 247
Aerospace database, 167
aesthetics, 18, 82, 358, 359–60
affi nity diagrams, 75, 126, 129–30
agendas, 123, 124
aircraft, 23
ALARP principle, 633
algorithms, 239, 713, 727
allowances for corrosion, 511
allowances with mating parts, 345
Alloy Digest, 457
alloys
corrosion, 508–9
costs, 460, 461
hardening, 616
selection example, 479–81
strength benefi ts, 441–42
alpha prototypes, 39, 370–71, 372
alternate-year payments, 741–42
alternating single-variable 
searches, 722
alternating stress, 497
alternative solutions
in basic problem solving, 12
in confi guration design, 313–16
in decision theory, 248
in parametric design, 329, 
332–33
altruism, 845–46
aluminum
in cars, 477, 478
in electric motors, 479–81
mechanical properties, 448
aluminum oxide, 510
aluminum recycling, 425
American Association of 
Engineering Societies, 175
American Institute of Chemical 
Engineers, 175
American Iron and Steel Institute, 
175
American Medical Association, 
175
American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI), 25, 176, 
177, 343
American Nuclear Society, 25
American Society for Testing and 
Materials (ASTM), 25, 
177
American Society of Civil 
Engineers, 175
American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers
codes, 25, 177
dimensioning standards, 341
ethics code, 842–45
origins, 175
American Society of Mining, 
Metallurgical and Petroleum 
Engineers, 175
analog displays, 365
analogies, 208–11, 262, 787
analog models, 262–63
Note: Page numbers in italics are references in web chapter.
I-7

I-8 
engineering design 
analysis
in design process, 2
in parametric design, 329
in Six Sigma, 700
analysis of variance, 711
Analytic Hierarchy Process, 284, 
286–94
AND gates in fault tree analysis, 
668
angularity tolerances, 354
anisotropic materials, 445, 449, 
592
annealing, 615, 616
annual cost method, 745
Annual Index of Patents, 184
annualized return, 763
Anthropocene era, 411
anthropometrics, 366, 367
antistatic agents, 519
apparent creep modulus, 521, 
522
appealing ethical issues, 848
appendixes in technical reports, 
398
Apple Computer, 359
Appliance Labeling Rule, 87
Applied Science & Technology 
database, 167
appraisal costs, 692
arc welding, 605
ARIZ, 230, 239
ASCE Database, 167
Ashby charts, 450, 451
Asimow’s iteration model, 6–8
Ask Nature website, 211
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Code, 25, 177, 631
ASME Criteria for Interpretation 
of the Canons, 845
ASM Engineered Materials 
Handbook, 457–58
ASM Handbooks
manufacturing process 
references, 533, 534, 554
materials selection references, 
457, 458, 459
ASM Materials Engineering 
Dictionary, 164
assemblies. See also Design for 
assembly
defi ned, 18, 311
physical decomposition, 216–18
tolerances for, 349, 358
assembly costs, 782
assembly drawings, 17, 393
assembly-line production, 535
assembly processes, 532, 534
assembly surfaces, 566
assignable variation, 688
associativity of data, 275
assumptions for mathematical 
modeling, 266–67, 269, 273
ASTM International, 177
attendance at meetings, 125
attitude questions on surveys, 77
attitudes, creative, 197
attitudes for teamwork, 119
attributes, inspection by, 685
attribute testing, 691
auditory displays, 365
austenite
heating procedures for, 616–17
residual stresses from 
transformation, 611, 612–13, 
614
author certifi cates, 230, 231
AutoCAD, 23
automated inspection, 684
automated processes, 536
automatic assembly, 565
automobiles
computer-aided parts design 
for, 596–97
consumer information sources, 
88
development costs, 42
grille quality example, 693–95
manufacturing process selec-
tion examples, 556–61
materials selection examples, 
428–29, 465–69, 477–79
modular architecture, 305
world markets for, 56
availability, 656
average quality loss, 703, 704
axiomatic design, 215
bag molding, 622
balanced bilateral tolerance, 343, 
347
balanced scorecards, 422
ball bearings, 18
bar graphs, 79–80
barriers to entry, 43
barriers to hazards, 639
basic research, 62
basic size dimensions, 343
basketball return device, 73, 
74–75, 184, 185. See also 
Shot-Buddy example
batch fl ow manufacturing, 535, 
575–76
batch sizes, 538–40
bearings, 320, 511
behavioral roles on teams, 123
behavior questions on surveys, 
77
behaviors, innovative, 64–65
benchmarking, 96–97
bending sheets, 594
bending stresses, 320, 321
benefi t-cost analysis, 768–70
benefi ts
defi ned, 768
features versus, 60
market segmentation by, 59
best-in-class companies, 97
best practices, 24, 96, 318–27
beta testing, 39, 371, 389
bilateral contracts, 829
bilateral tolerance, 343, 347
bills of materials, 389, 394–95, 
789
bio-inspired design, 209–10
biomechanics, 362
biomimetics, 210–11
biosphere, 412
black box representations, 222–23
blanking, 594
blends of polymers, 517
blind holes, 602
block diagrams, 217–18, 221, 
222–26
blocker dies, 592
blocking designs, 378
blow molding, 620
Boeing 777 transport, 23, 787
Boeing 787 transport, 787
Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 
25, 177, 631
bonus tolerances, 356, 357
book value, 748
Boothroyd Dewhurst concurrent 
costing software, 582–84, 
808
Boothroyd Dewhurst DFA 
method, 568–72
bosses, 622
Boston Consulting Group, 62
boundaries of mathematical 
models, 266, 268
boundaries of problems, 198
boundary lubrication, 515
brain-dominance theory, 194–95
brain models, 193–95

 
subject index 
I-9
brainstorming
as aid to creativity, 202–4
on customer needs, 75–76
guidelines, 128–29
as problem-solving tool, 126, 
127
in real-world design, 140
brainwriting, 128, 204
branch functions, 220
brand names, 56
brazing, 604
breach of contract, 830, 831
breakdown maintenance, 367
break-even analysis, 765–66, 
779–80
breakthrough ideas, 66
briefi ngs, 399–401
British Standards Institution, 177
brittle fracture, 488–94. See also 
Material performance in 
design
brittleness of polymers, 517
brochures, 167
Brundtland Report, 417–18, 419
buckling, 321, 326, 335
budgets, 49. See also Cost(s)
bulk molding compound, 621
bumper manufacturing example, 
539–40
Bureau of Economic Analysis, 
174
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 174
burrs, 601
business aspects, reviewing, 27
business case, building, 37
business organization approaches, 
48–55
business practice patents, 180
Business Source Premier, 173
business strategies, 62–64
business units, 62–64
bus-modular architecture, 304
butt welds, 607
calculators (Google), 171
calculus, 716–18
Cambridge Engineering Selector, 
461, 476, 536
Cambridge Materials Selector, 
457
Canons of Ethics (ASME), 
844–45
Cape Wind project, 421
capital equipment costs, 552–53, 
799–800
capital expenditures, 753
capital gains or losses, 753
capitalized cost analysis, 745–46
capital recovery calculations, 
739–40
capital write-off time, 552
carbon dioxide, 414, 419
carbon footprint, 414, 430
carburizing, 477, 515
cars. See Automobiles
case law, 827, 832
case studies in ethics, 849–50
cash-cow businesses, 62, 64, 761
cash fl ow calculations, 737–42, 
754–56, 765
casting processes
design for, 586–90
elements of, 531, 586
information sources, 533
for plastics, 621
residual stresses from, 614
section thickness limits in, 
543
shapes produced by, 543
cast iron, 448, 479–80
catalogs, 164, 167, 326–27
categorization. See Classifi cation
categorizing costs, 777–80
categorizing data, 159
categorizing ideas, 204–5
cathodic protection, 509
CATIA 3-D CAD system, 23
cause-and-effect diagrams
as problem-solving tools, 127, 
132–33, 142–44
use in quality improvement, 
693–95
cause-and-effect relationships, 
135–36
cause-fi nding stage
overview, 126–27
real-world design example, 
140–43
tools for, 126, 127, 131–36
cavitation, 508
c charts, 691
CDMA protocol, 179
cell layouts, 576
cells, spreadsheet, 23–24
Census Bureau, 174
Census of Manufacturers, 168
Center for Engineering Ethics, 
850
centerline average, 548
ceramics, 448, 449, 457–58
certainty, decision making with, 
249–50
CES EduPackä software, 430
chance variation, 688
channel functions, 220
chaos, unease with, 200
characteristic value of the Weibull 
distribution, 648
charge-coupled devices, 63
Charpy V-notch impact test, 488
charters for teams, 122
checking, 12
checklists
fi nal reviews, 403, 404
idea generation, 203, 204, 207
mistake-proofi ng, 581
checksheets, 127
Chemical Engineering magazine, 
798
Chemical Engineering Plant 
Equipment Index, 798
chemical processes, residual 
stresses from, 614
chemical properties handbooks, 
458
Chevrolet Corvette, 477–79
chills, 614
choices in design, 3
chunks, 306
circularity tolerances, 353, 354
citation searching, 166–67
civilian air transportation, 30–31
civil law, 827–28
Civil Service Reform Act, 849
claims of invention, 186
clamping activities, 564, 601
clarity of function, 318, 321
clash allowance, 335
class action suits, 833
classifi cation
of basic shapes, 541
of casting processes, 587
of costs, 777–80
of customer requirements, 
83–86
of design defi ciencies, 670
of fl ow types in systematic 
design, 219–21
of hazards, 629, 673–74
of ideas, 204–5
of joining processes, 602–3
of manufacturing processes, 
529–36
of materials, 441–42, 443
of metal-cutting processes, 598

I-10 
engineering design 
classifi cation (continued)
of parts, 576–77
of patents, 183
of plastics, 516–19
of shapes, 541
classifi cation and coding, 576
cleaning, design for, 511
clearance, 344–45
clearance fi ts, 345
closed-die forgings, 592–93
closed-mold composite process-
ing, 622
close fi t design approach, 366
clustering elements on schemat-
ics, 307–9
coatings, 510. See also Surface 
treatments
codes for design, 24–25, 176–78
codes of ethics, 21, 28, 841–46
codes of practice, 25
coding parts, 576
coeffi cient of variation, 637–38
cognitive processing models, 
193–95
cognitive psychology, 193
cohesiveness of teams, 122
coil spring example, 330–38
cold-welding processes, 604
collection for recycling, 425
colorants, 519
combining, 314–15
Commerce Department website, 
174
commodities, 57
commodity plastics, 517
common cause failures, 657
common law, 827
communications
benefi ts of computers for, 22
for effective teamwork, 119–20
of fi nal designs, 13
functional organization 
shortcomings, 49–50
company-based information, 
187–88
comparison, gaining knowledge 
by, 160
Compendex, 167
competency of engineers, 845
competition, 43
competitive assessment in House 
of Quality, 108–9
Competitive Edge Products, Inc., 
88–89
competitiveness, 4–5
competitive performance 
benchmarking, 97
complaints, 76
complementary performance 
requirements, 17
complexity, 3
compliance features, 567–68
component costs, 781–82
components, 18, 311. See also 
Parts
component-sharing modularity, 
305
component-swapping modularity, 
305
composite materials
growing importance, 519
handbooks on, 458
manufacturing processes, 
621–22
selected properties, 448, 449
thermoplastic, 618
compound interest calculations, 
735–37, 739–40, 746, 747
compression molding, 620–21
compressive residual stresses, 
498
compromise, 3
computational tools, 24
computation phase, fi nite element 
analysis, 277
computer-aided databases, 476–77
computer-aided design. See also 
Software
benefi ts, 275, 406–7
Boeing’s successful use, 23
CAD integration, 277–78
of castings, 589–90
data associativity, 275
development of, 275
of forgings, 593
links to manufacturing, 22
machining, 601
sheet metal forming, 596–97
standardization and, 26
use in prototyping, 372
computer-aided design/computer-
aided manufacturing 
(CAD-CAM), 26
computer-aided engineering
benefi ts, 18, 406–7
development, 22–24
optimization tools, 728, 729
use in prototyping, 371
computer-integrated manufactur-
ing, 529
computer models, 370. See also 
Models; Simulation
computers. See also Software
Apple’s design strength, 359
DFMA methods, 582–85, 
807–8
impact on manufacturing 
processes, 528–29
standard interfaces in, 303
use in prototyping, 371, 372
concentricity tolerances, 355
concept development phase, 
37–38
concept generation, 15, 
213–14. See also Creativity; 
Systematic design methods
concept maps, 211–12
concept selection. See also 
Evaluation
by absolute comparisons, 
259–60
Analytic Hierarchy Process, 
286–94
in conceptual design process, 
15
measurement scales for, 
261–62
Pugh method, 279–83
using models, 262–79
weighted decision matrices for, 
283–86
conceptual design phase
costing in, 806–8
elements of, 14–15
evaluation in, 258
information requirements, 163
information sources, 456–57
materials selection at, 438–39, 
450, 452
prerequisites for, 70, 95
prototypes for, 263, 370, 371
sustainability criteria, 432
conceptual review, 26–27
conclusions in technical reports, 
398
concurrent costing software, 
582–84
concurrent engineering, 22–23, 
53–55, 380
confi dence levels, 638
confi dentiality, 841
confi dentiality agreements, 829

 
subject index 
I-11
confi guration design
analysis and evaluation in, 
316–17
best practices, 318–27
design for reliability in, 657–58
in embodiment design phase, 
16, 299
generating alternatives, 313–16
initial steps, 311–13
issues checklist for, 325–26
parametric design versus, 328
confl ict in teams, 122
confl icts of interest, 844
conformability analysis, 684
conformance, 82
conformity effect, 200
connection functions, 220
connections
best design practices, 323–25
gaining knowledge through, 
160
conscious mind, 194
consensus decision making, 124
consideration (contractual), 828
consistency checks, 289, 290
constant failure rates, 644, 
645–46
constant-value-dollars approach, 
763, 764, 765
constitutional law, 827
constrained nonlinear optimiza-
tion, 724
constrained optimization, 719
constraints
on connections, 323–24
defi ned, 95
engineering characteristics 
as, 110
on incorrect control inputs, 365
consulting engineers, 58
Consumer Price Index, 762, 798
consumer product literature, 88
consumer products, market 
evolution, 55–56
Consumer Product Safety 
Commission, 21, 88, 674
Consumer Reports magazine, 88
Consumers Union, 88
contact mechanics, 511
contextualization of data, 159
continuous-fl ow processes, 535
continuous media, 265–66
continuous product improvement, 
65–66. See also Quality
continuous quantitative scales, 
691
contracts, 828–30
Contradiction Matrix (TRIZ), 
236–39
contradictions, 232, 233, 236, 238
contributory negligence, 831
control charts, 688–92, 693, 694
control documentation, 38–39
control factors in robust design, 
706–8
control interfaces, 362–66
control limits, 344, 690
control magnitude functions, 
220, 221
control volumes, 266
convergent thinking, 194, 199, 
204, 244
conversations, gaining knowledge 
through, 160
conversion functions, 220, 221
cooling fan example, 465–69
cooling rates of castings, 586
copolymers, 517
copyright, 178, 186–87, 838
core CPI, 762
cores in molds, 586, 588
corporate income taxes, 750
corporate overhead, 782, 783
corporate social responsibility, 
420
corporations, 831
correction of data, 160
corrective maintenance, 819
correlation matrix, 107–8
corrosion allowances, 511
corrosion fatigue, 498
corrosion inhibitors, 510
corrosion resistance, 506–11
corrugation, 520
Corvette automobile, 477–79
cost(s). See also Manufacturing 
costs
benefi ts of standardization for, 
573
categories, 777–80
choosing processes based on, 
550–53, 792–93
customer requirements and, 
81–82
of design changes, 54
effects of standards on, 26
estimating, 390, 581–85
of joining processes, 608–9
as major design consideration, 
4, 5, 19, 734, 776
as materials selection criterion, 
439, 460–62
overhead, 553, 782–84
of ownership, 780–81, 817–18
as project planning consider-
ation, 146
of quality, 692, 803–5
relation to prices and profi ts, 
40–42, 782
cost allocation decisions, 
profi tability and, 761–62
cost-benefi t analysis, 768–70
cost-capacity relation, 799
cost comparison, 742–46
cost drivers, 785–86
cost evaluation. See also 
Engineering economy
activity-based method, 784–87
cost comparison analyses, 
742–46
depreciation computations, 
747–49
design to cost, 805–8
estimation methods, 787–92
introduction, 734–35
life cycle, 439, 660, 816–20
make/buy decisions, 387–88, 
792–93
manufacturing costs, 550–53, 
792–93, 811–16
overhead, 782–84
ownership costs, 780–81, 817–18
product profi t model, 793–97
refi nements to improve 
accuracy, 798–803
value analysis, 808–10, 811
Costimator software, 808
cost indexes, 798–99
cost-size relationships, 799–800
counters, 581
cover letters, 398
cracking stresses. See also Mate-
rial performance in design
brittle fracture with, 488–94
damage tolerance with, 504–5, 
660–61
in heat treatment, 617
in sheet bending, 594
in welded joints, 606, 607
creative cognition, 197
creative idea evaluation, 203, 
204–5, 206

I-12 
engineering design 
creative thinking, 194
creativity. See also Innovation; 
Problem solving
aids to, 197–99, 202–12
barriers to, 199–202
as basic element of design, 3, 
191–92
brain models for, 193–95
design applications, 212–16
creep, 326, 445, 521–23
crevice corrosion, 508
criminal law, 827–28, 832
Criteria for Interpretation of the 
Canons, 845
critical defl ection ratio, 335
critical path method, 150–53
critical thinking, 194
critical-to-quality customer 
requirements, 85
critical-to-quality engineering 
characteristics, 106
critical-to-quality parameters, 15, 
16, 685
critical-to-quality parts, 38, 343, 
357
criticism, 201–2
cross-functional teams, 54. See 
also Teams
cryogenic storage vessels, 473–74
crystal structures, 441
cues, limiting creativity, 200
cumulative time to failure, 644–45
current-dollars approach, 763, 
764, 765
customer information, 76–80, 162
customer relationship manage-
ment software, 407
customer requirements. See also 
Need identifi cation
as basis for quality, 681
classifying, 83–86
differing views of, 81–83
as engineering characteristics, 
97–98, 100
hierarchies of, 80–81
in House of Quality, 100, 103–6
interpreting correctly, 94–95
marketing’s role in obtaining, 
59–60
customer satisfaction, 83–84, 85
customer service plans, 406
customer surveys, 76–80
customized products, 44
CustomPartNet, 808
custom parts costs, 781–82
cutting processes, 532, 593–94. 
See also Machining processes
cut-to-fi t modularity, 305
cycles of stress. See Fatigue failures
cycle time, 4–5, 790
cyclic strain hardening exponent, 
501
cyclic strength coeffi cient, 501
cylindricity tolerances, 353, 354
damages (legal), 830, 834, 837
damage-tolerant design, 504–5, 
660–61
damping capacity, 445
data, knowledge versus, 159–60
data associativity, 275
databases
to classify parts, 577
as information source, 166, 167
for materials selection, 476–77
of operation times, 790
use in concurrent engineering, 
23
data gathering, 455–60. See also 
Information gathering
datums
for design concepts, 280, 281
for dimensioning, 342, 346, 
352, 353
debris particles, 513
decision-based design, 215–16
decision making. See also 
Concept selection
decision trees, 251–53
ethical, 846–51
psychology of, 246–48
by teams, 124
theories, 248–57
decision matrices
in decision theory, 250–51
for design concept selection, 
280–81, 283–86, 292–94
for materials selection, 463, 
471–74, 475
decision rules, 250–51
decision theory, 248–51
decision trees, 251–53
decline stage in product life cycle, 
45
declining-balance depreciation, 
748
decomposition
in design process, 2
functional representation 
methods, 218–21
function structure creation, 
222–25
overview of functional 
approach, 216
physical, 216–18, 222
to produce alternative concepts, 
315
deep drawing, 595–96
defective material mistakes, 579
defects
in castings, 589–90
causing unreliability, 659
costs of, 552
failure modes for, 670–72
impact on manufacturing 
process selection, 547
minimizing in welds, 605–7
mistake-proofi ng against, 
577–81
originating in design, 684, 
835–36
product liability issues, 833–37
defect structures, 441
Defense Information Analysis 
Center, 662
Defense Standardization Program 
Offi ce, 177
defensive avoidance, 247
defensive R&D, 833
deformation processes
basic texts, 533
common types, 532, 590, 591
shapes produced by, 543
deformations
anticipating in confi guration 
design, 325, 326
calculating in spring design 
example, 334–35
guidelines for minimizing, 
320, 325
reducing overconstraint with, 
325
from residual stresses, 609
degrees of freedom, 278
delivery costs, 787
Deming’s 14 points, 682–83
dendrites, 589
Department of Commerce 
website, 174
Department of Defense, 177
Department of Labor website, 174
depreciation
infl ation’s effects, 761–62, 765
methods of calculating, 747–49
tax deductions for, 750–53

 
subject index 
I-13
depreciation recapture, 753
derating, 660
design assembly effi ciency, 566, 
568
design briefi ngs, 399–401
design-build-test cycle, 371
design catalogs, 326–27
design change costs, 54
design data properties, 452
design defects, 684, 835–36
design for assembly
Boothroyd-Dewhurst method, 
568–72
guidelines, 565–68
overview, 338–39, 565
relation to DFM, 572, 585
design for environment. See also 
Sustainability
end-of-life options for products, 
422–27
life-cycle design, 368–69
materials selection in, 427–30, 
469–71
tools for, 431–35
design for function factors, 315, 
316, 317
design for manufacture. See also 
Manufacturing processes; 
Material performance in 
design
castings, 586–90
concurrent costing software, 
582–84, 807–8
cost estimates, 581–85
forgings, 590–93
guidelines, 562–64
heat treatment processes, 615–17
machined parts, 597–602
overview, 338–39, 561–62
plastic products, 618–23
relation to DFA, 572, 585
residual stresses, 609–15
sheet-metal forms, 593–97
welding, 602–9
design for manufacturing and 
assembly
castings, 586–90
computer methods, 582–85, 
807–8
cost estimates, 581–85
as driver of integrated 
architecture, 303
forgings, 590–93
heat treatment processes, 
615–17
machined parts, 597–602
mistake-proofi ng in, 567, 
577–81
overview, 338–39
plastic products, 618–23
residual stresses, 609–15
sheet-metal forms, 593–97
standardization in, 572–77
welding, 602–9
design for packaging, 368
design for reliability, 657–62
design for safety, 672–75, 836
design for serviceability, 
367–68
design for sustainability. See 
Sustainability
design for X (DFX), 379–81
design freezes, 388–89
design layouts, 393
design limits, exceeding, 659
design mistakes
causing unreliability, 659
classifying, 670
common in parts production, 
578
risks and liability, 835–36
design noise, 704
design notebooks, 396–97
Design of Experiments, 378–79, 
706–8
Design of Machine Elements 
online text, 172
design optimization, 215. See 
also Optimization methods 
in design
design parameters, 95, 704
design patents, 180, 838
design process
basic elements, 1–3, 14–17
codes and standards, 24–26
complexity of, 70–71
computer-aided, 18, 22–24
design review, 15, 17, 26–28
engineering models and 
methods, 6–9
engineering’s basic need for, 
3–6
performance requirements and 
product life cycle, 17–21
as problem solving, 2, 10–14, 
71
simplifi ed model, 301–2
terminology for phases of, 
300–301
design project reports, 390
design review
as design process milestones, 
15, 17
elements of, 26–28
fi nal, 390, 402–3, 404
design robustness. See Robustness
design selection criteria, 244–45. 
See also Concept selection
design space, 213–14
design team meetings, 399
design to cost, 805–8
design trade-offs, 725–26
design variables
defi ned, 95, 328
engineering characteristics 
as, 110
examples, 330–31
identifying in parametric 
design, 328
design with materials. See Mate-
rial performance in design
destructive testing, 615, 685
detail design phase
activities and decisions of, 
16–17, 387–91
activities following, 403–6
bills of materials, 389, 394–95, 
789
engineering drawings, 389, 
391–94
fi nal reviews, 27, 390, 402–3, 
404
information requirements, 
163–64
materials selection in, 459–60
meetings and presentations, 
399–401
overview, 38–39, 300–301, 
386–87
prototypes for, 263–64, 371
supporting documents, 395–99
detail drawings, 389, 391–94
detailed methods costing, 
789–92
detection ratings for failures, 664
deterministic searches, 719
Deutsches Institut fur Normung 
(DIN), 177
dewetting, 142
DFM Concurrent Costing 
software, 582–84, 808
DFP method, 723
Dialog.com, 174
dictionaries, 164
die casting, 538–39

I-14 
engineering design 
die swell, 620
differential calculus, 716–18
differential control volumes, 266
diffusion bonding, 604
diffusion of new technologies, 61
diffusion treatments, 515
digital displays, 365
digital imaging, 62, 63
diligence, 841
dimensional accuracy, 550. See 
also Tolerances
dimensional analysis, 264
dimensions, 340, 341–42, 352–57. 
See also Tolerances
diminishing marginal utility, 253
DIN standards, 177
direct analogies, 209–10, 211
direct assignment of weighting 
factors, 284
direct costs, 777
direct labor hours, 783–84
directories, 170, 171–72
Directory searches (Google), 
170, 172
disassembly, design for, 433
disbenefi ts, 768
discharge of contract, 830
discounting, 735
discovery, design versus, 1–2
discrete mathematical models, 
266
discriminating parameters, 471
discussion
by teams, 123–24, 280
in technical reports, 398
disposal, design for, 369
dissatisfaction stage for teams, 
121, 122
Dissertation Abstracts database, 
169
distortion in welding, 607
distribution industries, 530
distribution plans, 405
disturbance factors, 704
divergent thinking, 194, 199, 204, 
244
DMAIC process, 699–700
documentation
of detail designs, 395–99
as liability protection, 836
of module performance, 310
submitted at fi nal review, 402
documenting review process, 27
dog businesses, 62, 64
domain knowledge, limited, 227
drafts, 588, 623
drawbeads, 597
drawing processes, 590, 595–96
drawing tools, 22. See also 
Computer-aided design; 
Engineering drawings
drilling guidelines, 601–2
ductility, 445, 449
dummy activities, 151
duplication of actions, 581
DuPont Company, 44
durability
defi ned, 19, 339
design for, 369
improving reliability with, 660
as quality dimension, 82
duration of activities (CPM), 151, 
152, 153
dynamicity, 239
dynamic models, 265
dynamic products, 43
dynamic programming, 727
earliest start/fi nish times (CPM), 
151–53
early cost estimates, 581–85
ease of fabrication, 564
ease of inspection, 661
ease of use, 365
eBay, 424
eco-audit method, 430
eco-indicators, 430
economic analysis. See Cost 
evaluation; Engineering 
economy
economic batch size, 539, 559, 
560
Economic Recovery Act, 747
economies of scale, 49, 55, 
799–800
ecosystems, 412. See also 
Environmental impact
Edmunds, Inc., 88
EES software, 24
effi ciency, as professional value, 
841
effi ciency of assembly, 566, 568
effort, ergonomics and, 361–62
eFunda, 172
egoism, 846
e-Handbook of Statistical 
Methods, 636
eight basic dimensions of quality, 
82
80/20 rule, 131–32, 145, 692
elastic deformation, 320
elastic limit, 442–43
elastic modulus
defi ned, 445
increasing in plastics, 519–20
for plastics versus metals, 517, 
519
selected materials compared, 
446, 448
elastohydrodynamic lubrication, 
515
elastomers, 448
electrical safety, 675
electric arc welding, 605
electric motors, 479–81
Electric Power Research Institute, 
175
electro-coated zinc-nickel steel, 
428, 429
electron beam welding, 605
electronic devices, 527, 644, 662
electroplated metal coatings, 510
e-mail, 395–96
embodied energy, 430
embodiment design. See also 
Confi guration design; 
Parametric design; Product 
architecture
design for reliability in, 658
elements of, 15–16, 38, 
299–302
materials selection in, 439, 
453–55, 457–59
prototypes for, 263, 370–71
sustainability guidelines, 433
emotional blocks to creativity, 
200
empirical models, 268
encyclopedias, 164, 165
end-of-life product transforma-
tions, 422–27. See also 
Recycling
end-of-period convention, 738
endurance limit, 496
end users, customers 
versus, 72
energy fl ows, 310, 530
Energy Star program, 413
energy use
environmental impact, 414–15
impact of recycling, 425
as materials selection criterion, 
470
Engineered Materials database, 
167

 
subject index 
I-15
engineering characteristics
approaches to establishing, 
94–99
assessing importance, 104–6, 
110–11
in House of Quality confi gura-
tions, 100–101, 103, 104–6, 
107–8
as House of Quality goal, 98, 
100, 101
reverse engineering to identify, 
86–87
engineering databases, 577
engineering design. See Design 
process
engineering drawings, 389, 391–94
engineering economy. See also 
Cost evaluation
benefi t-cost analysis, 768–70
cost comparisons in, 742–46
dealing with uncertainty, 767
depreciation computations, 
747–49
infl ation’s effects, 762–65
overview, 734–35
profi tability assessment, 753–61
sensitivity and break-even 
analysis, 765–66, 779–80
taxes in, 749–53
time value of money calcula-
tions, 735–42
engineering handbooks, 165–66
engineering libraries, 188
engineering materials, 441–42
Engineering News Record, 798, 
799
engineering parameters in 
confl ict, 232, 233
engineering plastics, 517
engineering-sense checks, 12
engineering societies, 174–75
engineering trends, 31
Engineers Edge, 173
Engineous Software, 724
enterprise resource planning 
systems, 407
entrepreneurs, 64
environmental impact. See also 
Design for environment
as basic element of design, 318
design for, 369
energy use, 414–15
growing importance, 29–30
as materials selection criterion, 
427–30, 439, 469–71
measurement, 413–14
performance requirements 
based on, 18
environmental movement, 411–16
Environmental Protection 
Agency, 413
environments
as blocks to creativity, 201–2
design for, 368
as factor in fatigue failure, 
498–99
impact on reliability, 659
equality constraints, 713–14, 717
equations, solving with spread-
sheets, 24
equipment availability, 553
equipment costs, 552–53, 747–49, 
799–800. See also Cost 
evaluation; Engineering 
economy
ergonomics, 82, 358, 361–68, 674
erosion, 512
erosion-corrosion, 508
errors in design. See Design 
mistakes
ESDU Engineering Data Service, 
172
essential parts, 566, 569–70
estimates. See Cost evaluation; 
Cost(s); Engineering economy
ethics
codes, 21, 28, 841–46
confl icts involving, 846–51
as design consideration, 21, 
28–32, 826–27
law and, 839–40
ethnographic studies, 80
Euler load, 321
evaluation.
by absolute comparisons, 
259–60
Analytic Hierarchy Process, 
286–94
in confi guration design, 316–17
of creative ideas, 203, 204–5, 
206
elements of, 257–59
measurement scales for, 261–62
MEDA approach, 257
Pugh charts, 279–83
of team meetings, 125
using models, 262–79
weighted decision matrices for, 
283–86
events in critical path method, 151
evolution, optimization by, 712, 
727
evolution of products, 230–31
Excel software. See Microsoft 
Excel
excise taxes, 750
exciters, 83
exclusive licenses, 182
executive summaries, 398
existing products, gathering 
information on, 86–93
expected utility analysis, 255–56
expected value of actions, 250, 
255, 256
expecters, 83, 84
expendable mold casting, 587
expenses, 753. See also Cost 
evaluation
experience
in decision making, 247
defi ned, 6
gaining knowledge by, 160
identifying customer needs 
from, 74
importance in needs analysis, 
10
learning curves, 39, 42, 
800–803
experimental procedures, 
reporting, 398
Experimental Statistics (Natrella), 
636
Expert Choice software, 294
experts, in-house, 11
exploded assembly drawings, 393
explosive bonding, 604
express contracts, 828
extemporaneous-prepared talks, 
400–401
extenders, 519
external failure costs, 692, 804–5
external noise, 704
extraction, in TRIZ method, 234
extrema, 716
extreme case design approach, 
366
extrusion, 590, 619–20
fabrication, ease of, 564
facilitative leaders, 120, 121
facilitators, 120–21, 128
factorial designs, 378, 706, 707
factor methods of cost estimation, 
788–89
factory cost, 778

I-16 
engineering design 
factory overhead, 782–83. See 
also Overhead costs
fail-active design, 673
fail-operational design, 673
fail-passive design, 673
fail-safe design, 657, 673
failure curves, 644
failure mode and effects analysis, 
339, 581, 662–67
failure modes
classifying materials by, 
444–46
common types, 446, 447, 
670–72
defi ned, 662
failure of components. See also 
Fatigue failures; Reliability
anticipating in confi guration 
design, 325–26
anticipating in parametric 
design, 339
costs of, 692, 804–5
minimizing, 659–62
originating in design, 684
testing for, 377
failure of new products, 62
failure rate, 643, 644
fair use, 186–87
families of parts, 575, 576
fantasy analogies, 210
fantasy thinking, 207–8
fasteners, reducing, 562, 563, 
567
fast follower strategy, 64
fatality rates, 633
fatigue ductility coeffi cient, 502
fatigue failures. See also Failure 
of components; Material 
performance in design
anticipating in confi guration 
design, 326
damage-tolerant design, 504–5
information sources for, 499
measuring materials for, 445, 
446
overview of design for, 494–96
parameters, 496–99
safe-life design, 500–504
stress-life design, 500
fatigue limit, 496
fatigue notch factor, 500, 502–3
fatigue strength, 496
fatigue strength coeffi cient, 502
fault tree analysis, 667–70
fear of risk taking, 200
feasibility of concepts/ideas, 
204–5, 259
feasible designs, 214, 329, 718
feature control frames, 356–57
features
choosing manufacturing 
processes for, 540–42
defi ned, 18
as quality dimension, 82
standardizing, 563, 573
federal government agencies, 
630–31, 674
federal government information 
sources, 168–69
Federal Trade Commission, 87
feedback. See also Customer 
requirements; Need 
identifi cation
feedback from controls, 365
feedback from team members, 
119, 125
feed motions in machining, 597
fi ber-reinforced materials
anisotropy in, 445, 449
growing use of, 519
manufacturing processes, 
621–22
fi ber structure in forgings, 591–92
Fibonacci series, 719
fi eld-adjustable connections, 323
fi eld service, 368, 684
fi gures of merit, 329, 336
fi ling systems, 145
fi llet welds, 607
fi nal design reviews
checklists for, 403, 404
elements of, 26–28, 390, 402–3
fi nancial analyses, 37, 754. 
See also Cost evaluation; 
Engineering economy
fi nancial arrangements in 
organizations, 49
Finished Goods Price Index, 798
fi nishing processes, 531, 564
fi nite control volumes, 266
fi nite element analysis
in car design, 478
of casting solidifi cation, 
586–87
of forgings, 593
overview and concepts, 276
in parametric design, 329
steps in, 276–77
three-dimensional modeling 
with, 22
fi nite-element modeling, 22
fi rst costs, 816
fi rst in the fi eld strategy, 64
fi rst-to-market benefi ts, 41, 42
fi shbone diagrams, 132–33
fi tness for use, 683–84
fi t of tolerances, 344–45
Five Founder Societies, 175
fi ve whys technique, 207
fi xation, 200
fi xed costs, 777–78, 781
Fixed, nonadjustable connections, 
323
fi xes, 27
fi xture design, 405, 528, 581
fl ame hardening, 515
fl ame retardants, 519
fl ash, 623
fl atness tolerances, 353, 354
fl exibility in manufacturing, 
539–40, 574
fl exible automation, 536
fl exure test, 518
fl oor space, freeing with 
standardization, 573
fl owcharts, 141–42
fl ow types, 219–21
fl uorinated hydrocarbon refriger-
ants, 27
FOB costs, 787
focus groups, 59–60, 76
force fi eld analysis, 127, 136–38
force fi tting ideas, 209
force-fl ow visualization, 319–20
force transmission, 318–20
Ford Motor Company, 56
foreign standards, 177
forge welding, 604
forging, 558, 590–93
Forging Industry Association 
website, 593
formal documentation, 395, 
397–98
formal sources of information, 
187
formal technical reports, 
397–98
forming processes, 597
forming stage for teams, 121
form of a component, 18, 312, 
352–57
fossil fuels, 414–15, 425
four C’s of design, 2–3
fractional factorial designs, 706, 
707

 
subject index 
I-17
fracture mechanics, 488–94, 661
fracture toughness
calculating, 466–67, 488–94
defi ned, 445
franchising, 56
fraud, 831
free body diagrams, 93, 94
freedom/knowledge paradox, 
13–14
frequency distributions, 456
fretting corrosion, 508
fretting fatigue, 498–99
Freud’s model of the mind, 194
friction welding, 604
fuel tanks, 428–29
full active redundancy, 653
functional costing, 807
functional decomposition and 
synthesis
morphological analysis with, 
227
overview, 214, 215, 216
performing, 222–25
physical decomposition versus, 
216–18
representation methods in, 
218–21
strengths and weaknesses, 
225–26
functional design elements, 306, 
563
functional layout, 575–76
functional organizations, 48, 
49–50
functional requirements, 17
function basis, 219
function blocks, 221, 222–26
function classes, 219, 220, 221
function names, 219, 220
functions (mathematical), 254, 
636
function sharing, 303
functions of businesses, 48, 49–50
functions of designs, 17
function structures
aesthetics, 360
creating, 222–25, 227
defi ned, 218, 222
representation in systematic 
design, 219–21, 222
strengths and weaknesses, 
225–26
fused-deposition modeling, 
374–75
fusion welding, 604–5
gages, 528
galling, 512
galvanic corrosion, 507, 509, 510
galvanized steel, 510
gamma function (Weibull 
distribution), 647
Gantt charts, 148–49, 150, 155
Garvin’s eight dimensions of 
quality, 82
gases, landfi ll, 427
gas welding, 605
gatekeepers, 64
gates (product development), 
36–37
general and administrative 
expenses, 778
General Electric, 420, 422
General Science Abstracts, 167
General Services Agency, 177
generating processes, 597–98, 599
generative design, 213
genetic algorithms, 727
geometric Dimensioning and 
Tolerancing, 352–57
geometric layouts, 309–10
geometric modeling, 275–76
geometric scale factor, 265
geometric similarity, 264
global maximum, 716
global sustainability, 419
global warming, 368
golden mean, 719
Golden Rule, 846
golden section searches, 719–20
go/no-go screening, 260, 471, 691
Goodman equation, 497
Google Directory, 170, 172
Google Scholar, 170
Google searches, 169–71, 184
government infl uences on 
profi tability, 762
Government Printing Offi ce, 168
government regulations. See 
Regulatory issues
government sources of informa-
tion, 162, 168–69, 174, 176, 
177
gradient cash fl ow series, 740–41
gradient method, 722–23
graduated tax schedules, 750
grain boundaries, corrosion along, 
508
Grainger Industrial Supply, 173
gravity die casting, 559
gray cast iron, 479–80
gray literature, 168
green design, 30
greenhouse gases, 414
gross profi t, 779
groups. See Teams
group technology, 575–77
growth stage in product life cycle, 
44–45
guidelines for teams, 122
guide pins, 581
gusset plates, 520
handbooks, 165–66, 457–59. See 
also ASM Handbooks
hand layups, 621
handling, 565, 567
handling time, 570
hard automation, 536
hard-drawn wire, 334, 337
hardenability, 616
hardening processes, 611–14
hardfacing, 515
hardness, 445–46, 514, 515
hardware failures, 670. See also 
Failure of components
hazardous materials, 470
hazard rate, 643
hazard rate function, 644
hazards, 628, 629, 673–74. See 
also Risk
HDPE, 428, 429
hearing, 365
heat-affected zone of welds, 605, 
606
heat-defl ection temperature, 
518–19
heat treatment processes, 532, 
534, 615–17
heavyweight matrix organiza-
tions, 52–53, 391
helical spring example, 330–38
helping roles on teams, 123
hemispheres of brain, 194–95
Herrmann Brain Dominance 
Instrument, 195
Hewlett-Packard, 179
hierarchies
business and industry, 529–30
materials classifi cation, 442, 
443
meetings, 399–400
objective trees, 285
visual aesthetics, 359–60
weighted decision matrices, 
286–94

I-18 
engineering design 
high-density polyethylene, 428, 
429
high-stress wear, 513
hindering behavior on teams, 123
hinged connections, 323
histograms, 127
holes, 563, 594, 601–2
home scrap, 425
homogeneity, 359
honesty, 841
honor, 841
Hoovers database, 174
hot isostatic pressing, 547, 589
hot roll bonding, 604
hot tearing, 588
House of Quality
basic functions, 100–101
building, 103–10
confi gurations, 101–3
decomposition in, 216
how-how diagrams, 127, 136, 137, 
143–44
How Stuff Works, 172
human factors engineering
elements of, 19, 361–68
safety and, 21, 674
human mistakes, 579, 670, 674
human physical effort, 361–62
hybrid organizations, 52–53
hydroelectric dam example, 
768–69, 770
hypervigilance, 247
hypotheses, 8
IBM, 179
iconic models, 262
idea evaluation, 203, 204–5, 206
idea generators, 64, 205–8. 
See also Brainstorming; 
Creativity
ideality, 230–31
ideas, resistance to, 200
identifi cation and sorting 
(recycling), 426
idle time, 813
IEEE, 175
iMac, 359
imagination, 197
impact analysis, 430
impact loading, 326
impact resistance, 445
implementation plans, 127, 138, 
139
implied contracts, 828–29
implied warranties, 834
importance ratings
in House of Quality analysis, 
110–11
in House of Quality construc-
tion, 103, 104, 105
obtaining from customers, 79
improvement analysis, 430
impulse momentum theorem, 269
inaccurate information, 201
incident-reporting systems, 837
incineration, 426–27
inclusion in team interactions, 122
inclusions, 589
income taxes, 750–53, 754
increments of investment, 759
incubation stage, 198, 200
independent events, fault tree 
analysis, 668
indexing by search engines, 169
indexing of patents, 184
indexing services, 166–67
indirect costs, 553, 777
industrial design
aesthetics in, 18, 82
elements of, 358–60
human factors engineering, 19
industry standards, 25. See also 
Standards
inequality constraints, 714, 715
infl ated interest rates, 763–64
infl ation, 761, 762–65
infl uence on teams, 122
informal documentation, 395–97
informal sources of information, 
187
information, data versus, 159
information fl ow, 311, 530
information gathering. See also 
Needs analysis; Problem 
solving
in Asimow model, 6
codes and standards, 176–78
within companies, 187–88
in conceptual design process, 
15
from customers, 76–80
data and knowledge compared, 
159–60
in decision making, 247
on design for fatigue, 499
on existing products, 86–93
government sources, 88, 89, 
162, 168–69, 174, 176, 177
intellectual property rights and, 
178–87
library sources, 162, 164–68
on manufacturing processes, 
532, 533–34, 554–61
for materials selection, 
455–60
needs for, 158
online sources, 88–89, 161–63, 
166, 169–75
overview of potential sources 
for, 11, 161–64
in problem-solving process, 
10–12
professional sources, 89, 162, 
174–75
on reliability, 662
for statistical tables, 636
information overload, 199
information sharing, 22, 27, 
187–88
information technology, intel-
lectual property protection 
and, 179, 182
in-house manufacturing decisions, 
792–93
in-house standards, 25
injection molding
cost estimates, 561, 582–84
elements of, 619
process data sheet, 537
time requirements, 542
injuries, designing controls to 
avoid, 362. See also Safety
inkjet cartridge remanufacture, 
424
inkjet printing, 375
inner noise, 704
innovation. See also Creativity; 
Product development
in business strategies, 62–64
effect of intellectual property 
rights on, 180
incremental versus radical, 
65–66
overview, 61–62
personal traits for, 64–65
in TRIZ method, 231–32
innovative design, 5
innovators, 64–65
insertion guidelines, 567–68
insertion time, 570
insight, 198
INSPEC database, 167

 
subject index 
I-19
inspection
automated, 684
ease of, 661
in quality control, 685–86, 691
shortcomings of, 578
instantaneous failure rate, 643
Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers, 175
instruction manuals, 88
intangibles in investment, 754
integral architecture, 303
integrated product and process 
development teams, 54
integrity of surfaces, 549
intellectual blocks to creativity, 
200–201
intellectual property
copyright, 186–87, 838
legal overview, 838–39
obtaining patents, 2, 180–82
patent documents, 184–86
patent literature, 89–90, 182–84
respecting, 844
types and current trends, 
178–80
intentions of users, designing 
for, 365
interdependence on teams, 122
interest calculations, 735–37
interest rates, infl ation and, 762, 
763–65
interfaces
best design practices, 323–25
creating in confi guration 
design, 313
defi ning architecture by, 304
documenting, 310
force transmission guidelines, 
318–20
importance, 302–3
interference fi ts, 345
intergranular corrosion, 508
interim reviews, 27
internal customers, 72
internal defects, 547
internal failure costs, 692, 804
internal rate of return, 757–61, 
764–65
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), 25, 
176, 177, 414
International Society for Genetic 
and Evolutionary Computa-
tion, 727
Internet
design information links, 
171–74
DFMA resources, 585, 593
ethics resources, 850
gathering customer feedback 
on, 76
information sharing via, 23
material properties data on, 
459, 499
plastics resources, 623
searching for information on, 
11, 161–63, 166, 169–75
shopping sites, 88–89
strengths and weaknesses, 
161–63
technological innovations 
producing, 61
used goods sales outlets, 424
welding resources, 605
interrelationship digraphs, 127, 
135–36, 143
Interstate Commerce Commis-
sion, 630
interval scales, 262
interviews with customers, 76, 79
introductions in technical reports, 
398
introductory stage in product life 
cycle, 44
intuition, 247, 712–13
Intute: Science, Engineering and 
Technology, 172
inventions
designs versus, 2
innovation versus, 61
patenting, 180–82
TRIZ principles, 230–31, 
233–35
inventions outside of technology, 
232
inventive problem solving. See 
TRIZ
inventory analysis, 430
inventory reduction, 573
inversion in TRIZ method, 238
investment casting, 558, 560
investment profi tability, 753–61
IPAT equation, 413–14
iPod, 359
iron carbide, 442
irregular cash fl ows, 741–42
Ishikawa diagrams, 132–33, 
693–95
iSIGHT software, 724
ISO 9000 standards, 687, 688
iteration
computer-aided, 22
in design process, 6–8, 12
in modeling, 267
iteration model, 6–8
Japanese automakers, 56
Japanese quality control, 680, 682
jigs, 527–28, 581
J-integral, 494
job shops, 535
joining processes, 532, 534, 
602–9
joint and several liability, 837
joints, welded, 606–7
journal bearings, 322–23
journals, 166–67
JSR Design, 73, 74–75, 91–92
judgment, 197, 247
just-in-time manufacturing, 405
kaizen, 680
Kano diagrams, 83–84
Keeler-Goodman forming limit 
diagram, 596
keywords, 164, 169–70, 183
kinesthetic senses, 365
Knovel.com, 166, 172
knowledge
data versus, 159–60
ethical commitment to, 841
lacking for creative solutions, 
201
states of, 249–51
knowledge/freedom paradox, 
13–14
knowledge questions on surveys, 
77
knowledge workers, 159
Kolb Learning Style Inventory, 
195
labeling requirements, 87–88. See 
also Warning labels
labor costs, 552
Labor Department website, 174
Lagrange multiplier method, 
717–18
laminated object modeling, 374
landfi lls, 427, 470
LaPlace transforms, 210
laser beam welding, 605

I-20 
engineering design 
lateral thinking, 199, 208
latest start/fi nish times (CPM), 
151–53
lathe turning, 812
lattice searches, 721
launch of products, 39, 60
law of diminishing marginal 
utility, 253
laws. See also Legal issues; 
Regulatory issues
ethics and, 839–40
origins, 827–28
safety, 630–31, 674
tort, 832–33
layout drawings, 393
leachate, 427
leaching, selective, 508
lead times, 553
leadership, 120–21, 123, 124
learning curves, 39, 42, 800–803
least material condition, 356
left-brained thinking, 194, 195
legal issues. See also Regulatory 
issues
contracts, 828–30
as design consideration, 826–27
ethics in, 839–40
intellectual property rights, 
838–39
liability, 831, 833–37
safety, 630–31, 674
tort law, 832–33
whistleblowing, 848
legislation. See Laws; Legal 
issues
levelizing expenditures, 775
levels of consciousness, 194
levels of risk, 632–33
LexisNexis, 173
liability, 831, 833–37
libraries, 162, 164–68, 184, 188
licensing agreements, 178, 179, 
182
life-cycle assessments, 430–31
life-cycle costing, 439, 660, 
816–20
life-cycle design, 368–69, 431
life cycle of products. See Product 
life cycle
lightweight project organizations, 
52
Likert-type scales, 77
limited domain knowledge, 227
limit switches, 581
linear elastic fracture mechanics, 
494, 505
linear programming, 715, 723–24
liquid-state welding, 604–5
listening skills, 119
list reduction methods, 130–31
living standards, 61
load factors, 265, 552
load scale factor, 265
local maximum, 716
locations for team meetings, 124
locator connections, 323
loss function, 701–4
loss spreading, 834
low-cycle fatigue curves, 500
lower control limits, 690
low-pressure permanent mold 
casting, 559, 560, 561
low-stress wear, 513
loyalty, 841
LS7 engine, 478–79
lubrication, 511, 514–15
luxury products, 58
machinability, 598–600
Machine Design magazine, 172
machining allowances, 588
machining processes
cost evaluation, 800, 811–16
design for, 597–602
effects on residual stresses, 610
elements of, 532, 597–98
minimizing in design, 564
providing extra material for, 588
shapes produced by, 543
macroporosity, 589
macrostructures, 441
MACRS, 747–48, 749
magnifying, 315
maintainability, 433, 655–56
maintenance
costs of, 816, 817–18, 819
design for, 367–68
developing plans for, 405
markets for, 58
system reliability and, 655–56, 
659
make/buy decisions, 387–88, 
792–93
management structures, 49–53
management support for quality, 
684
mandatory standards, 632
manual assembly, 565, 570
Manual of Classifi cation, 183
manuals, 167
manufacturability, 19
manufacturing-based approach to 
quality, 681
manufacturing cell layout, 576
manufacturing costs. See also 
Cost evaluation; Cost(s)
elements of, 550–53, 778, 
781–82
evaluating for make/buy 
decisions, 792–93
modeling, 811–16
manufacturing defects, 659, 836. 
See also Defects
manufacturing mistakes, 579
manufacturing processes. See 
also Design for manufacture
classifying, 529–36
development cycles of, 47–48
early cost estimates for, 581–85
energy use, 470
evolution, 526–27
impact of world markets on, 56
as major design consideration, 
19, 44, 338–39
major factors in selecting, 536
major functions of, 527–29
prototypes for, 371
quality capabilities, 695–700
relation to product life cycle, 45
releasing design for, 390–91
selecting by complexity of 
parts, 540–42, 545
selecting by cost factors, 550–53
selecting by equipment 
availability, 553
selecting by materials needed, 
19, 453, 542–45
selecting by part sizes, 542, 544
selecting by quality needs, 
545–50
selecting by quantities needed, 
538–40
selection resources, 554–61
software for managing, 407
marginal utility, 253
margins of safety, 639, 659
marketing, 55–60
marketing analyses, 37
marketing departments, 59–60
marketing plans, 60
marketing websites, 174
market interest rates, 763

 
subject index 
I-21
market pull situations, 43, 62, 63
markets, evolution, 55–56
market segmentation, 56–59
market share, 41, 62–64
Marshall and Swift Index, 798
Mars lander, 577
martensite
formation creating residual 
stresses, 611, 612–13, 614
formation from rapid weld 
cooling, 606
tempering, 446–49, 616
mass conserving processes, 530
mass customization, 44, 305, 574
mass production, 304–5
mass reducing processes, 530
material condition modifi ers, 
353–56
material defects, 547, 579
material-fi rst approach, 453
material fl ow, 311, 530
material indices, 464
material performance in 
design. See also Design 
for manufacture; Materials 
selection
brittle fracture, 488–94
corrosion resistance, 506–11
damage-tolerant design, 
504–5
estimating variability, 637–38
fatigue failure information 
sources, 499
fatigue failure overview, 
494–96
fatigue failure parameters, 
496–99
plastics, 516–23
safe-life design, 500–504
stress-life design, 500
wear resistance, 511–16
material performance indices, 
463–71
material properties, 442–49
material removal processes, 532, 
534. See also Machining 
processes; Manufacturing 
processes
materials costs. See also Materi-
als selection
cost estimates based on, 806
as main part cost driver, 789
in methods analysis, 789–90
relation to part size, 800
as selection criterion, 439, 
460–62
in unit costs, 552
materials cycle, 19–21, 428–29, 
469
materials processing, 526
materials requirements planning 
software, 407
materials science, 440–41
materials selection. See also 
Material performance in 
design
computer-aided, 457, 461, 
476–77
confi guration design issues, 
326
for corrosion resistance, 509
economic factors in, 439, 
460–62
examples, 477–81
impact on manufacturing 
process selection, 542–45
impact on total life cycle, 19
information sources for, 455–60
performance requirements and, 
440–50
process overview, 439–40, 
451–55, 462–63
relation to design, 437–39
role in design for environment, 
427–30, 469–71
using decision matrices, 463, 
471–74, 475
using performance indices, 
463–71
for wear prevention, 515–16
materials substitution, 452–53, 
479–81
MathCAD, 24
mathematical checks, 12
mathematical models, 263, 264–75
Mathematica software, 24
MATLAB software, 24, 724, 725
matrix organizations, 52–53
maturity stage in product life 
cycle, 45
maximax decision rule, 250–51
maximin decision rule, 250, 251
maximum material condition, 353
MBTI, 195
McGraw-Hill technical publica-
tions, 165
McMaster-Carr Supply Co., 173
mean life, 645
mean shifts in processes, 691, 
696–98
mean stress, 497
mean surface, 548
mean time between failures, 645, 
646, 655
mean time to failure, 645, 655, 
656
mean time to repair, 655, 656
measurement, 261–62, 700. See 
also Quality control; Testing
measures of sustainability, 419
mechanical devices, failure 
curves, 644
Mechanical Engineering 
database, 167
Mechanical Engineering 
magazine, 172
mechanical properties of 
materials, 443, 444–49
mechanized processes, 535–36
meetings, 123–25, 399–400, 
403
melting point of materials, 545
memorandum reports, 396
memory blocking, 200, 201
mental blocks, 199–202
meshes, 277, 278
METADEX database, 167
metal-forming processes
design for, 593–97
elements of, 532
information sources, 533
shapes produced by, 543
metal inserts in plastic parts, 623
Metallic Materials Properties 
Development and Standard-
ization, 457
metals. See also Material 
performance in design; 
Materials selection; Steel 
products
casting processes, 586–90
corrosive forces on, 506–11
identifying in recycling, 426
machinability, 598–600
plastics versus, 516, 517, 519
metals handbooks, 457
methane gas, 427
methods costing, 789–92
metrics for benchmarking, 97
microelectromechanical systems, 
48
microelectronics revolution, 527

I-22 
engineering design 
microporosity, 589
microprocessors, 5
Microsoft Excel
compound interest factors, 740
statistical functions, 636
use in concept selection, 294
use in engineering economy, 
746, 747, 758
use of Solver in optimization, 
724
Microsoft Project 2010 software, 
155
microstructures, 441
MIG welding, 605
milestone events, 148
military design standards, 177
mind maps, 211
minifying, 315
minimizing parts, 313, 562, 
565–66
minimum attractive rate of return, 
742
minutes of meetings, 124–25
misrepresentation, 832
mistake-proofi ng, 567, 577–81
models. See also Computer-aided 
design; Prototypes
building and validating 
mathematical models, 264–75
computerized tools for creating, 
22, 23, 275–76
fi nite element analysis for, 
276–79
of manufacturing costs, 808
of manufacturing processes, 
790
online sources, 172
of profi t, 794, 795
of reliability, 657
simulation with, 279, 584–85
types, 262–64
use in design for manufacture, 
584–85
use in information gathering, 
90–93
of wear, 513–14
model shops, 372
model verifi cation, 267, 271–72, 
273–74
modes of fracture, 489
modifi ed accelerated cost 
recovery system, 747–48, 
749
modular architecture, 302–3, 
303–6
modulus of elasticity. See Elastic 
modulus
modulus of rupture, 444
molds
casting processes, 531, 538, 
586–88, 590
costs, 582–84
creating with rapid prototyping, 
376
for plastics, 532, 619, 620–22
undercuts with, 542
molecular orientation, 620
money, time value, 734, 735–42
monographs, 166
monotonicity analysis, 726
morality, 841
More feature (Google), 170, 171
morphological analysis, 215, 
226–29
morphological charts, 227–29
morphology of design, 14
motivation, creativity and, 200
motor vehicles. See Automobiles
movement, designing constraints 
on, 323–25
MSC Industrial Supply Co., 173
MTI Systems, 808
multiattribute utility functions, 
257
multifunctional parts, 563
multinational companies, 56
multiobjective optimization, 
725–26
Multiphysics software, 276
multivariable optimization, 
723–25
multivariable search methods, 
720–21
multivoting, 130
municipal law, 827
municipal solid waste, 416
muscle output, 362, 363
must actions, 248
NAICS codes, 168, 174
National Academy of Engineer-
ing, 175, 850
National Association of 
Manufacturers, 175
National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, 26, 
176–77
National Research Council, 4
National Standards System 
Network, 178
National Technical Information 
Service, 168
National Whistleblower Center, 
849
natural tolerance limits, 348
near net shape, 564
near-optimal values, 8
necking, 595
need-driven innovation, 65–66
need hierarchies, 80–81
need identifi cation. See also 
Customer requirements
in conceptual design process, 14
drivers of, 9
hierarchies in, 80–81
information-gathering tools, 
76–80
major considerations, 72
preliminary research, 72–76
needs analysis, 10
NEEDS digital library, 172
negligence, 831, 833, 835
nesting forces, 324–25
net cash fl ow, 737
net present value calculations, 
818–19
net present worth, 744, 756–58, 
760–61
net profi ts, 794
net shape parts, 588
network critical paths, 149
network logic diagrams, 149, 150, 
151–52
Neuber’s analysis, 502, 503–4
new ideas, resistance to, 200
new product failure, 62
new product marketing reports, 
111
new product material selection, 
451–52
Newton’s method, 723
NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook 
of Statistical Methods, 636
nitriding, 477, 515
nodes, in fi nite element analysis, 
276
noise factors, 700, 704–5, 707–8
nominal group technique, 156
nominal scales, 261
nominal size, 343
nonadjustable connections, 323
nondestructive testing, 615, 660, 
661, 685
nondisclosure agreements, 839
nondiscriminating parameters, 471

 
subject index 
I-23
nonexclusive licenses, 182
nonlinear optimization methods, 
723–26
nonpermanent joining methods, 
602
nonrecurring costs, 819
normal distributions
in probabilistic design 
approach, 634–36
in statistical process control, 
690, 692
in tolerance design, 348, 351
normal events, fault tree analysis, 
668
norming stage for teams, 
121–22
North American Industry 
Classifi cation System codes, 
168, 174
notch sensitivity factor, 497
notch toughness, 488
notebooks, 12, 396–97
n-out-of-m unit networks, 653
novelty test for patents, 180–81
nuclear power, 415
nuisances, 832–33
numerically controlled machin-
ing, 372, 373
nylon, 44
objective functions
basic features of, 713
choosing performance 
characteristics as, 329
in Lagrange method, 717
in material performance 
indices, 464
multiple, 725–26
in optimization by differential 
calculus, 716–17
search methods for optimizing, 
719–23
objective trees, 284, 285
observing customers, 80
occurrence ratings for failures, 
663
offers (contract), 828
Offi ce of Scientifi c and Technical 
Information, 168
Offi ce of Whistleblowers 
Protection (OSHA), 849
Offi cial Gazette for Patents, 
183–84
off-line quality control, 681
offshoring, 792–93
oil quenched and tempered wire, 
337
oil supplies, 415
old scrap, 425
one-of-a-kind installations, 57
one-sided tolerance limits, 638, 
639
one-three-nine rule, 806
one-time costs, 816, 819
Online Ethics Center, 850–51
on-line quality control, 681
open-die forgings, 592
open-ended questions, 77
open-mindedness, 197
open-mold composite processing, 
621–22
operating costs, 816
operational requirements, 86, 87
operations research, 245–46
operations route sheets, 790
opportunity costs, 739–40
optimal designs, 8, 215, 713
optimization methods in design
CAE tools for, 728, 729
dynamic programming, 727
genetic algorithms, 727
monotonicity analysis, 726
nonlinear, 723–26
overview, 215, 712–15, 728
search methods, 719–23
using differential calculus, 
716–18
Oracle Primavera software, 155
oral contracts, 828
oral presentations, 400–401
order of magnitude estimates, 
805–6
ordinal scales, 261–62
ordinary expenses, 753
ordinary interest rates, 763
organizational failures, 670
organizational structures, 48–55
Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries, 415
OR gates in fault tree analysis, 
668
orientation stage for teams, 121
original design, 5, 302
original equipment manufactur-
ers, 58
orthogonal arrays, 706–8
outcomes in work breakdown 
structures, 146
output events in fault tree 
analysis, 668
outsourcing, 792–93
overconstrained designs, 325, 
342, 357
overhead costs, 553, 782–84, 813
overlooked impact on society 
costs, 817
overseas manufacturing, 56
ownership costs, 780–81, 817–18
oxide layers, 510
packaging, design for, 368
paid-up licenses, 182
pairwise comparisons, 261–62, 
287–88
PAM-STAMP 2G, 597
paper, recycled, 420
parallel design, 54, 301
parallelism tolerances, 354
parallel redundant designs, 660
parallel reliability, 653
parameter design, in Taguchi 
method, 706–11
parameters, House of Quality, 110
parameters in a design, 95
parametric cost estimation, 
787–88, 807
parametric design
confi guration design versus, 
328
design for reliability in, 658
in embodiment design phase, 
16, 299
failure and safety analysis in, 
339
helical spring example, 330–38
manufacture and assembly 
considerations, 338–39
materials selection in, 439, 455
quality and robustness 
considerations, 339–40
steps in, 328–29
Pareto charts
in problem solving, 127, 
131–32, 140
in quality improvement, 692, 
693, 695
in survey analysis, 80
Pareto frontier, 726
Pareto Sets, 719
part codes, 576
part complexity, 540–42, 580, 582
part families, 575, 576
partial active redundancy, 653
parting lines, 583, 623
partnerships, 831

I-24 
engineering design 
part proliferation, 572
parts. See also Components, 
Manufacturing processes; 
Tolerances
basic types, 311–12
classifying, 576–77
costs of, 781–82, 788 (see also 
Unit costs)
defi ned, 18, 311
DFA principles for, 565–66, 567
DFM principles for, 313, 
562–64
make/buy decisions, 387–88, 
792–93
mistake-proofi ng, 577–81
production runs, 58
spare, 819–20
standardizing, 572–75
total life cycle, 19–21
parts lists, 389, 394–95
PartSpec, 173
part specifi cations, 389
passive leaders, 120, 121
patching, 314–16
Patent and Trademark Offi ce, 
182, 184
patents
current trends for, 178–80
declining share given to 
individuals, 61
defi ned, 178
design protection with, 838
documenting, 184–86
fi nding online, 170
literature of, 89–90, 182–84
obtaining, 2, 180–82
TRIZ method and, 230, 240
patent trolls, 180, 855
payback periods, 756, 757, 760
payoff matrices, 250
p charts, 691
pencil function structures, 223–25
pending activities, 145
perceived quality, 82
perceptual blocks to creativity, 
199–200
performance as quality dimen-
sion, 82, 83–84
performance characteristics, 
310–11
performance codes, 25
performance metrics, 464
performance requirements, 
17–19, 81, 440–50. See also 
Materials selection
performance standards, 25
performance testing, 146
performing stage for teams, 122
period costs, 777
periodicals, 166–67
perjury, 832
permanent joining methods, 603
permanent mold casting, 559, 560, 
561, 587
perpendicularity tolerances, 354
persistence, 197
personal analogies, 210
personal computers, 303, 359
personal contacts, 162, 163, 
187–88
personal injury suits, 833
personalities, innovative, 64–65
personal time management, 
144–45
personal traits, 64–65, 119
person weeks, 148
PERT, 153
phase zero prototypes, 370
photography, 63
physical decomposition, 216–18, 
222
physical design elements, 306
physical effort, 361–62
physical environments, as block 
to creativity, 201
physical layouts of organizations, 
49
physiological needs, 81
piggy-backing, 203
piloting surveys, 78
pinholes, 507, 510
pitting, 498, 508
pivoting connections, 323
plane-strain fracture toughness, 
490–94
planning
major decisions for projects, 
146
as product development phase, 
37
software for, 155
for team meetings, 123
using critical path method, 
150–53
using Gantt charts, 148–49, 
150
work breakdown structures for, 
146–48
plant engineering, 528
plant patents, 180
plastic deformation. See also 
Material performance in 
design
as failure mode, 444
minimizing, 325
from quenching, 617
reducing overconstraint with, 
325
plasticizers, 519
plastics
design with, 516–23, 618, 623
failure mode for, 444
handbooks on, 458
manufacturing processes, 532, 
618–23
recycling, 426
selected properties, 448, 449
variations in mechanical 
properties, 442
plastic strain ratio, 596
platform modularity, 305
platform products, 44
poka-yoke, 577
pollution, 425, 469–70. See also 
Environmental impact
polymer processing, 532, 533, 
543
polymers, 442. See also Plastics
population growth, 419
porosity in castings, 586, 589
positioning of products in 
markets, 60
position tolerances, 355
postprocessing, rapid prototyping, 
373
post processing phase, 277
powder processing, 532, 534, 
543
Power Mac G4, 359
power tool development costs, 
42
practicing presentations, 401
preconscious mind, 194
preference, in utility theory, 253
preferred embodiment of 
inventions, 184
preliminary design, 300
preliminary engineering assess-
ments, 37
preparation stage in creative 
thinking, 198
prepared mind, 211
prepregs, 621
preprocessing phase, 277
preproduction prototypes, 371

 
subject index 
I-25
prequalifi cation of parts, 573
prescriptive codes, 25
presentations, 400–401, 402–3
present value calculations, 818–19
present worth
capitalized cost as, 745–46
cost comparisons by, 742–45
of a future sum, 735
of uniform series of payments, 
739
press fi t pins, 325
prevention costs, 692
preventive maintenance, 367, 
655, 819
price extras on steel, 462
prices
basing target costs on, 805
profi ts and, 782
purchase, 780–81
relation to total costs, 40–42, 
778
pride in products, 684
primary datums, 353
primary motions in machining, 
597
primary processes, 531
PRIMA selection matrix, 545, 
546, 554
Primavera Project Portfolio 
Management software, 155
prime cost, 778
priming, 200
printed circuit boards, 140–41
prior action in TRIZ method, 235
priority vectors, 291–92
privity, 833
probabilistic approach to design
material property variability, 
637–38
safety factors and, 639–42
using normal distributions, 
634–36
probabilistic fracture mechanics, 
661
probability distributions, 767
problem defi nition
in conceptual design process, 
14, 300
as fi rst step in problem-solving, 
10, 71
parameters of, 329
real-world design example, 
139–40
in Six Sigma, 700
tools for, 126, 127–31
problem solving. See also 
Creativity
cause fi nding in, 131–36, 140–43
classroom versus real-world, 2
creativity in, 196–202
design as, 10–14, 71
ethical, 846–51
in mistake-proofi ng, 580
overview of process, 126–27
problem defi nition in, 127–31, 
139–40
real-world design example, 
139–44
solution planning and 
implementation in, 136–38, 
139, 143–44
TRIZ method, 215, 229–41
problem statements
elements of, 10
examples, 127, 131
for mathematical modeling, 
266, 268
in parametric design, 328, 330
process capability, 695–700
process capability index, 348, 
695–96, 697, 698–99
process characteristics, 531
process control, 685
process data sheets, 537
process development cycle, 47–48
processed materials markets, 57
process engineering, 527
processes, defi ned for costing, 
790
process-fi rst approach, 453
process-intensive products, 44
process mean shifts, 691, 696–98
process planning, 404–5
process waste, 435
Producer Price Index, 762, 798
producing industries, 530
product architecture
budgeting, 305–6
development steps, 306–11
in embodiment design phase, 
16, 38, 299
integral, 303
major goals, 302–3
modular, 302–3, 303–5
product-based approach to 
quality, 681
product benefi ts, describing, 60
product concept models, 370
product costs, 777
product cycle time, 4–5
Product Data Exchange Specifi ca-
tion, 26
product data management 
software, 394, 407, 562
product design specifi cation
creating, 37–38
defi ned, 14
elements of, 111–13
in product development 
sequence, 71, 111
review of, 15, 27
revising in detail design phase, 
389
product development process. See 
also Innovation
alternate approaches, 43–44
costs of, 794
customer requirements in, 
81–82
decomposition in, 216
organizing businesses for, 48–55
phases of, 36–40, 71
product and process life cycles, 
44–48
static versus dynamic, 43
success factors in, 40–42
technological innovations and, 
61–66
product dissection, 86–87
product evolution, 230–31
product families, 303
production acceptance tests, 405
production control plans, 405
production energy, 430, 469, 470
production fl ow analysis, 576
production-intent parts, 39
production ramp-up phase, 39
production rate, 552
production stage for teams, 122
production time, 813
product liability, 833–37
product life cycle
costs in, 439, 660, 816–20
end-of-life options for products, 
422–27
life-cycle design versus, 368
as major design consideration, 
19–21
in relation to product develop-
ment, 44–45
role of materials selection, 
429–31
product lifecycle management, 407
product lines, common parts 
across, 562

I-26 
engineering design 
product literature, 87–88
product profi t model, 793–97
product safety regulations, 
630–31, 674
Product Search (Google), 170
product specifi cation, 17
product strategies, 60
product usage, market segmenta-
tion by, 59
ProE software, 23
professional ethics, 841, 842. See 
also Ethics
professional societies, 162, 
174–75, 842, 848
profi le tolerances, 355
profi lometers, 547
profi tability
common evaluation methods, 
753–61
infl ation’s effects, 761, 762–65
modeling for cost evaluation, 
793–97
varied infl uences on, 761–62
profi t improvement, 797
profi t margins, 42
profi ts
break-even point for, 779–80
from patents, 179
profi tability versus, 761
relation to costs and prices, 
40–42, 782
relation to technology curve, 
47
program evaluation and review 
technique, 153
program managers, 64
project organizations, 51–52
projects, defi ned, 48
project teams. See Teams
prompt industrial scrap, 425
proof-of-concept prototypes, 263, 
370, 372
proof-of-process prototypes, 264, 
371
proof-of-product prototypes, 263
properties of materials, 442–49
property taxes, 749
protective coatings, 510. See also 
Surface treatments
prototypes. See also Models
in Asimow model, 7
building, 371–72
defi ned, 370
in detail design phase, 389
rapid, 372–76
stages of, 39, 263, 370–71
verifi cation testing, 16
provision functions, 220, 221
provision of cues, 200
psychological needs, 81
publications, 11. See also 
Information gathering
public projects, benefi t-cost 
analysis, 770
public safety standards, 631–32
Pugh charts, 279–83
Pugh concept selection method, 
471–72
punching processes, 593–94
punitive damages, 834
purchase price, 780–81
quadratic loss function, 701
quadratic programming, 724
Qualcomm, 179
quality. See also Tolerances
benefi ts of standardization for, 
573–74
costs and, 692, 803–5
Deming’s 14 points, 682–83
elements of, 82, 680–81
as fi tness for use, 683–84
impact of design on, 4, 339–40
improvement tools, 692–95
as liability protection, 836
of metal castings, 589–90
process capability for, 695–700
process selection for, 545–50, 
684
statistical process control for, 
687–92
TQM approach, 71, 680–83
quality assurance, 405, 683, 
686–87
quality circles, 684
quality control
basic principles, 684–86
defi ned, 683
process capability and, 695–700
statistical process control 
principles, 687–92
Taguchi method, 700–705
quality control charts, 344. See 
Control charts
quality function deployment 
(QFD)
House of Quality confi gura-
tions, 101–3
House of Quality construction, 
103–10
House of Quality interpretation, 
110–11
overview, 71, 99–101
purpose of, 14
selection criteria from, 279
quality loss function, 701–4
quality of life, 419
quantities, choosing manufactur-
ing processes for, 538–40
quench cracks, 617
quenching
process overview, 446–49, 616
residual stresses from, 611–14, 
617
quenching and tempering, 
446–49, 616–17
questionnaires, 76–80
questions, answering, 401
quick cost calculations, 807
Quick Search for patents, 183
quotation marks for search terms, 
169
radical innovation, 65, 66
radii, designing, 602, 623
railroad wheels, 27–28
random input technique, 208
ranking of manufacturing 
processes, 555–56
ranking of problems, 130–31
rank variables, 261–62
rapid prototyping, 372–76
rate-of-return method, 756, 760
rating scales for failures, 663–64
rating scales on surveys, 77
ratio scales, 262
raw materials markets, 57
raw materials standardization, 
573
RDS Business & Industry, 174
reaction time, 366
rearranging, 315
reasonable care, 831
reclamping, 564, 601
record keeping. See 
Documentation
recurring costs, 819
recursive processes, 216
recycling
benefi ts of, 424–25
as cost evaluation factor, 818
current trends, 415–16
design for, 434–35
energy use, 469
impact on product prices, 420

 
subject index 
I-27
materials selection and, 469–70
steps in process, 425–26
redesign, 5–6, 27–28
reduction to practice, 181
redundant structures, 320
redundant systems, 653–55, 660
reference concepts, 280
references in technical reports, 
398, 399
refi nement and evaluation of 
ideas, 204–5, 314
refrigeration systems, 27
refurbishing, 424
registered trademarks, 838
regulatory issues
codes, 25
as design consideration, 21, 32
environmental, 420–21
profi tability and, 762
safety, 630–31, 674
reinforcing ribs, 520
relationship matrix (HOQ), 103, 
105–6
relative comparisons, 259
relative costs, 806
relative importance of engineer-
ing characteristics, 105
release to manufacturing, 
390–91
reliability
with constant failure rates, 
646
defi ned, 339, 630, 642
design for, 369, 657–62
to improve serviceability, 367
maintenance and, 655–56
overview of theory, 642–44
as quality dimension, 82
of systems, 652–55
terminology of, 644–45
with variable failure rates, 
650–52
Weibull frequency distribution, 
647–50, 651
Reliability Information Analysis 
Center, 662
relieving residual stresses, 615
remanufacturing
design for, 434
as life cycle option, 818
purpose of, 369, 424
repairs, 369, 655–56
replacement of mechanical 
systems, 235, 239
reporting relationships, 49
research and development
defensive, 833
innovation and, 62
relation to business strategies, 
64
societal pressures, 29
for static versus dynamic 
products, 43
research on customer needs, 
76–80
residual stresses, 498, 609–15, 
622–23
resin transfer molding, 622
resistance to benchmarking, 96
resistance welding, 605
resolution stage for teams, 121–22
respect, standard of, 841
response surfaces, 379, 720–21, 
722
results (experimental), reporting, 
398
retirement from service, planning 
for, 405
return on investment, 756, 760
reuse, 26, 369, 423–24, 818
reverse engineering, 86–87
review of designs. See Design 
review
ribbed structures, 520, 521, 622
right-brained thinking, 194, 195
risk. See also Safety
as decision making element, 
246–47
in decision theory, 250–51
fear of, 200
overview, 628–30
as project planning consider-
ation, 146
regulations and standards to 
limit, 630–32, 674
in utility theory, 254–56
risk assessment, 628–29, 632–33
risk priority numbers, 664–65, 
666
robotic assembly, 565
robust design, 700, 706–12
robustness
of algorithms, 723–24
defi ned, 16, 328, 340
designing critical-to-quality 
parts for, 38
of designs, 680, 700, 706–12
Rockwell hardness, 689
ROI (return on investment), 756, 
760
RolBak Basketball Return Net 
System, 282–83
roles on teams, 120–21
rolling processes, 590
room temperature mechanical 
properties, 446–49
root causes, 126–27, 133–36, 
140–43
root sum of the squares method, 
349
rosters, team, 125
rotational molding, 620
rough geometric layouts, 309–10
roughness of surfaces, 547–48, 
549, 550, 551
rough sketches, 228, 229
route sheets, 790
routine design, 302
routine maintenance, 655
royalties, 179, 186
RPNs (risk priority numbers), 
664–65, 666
rules of thumb, 160, 796, 806
run charts, 127
runner systems, 583
runout space, 601
runout tolerances, 353, 355
sacrifi cial anodes, 507, 509
SAE Handbook, 457
strain-life design, 500–504
safety
as basic element of design, 318, 
339
defi ned, 630
design principles for, 672–75, 
836
growing importance, 32
regulations for, 21, 88, 630–31, 
674
standards for, 631–32, 836
of team interactions, 122
safety and security needs, 81
safety factors, 639–42, 659
Safety Science and Risk database, 
167
sales price, 780–81
sales taxes, 750
salvage value, 745
sampling, 79, 685
sand casting, 538–39
satellites, 63
satisfi cing, 713
saying no, 145
scaffolding, 203

I-28 
engineering design 
scaled properties, 473
scale models, 262, 264–65
scale parameter in Weibull 
distribution, 647
scales of measurement in concept 
evaluation, 261–62
SCAMPER checklist, 203, 204
scatter diagrams, 127
scheduling
major decisions for projects, 
146
personal activities, 145
software for, 155
using critical path method, 
150–53
using Gantt charts, 148–49, 150
work breakdown structures for, 
146–48
schematic diagrams, 306–9
Science Citation Index, 166, 167
Science Direct database, 167
sciences of the artifi cial, 193
scientifi c method, 8–9
scope of work, 147–48
scoring, 512
scrap costs, 552, 789–90
screening manufacturing 
processes, 536
screening properties for materials 
selection, 452
screws, 567
scuffi ng, 512
search engines, 169, 171
searching patents, 182–83
search methods in design 
optimization, 719–23
search phrases in Google, 169–70
secant modulus, 517
secondary material, 426
secondary processes, 531, 564, 
622
sectional-modular architecture, 
304
section thickness, 492, 542, 544
section views, 341
SEER DFM software, 808
segmentation in TRIZ, 234
segmentation of markets, 56–59
seizure, 512
selection and sizing of compo-
nents, 388–89
selection design, 6, 302
selective assembly, 358
selective hardening, 515
selective laser sintering, 374
selective leaching, 508
self-damaging effects, 321
self-fulfi llment needs, 81
self-help concept, 321
self-protecting elements, 321
self-reinforcing elements, 321
self-service functions, 231
selling price, 778, 779, 782
sensitivity analysis, 765
sensory input, design for, 
362–65
separable connections, 323
separation in recycling, 425, 426
separation principles in TRIZ, 
240
sequential linear programming, 
723–24
sequential quadratic program-
ming, 724
sequential searches, 719
serendipitous discovery, 210–11
series reliability, 653
serviceability, 82, 367–68
service conditions, 18
service industries, 529–30
setup periods, 790
severity ratings for failures, 663
shape complexity, 541–42
shape factors, 520
shape-generating processes, 
530–31
shape parameter in Weibull 
distribution, 647
shape replication processes, 530
shapes
classifying, 541
process selection for, 540–42
tailoring to stresses, 321
visual aesthetics and, 359–60
shearing stresses, 320, 332–33
shear webs, 322
sheet bending, 594
sheet-metal forming, 532, 593–97. 
See also Metal-forming 
processes
sheet molding compound, 621
shielded metal arc process, 605
shock loading, 326
Shot-Buddy example
concept selection, 281–83
concept sketches, 228, 229, 
258, 260
critical-to-quality requirements, 
85–86
customer survey, 78, 79
engineering characteristics, 
98–99
free body diagram, 93, 94
function structure, 224
geometric layout, 309–10
House of Quality, 106–9
mathematical models, 268–75
modeling forces on, 91–93
needs identifi cation, 74–75
product description, 73
product design specifi cations, 
114
schematic diagrams, 307, 308
should actions, 248
shredding in recycling, 425
shrinkage
in metal castings, 586–88
in molded plastic parts, 619
in welds, 607
shrinkage cavities, 587
signal factor, 706
signal functions, 220
signal-to-noise ratio, 705, 708, 
710
Silent Spring (Rachel Carson), 413
silos, organizational, 49
similitude, 264–65
simplicity in design, 318, 365, 563
simulated service testing, 506
simulation. See also Models
to assess design concepts, 12
castings, 589–90
forgings, 593
heat treatment, 617
metal-forming processes, 597
overview, 279
use in design for manufacture, 
584–85
simultaneous searches, 719
single-variable searches, 721–22
sinking funds, 739
sintering, 374
six key questions technique, 206
Six Sigma quality program, 
699–700
six-tenths rule, 799
size effects on fatigue, 498
sizes, choosing manufacturing 
processes for, 542, 544
sizing of components, 388–89
sketches, 228, 229, 313
slack quenching, 614
slack time, 149
slenderness ratio, 335
slides, 401

 
subject index 
I-29
sliding contact, wear from, 515
slot-modular architecture, 304
slots, 581
SLP technique, 723–24
small-batch engineered products, 
57
small jobs, time management 
for, 145
snap-fi t elements, 562, 563, 567
S-N curves, 495–96
social issues, 21, 28–32
social needs, 81
socialware, 30
Society for the Plastic Industry 
identifi cation symbols, 426
Society of Automotive Engineers, 
25
Society of Value Engineers, 809
software. See also Computer-
aided design; Finite element 
analysis
casting simulation, 589–90
for costing, 582–84, 807–8
decision making, 294
design optimization, 724, 728, 
729
for engineering economy tasks, 
746, 747
forgings analysis, 593
group technology, 577
heat treatment simulation, 617
House of Quality, 101–2
machining, 601
materials selection, 457, 461, 
476–77, 536
patenting, 180
planning and scheduling tools, 
155
process modeling, 584–85
product data management, 394
product lifecycle management, 
407
sheet metal forming, 596–97
software failures, 670
soldering, 141, 604
sole proprietorships, 831
solidifi cation software, 589–90
solidifi cation time in castings, 586
solid models, 22, 23, 275
solid-state electronics, 527
solid-state welding, 603–4
solid waste handling, 415–16, 
426–27. See also Design for 
environment; Recycling
SolidWorks, 23
solution evaluation parameters, 
328
solution-fi nding phase
in real-world design, 143–44
tools for, 126, 127, 136–38
solution-neutrality, 95, 216
Solver (Excel), 724, 725
sorting in recycling, 426
spare parts costs, 819–20
spatial constraints, 312, 313
spatial interactions between 
modules, 310
specialist consulting groups, 58
special-purpose parts, 311, 313
special tooling, 573, 602
specifi cations
in design optimization, 714
helical coil spring example, 
335–36
as major design consideration, 
21
of materials, 449–50
standards versus, 25, 176
specifi city in design, 661–62
splats, 516
spokens, 83
sponsors, 64, 120
spot welding, 605
spreadsheets, 23–24. See also 
Microsoft Excel
squeeze casting, 558–59, 560–61
stability of design, 321
stackup of tolerances, 344, 
345–52, 357
staged construction, 766
stage-gate process, 37, 53
stainless steel, 510
stainless steel gas tanks, 429
stamping, 593–94
standard assemblies, 311
standard components, 6
standard deviations
for assemblies versus single 
parts, 349
estimating, 637–38, 692
natural tolerance limits in, 348, 
696
in normal curve equation, 634
relation to defect rates, 698, 
699
use in control charts, 690, 
691–92
Standard for the Exchange of 
Product model Data (STEP), 
275
Standard Industrial Classifi cation 
codes, 168
standard interfaces, 303
standardization
of controls, 366
of design features, 563
DFMA implementations, 572–77
standardized function names, 
220
standard normal distributions, 
351, 634–36
standard parts
benefi ts of, 572–75
considering in confi guration 
design, 313
costs of, 782
defi ned, 311
in DFA principles, 567
in DFM guidelines, 562
standards
defi ned, 24–25
for dimensioning, 341
fi nding information about, 
176–78
as major design consideration, 
21, 24–26
for manufacturing operations, 
528
for materials, 449–50
for quality, 82, 687
safety, 631–32, 836
Standards Services Division 
(NIST), 176
standby systems, 654–55, 660
star businesses, 62, 64
start-up companies, 179
state of the art, 831
states of knowledge, 249–51
states of nature, 249
static products, 43
Statistical Abstract of the United 
States, 168
statistical design of testing, 
378–79
statistical process control, 687–92
statistical quality control, 682–83, 
685
statistical tables, 636
statistical tolerance design, 
348–51, 358
statistics websites, 174
statutes, 827
statutory law, 827
steady-state mathematical models, 
265

I-30 
engineering design 
steel products. See also Metals
additional costs, 460, 462
in cars, 477
plastics versus, 516, 517, 519
properties of, 442, 446–49
protecting from corrosion, 510
protecting from wear, 515
residual stresses in, 611–14
selected prices, 461
Steel Tank Institute, 175
step testing, 377
stereolithography, 374
stereotyping, 199
stiffness, design for, 519–20
stiffness matrixes, 277
STL fi les, 372–73
stochastic searches, 719
storming stage for teams, 121, 
122
straight-line depreciation, 748, 
749
straightness tolerances, 354
strain forces. See also Material 
performance in design
considering, 322–23
fi nite element analysis, 277
in sheet bending, 596
strain-life curves, 500, 501–2, 
503–4
strain rate of plastics, 517
strain reversals, 501
strategies for product develop-
ment, 60, 62–64
Streamlined House of Quality, 
103–7
strength measurements, 444–46
stress concentrations. See also 
Material performance in 
design
anticipating in confi guration 
design, 321, 326
fatigue failure and, 497
fi nite element analysis, 277
residual, 609–15
stress-corrosion cracking, 508–9
stress cycles, 497–98. See also 
Fatigue failures
stress intensity factor, 488–94, 
504–5. See also Material 
performance in design
stress-life design, 500
stress ratio, 497
stress relaxation, 521
stress relief, 615
stress-strain curves, polycarbon-
ate versus steels, 517, 518
stress-strain loops, 500, 501
stress-strength models, 639
stretching, 595
strict liability, 834, 835–36, 837
structural materials, 441. See also 
Materials selection
structure, levels of, 441
structure-sensitive properties, 443
styling, 358–60
subassemblies
defi ned, 18, 311
DFA principles for, 567
physical decomposition, 
216–18
subconscious mind, 194
submerged arc process, 605
subsidiaries, 56
substituting in idea generation, 
314
substitution of materials, 452–53, 
479–81
subsystems, 6, 38, 805
Su-Field Analysis, 240
summaries of meetings, 124–25
supplier partnering, 55
suppliers
defi ned, 58, 574
as information source, 163, 
167, 173
negotiating with, 405
support costs, 819
support functions, 220
surface defects, 547
surface fatigue, 512
surface features, molding into 
plastic parts, 583, 623
surface fi nishes, 498, 547–50, 583
surface hardening, 477
surface integrity, 549
surface lay, 548
surface patches, 582
surface roughness, 547–48, 549, 
550, 551
surface treatments
effects on residual stresses, 
611, 614
information sources, 534
manufacturing process 
selection, 547–50
overview of processes, 532
to prevent corrosion, 510
relation to fatigue failure, 498
for wear prevention, 515–16
surveys, 76–80, 131
sustainability. See also Environ-
mental impact; Recycling
as basic design goal, 411
challenges for business, 420–22
design tools, 431–35
end-of-life product transforma-
tions for, 422–27, 818
growing interest in, 416–19
sustainable development, 30, 411, 
417
swap meets, 423
symbolic analogies, 210
symbolic models, 263
symbols in fault tree analysis, 
668
symbols in fl owcharts, 141
symmetrical parts, 359
Synectics, 208–10
synthesis, 1, 2
systematic design methods. See 
also Creativity; Design 
optimization
axiomatic design, 215
functional decomposition and 
synthesis, 214, 215, 216–26
morphological analysis, 215, 
226–29
overview, 213–15, 218–21
TRIZ, 214, 215, 229–41
system-level design phase, 38, 
300. See also Confi guration 
design; Parametric design; 
Product architecture
system reliability, 652–55. See 
also Reliability
systems, 6, 7, 144–45
systems engineering, 31
systems integration, 58
Sysweld software, 617
tactile senses, 365
Taguchi method
basic principles, 700–705
robust design techniques, 
706–12
target costing, 805–8
target values for engineering 
characteristics, 110
taxable income, 754
taxes, 749–53
Taylor tool life equation, 814
team charters, 122

 
subject index 
I-31
teams
concept selection by, 279–83
concurrent engineering by, 23, 
53–55
defi ning authority, 53
design review, 26
developmental dynamics, 
121–23
in hybrid organizations, 52–53
importance of studying, 118–19
meetings of, 123–25, 399
in project organizations, 51–52
roles on, 120–21, 123
working effectively on, 119–20
technical assessment in House of 
Quality, 109–10
technical contradictions, 232, 233, 
236, 238
technical dictionaries, 164
technical diffi culty ratings, 110
technical encyclopedias, 164, 165
technical journals, 89, 166–67
technical libraries, 168
technical papers, patents versus, 
186
technical reports, 11, 168, 397–98
technical reviews, 27
technical writing guidelines, 
398–99
Techniques for Failure Analysis, 
672
technological discontinuity, 47
technology. See also Innovation
development curve, 45–47
environmental impact, 414, 418
innovative, 61–62, 65–66
intellectual property protection, 
179, 182
social issues raised by, 30–32
technology insertion, 47
technology push products, 43–44, 
62
technology readiness, 259
temperatures
distributing in castings, 586
impact on corrosion, 511
plastics’ resistance to, 518–19
residual stress relief and, 615
tempering, 449
tempering, 446–49
tensile strength, 445
tension stresses, 319
termination stage for teams, 122
terne-coated steel, 428
tessellation, 372
testability, 367
testing. See also Evaluation
for brittle fracture, 488, 490, 494
costs of, 804
in detail design phase, 389
for fatigue failure, 498, 506
of plastics, 518–19
production acceptance, 405
purposes, 376–78
in quality control, 685
for residual stresses, 615
safety, 836
statistical design, 378–79
types of, 377
testing and refi nement phase, 39
test method standards, 25
test plans, 376
textbooks, 166
textures, 583, 623
theoretical parts, 566, 569–70
theory of inventive problem 
solving (TRIZ). See TRIZ
thermal conductivity, 606
thermal deformation, 326
thermal diffusivity, 612
thermal fatigue, 498
thermal spraying, 516
thermoforming, 620
thermoplastic polymers, 426, 448, 
516–17, 618. See also Plastics
thermosets, 448, 516–17, 618
theses, 169
thickness of parts, 492, 542, 544, 
622
thinking, 193
Thomas Register of American 
Manufacturers, 167, 173
three-body abrasion, 513
three-dimensional modeling, 22, 
23, 262
three-dimensional printing, 
375–76
three-parameter Weibull distribu-
tion, 649, 650
through holes, 602
TIG welding, 605
time management systems, 
144–45
time to market, 41, 81
time value of money, 734, 735–42
TK Solver software, 24
to-do lists, 145
tolerable risks, 633
tolerance charts, 351–52
tolerance design, 711–12
tolerance limits, 638, 639
tolerances. See also Quality
on blanked parts, 594
DFM principles for, 564
as factor in cost estimates, 582
fi t, 344–45
general principles, 340, 342–44
Geometric Dimensioning and 
Tolerancing, 352–57
guidelines for using, 357–58
impact on manufacturing 
process selection, 550, 551
of injection-molded parts, 619
process capability and, 695–700
reviewing in confi guration 
design, 326
stackup, 344, 345–52, 357
tool engineering, 527
tooling
costs, 552, 814
design, 405
setup time, 790, 813, 814
topical searches, 170
torsional stresses, 331, 332–33
tort law, 832–33
total costs, 778. See also Cost(s)
total fl oat, 152, 153
total life cycle, 19–21. See also 
Product life cycle
total quality management (TQM)
elements of, 680–83
need identifi cation in, 71
overview, 680
problem-solving tools in, 126, 
127
Six Sigma versus, 699
toughness
defi ned, 488
against fracture, 445, 466–67, 
488–94
as impact resistance, 445
toxic waste, 470
trade associations, 175
trade dress, 838
trade literature, 167
trade magazines, 166
trademarks, 178, 838
trade-offs in design, 725–26
trade-off studies, 794–97
trade secrets, 178, 838–39
traditional leaders, 120, 121
tramp elements, 426

I-32 
engineering design 
transcendent approach to quality, 
681
transducers, 218
transfer molding, 621
transfer symbols, 668
transformation in TRIZ, 235
transient mathematical models, 
265
transistors, 66, 527
transition fi ts, 345
translation using Google, 171
transverse shear stress, 332–33
trends, 31
trial-and-error modeling, 713
triangular shapes, 322
tribology, 511
triple bottom line, 422
TRIZ
contradiction matrix, 236–39
innovation and invention model, 
230–32
inventive principles, 230–31, 
233–35
overview, 214, 215, 229–30
strengths and weaknesses, 
240–41
TRIZ Journal, 235, 240
trust on teams, 122
two-body abrasion, 513
217 Plus, 662
ultimate tensile strength, 445
ultraviolet radiation, 519
unacceptable risks, 633
unbalanced bilateral tolerance, 
343
uncertainty, 250, 767
unconfl icted adherence of change, 
247
unconstrained multivariable 
optimization, 723
underconstrained designs, 718
undercuts, 542, 602
Underwriters Laboratories, 25
undeveloped events, 668
unease with chaos, 200
uniform annual series, 738–41
uniform attack, 507
Uniform Commercial Code, 834
unilateral contracts, 829
unilateral tolerance, 343
unintended uses, 21
unit costs. See also Cost(s)
components of, 550–53, 781
early estimates for, 581–82
factor estimation methods, 788
in machining cost model, 
812–13, 815
sample calculation, 561
unit prices, 780–81, 782
univariate searches, 721–22
universal resource locators 
(URLs). See also Websites
unreliability, 659
unsafe conditions, 628
unspokens, 83, 84
updates, 27
upper control limits, 690
usage, market segmentation by, 59
U.S. Copyright Offi ce, 186
used goods sales outlets, 423–24
useful life of products, 368–69, 
817
usefulness requirement for 
patents, 181
user-based approach to quality, 
681
user-friendly designs, 365–66
user manuals, 405
U.S. Patent and Trademark Offi ce, 
182, 184, 838
utility, 249–50, 253–57
utility functions, 254, 255, 
256–57
utility patents, 180, 838
utility theory, 253–57
vacuum melting, 589
vacuum tubes, 527
validation of models, 267, 272, 
274–75
value
as customer requirement, 82
in utility theory, 253, 255–56
value analysis, 808–10, 811
value-based approach to quality, 
681
values, ethical. See Ethics
values, near-optimal, 8
variability. See also Tolerances
basic principles, 684–85
chance versus assignable, 688
controlling, 580
as enemy of quality, 340, 680
estimating for materials, 
637–38
of failure rates, 650–52
frequency distributions, 456
process capability and, 695–700
variable costs, 777, 778
variables
design, 95, 110
inspection by, 685
variant design, 6
variation. See Variability
variational noise, 704
Velcro, 210
vendor partnering, 55
vendors, 58. See also Suppliers
venture capital, 61
verb tense, 399
verifi cation testing, 16, 267, 
271–72, 273–74, 389
vigilance, 247
virgin material, 426
virtual prototypes, 371
virtual reality, 22
viscoelastic properties of 
polymers, 521–23
visual aids in presentations, 401
visual appeal, 358, 359–60
visual displays, 362, 364, 365
voice of the customer, 71, 99
volume, choosing manufacturing 
processes for, 538–40
voluntary standards, 632
voxels, 375
Wahl factor, 331, 333
wall thickness of plastics, 622
want actions, 248
warning labels, 675, 835, 836
warranty costs, 804–5
warranty data, 76
warranty decisions, 405
waste recovery in processing, 
435
waviness of surfaces, 548
WCED report on sustainability, 
417–18, 419
wear, design against, 511–16
wear debris particles, 512, 513
wear rate, 446
webs, 622
websites. See also Internet
design information links, 
171–74
fatigue data, 499
gathering customer feedback 
on, 76
material properties data on, 459
searching for information on, 
161–63, 166, 169–75
strengths and weaknesses, 
161–63

 
subject index 
I-33
Weibull frequency distribution, 
647–50, 651
weight, cost estimates by, 806
weighted criteria, 288–90, 291
weighted decision matrices, 283–86
weighted property indices, 463, 
473–74, 475
weldability, 606
weld decay, 508
welding, 602–9, 614
weld lines, 623
weldments, 602
whistleblowing, 840, 847, 848–49
wholly owned subsidiaries, 56
why-why diagrams, 127, 134–35
Wikipedia, 172
wildcat businesses, 62, 64
wind power, 421
wireless communications, 179
wishful thinking, 207–8
workability of materials, 545–47
work breakdown structures, 
146–48
work habits for team members, 119
working capital, 778–79
working groups, 119
work standards, 528
world markets, 56
World Wide Web. See Internet; 
Websites
worst-case design, 657
worst-case tolerance design, 
346–47
write-off time, 552
writing guidelines, 77, 398–99
Yahoo, 171
Yahoo Directory, 172
yield of manufacturing processes, 
804
yield strength
estimating minimum acceptable 
values, 638
as failure mode, 444
relation to ductility, 449
relation to fracture toughness, 
491
yield stress
relation to hardness, 445
residual stress and, 610, 612, 
615
yoke connections, 319–20
Young’s modulus. See Elastic 
modulus
z distribution, 634–36
zero defects, 577


 ROADMAP to ENGINEERING DESIGN 
 Chap. 1 – Engineering Design 
 Chap. 2 –  Product Development Process 
 Chap. 3 –  Problem Defi nition and Need 
Identifi cation 
 Chap. 4 –  Team Behavior and Tools 
 Chap. 5 –  Gathering Information 
 Chap. 6 –  Concept Generation 
 Chap. 7 –  Decision Making and Concept 
Selection 
 Chap. 8 –  Embodiment Design 
 Chap. 9 –  Detail Design 
 Chap. 10 –  Design for Sustainability and 
the Environment 
 Chap. 11 –  Materials Selection
Chap. 12 – Design with Materials 
 Chap. 13 –  Design for Manufacturing 
 Chap. 14 –  Risk, Reliability, and 
Safety 
 Chap. 15 –  Quality, Robust Design, 
and Optimization 
 Chap. 16 –  Economic Decision 
Making 
 Chap. 17 – Cost Evaluation 
 Chap. 18 –  Legal and Ethical Issues in 
Engineering Design* 
*See www.mhhe.com/dieter
Define
problem
Problem statement
Benchmarking
Product dissection
House of Quality
PDS
Gather
information
Conceptual design
Internet
Patents
Technical articles
Trade journals
Consultants
Concept
generation
Creativity methods
Brainstorming
Functional models
Decomposition
Systematic design
methods
Evaluate &
select concept
Decision making
Selection criteria
Pugh chart
Decision matrix
AHP
Product
architecture
Arrangement of
physical elements
Modularity
Configuration
design
Preliminary
selection of
materials and
manufacturing
processes
Modeling
Sizing of parts
Parametric
design
Robust design
Set tolerances
DFM, DFA, DFE
Tolerances
Detail
design
Engineering
drawings
Finalize PDS
Embodiment design
10
11
12
11
12
13
13
14
15
9
16
17
8
3
4
5
8
10
6
7
10
17
Abbreviations and Acronyms
 AHP  Analytic Hierarchy Process
 ANSI  American National Standards 
Institute
 ASTM  American Society for Testing 
and Materials
 BOM  Bill of Materials
 CAE  Computer-Aided Engineering
 CFD  Computational Fluid 
Dynamics
 
CR  Customer Requirement
 CTQ  Critical to Quality
 DBD  Decision-Based Design
 DFA  Design for Assembly
 DFE  Design for the Environment
 DFM  Design for Manufacture
 
DV Design Variable
 
EC  Engineering Characteristic
 ERP Enterprise Resource Planning
 FEA  Finite Element Analysis
 FMEA  Failure Modes and Effects 
Analysis
 FTA Fault Tree Analysis
 GD&T  Geometric Dimensioning and 
Tolerancing
 HOQ  House of Quality
 
ISO  International Organization for 
Standardization
 
JIT  Just-in-Time
 
LCC  Life-Cycle Costing
 MARR  Minimum Attractive Rate of 
Return
 MRP  Materials Requirements Planning
 MTBF  Mean Time Between Failure
 
NDE  Nondestructive Evaluation
 NIST  National Institute of Standards 
and Technology
 OEM  Original Equipment 
Manufacturer
 
PDP  Product Design Process
 
PDS  Product Design Specifi cation
 
PLM  Product Life-Cycle Management
 
QFD  Quality Function Deployment
 
ROI  Return on Investment
 
RP  Rapid Prototyping
 
SPC  Statistical Process Control
 TQM  Total Quality Management
 TRIZ  Theory of Inventive Problem 
Solving
 USPTO  United States Patent and 
Trademark Offi ce

