www.ebook3000.com

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0001
English Studies: The State of the Discipline, Past, 
Present, and Future

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0001
Other Palgrave Pivot titles
Yoel Guzansky: The Arab Gulf States and Reform in the Middle East: Between Iran and 
the “Arab Spring”
Menno Spiering: A Cultural History of British Euroscepticism
Matthew Hollow: Rogue Banking: A History of Financial Fraud in Interwar Britain
Alexandra Lewis: Security, Clans and Tribes: Unstable Clans in Somaliland, Yemen and 
the Gulf of Aden
Sandy Schumann: How the Internet Shapes Collective Actions
Christy M. Oslund: Disability Services and Disability Studies in Higher Education: 
History, Contexts, and Social Impacts
Erika Mansnerus: Modelling in Public Health Research: How Mathematical Techniques 
Keep Us Healthy
William Forbes and Lynn Hodgkinson: Corporate Governance in the United Kingdom: 
Past, Present and Future
Michela Magliacani: Managing Cultural Heritage: Ecomuseums, Community Governance 
and Social Accountability
Sara Hsu and Nathan Perry: Lessons in Sustainable Development from Malaysia and 
Indonesia
Ted Newell: Five Paradigms for Education: Foundational Views and Key Issues
Sophie Body-Gendrot and Catherine Wihtol de Wenden: Policing the Inner City in France, 
Britain, and the US
William Sims Bainbridge: An Information Technology Surrogate for Religion: The 
Veneration of Deceased Family in Online Games
Anthony Ridge-Newman: Cameron’s Conservatives and the Internet: Change, Culture and 
Cyber Toryism
Ian Budge and Sarah Birch: National Policy in a Global Economy: How Government Can 
Improve Living Standards and Balance the Books
Barend Lutz and Pierre du Toit: Defining Democracy in a Digital Age: Political Support on 
Social Media
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka: Migration States and Welfare States: Why Is America 
Different from Europe?
Conra D. Gist: Preparing Teachers of Color to Teach: Culturally Responsive Teacher 
Education in Theory and Practice
David Baker: Police, Picket-Lines and Fatalities: Lessons from the Past
Lassi Heininen (editor): Security and Sovereignty in the North Atlantic
Steve Coulter: New Labour Policy, Industrial Relations and the Trade Unions
Ayman A. El-Desouky: The Intellectual and the People in Egyptian Literature and Culture: 
Amāra and the 2011 Revolution
William Van Lear: The Social Effects of Economic Thinking
Mark E. Schaefer and John G. Poffenbarger: The Formation of the BRICS and Its Implica-
tion for the United States: Emerging Together
Donatella Padua: John Maynard Keynes and the Economy of Trust: The Relevance of the 
Keynesian Social Thought in a Global Society
www.ebook3000.com

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0001
English Studies: The 
State of the Discipline, 
Past, Present, and 
Future
Edited by
Niall Gildea
Queen Mary, University of London, UK
Helena Goodwyn
Queen Mary, University of London, UK
Megan Kitching
Queen Mary, University of London, UK
and
Helen Tyson
Queen Mary, University of London, UK

Selection, introduction and editorial matter © Niall Gildea, Helena Goodwyn, 
Megan Kitching and Helen Tyson 2015
Individual chapters © their respective authors 2015
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this publication 
may be made without written permission.
No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted  
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence 
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency,  
Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication  
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The authors have asserted their rights to be identified as the authors of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published 2015 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited, 
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC,  
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies  
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States,  
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
ISBN: –––– PDF
ISBN: 978-1-349-50221-9
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
www.palgrave.com/pivot
doi: ./
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2015 978-1-137-47804-7
www.ebook3000.com

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0001
v
Contents
Acknowledgements 
vii
Notes on Contributors 
viii
Introduction 
1
Niall Gildea, Helena Goodwyn,  
Megan Kitching and Helen Tyson
Past
1 English on Its Borders 
15
Ben Knights
2 The Literature Study Guide: Mastering the  
Art of English? 
25
Mildrid Bjerke
Present
3 The Department of English and the  
Experience of Literature 
42
Derek Attridge
4 The Public Sphere and Worldliness:  
The Present Dialogue within English Studies 
48
Nigel Wood
5 The Dilemma of Cognitive Literary Studies 
67
Sowon S. Park
Future
6 Employability and the English  
Literature Degree 
83
Stephen Longstaffe

vi 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0001
7 The Future of English and Institutional Consciousness: 
Threats and Disengagement 
100
Robert Eaglestone
Bibliography 
114
Index 
124
Contents
www.ebook3000.com

vii
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0002
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for much assistance both in the composi-
tion of this book, and in the organization of the confer-
ence from which in large part it has arisen. Foremost, 
the contributors to the volume should be thanked for the 
diligence of their work and efficiency of their correspond-
ence over the past 18 months. Additionally, we thank Jamie 
Bamber, Mark Currie, Ben Doyle, James Everest, Peter 
Howarth, Huw Marsh and Andrew van der Vlies for the 
inestimable benefit of their advice and expertise. Finally, 
this would have never been possible without the support 
of the Department of English at Queen Mary, University 
of London.
Niall Gildea
Helena Goodwyn
Megan Kitching
Helen Tyson
August 2014.

viii 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0003
Notes on Contributors
The editors of this volume are all currently PhD candi-
dates and teaching associates at Queen Mary, University 
of London. Their research interests include eighteenth-
century British literature; deconstruction; nineteenth- and 
twentieth-century transatlantic fiction and journalism; 
modernism and psychoanalysis.
Derek Attridge is Professor of English at the University of 
York and a fellow of the British Academy. His publications 
include The Singularity of Literature (2004), J. M. Coetzee 
and the Ethics of Reading: Literature in the Event (2004), 
Reading and Responsibility: Deconstruction’s Traces (2010), 
Moving Words: Forms of English Poetry (2013), and The 
Work of Literature (forthcoming, 2015). He is co-editor 
(with David Attwell) of The Cambridge History of South 
African Literature (2012).
Mildrid Bjerke is a PhD candidate in the Department of 
English and Related Literature at the University of York. 
Her doctoral dissertation is entitled ‘Interested Disinterest: 
The Development of the Literature Study Guide’. Using the 
study guide as an example of a meeting point between 
disinterested humanist traditions and more instrumentally 
orientated pedagogical strategies, she examines the ques-
tion of the institutionalization of the discipline of English 
Literature, concentrating on the clash between the ‘social 
mission’ tradition of Matthew Arnold, I. A. Richards and 
the Leavises and the more ‘utilitarian’ demands of peda-
gogy and neoliberal educational policies.
www.ebook3000.com

ix
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0003
Notes on Contributors
Robert Eaglestone is Professor of Contemporary Literature and 
Thought at Royal Holloway, University of London. He has published on 
contemporary literature and literary theory, European philosophy and 
on Holocaust and Genocide studies. He is the author of five books and 
editor of seven more. His work has been translated into five languages. 
He is the Series Editor of Routledge Critical Thinkers. He has advised 
QCDA, DfE, OfQual and was a literary advisor to the British Council. 
He is on the subject panels for English Literature for the OCR exam 
board.
Ben Knights studied at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and 
has taught at the universities of Cambridge, Durham and Teesside, where 
he was subject leader for English and Cultural Studies. From 2003 to 2011 
he was Director of the (HE Academy) national English Subject Centre. 
His books include Writing Masculinities: Male Narratives in Twentieth-
Century Fiction (1999), Masculinities in Text and Teaching (2008) (editor), 
and (with Chris Thurgar-Dawson) Active Reading: Transformative Writing 
in Literary Studies (2006). He edits the Palgrave Series Teaching the New 
English.
Stephen Longstaffe is Senior Lecturer in English at the University of 
Cumbria. His main critical interests are in comedy and the politics 
of performance in early modern theatre. His publications include a 
critical edition of Jack Straw, a play about the 1381 Peasants’ Revolt, 
and work on Bakhtin, Shakespeare and the early modern history play. 
He has edited several collections of essays including (with Dermot 
Cavanagh and Stuart Hampton-Reeves) Shakespeare: Histories and 
Counter-Histories, (with Andrew Hiscock) The Shakespeare Handbook, 
and 1 Henry IV: A Critical Guide. Currently he is working on clowning 
and improvisation in early theatre, and on the Queen’s Men theatre 
company.
Sowon S. Park is Lecturer in English at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. 
She is interested in the implications of new and ongoing neuroscientific 
findings for the study of literature. Her publications in this field are ‘ “Who 
Are These People?”: Anthropomorphism, Dehumanization and the Question 
of the Other’, Arcadia (2013); ‘The “Feeling of Knowing” in Mrs Dalloway: 
Neuroscience and Woolf’, Contradictory Woolf: Select Papers from the 
Twenty-First Annual International Conference on Virginia Woolf (2012).

x 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0003
Notes on Contributors
Nigel Wood is Professor of Literature at Loughborough University. He 
was General Editor (and volume editor) of 11 volumes in the Theory in 
Practice series (1993–97). He also edited (with David Lodge) the second 
and third editions of Modern Criticism and Theory (1999, 2008). He has 
recently stepped down as a member of the AHRC college, and was a 
member of the Leverhulme Trust’s consultative committee on New 
Directions.
www.ebook3000.com

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004

Introduction – English Studies: 
The State of the Discipline, 
Past, Present, and Future
Niall Gildea, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching 
and Helen Tyson
Abstract: Introducing English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future, the editors trace 
some historical and contemporary debates surrounding 
English Studies in the university. Niall Gildea, Helena 
Goodwyn, Megan Kitching and Helen Tyson discuss the 
present threats to English and consider how critics of 
the discipline might capitalize on its problematic history 
of self-definition. Although indispensable for much 
work in English studies, this problem of self-definition 
simultaneously provides an avenue for instrumentalist 
attacks on the discipline. The challenge facing English 
scholars today is to position ourselves responsibly vis-à-vis 
this paradox, and at the same time to articulate what we 
value in English Studies. The authors introduce the essays 
that follow, indicating how these exemplify this crucial 
responsibility.
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004.

 
Niall Gildea, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching and Helen Tyson
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
The past is not erased but haunts the present. Thus, the traumatic 
return of repressed memory is a constant threat. To inhabit the 
ruins of the University must be to practice an institutional prag-
matism that recognizes the threat rather than to seek to redeem the 
epistemological uncertainty by recourse to the plenitude of aesthetic 
sensation (nostalgia) or epistemological mastery ( knowledge as 
progress).1
In The University in Ruins, Bill Readings exhorted his readers to ‘recognize 
that the University is a ruined institution, while thinking what it means to 
dwell in those ruins without recourse to romantic nostalgia’.2 Tracing the 
history of the modern university as ‘producer, protector, and inculcator 
of an idea of national culture’, Readings highlighted the centrality of the 
English Department to the idea of the university in nineteenth- and 
early twentieth-century Britain and America.3 In the age of globalization, 
Readings argued, this intimate relationship between the nation-state and 
the university has come undone. And yet, Readings invoked a relation-
ship to the past in which the past is always still present; there is always 
a danger of recourse to a conservative, nationalist conception of the 
English Department. ‘We should not attempt’, Readings wrote, ‘to bring 
about a rebirth or renaissance of the University, but think its ruins as the 
sedimentation of historical differences’.4
English Studies: The State of the Discipline, Past, Present, and Future is 
an attempt, in the face of current challenges, to trace – without resort-
ing to nostalgia or despair – some of the historical and contemporary 
debates pertaining to English Studies in the university. In the open-
ing chapter, Ben Knights echoes Readings in his description of the 
discipline as a ‘sedimented history of negotiations across borders’ – a 
history which students carry with them ‘through accretions of 
acquired social memory’. Knights’ essay, like the others in this volume, 
demonstrates the ways in which we carry the past of our discipline 
(and our institutions) with us – we inherit the entangled negotiations 
of the past like a form of culturally and socially acquired collective 
unconscious. Committed to a belief that we cannot understand the 
state of the discipline today, or imagine the discipline of tomorrow, 
without some attempt to engage with this past, this book nonetheless 
takes heed of Readings’ warning: we should not turn to the past in a 
quest for redemption.
www.ebook3000.com


Introduction
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
But what do we mean when we talk about the ‘State of the Discipline’? 
Of course, in one sense of the word ‘state’ we are talking about the rela-
tionship between English and the state – the condition of the subject (to 
borrow a phrase from Philip W. Martin) as defined by its relationship 
to government funding (or its absence) and policy.5 On the other hand, 
naming as it does a nation-state and a language as well as an academic 
discipline, English solicits particularly fraught psychical and political 
investments from those both inside and outside of the university walls. 
‘The point about “English” as the name of a subject’, wrote Colin Evans, 
‘is that it is an adjective being made to serve as a noun. So “English” is 
always pointing towards an absence – the noun. Is the subject English 
literature, language, society, culture, people?’6 There is no consensus on 
this matter, but what is certain is that the nominal lack, which some-
how constitutes the very name of the subject, has experienced many 
attempted compensations. Constructed, as Ben Knights notes, out of 
the projections and desires of a diverse set of (sometimes) warring tribes 
of academics, teachers, students, governmental policy makers and the 
wider public, English is a peculiarly over-determined state, freighted 
with the often conflicting, conscious and unconscious, desires of these 
various individuals and groups.
Not only is English an over-determined subject, but it is also one 
that is frequently perceived to be in a state of crisis. In What Are 
Universities For? Stefan Collini describes how the term ‘humanities’ in 
its contemporary sense first came to prominence in the USA in the 
middle decades of the twentieth century. The term was itself a response 
to ‘an aggressive form of positivism that promoted the supposed 
methods of the natural sciences as the basis for all true knowledge’.7 
If the ‘humanities’ can therefore be said to have come into existence 
on the defensive, it was also ‘uncontroversial’, when in 1964 a Pelican 
Original entitled Crisis in the Humanities was published. As Collini 
observes:
This brief history signals two related themes which have remained character-
istic of so much discourse about the humanities: first, it has largely been reac-
tive and has thus tended to have a defensive or vindicatory edge to it in a way 
not true of most discourse about ‘the sciences’; and secondly, the humanities 
turn out to be almost always in ‘crisis’. There has been a good deal of writing 
under that heading in the USA in the past decade, and a similar urge to draw 
the wagons into a circle is evident in the humanities departments of British 
universities at present in response to recent government policies.8

 
Niall Gildea, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching and Helen Tyson
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
As a relatively young subject within the humanities, English itself carries 
an anxiety about subject definition. But cries of ‘crisis’, and the reaction-
ary tone that comes alongside such cries, are not always helpful. The 
defensive mentality can trigger an urge to shore up identity, to build up 
protective walls and to insist too narrowly on the drawing of boundaries. 
To proclaim that English is in a state of crisis might lead only to unwel-
come forms of entrenchment.
And yet, the humanities and English Studies in UK universities are, as 
Robert Eaglestone puts it bluntly in this volume, ‘under threat’. Andrew 
McGettigan, author of The Great University Gamble: Money, Markets and 
the Future of Higher Education, writes: ‘An experiment is being conducted 
on English universities; one that is not controlled and that in the absence 
of any compelling evidence for change threatens an internationally 
admired and efficient system.’9 Part of this ‘great gamble’ involves the cuts 
to Higher Education made by the current UK Coalition government. In 
the wake of the global financial crisis, this government ushered in a series 
of cuts as part of its austerity policy. In the Comprehensive Spending 
Review of October 2010, the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced 
that the block grant received by universities to support undergradu-
ate teaching would be cut from £5 billion to roughly £2 billion. While 
medicine, science, engineering and technology teaching budgets have 
been (to some extent) protected, the public funding of the humanities 
has been abolished in a move towards privatization.10 In December 
2010, against a backdrop of massive protest on the streets of London, 
the government voted to raise the maximum tuition fee at state-funded 
universities to £9,000 per year. As McGettigan notes, although fees were 
first introduced in 1998 as additional funding to supplement the block 
grant, the replacement of public funding with £9,000 fees is part of a 
concerted ideological move, rushed in under the guise of an austerity 
measure, towards the ‘internal privatisation of the university’.11
Despite this move towards privatization, teachers and researchers are 
faced with mounting expectations that we contribute tangible benefits to 
society. For better or for worse, Performance-Based Research Funding 
(and its attendant acronyms) is now a familiar feature of the global 
academic landscape.12 In the UK, the Research Assessment Exercise 
(RAE) established under Thatcher was discontinued in 2008, only to be 
replaced with the Research Excellence Framework (REF), which contin-
ues the mission to measure the international ‘impact’ of research. The 
impact of such measures on the humanities themselves has since been 
www.ebook3000.com


Introduction
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
debated and criticized, by Stefan Collini and numerous others, including 
those quoted in and contributing to this volume. Such external appraisals 
of scholars and their departments, many fear, are leading to a culture in 
which evaluative surveillance and quantitative assessment are accepted 
as professional facts simply because of their fiscal influence. The growing 
scarcity of funding to support research is only intensifying competition 
to conform to these box-ticking exercises. In such a climate, we need 
more than ever to continue to articulate what we value in the study and 
teaching of English while resisting demands that all these values be 
measurable and measured.
The logic of return on investment for governments and funders 
is compelling, and the REF may now seem so entrenched as to foster 
a mood of resignation. Within the Humanities and Social Sciences, 
English and related disciplines have to frame their work within the 
parameters recognized by the REF: number of outputs, a star-rating of 
quality and – increasingly – open public access to research. As many 
have noted, these metrics are drawn from and favour STEM (Science, 
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) subjects. The publication 
practices of English Studies, as Nigel Wood observes, have traditionally 
centred on the single-author print monograph, produced without special 
time pressure upon author, publisher or reader, and disseminated for the 
purposes of interpretation and critique. The performance-based acad-
emy, however, favours a publishing model based on that of the sciences: 
numerous multi-authored papers, primarily digital, produced for quick 
turnaround and access, containing data for re-use and metadata gauging 
citation impact.13 These pressures to publish affect all academics regard-
less of field (recent exposés of spurious scientific papers in journals as 
prestigious as Nature are only the most sensational examples of the risks 
to rigor and scholarship that can result).14 Academics under this model 
are asked to present their work as research with findings; there is less 
room in this model for the kind of self-reflexive work in which scholars 
challenge understandings of culture and its manifestations. This volume, 
however, and the Palgrave Pivot imprint, are one example of how the 
humanities is responding in positive ways to these pressures.
English Studies: The State of the Discipline, Past, Present, and Future began 
as a conference held at Queen Mary, University of London, on 21 June 
2013, on ‘The Art of English’. This conference called for those working 
in pedagogy, criticism and research across the discipline to meet the 
challenge of affirming what it is that we value in the study and teaching 

 
Niall Gildea, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching and Helen Tyson
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
of English by tracing and interrogating historical and contemporary 
debates pertaining to the discipline. Commencing from a suspicion 
of the defensive mentality surrounding the cries of a crisis in English 
Studies, without denying that there are at present very real threats to 
our discipline, ‘The Art of English’ sought not only to explore past and 
present articulations of what we do in English Departments, but also 
to keep in play an openness to the future. Our use of the term ‘English 
Studies’ in this introduction marks a similar attempt to remain open to, 
to be hospitable to, the work done under the various banners of: English 
literature, English language, linguistics, creative writing, composition, 
philology, drama, the creative and visual arts, comparative literature, 
cultural studies, theory, media studies – this is to say nothing of the joint 
honours degrees, the ‘English ands’ that have proven so popular in recent 
years. Although recent publications do address why universities and the 
humanities matter, this volume seeks to foreground the particular way in 
which the study of literature reframes the question of value. The essays 
presented here suggest that the discipline has, and always has had at its 
intellectual core, precisely these questions of valuation and evaluation.
English Studies: The State of the Discipline, Past, Present, and Future is 
divided into three sections. The first is devoted to a historical considera-
tion of debates about the discipline. In the opening essay, ‘English on Its 
Borders’, Ben Knights focuses on the history of English as a history of 
practices – ‘A story about what students and their teachers have expected 
each other to do, rather than what they were expected to know’. Knights 
describes English as a ‘boundary practice’, one which has always oper-
ated on the margins, negotiating across borders internal to the discipline 
(between related but rivalrous areas of study), and borders external to 
the discipline (among institutions, sectors and diverse lay publics). As 
Knights notes, English has a history in adult education, in the Workers’ 
Educational Association and the tutorial classes of the extension move-
ment; it is not simply a product of the university. With its roots in a reac-
tion to the deadening forces of popular culture, English (in this account) 
was born as a form of praxis, not as a body of knowledge. Literary criti-
cism focused on the reading of difficult texts as a form of estrangement – 
a means of startling the reader out of the infantile modes of addiction 
induced by popular culture. As Knights suggests, the pedagogical 
practices that emerged alongside this mode of reading involved a similar 
emphasis on the performance of resistance to the commodification of 
culture. English, Knights argues, was distinctively not a transmission 
www.ebook3000.com


Introduction
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
model of education, but a way of performing and staging the individual 
reader’s journey towards maturity via their interaction with the difficult 
literary object.
Recently, Knights suggests, the pressures of professionalization and 
the audit imperatives of the RAE and REF have led to a shift in the way 
that we understand and describe our work, from a student-centred to 
a scholarship-centred paradigm, in which we describe ourselves as 
‘researchers’ rather than as teachers or students. But, as both Nigel Wood 
and Derek Attridge also argue in this book, to describe our work solely 
in terms of ‘research’ is to misrepresent it. Furthermore, Knights argues, 
this recent shift has taken us further away from the basis of English in 
praxis, leading to a need to articulate a more material, less abstract or 
idealized, history of the discipline.
In the academic year of 2013–14, Robert Eaglestone and Ben Knights 
hosted a series of Pedagogical Criticism Workshops at the now imper-
illed Institute of English Studies.15 In these workshops, practitioners from 
a variety of institutional backgrounds presented research pertaining to 
teaching practices, often foregrounding the marginalized position peda-
gogical research has historically held within the English Department. 
It was a topic of discussion in more than one of these workshops that 
English Studies continues to suffer from an inability, even an unwilling-
ness, to articulate what we ‘do’ in the English Department. In an essay 
on ‘The Implied Aesthetic of English Teaching’, Knights describes our 
implicit but unacknowledged commitment to English as not only a study 
of the aesthetic, but also a performance of it. This ‘unacknowledged 
pedagogic aesthetic’ can cause problems for the first-year student who, 
failing to pick up on subterranean hints, misinterprets the subject as one 
in which they are expected simply to acquire and to repeat knowledge. 
Part of this unacknowledged aesthetic involves a commitment to the 
implicit, a sense that the ‘the most important things defy being made 
explicit’, as Knights puts it in this volume. But this too leads to potential 
embarrassment for students, who can be left feeling vulnerable and 
excluded.
This refusal to make our pedagogical ideals explicit – an over-reliance 
on what (following Chris Baldick) Mildrid Bjerke refers to as ‘intellectual 
trade secrets’ – induces a form of anxiety for students that results in the 
turn to the literary study guide. In ‘The Literature Study Guide: Mastering 
the Art of English?’ Bjerke describes the homogenizing tendencies of the 
study guide as symptomatic of a split between a belief in the subject’s 

 
Niall Gildea, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching and Helen Tyson
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
‘transformative power for social reform’ – a power which is rooted in 
the ideal of disinterested aesthetic experience – and a more utilitarian 
and instrumental educational tradition. Tracing the roots of the litera-
ture study guide back to Matthew Arnold’s A Bible Reading for Schools: 
The Great Prophecy of Israel’s Restoration (the first ‘proto-study guide’), 
Bjerke outlines what she describes as Arnold’s ‘pedagogical transmission 
problem’: his attempt to reconcile an ideal of immediate disinterested 
aesthetic experience with the pragmatic mediation required to equip 
Victorian schoolchildren with the basic cultural capital required to 
access texts. Discussing the work of I. A. Richards, F. R. and Q. D. Leavis, 
Bjerke teases out a historical irony in the origins of the study guide. The 
very insistence on the potency of literature as a form of inoculation 
against the numbing intoxication of popular culture leads towards the 
need for a standardizing means of access to high culture for those other-
wise excluded from it. One lesson that we might take from the literature 
study guide, Bjerke suggests, is that in defending the discipline against 
neoliberal educational policies we should avoid the temptation to resort 
to polarized conceptions of the useful and the useless.
Taking up the difficult task of assessing the present moment from inside 
English Studies, Derek Attridge is also concerned with the contemporary 
pressure to justify the activities of the university in terms of economic util-
ity. It is, Attridge suggests, the university’s responsibility to offer its members 
and the public at large avenues of enquiry in the humanities which implic-
itly frustrate or outright critique the ‘business-facing’ logic of contemporary 
university governance. However, where many such accounts presuppose a 
straightforward opposition between disinterested Wissenschaft and admin-
istrative accountability, Attridge points out that this need not be the case. 
The study of literature, he argues, has a special potential in the current situ-
ation because of the encounter with ‘otherness’ which, experienced as the 
pleasure of reading, motivates all literary criticism from the traditional to 
the avant-garde. That ‘the pleasure of reading’ is the most democratic truism 
and yet, somehow, simultaneously denotes a highly enigmatic structure of 
experience renders it ideally placed to resist the reductive poles – instru-
mentalism versus aestheticism – which comprise the terms of debates over 
the ‘value’ of literary studies. The struggle to iterate the singularity of the 
reading experience, unique to this discipline, performatively indicates the 
discipline’s capacity to exceed these terms.
In ‘The Public Sphere and Wordliness: The Present Dialogue within 
English Studies’, Nigel Wood traces negotiations the discipline must make 
www.ebook3000.com


Introduction
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
between material changes in technology and the new pressures students 
and their teachers face from government initiatives. With imperatives to 
publicize and commodify academic research never far from the institu-
tional consciousness, this essay suggests that English Studies reconsiders 
these demands for impact and accountability in the context of the civil 
public sphere.
The use of ‘public’ in various pronouncements on the importance 
of the public accountability of universities does, Wood suggests, recall 
‘earlier manifestations of civic humanism (and the need for transparency 
to aid the common good)’. But, although even the Habermasian public 
sphere of the eighteenth century was contingent and short-lived, Wood 
also wonders ‘whether less welcome concerns are not camouflaged under 
such rhetoric’. Drawing on the work of Richard Mulgan, he describes the 
ways in which the demand for ‘public accountability’ becomes a ‘means 
of achieving control’. The ‘common concern’ is, he writes, ‘never an inno-
cent signified’. We need, he argues, to take seriously our responsibility to 
address wider audiences while opposing the co-opting of the distinctive 
knowledge English produces for dogmatic or overly instrumental ends. 
Indeed, ‘our responsibility to our funders might not be to give them what 
they would like, initially, to hear’. In closing, Wood points to some possi-
ble futures for English Studies in a deeper examination of the metaphors 
and myths that shape our culture, and in a continuing dedication to the 
awkward, oppositional and sometimes irritant side of critique.
Sowon S. Park, in ‘The Dilemma of Cognitive Literary Studies’, adds a 
further seam to the histories of English Studies considered in this volume. 
Contextualizing the emergence of cognitive literary criticism and tracing 
the field’s genesis, Park illustrates the salient and arguably unique ways 
in which this fledgling discipline can allow us to think anew the stakes 
of C. P. Snow’s well-known bipartition of the ‘Two Cultures’, and indeed 
to question whether this bipartition continues to obtain. However, she 
emphasizes, firstly we need to critique more familiar models of literature/
science ‘interdisciplinarity’ wherein the former is subsumed under the 
terms of the latter. Park considers the possibility of a true interdiscipli-
narity in which one discipline would not be appropriated or subordinated 
by another in this way. Cognitive literary criticism makes possible an 
authentic dialogue between the ‘Two Cultures’, but currently falls short 
of this goal. Park argues that cognitive literary criticism at present tends 
simply to incorporate scientific discourse into literary studies. Hence the 
‘dilemma’ of the chapter’s title: ‘On the one hand, attempts to integrate 

 
Niall Gildea, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching and Helen Tyson
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
scientific and literary knowledge are fraught with scientific reductions 
of the literary; on the other, attempts to preserve literary knowledge as 
a different-but-equal field of inquiry risks the complete exclusion from 
the hegemonic discourse and a further marginalization.’ In response to 
this dilemma, Park calls for literary studies to be ‘more explicit about 
defending the boundaries of non-verifiable knowledge’. Like others in 
this volume, Park goes some way to articulating what it is that we value 
in the peculiar and singular forms of knowledge and experience encoun-
tered in the literary object; for Park, this is the capacity of literature, in 
Suzanne Langer’s words, ‘to objectify the life of feeling’.
In Stephen Longstaffe’s and Robert Eaglestone’s contributions to this 
volume we witness the intersections between hopefulness and materi-
ally realistic concerns which are surely at the heart of any consideration 
of the future of English Studies. Eaglestone and Longstaffe focus on 
the very real threats to the future of the discipline in both schools and 
universities, while offering rare concrete recommendations for corrective 
action – action which aims not at a conservation of, but imaginatively 
critiques, historical models of the discipline and its institutions.
Taking the University of Cumbria as a case study, Longstaffe shows 
how remodelling the English Literature degree to include employability 
may help to make the subject more attractive at degree level, increase 
student satisfaction and even redress some of the problems caused by 
the impact of ‘impact’. With fewer students taking English Literature 
at GCSE and A-level, rising tuition fees and the ‘emergence of a fairly 
sizeable free market’ in competition for that dwindling pool of students, 
Longstaffe’s study offers a nuanced insight into the imaginative ways 
one institution has responded to the current climate. In attending to 
the particular concerns affecting the University of Cumbria – an insti-
tution devoted from its founding in 2007 to widening participation in 
an area with little HE provision – Longstaffe offers a useful corrective 
to the metropolitan bias that so often colours discussions of the fate of 
English in the university. The Cumbria course is committed to giving 
its students access to English as it is more traditionally conceived, but at 
the same time seeks to ensure that those students are not let down by a 
degree that, through a blinkered idealistic refusal of what some fear to be 
‘instrumental’, fails to take into account the students’ future prospects. 
There is here a remarkable sensitivity to the responsibility that we have 
to our students. Having outlined the ways in which (unlike traditional 
models of Career Studies) employability is integrated into the English 
www.ebook3000.com


Introduction
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
degree, Longstaffe suggests that the beauty of the employability project 
lies paradoxically in its ‘uncoupling from actual employment’. It seems 
that the key to this course lies not just in its students ‘getting a job’ at the 
end, but in its innovative way of foregrounding and theorizing the latent 
pedagogical ideals within more traditional iterations of English.
If Longstaffe’s focus on latent pedagogy recalls Ben Knights’ opening 
essay, his emphasis on the University of Cumbria’s involvement with 
local institutions anticipates Robert Eaglestone’s concluding piece. In 
‘The Future of English and Institutional Consciousness: Threats and 
Disengagement’, Eaglestone outlines a number of ‘threats’ bearing down 
on English Departments in schools and universities, including: shrinking 
student numbers and, as a direct consequence, shrinking departments 
and the redundancies this entails; top-down changes to the GCSE and 
A-level system that embroil the subject in national debates about what 
qualifies as a suitable text for study and who has the right to dictate that 
suitability; and the ongoing debate about open access publishing and 
what this means for English research. Picking up on the former Secretary 
of State for Education, Michael Gove’s predilection for quoting Antonio 
Gramsci, Eaglestone asks why haven’t we, in English Departments, learnt 
from the likes of Gramsci that without critical attention to English as 
an institution, we risk a continued disconnect, increasing isolation and 
potential marginalization?
Offering a sketch of the broad and variegated reach of the institution 
of English Studies in the UK today (a reach which extends far beyond 
the confines of the university to include: schools, students, teachers, 
exam boards, academic and non-academic publishers, educational chari-
ties, UCAS and so on), Eaglestone calls for us all to engage more right 
across the institution. This is, he explains, not the same as the numerous 
summons to present the ‘public understanding of English’, as though it 
were a positivistic subject in which we the experts could present our 
findings, simplify them and translate them to a wider public. The ‘sort of 
knowledge English often produces’, Eaglestone argues, is simply not like 
that. ‘More’, he continues, ‘this failed idea suggests that there is a “private 
sphere” (the university, the archive, the seminar room) and a “public 
sphere” (out there) and knowledge can simply be translated from one to 
the other. This is just not the case in our subject: it is simply too diffuse’. 
From Knights’ delineation of the roots of the subject as much ‘outside’ 
as ‘inside’ the university walls in the Workers’ Educational Association 
and extramural extension lecturing, to Longstaffe’s description of the 

 
Niall Gildea, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching and Helen Tyson
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
Cumbria degree course’s attentiveness to the local cultural heritage 
industry, all of the essays collected here demonstrate that English is 
already (in Longstaffe’s evocative phrase) ‘in the world’. But we do not, 
Eaglestone suggests, make sufficient attempts to reach out and engage.
As this introductory summary makes clear, though, a variety of 
voices within the institution of English are presently involved with, and 
responding to, the challenges of the current situation. The essays to 
follow offer a range of perspectives through which the reader is invited 
to engage with the important question of the state of the discipline.
Notes
Bill Readings, 
 
The University in Ruins, Cambridge, MA, and London, Harvard 
University Press, 1996, pp.170–1.
Readings,
 
 University in Ruins, p.169.
Readings, 
 
University in Ruins, p.3.
Readings,
 
 University in Ruins, p.171.
Philip W. Martin, ‘Introduction: The Condition of the Subject’, in Philip 
 
Martin (ed.) English: The Condition of the Subject, Basingstoke, Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2006, pp.1–18.
Colin Evans, 
 
English People: The Experience of Teaching and Learning English 
in British Universities, Buckingham and Philadelphia, Open University Press, 
1993, p.184.
Stefan Collini, 
 
What Are Universities For?, London, Penguin, 2012, p.63.
Collini, 
 
Universities, p.63.
Andrew McGettigan, 
 
The Great University Gamble: Money, Markets and the 
Future of Higher Education, London, Pluto Press, 2013, p.2.
The Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE), responsible 
 
for managing the distribution of public money to universities, categorizes 
degrees into four bands: A (Clinical Medicine and Clinical Dentistry, 
Veterinary Science), B (Laboratory-based subjects: Science and Pre-Clinical 
Medicine, Engineering and Technology), C (Intensive teaching, studio 
or fieldwork, including Art, Design and Mathematics) and D (Arts and 
Humanities, Law and Business). These categories are meant to reflect the 
different resources each subject needs. In 2012, the teaching budget allocated 
to Bands A and B subjects was reduced, whereas for Bands C and D subjects, 
it was removed entirely. See McGettigan, Great University Gamble, pp.1, 27.
McGettigan, 
 
Great University Gamble, p.25.
For a survey of PBRFs across OECD countries, see 
 
Performance-Based 
Funding for Public Research in Tertiary Education Institutions: Workshop 
www.ebook3000.com


Introduction
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0004
Proceedings, OECD Publishing, 01 December 2010, <http://www.oecd.org/
science/sci-tech/46756874.pdf>.
See the Report published 18 June 2012 by a working group headed by Dame 
 
Janet Finch, Accessibility, Sustainability, Excellence: How to Expand Access to 
Research Publications, <http://www.researchinfonet.org/publish/finch/>.
Richard Van Noorden, ‘Publishers Withdraw More than 120 Gibberish 
 
Papers’, Nature 24 February 2014. See also John Bohannon, ‘Who’s Afraid of 
Peer Review?’, Science 4, 342.6154, October 2013, pp.60–5.
Richard Adams, ‘University of London Plan to Close Institute of English 
 
Studies on Hold’, Guardian, 23 May 2014.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0005
Past
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0005.
www.ebook3000.com

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006

1
English on Its Borders
Ben Knights
Abstract: The history of ‘English’ cannot be sundered from 
its pedagogic traditions. For this loose bundle of often 
warring and periodically cross-fertilizing subjects is, above 
all, a family of overlapping and often rivalrous verbal and 
social practices. During its twentieth-century development 
and up to the present day, ‘English’ as a university 
subject has maintained an ambivalent relationship to 
both scholarship and schools. Underlying its practice in 
universities, in adult education, and, for extended periods, 
in schools was a contrarian energy that aimed not so 
much to create or transmit knowledge as to transform its 
students. In this essay, Ben Knights sketches a performative 
history of the subject in its embattled position, in 
continuing negotiation with both educational institutions 
and the wider cultures of readers and reading.
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006.

 
Ben Knights
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006
It amounts to this – Literature is not a mere Science to be studied; 
but an Art to be practised. Great as is our own Literature, we must 
consider it as a legacy to be improved. (Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch)1
In the context of a collection dedicated to the ‘State of English’, I intend 
to focus on the history of English as a history of practices – a story about 
what students and their teachers have expected each other to do, rather 
than what they were expected to know. The relatively recent historical 
shift within the discipline and the life-narrative of its practitioners from a 
(broadly) student-centred to a (broadly) scholarship-centred paradigm – 
a model of professional productivity reinforced by the audit imperatives 
of the Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) and Research Excellence 
Framework (REF) – has had many effects, not least on perceptions of the 
intellectual history of the discipline. But I believe that it is as mislead-
ing to view ‘English’ through the lens of contemporary expectations 
about literary and historical scholarship as it is to swallow uncritically 
the reductive history of the discipline, which has become increasingly 
orthodox since around 1980. Paradoxically, I would like to make a case 
for a more material history than the rather abstract, even idealist ‘high’ 
version propagated by Terry Eagleton (among others).2 The serious chal-
lenges Higher Education (HE) English faces – in relation to pedagogy, 
widening access and public self-explanation – are a direct product of this 
history.3 But so too are its strengths and continuing potentials.
Although this has been partially obscured by the reluctance felt by 
many members of the academic tribe to talk about pedagogy in public, 
the intellectual history of the English family of disciplines has been 
deeply intertwined with its protocols for teaching and learning. Indeed 
the creation and management of a space on the boundary between public 
and private has been a generative if vexed topos from the beginnings of 
the educational subject. Not indeed the only boundary in question, and 
the case I shall be making (in a brief and summary form) is that ‘English’ 
should be understood as a boundary practice.4 To do so is to propose, 
so to speak, an anti-essentialist history. Disciplinary landscapes are no 
more just ‘there’ than are ‘natural’ ones, and ‘English’ is littered with the 
hallmarks of its perpetual construction. If we are in our imaginations to 
project the ‘art of English’ into a vigorous future, we need to comprehend 
the discipline as performance, as a sedimented history of negotiations 
www.ebook3000.com


English on Its Borders
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006
across borders both ‘internal’ (among related though often rivalrous 
subject domains), and ‘external’ (among institutions, sectors and diverse 
constituencies of readers or producers of language). This history-in-
becoming creates in the student what Pierre Bourdieu would call a 
habitus: a sense of the world and an aspiration to taste and heightened 
symbolic legitimacy carried in the body through accretions of acquired 
social memory.5
This is not the place to articulate this history in any detail. But there are 
certain key points to make (see Figure 1.1 that follows, ‘English on its borders: 
some key interactions and processes’). One is about the multifarious nature 
of the subject’s origins. (Although I am concentrating here on universities, 
the same would also be true in relation to the remarkably different history 
of English in schools.) And given that ‘English’ names a language and a 
nation as well as an educational subject, the expectations and projections of 
the media and larger publics have never been far away. In both schools and 
universities, teachers carry – or consciously refuse – a burden of external 
expectation, whether as the custodians of heritage, of the canon or even as 
the guardians of standards of ‘correct’ language or spelling.
Even at what might be seen as the peak of the practical criticism 
era in the 1960s, English in universities was a much more diverse and 
figure 1.1 English on its borders: some key interactions and processes
Source: Artwork by Jamie Bamber based on an original diagram by Ben Knights.

 
Ben Knights
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006
varied federation than is now generally recognized, formed of an uneasy 
and at times tetchy accommodation among critics, textual scholars, 
medievalists and historical philologists. The gravitational field that 
held this methodologically plural little cosmos together was however 
to a considerable extent the outcome of the pedagogic traditions aris-
ing from two main sources: the practice of criticism within the small 
face-to-face universities of the pre-Robbins period and the burgeoning 
of literature as a subject ‘outside the walls’ in adult education, especially 
the Workers’ Educational Association and the tutorial classes of the 
extension movement.6 In outline, I suggest that practical criticism as a 
pedagogic dynamic has been and continues to be pervasive within the 
HE practice of the subject. But there is much missing from the way we 
currently tell this story to students – or indeed to ourselves.
‘English’, in the incarnation I am examining, began with a diagnosis 
of consumer culture and a prescription. Resistance to the commodifica-
tion of culture and living, resistance to the perceived standardization of 
language and culture (and ultimately of the human itself), led not towards 
a body of scholarly knowledge, but to a form of praxis, an intervention 
designed to form the identity of the student as a member of a cultural 
fifth column. If mass culture depended upon and reinforced forms of 
addiction, criticism – like the modernism on which to a considerable 
extent it drew – was designed to estrange the text, to awaken readers from 
their conformist trance and to startle the student into vigorous seman-
tic action. In identifying aesthetic with moral values (and in common 
with the homologous New Criticism in the USA), literary criticism 
sought to induce in students resistance to sentimentality, escapism and 
what in Lawrentian mood the Scrutiny group dubbed ‘substitute living’.7 
Genre fiction, and any text that relied for its effects on the seductions 
of archaism or sonority, became its targets. Such debased qualities were 
seen as standing in the way of the difficult but necessary journey towards 
emotional and intellectual maturity. To succumb to the blandishments 
of what now gets called ‘feel-good’ in novel, poetry or film would be to 
betray the necessary severity of standards and mission. Initiation into 
‘the minority’ was in fact a form of secular conversion narrative.
In its campaign against philology and literary scholarship, literary 
criticism concentrated on estrangement and counter-intuitive reading – 
the formation of strongly bonded pedagogic communities of intensive 
readers, rather than of a body of knowledge. Inasmuch as it produced 
knowledge in the classroom, that knowledge was provisional, oblique 
www.ebook3000.com


English on Its Borders
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006
and only indirectly replicable. This classroom tradition thus represents 
the polar opposite of a transmission model of education. In setting its 
face against scholarship in all the forms of which the nascent subject was 
composed – textual and source studies, philology, literary biography and 
‘influences’ – literary criticism offered its students the superior pleasures 
of outlawry, outsiderliness and embattlement. The poverty of scholarship 
ungrounded in critical sensibility was a Scrutiny commonplace. Thus F. 
R. Leavis said in The Common Pursuit: ‘For the purposes of criticism, 
scholarship, unless directed by an intelligent interest in poetry – with-
out, that is, critical sensibility and skill that enables the critic to develop 
its responses in sensitive and closely relevant thinking – is useless.’8 The 
heightened sense of beleaguered superiority arising from enlistment in 
a mission was a key element of the attraction, and was indeed a predi-
lection inherited for a relatively brief period in the 1970s (and from the 
starting point of the estranged reading of an entirely different canon) by 
Birmingham-style Cultural Studies of the Stuart Hall era.
Although literary criticism as a written form lent itself (under the aegis 
of Ian Parsons at Chatto and Windus) to the critical essay, its routines 
were established through a ‘signature pedagogy’ of oral engagement.9 The 
procedure was dialogic, and at least on the face of it democratic, in that 
it proposed to value the insights of any member of the group no matter 
how inexperienced. Yet, and despite this ostensibly egalitarian starting 
place, those values of outsiderliness and embattlement were inculcated 
through a sequence of teaching procedures, involving a guided dialogue 
between tutor and student group over the shared text and on the basis 
of pooled subjectivity.10 And thus also another, admonitory presence, 
that of the conventional and colonizing culture outside the classroom. 
In the pedagogic tradition of practical criticism this alien ‘other’ was 
often represented on the handout sheet by a sample of writing inferior 
by virtue of its sentimentality, its formulaic nature or the ‘posturing’ 
of its author, its role being to bring out by contrast the strong features 
of the superior text. In this pedagogic plot, the key role was played by 
the charismatic teacher. In a suggestive recent exploration of the inter-
subjective nature of the Humanities class, Vicky Gunn has adapted from 
René Girard the idea of mimetic desire. Intrigued by the formation of 
‘epistemological empathy’, she asks how some students ‘come to desire 
what academics desire’.11 In this vein, we might map the critical class-
room, with its discourse of ‘discrimination’, and its textual exclusiveness, 
as a space for instilling, through a guided process of exemplification, a 

 
Ben Knights
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006
revised hierarchy of perspectival values. The procedure was always in 
danger of turning into a pedagogy of shame, where students took the 
risk of exposing their preferences and their own inner worlds – even, 
inadvertently, their unconscious – to the stringent judgement of tutor 
and fellow students.12
What we are seeing, then, is an isomorphism between the staged 
classroom encounter and the valued forms of the text. Both text and 
pedagogic event are understood as analogous and interacting journeys 
towards maturity. In provoking students out of their comfort zone, in 
requiring them to put their own subjectivity on the line, the critical style 
enacted in the classroom corresponds with the perceived virtues of the 
literary subject matter – complexity, breadth and freshness of vocabu-
lary, metaphorical density, the capacity to hold potentially ambivalent 
meanings in suspension. This ethic of difficulty had implications for 
student writing: just as the rewarding text resisted lazy or escapist 
consumption, the essay was expected to register in its own discourse 
the hard and frequently baffled task of engaging with mental energies 
that defied simple paraphrase or denotative summary. For the Leavises 
and their colleagues what was disparagingly referred to as ‘journalistic 
facility’ represented the direct opposite of everything to which the ideal 
student was to aspire.13
Strategies designed to push students out of their comfort zone and 
induce agonistic pride lend themselves to the kind of analysis of genres 
and rhetorical conventions which Laura Wilder has recently attempted 
to perform in the literary classroom. In a refreshing break from the 
social psychology that dominates so much learning theory, she seeks to 
make explicit particular ‘topoi’ around which the rhetorical strategies 
of the class are organized.14 One more such topos might be summarized 
as an implicit injunction to the effect that the most important things 
defy being made explicit: if you attempt to spell them out, the colour 
leaches from them. One problem generated by this anti-reductive spirit 
is therefore what kind of resolution the critic, the seminar or the student 
essay can achieve: the apprentice critic is placed in the vulnerable posi-
tion of having to draw conclusions while at the same time recognizing 
how provisional they are. The ironic and un-spell-outable nature of the 
propositions in play generates mystique, and leads to the emergence 
of an out-group of students who feel irretrievably (and resentfully) 
left behind. As one of Wilder’s respondents remarks, ‘they assume you 
already know this stuff’.15
www.ebook3000.com


English on Its Borders
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006
Critical strategies committed to ‘depth’ as much as those enamoured 
of the play of surfaces have continued to insist (against commonsense, 
against boredom, against instrumentalism and what Louise Rosenblatt 
called ‘efferent reading’) on estranging the textual object of attention by 
insisting on alternative – even at times outrageous – frameworks within 
which to re-vision the verbal artefact.16 They have stage-managed encoun-
ters through which to hold the text up to attention for long enough for 
connotations to form and re-form. The potential of the subject itself 
to transmute into a form of cultural capital, and what (speaking of Mr 
Ramsay) Virginia Woolf referred to as a ‘pleasure in disillusioning’, is 
thus ironically implicated in the very aptitudes with which it seeks to 
endow its students: a tenacious willingness to startle cultural phenom-
ena into new contexts; a capacity for analogical thinking; a willingness 
to hold meanings in suspension; an alert impatience with cliché, rhetoric 
or soundbites.17
The core history to which I have so briefly alluded was predicated on a 
dialogic tradition of small group work. The fertility of this tradition does 
not preclude some insistent questions. What can ‘the subject’ still offer 
students where the practice of intensive reading in small groups is only 
generally on offer in a few high prestige institutions? Or where the prom-
ised personal transformation is no longer widely felt to be an authentic 
option? Where students generally (and with good reason) resist being 
co-opted into a superior critical and epistemological elite? What author-
ity could this endlessly re-forming and historically counter-cultural 
discipline carry in the age of the neoliberal university, of modularized 
packets of knowledge and assessment, of student loans and ubiquitous 
instrumentalist rhetoric?
There are, I believe, potentially answers to these questions, though 
the search for answers will involve more than further investment in 
scholarship. They will require us all to re-invigorate negotiations on the 
boundaries. In The Practice of Everyday Life, Michel de Certeau refers to 
‘an art of being in between’.18 Such an art has always lain at the heart of the 
practice of English. It is arguable that even now, the subject offers a space 
for students who precisely do not identify with the entrepreneurial, CV 
society, or whole-heartedly embrace an instrumentalized vision of their 
own future. Students who actually want to retain some possibility for 
quirkiness or for diversity in forms of expression. English – though the 
possibility does not lend itself to market branding – may yet represent a 
utopian space outwith the demand for the operationalized self.

 
Ben Knights
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006
So in preparing to hand over to the essays that follow, I will suggest 
that the future of ‘the subject’ rests on celebrating and re-invigorating 
those negotiations on borders both institutional and intellectual. A first 
step in re-aligning identity, scholarship and performance will be to revisit 
and tap the energies of some of the boundaries and margins on which I 
have so briefly touched, above all, to invigorate and learn from the fertile 
dialogues which already in many local habitations take place between 
tribes and practices. Among them will be dialogues between academics 
and school teachers, and between Literature and the academic tribes of 
both English Language and Creative Writing. All such initiatives will be 
embedded not just in pedagogy in an abstract sense, but in collaborative 
performance: placing at the core of the process forms of making and 
re-making both oral and written.
The contents of the rest of this volume – like the conference in which 
they originate – clearly suggest that solutions lie neither in nostalgia nor 
in despair.
Notes
Arthur Quiller-Couch, 
 
The Art of Writing, New York, Putnam, 1916, p. vii.
See Terry Eagleton, ‘The Rise of English’, 
 
Literary Theory: An Introduction, 
Oxford, Blackwell, 2008, pp. 15–46. For examples of recent more material 
histories of English, see Carol Atherton, Defining Literary Criticism: Scholarship, 
Authority and the Possession of Literary Knowledge, 1880–2002, Basingstoke, 
Palgrave, 2005; Rachel Sagner Buurma and Laura Heffernan, ‘The Common 
Reader and the Archival Classroom’, New Literary History, 43.1, 2012, pp. 113–35 
and Alexandra Lawrie, The Beginnings of University English: Extramural Study, 
1885–1910, Basingstoke, Palgrave, 2014.
Recent experiences of the process of revising the Quality Assurance Agency 
 
Subject Benchmark draw attention not only to the difficulty of explaining the 
subject group to external ‘stakeholders’, but also to the degree to which the 
default assumption about ‘English’ in higher education is that the term refers 
to literary studies – in turn still grounded in the tradition of ‘close reading’.
See Colin Evans, 
 
English People: The Experience of Teaching and Learning English 
in British Universities, Buckingham, Open University Press, 1993, pp. 166–82. 
The concept of ‘boundary’ here draws heavily on the theory and practice of 
the Tavistock group relations conferences, in which the creation of a bounded 
space allows the ‘here and now’ to be read for the light it throws on behaviour 
in groups. For a description of the ways in which the Development 
www.ebook3000.com


English on Its Borders
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006
of University English Teaching (DUET) project drew, at its inception 
in the 1980s, upon both the Tavistock group relations conferences and 
psychoanalyst Wilfred Bion’s work on groups, see Ben Knights and Chris 
Thurgar-Dawson, Active Reading, London, Continuum, 2006, pp. 27–9.
Pierre Bourdieu, 
 
The Logic of Practice, trans. Richard Nice, Cambridge, Polity, 
1990, pp. 53–5.
In the UK, the Robbins Report of 1963 heralded a period of university 
 
expansion, leading to growth in the number of universities and students:  
<http://www.educationengland.org.uk/documents/robbins/robbins1963.
html>. English in contemporary adult education was described and 
celebrated in Chapter 8 of the Newbolt report, The Teaching of English in 
England, London, His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1921, pp. 252–77. See also 
Lawrie, Beginnings of University English, pp. 56–85, pp. 149–57.
There are marked parallels with the struggles between the Philologists 
 
and the New Critics in the USA. See Gerald Graff, Professing Literature, an 
Institutional History, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2007, and Mark 
Jancovich, The Cultural Politics of the New Criticism, Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press, 1993.
F. R. Leavis, 
 
The Common Pursuit, London, Chatto and Windus, 1952, p. 9.
Stefan Collini, ‘ “The Chatto List”: Publishing literary criticism in 
 
mid-twentieth-century Britain’, Review of English Studies, 63, 2012, pp. 634–63.
For a contemporary analysis of seminar interaction see Susan Bruce, Ken 
 
Jones and Monica McLean, ‘Some Notes on a Project: Democracy and 
Authority in the Production of a Discipline’, Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to 
Teaching Literature, Language, Composition, and Culture, 7.3, 2007, pp. 481–500 
and Susan Bruce, ‘Using your Profanisaurus: Comparisons, Analogies, and 
Cultural Capital in Two English Literature Seminars’, Arts and Humanities in 
Higher Education, 12.1, 2012, pp. 53–69.
Vicky Gunn, ‘Mimetic Desire and Intersubjectivity in Disciplinary Cultures: 
 
Constraints or Enablers to Learning in Higher Education?’, Studies in 
Continuing Education, 36:1, 2014, pp. 67–82, p. 73.
The 
 
Scrutiny movement has recently been re-examined from two very 
different but complementary angles. See David Ellis, Memoirs of a Leavisite: 
The Decline and Fall of Cambridge English, Liverpool, Liverpool University 
Press, 2013, and Christopher Hilliard, English as a Vocation: The ‘Scrutiny’ 
Movement, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2012.
F. R. Leavis, 
 
Education and the University: A Sketch for an ‘English School’,  
London, Chatto & Windus, 1943, p. 43.
Laura Wilder, ‘ “Get Comfortable With Uncertainty”: A Study of the 
 
Conventional Values of Literary Analysis in an Undergraduate Literature 
Course’, Written Communication, 19.1, 2002, pp. 175–221, and Rhetorical 
Strategies and Genre Conventions in Literary Studies: Teaching and Writing 

 
Ben Knights
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0006
in the Disciplines, Carbondale, Ill., Southern Illinois University Press, 
2012. In remarking on the clunkiness of tropes like ‘the mistaken critic’ 
or ‘contemptus mundi’, I am probably simply re-enacting my own critical 
formation.
Wilder, 
 
Rhetorical Strategies, p. 46.
Louise M. Rosenblatt, 
 
The Reader, the Text, the Poem: The Transactional Theory 
of the Literary Work, Carbondale, IL, Southern Illinois University Press, 1978.
Virginia Woolf, 
 
To the Lighthouse, Stella McNichol (ed.), London, Penguin, 
2000, p. 8.
Michel de Certeau, 
 
The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven F. Rendall, 
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1984, p. 30.
www.ebook3000.com

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007

2
The Literature Study Guide: 
Mastering the Art of English?
Mildrid Bjerke
Abstract: The literature study guide is torn between its 
instrumental format and its participation in a humanist 
tradition centred on the notion of disinterest. Bjerke 
demonstrates the guide’s membership in that tradition 
through its kinship with Matthew Arnold’s A Bible 
Reading for Schools (1872), and argues that the genre finds 
further motivation in the demands of practical criticism. 
The study guide, as Bjerke shows, not only mirrors the 
clash between neoliberal and humanist values, but also 
reflects an analogous conflict within the discipline of 
English literature concerning the institutionalization of 
disinterested ideals. It thus provides a space for reflection 
upon the discipline’s implicit values and intuitions of 
purpose. It is argued that such a reflection leaves us better 
equipped to tackle ongoing challenges to the discipline.
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007.

 
Mildrid Bjerke
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
The genre of the English Literature study guide for A-level (York Notes, 
Brodie’s Notes, Macmillan Master Guides, amongst other series) is associ-
ated with an instrumental bias in education. However, it is also part of 
a humanistic tradition which has been integral to the formation of the 
discipline of English Literature and has informed what Chris Baldick has 
described as the ‘social mission’ of English criticism – a tradition accord-
ing to which literary culture, and the disinterested values with which it is 
associated, holds a transformative power for social reform.1 Consequently, 
the tensions and paradoxes of the study guide genre manifest the tensions 
and paradoxes of that tradition. Because the study guide is situated 
between this tradition of disinterested culture and a more utilitarian tradi-
tion associated with quantifiable results-based valuation, it constitutes a 
good place from which to examine conflicts between instrumentality and 
disinterest as they arise within the discipline of English Literature.2
Through the lens of the literature study guide we can gain insight into 
the development of the idea of the transformative power of culture in 
the discipline: from Matthew Arnold’s adaptation of German theories of 
aesthetic education, to related ideas in the work of I. A. Richards and  
F. R. and Q. D. Leavis of literary culture as a source of spiritual resistance 
to the supposedly harmful influence of popular culture. For these critics, 
the social importance of English Literature lies in the spiritually – and, if 
taught correctly, socially – beneficial effects of disinterested culture, which 
bring about ‘a certain balance or harmony of the individual mind’.3
Kant’s Critique of the Power of Judgement (1790) is the text from which 
our understanding of disinterest in this context stems, and has been 
of paradigmatic importance for the discipline of English Literature, 
permeating thinking about the place and importance of artworks as 
transcending the interests of individuals and allowing contemplation of 
that which transcends our own time and place. Because of its internal 
tension between ideals of disinterest and its highly interested format, the 
ostensibly unremarkable study guide embodies the collision between the 
literary social mission and a utilitarianism in educational policy which 
reached a kind of fever pitch with the rise of neoliberalism.4
The instrumental format of the study guide makes manifest a difficulty 
of initiation into disinterested culture for students who do not possess 
the right kind of cultural capital: those who have yet to internalize the 
disinterested values of the discipline and crack its cultural code.5 Gerald 
Graff, too, sees the study guide genre as an expression of student despera-
tion at being cut off from cultural codes: ‘students repress their anxiety 
www.ebook3000.com


The Literature Study Guide: Mastering the Art of English?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
and alienation and some end up resorting to Cliffs Notes’. This happens 
when students make the assumption that correct interpretations of texts 
are available and waiting to be found, that: ‘rivers and gardens in them-
selves have some fixed but secret meaning that you either get or don’t 
get; if you’re one of those who doesn’t, you can only ... try to find one of 
those who do.’6 In addition to its immediate function as an examination 
guide, the study guide genre, I argue, responds to a more generalized 
need for a manual for taste occasioned by the discipline’s social mission, 
and its resistance to the very codification required for the pedagogic 
dissemination of its values throughout the stratified social sphere. The 
study guide is given this conflicted form because the discipline within 
which it emerges is split between a certain ideal of literary value and the 
institutionalization required to teach that ideal.
The tension between ideals of literary value as disinterested and their 
practical pedagogical implementation has been described by Carol 
Atherton as a ‘disciplinary anxiety’ which still informs the teaching of 
English Literature at secondary school level today: ‘the most significant 
feature of these early debates about literary criticism – about its nature and 
methods, its underlying values and its social utility – is their persistence’.7 
As an instrumental means towards the internalization of disinterested 
culture, the study guide reflects this problem of reconciliation. Hence, 
the vantage point of the literature study guide, with its internal contradic-
tions, makes the division between disinterested culture and interested 
educational policy especially acute; yet, it does this precisely by forcing 
us to engage with the necessity of something like a consideration of impact 
in the transition from a humanistic ideal of culture to the practicalities 
of its pedagogical dissemination, opening a space for reflection upon 
whether this apparent division is ultimately meaningful or sustainable. I 
use the word ‘impact’ here to describe the practical effect of the transla-
tion of a theoretical ideal of disinterest into practice. However, the word 
has been chosen to serve the additional function of alluding to the much 
debated ‘impact agenda’ of the Research Excellence Framework (REF). 
In this context, ‘impact’ represents an instrumentalism which is very 
far removed from the ideal of disinterest.8 This instrumentality, which is 
external to the discipline of English, throws the tension between disinter-
est and instrumentality into sharp relief. In consequence, the debate about 
the challenges posed by this kind of politics for English literary studies 
tends in part to obscure the less apparent tension between disinterest and 
the necessarily instrumental character of pedagogy that exists within the 

 
Mildrid Bjerke
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
discipline. The study guide, however – which casts light on this internal 
tension – provides an apt point of departure for the broader discussion 
about the place and value of English studies within an education system 
increasingly governed by neoliberal and utilitarian values.
The neoliberal study guide
The literature study guide for A-level is often presumed to be a vehicle of 
a calculated, and perhaps cynical, approach to success in examinations. 
There seems to be an uneasiness amongst literary critics and pedagogues 
as to whether the study guide treats the literary according to a formulaic 
method that can reduce its transcendent potential and ‘handicap original 
thought’.9 In its capacity as examination guide, the study guide genre does 
indeed operate, as part of its instrumental pedagogy, through a formu-
laic and predictable procedure. Since the 1950s, it has functioned, across 
series, more or less exactly according to the following configuration: 
a section on the author in question and her or his work; short chapter 
summaries with textual notes and revision questions; sections on char-
acters, setting and plot, background, structure, and style; general study 
questions, often including sample answers or sample essays; a section on 
further reading, often fairly limited. The rationale behind this formulaic 
treatment of the literary is obviously pedagogical, but seems excessively 
instrumental. This is because it represents an instrumentalism extrinsic 
to the value of the object of study: the study guide’s main concern is ulti-
mately not the teaching of literature, but examination success, and this is 
reflected in its homogenizing, algorithmic form.
All teaching involves an element of instrumentalism in the sense that 
it serves as a means to an end. However, within the particular frame-
work of literary education – for which the instrumental side to pedagogy 
is difficult to reconcile with the liberal humanist dictum that culture 
should be disinterested – the study guide’s extraordinary instrumentality 
seems especially problematic. The study guide represents a disagree-
able reminder that literary education takes place within an economic 
logic: literary humanism cannot disseminate its disinterested values via 
pedagogy without becoming trapped in the ironic contradiction of the 
objectification of those values through the interested activity of pedagogy 
itself. When the literature study guide offends literary critics and human-
ists this is because of the difficult relationship between the educational 
www.ebook3000.com


The Literature Study Guide: Mastering the Art of English?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
institution and the values we, as humanist educators, seek to transmit. 
What is referred to as the intrinsic or abstract value of the literary work 
is hardly presentable as a fact that can be taught, or something which, 
once taught, should lead to quantifiable results for interested individuals. 
Literature study guides are insensitive to this situation insofar as their 
very function, as well as their market appeal, implies the subordination 
of higher cultural and moral values in the learner’s order of priorities to 
practical gain or personal educational achievement.
A common argument against the use of literature study guides is based 
on the perception that students use them as a substitute for the primary 
literary text, reducing the disinterested potential of literary experience 
to cheat sheet formulae. Moreover, the study guide’s instrumentality and 
its preoccupation with practical gain are indicative of its affinity with 
an examination system which has been heavily affected by neoliberal 
educational policy. Neoliberal demands for quantifiable results through 
standardized testing misapprehend the functioning and core values of 
humanities disciplines, the outcomes and impacts of which are not taken 
by humanists to be demonstrable through the methods and measurements 
preferred by neoliberalism. The humanist dictum that aesthetic experience 
is disinterested has thus been dismissed, as within a framework where 
value is understood in terms of what use something might be for self-
interested agents, disinterestedness is equated with economic uselessness. 
The literature study guide participates in the commodification of educa-
tion by advertising utilitarian approaches to exam success which stand in 
opposition to humanist notions of intrinsic literary value and disinterest-
edness. Study guide advertisements, such as the following, tie the notion 
of improved examination results to the economic language of value for 
money and betray the place of the study guide within the economic logic 
of the marketplace: ‘YOUR BIGGEST BARGAIN IN BETTER GRADES ... 
ONLY $1 AT YOUR BOOKSELLER’S.’10 The association of the literature 
study guide with neoliberalism and other forms of rational instrumental 
thinking foregrounds its instrumental function rather than its role as 
participant in the dissemination of literary and humanist values.
Arnold’s social mission dilemma
To those schooled in literary and humanist disciplines more broadly, the 
study guide’s amalgamation of economic logic and the sphere of culture 

 
Mildrid Bjerke
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
seems crude and reductive. It seems to smack of what Arnold referred to as 
the utilitarian tendency of British society towards the valuation of ‘things 
like coal or iron as constituting the greatness of England’.11 But whilst the 
study guide is primarily associated with its instrumentally instructive 
function, it actually finds its earliest expression as part of Arnold’s social 
mission. The conflicted form of the study guide genre, which seems to 
participate in the project of English Literature whilst simultaneously 
corrupting it, is an expression of the very conflicts the discipline inherits 
from Arnold’s joint status as ideologue and pedagogue.
Arnold’s importance for the early institutionalization of literature 
within the education system can hardly be overestimated, as he ‘convinced 
education’s overseers to create a legal mandate for English Literature’s 
place in the lives of the young’.12 Thus, English poetry gained its status 
as a ‘specific subject’ in 1871, and by 1882, when Arnold’s tenure as an 
inspector of schools was coming to an end, English Literature received 
compulsory status in schools.13 Over time, Arnold’s ideal of poetry as a 
humanizing force has informed theories, both of pedagogy and of literary 
value, perhaps most notably those written by Richards and Leavis, and 
others within the Scrutiny movement. In this way, Arnold’s ideas about 
the value of literary education came to be institutionalized in the English 
curriculum. However, for Arnold, the move from a belief in a human-
ist ideal to institutionalization is fraught with tensions, and involves a 
pedagogical transmission problem; the reconciliation of his idea of the 
immediacy and necessity of aesthetic experience with the pragmatic 
mediation required to bring that experience about in people for whom 
it is neither necessary nor immediate. For Arnold, this reconciliation is 
crucial because he associates culture with individual self-cultivation, but 
also wants to see it as the remedy to the unsatisfactory political situation 
of Victorian class society. His desire to put culture to political use requires 
him to develop a strategy for the installation of culture in the children of 
the working class through education in state institutions, in other words, 
for the institutional propagation of a condition he ultimately takes to 
be inherently personal and inward. Thus, Arnold’s social mission itself 
confronts a predicament, as culture – understood as an ‘inward condi-
tion’ – must express itself through the mediating machinery of schools.14 
In order to disseminate culture to all levels of society and to inspire in 
the individuals who make up the social mass the very aesthetic experi-
ence which leads to collective Bildung and democracy, there needs to be 
a pragmatic pedagogical process which is instrumental and thus not at 
www.ebook3000.com


The Literature Study Guide: Mastering the Art of English?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
all disinterested. Arnold finds the pragmatic circumstances surrounding 
the teaching of the inward condition of culture, let alone the instrumen-
tal social objective of that pedagogy, difficult to reconcile with the initial 
ideal of disinterest. Hence, I propose, the discipline has inherited its split 
between ideal and institution – disinterest and interest – from Arnold’s 
social mission dilemma.
A Bible Reading for Schools and the  
modern day study guide
The study guide genre, which is expressive of the split between an ideal 
and an institutionalization of English, develops out of Arnold’s attempt 
to consolidate the problems triggered by the practical demands of the 
institutionalization of his cultural ideal. He published the first proto-
study guide, A Bible Reading for Schools: The Great Prophecy of Israel’s 
Restoration, in 1872, the year after poetry gained special subject status in 
British elementary schools. The influence of this publication on the study 
guide genre is evident in the modern day study guide’s continuation and 
expansion of Bible Reading’s format, as well as in the genre’s continued 
conflict between its strategic format and its disinterested moral and 
aesthetic purpose. Bible Reading exposes the difficult balance between 
Arnold’s ideal of aesthetic experience in which the artwork gives the 
individual observer unmediated access to the universal experience of 
beauty, and his awareness that without sufficient institutional mediation 
the individual is cut off from that supposedly universal experience.15 The 
preface to Bible Reading (the intended audience of the preface being the 
critic and the school teacher) provides an insight into Arnold’s practical 
move from the individual to the social, and sheds light on his pragmatic 
choices as pedagogue and as social critic. Arnold emphasizes that Bible 
Reading is not intended as a scholarly edition. His aim is that of ‘enabling 
English school-children to read as a connected whole the last twenty-
seven chapters of Isaiah, without being frequently stopped by passages 
of which the meaning is almost or quite unintelligible’. The text is edited 
in accordance with a principle of accessibility for Victorian children 
in elementary schools, and to this end Arnold has selected ‘among the 
better meanings which have been offered for each of these passages, that 
which seemed the best’, presenting a text which does not ‘produce any 
sense of strangeness or interruption’.16

 
Mildrid Bjerke
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
Arnold proclaims that Bible Reading was the first publication of its 
kind, and he expresses regret at not having contributed such a pedagogi-
cal tool sooner. ‘In general’, he writes, ‘the scholars in our schools for the 
people come in contact with English literature in a mere fragmentary 
way, by short pieces or by odds and ends’.17 For over 20 years, he ‘got his 
living by inspecting schools for the people, has gone in and out among 
them, has seen that the power of letters never reaches them at all and 
that the whole study of letters is thereby discredited and its power called 
into question’, and yet, this school edition is his first attempt to ‘remedy 
this state of things’.18 The preface indicates clearly that Arnold is eager 
to resolve his pedagogical transmission problem through the use of 
learning technologies designed to allow the reader access to the aesthetic 
experience of literary texts. Moreover, Arnold published Bible Reading 
with the intention of inaugurating a genre. He writes of himself (in the 
third person) and his hopes for the future of Bible Reading: ‘Even if what 
he does cannot be of service at once, owing to special prejudices and 
difficulties, yet these prejudices and difficulties years are almost sure to 
dissipate, and it may be of service hereafter’.19
Arnold’s hopes for a future genre based on Bible Reading would come 
to be met by the literature study guide. In 1937, several decades after 
Arnold’s initial attempt at founding a genre, his gesture was repeated by 
the series Brodie’s Chosen English Texts. The series shared the pedagogi-
cal aims of Bible Reading, as well as its understanding of how those aims 
could be achieved. Between 1937 and 1956, the early Brodie’s publications 
replicated the format of Arnold’s publication, giving a school edition of a 
literary text and an introductory note on that text, supplying the reader 
with background information. And like Bible Reading, they also provided 
clarificatory notes to each chapter, with a short summary. In the late 
1950s, however, not long after the implementation of the A-level system, 
James Brodie Ltd stopped that series of school editions, Brodie’s Chosen 
English Texts, in favour of the first fully fledged UK study guides, Brodie’s 
Notes on Chosen English Texts. In the shift from Brodie’s Chosen English 
Texts editions to Brodie’s Notes study guides, the text itself was removed 
and the pedagogical apparatus honed and bolstered in order to form 
the first British study guide series. Nevertheless, the change in format 
did not disrupt the continuity of purpose and strategy which links the 
study guide proper to Arnold’s proto-guide. Rather, in this compressed 
form, the study guide emerged as a distillation of Arnold’s pedagogical 
purpose.
www.ebook3000.com


The Literature Study Guide: Mastering the Art of English?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
The continuity between Bible Reading and the study guide becomes 
starkly apparent if we compare their respective declarations of intent. 
The following quotation from the preface to Bible Reading will, when 
compared with a quotation from 1937 in one of the first student editions 
in the series Brodie’s Chosen English Texts, serve to show the continuity 
between Arnold’s school edition and the literature study guide, exposing 
the endurance of the problem of the combination of idealist aesthetic 
education and pragmatic pedagogy:
Now the learner in our schools for the people, who has the bare text of a 
common Bible and nothing more, may perceive that there is something 
grand in this passage, but he cannot possibly understand it; and this is due 
partly to the want of explanations, partly to the arrangement, partly to obscu-
rity in the translation. He requires to be told first, as a learner would be told 
before reading an ode of Pindar, what it is all about; he requires to have the 
passage separated for him from that with which it has no connexion; and 
he requires to have the text made much clearer, both in its words and in its 
punctuation.20
Here, Arnold gives his pedagogical rationale for the publication of Bible 
Reading. His edition of Isaiah was pragmatically designed to meet the 
pedagogical challenges of the encounter between the uneducated reader’s 
horizon of literary understanding and the many complexities of the text 
by guiding the student’s reading, offering clarity and contextual informa-
tion. The rationale outlined here is clearly shared by the earliest edition 
of Brodie’s Chosen English Texts. The spirit of the following statement is 
strikingly similar to Arnold’s:
The abundance of complex, inexplicit passages, and the wealth of classical 
allusions prevent the ordinary reader from grasping the full meaning of what 
is read, and are apt to confuse those who wish to study it in detail. To assist in 
overcoming some of these difficulties this Edition is published.21
Here, Arnold’s ‘learner in the schools for the people’ has become ‘the 
ordinary reader’ and Pindar’s ode ‘classical allusions’. The similarity 
between the two passages is apparent. Both publications are intended for 
use within the context of state education, and thus they display a concern 
with aiding student reading by making the text itself more accessible, 
softening the harsh encounter between unprepared readers and difficul-
ties such as classical allusions and complex formulations which hinder 
correct appreciation.

 
Mildrid Bjerke
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
Ultimately, this continuity between Arnold’s Bible Reading and the study 
guide should not surprise us. After all, the study guide is an expression of 
something that is happening within liberal humanist pedagogy. For the 
discipline of English Literature, the study guide is an object of discomfort 
because it seems to represent a cynical and calculating engagement with 
literary values. This tendency towards instrumentality has been brought 
out and externalized by the study guide’s participation in the cultivation 
in learners of a neoliberal work ethic, but the study guide itself has always 
been instrumental. Having grown out of the split between an ideal of the 
humanizing power of literature and the institutionalization required to 
teach that ideal, the study guide’s rationale has continuously been one 
of transmitting disinterested values in an interested and targeted way. 
Hence, the study guide expresses tensions and difficulties that lie at the 
heart of the discipline of English.
The ‘intellectual trade secret’ and the  
study guide as mediator
Literature, according to Arnold, is apt for the purposes of a social mission 
because it delivers aesthetic experience naturally and spontaneously – in 
other words, because it is self-teaching. However, Arnold concedes that 
its ‘influence seems to need in the recipient a certain refinement of nature 
at the outset in order to make itself felt’.22 As a concrete expression of the 
conflicted idea that immediate aesthetic experience might require peda-
gogical mediation, Bible Reading gives an insight into Arnold’s awareness 
of the pragmatics required by actual circumstance: it takes the bull by the 
horns and admits that the universal, yet individual, aesthetic experience 
which culture requires is not naturally universally accessible, but needs 
much preparation through the machinery of state education. Despite his 
efforts to reconcile theory and practice, however, Arnold fails to set out 
a detailed and specific account of what his move from aesthetic educa-
tion as social theory into the process of implementing this theory in the 
state school apparatus might involve. Instead, as Atherton points out, he 
adopts a strategy of ‘assuming that the skilled critic will simply recognize 
what he is referring to without needing it to be defined, almost as if he is 
protecting what Baldick has described as an “intellectual trade secret” ’.23 
The discipline’s continued protection of such ‘secrets’ provides the study 
guide with its rationale as a manual for taste, or, for the internalization of 
www.ebook3000.com


The Literature Study Guide: Mastering the Art of English?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
the cultural assumptions required for successful socialization into liter-
ary culture.
The emergence of mass culture, which followed the expansion of 
the reading public generated by late-nineteenth-century educational 
reforms, prompted what John Carey describes as a modernist ambition 
‘to exclude these newly educated (or “semi-educated”) readers [and] to 
preserve the intellectual’s seclusion from the “mass” ’.24 The notion of a 
cultural elite who are opposed to popular culture has played a key role 
in the discipline’s perpetuation of its ‘trade secrets’. The idea is strongly 
present in the highly influential work of I. A. Richards, F. R. Leavis and 
Q. D. Leavis, and affects the development of practical criticism, a method 
based upon I. A. Richards’ foundational 1920s lectures and 1929 text 
Practical Criticism.25 The approach, which was developed at Cambridge, 
soon became central in the teaching of English Literature, both at 
secondary and tertiary levels. Practical criticism was, writes Francis 
Mulhern, ‘naturalized as the technically necessary approach to literary 
language’.26 As Christopher Hilliard points out, practical criticism was a 
teaching method which reflected a critical method: ‘an exercise whose 
end (heightened powers of discrimination) was coextensive with its 
means (discriminating between good and bad writing)’.27 In short, prac-
tical criticism was designed, in part, to aid the student in distinguishing 
‘high’ from ‘low’ culture.
Whereas Richards and the Leavises maintain that Arnold’s conception 
of culture still holds powerful potential as social remedy, the newly emer-
gent mass culture is perceived to threaten culture proper by promoting 
clichéd and habitual stock responses in its recipients. Thus, culture needs 
protecting by an elite minority who have lost faith, not in the human-
izing power of culture, but in the readiness of people to receive culture’s 
humanizing effects. This distrust in the ability, and willingness, of the 
masses to withstand what are perceived as the damaging influences of 
mass culture in favour of the healthy influence of culture proper causes 
an ambivalence about the value of mass literacy – the very project to 
which the social mission tradition is itself devoted and out of which the 
study guide emerges.28
Thus, the study guide genre, which grows out of Arnold’s attempt to 
move from secrecy to shared experience, runs into conflict with practical 
criticism, a critical approach which strengthens rather than resolves the 
rarefication of culture as belonging to those already initiated. Practical 
criticism exacerbates the Arnoldian ambivalence towards codifying 

 
Mildrid Bjerke
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
literary culture: it represents a systematic codification of a resistance to 
codification, representing, at the same time, a rigorous method of liter-
ary pedagogy (interest) and a preference for immediate experience over 
theory (disinterest). The practical criticism examination at Cambridge, 
which withdrew what was perceived as distracting contextual informa-
tion, thereby repeats the pedagogical transmission problem involved 
in the disinterested approach to literature, or as Pierre Bourdieu would 
describe it: the ‘myth of an innate taste’ – an expression ‘of the recurrent 
illusion of a cultivated nature predating any education’.29 Moreover, the 
exam’s complicity with this myth makes practical criticism all the more 
effective as an entrance exam for membership in the cultural elite.
By withdrawing contextual information, and asking for what were 
perceived as ‘free’ responses, unbound by customary critical biases which 
might disturb the reading experience, the practical criticism examina-
tion came to crystallize the sense that literary criticism depends upon 
some intellectual trade secret: the examination asks for the expression 
of a specific set of cultural values, or rather, for the demonstration of 
‘taste’, whilst at the same time mystifying and obscuring the pedagogical 
and/or social methods of internalizing these values for those students 
who do not already possess them. Moreover, in testing the student’s 
immediate responses to poetry, it would seem that the practical criticism 
examination was in effect examining the extent of the student’s success-
ful socialization into culture. Thus, despite its side-lining for pedagogical 
purposes of contextual information, practical criticism comes to inten-
sify the rationale of the literature study guide genre – the guidance of the 
student into unknown territory.
Furthermore, the antagonism between practical criticism’s preference 
for immediate experience over theoretical elaboration and the idea of 
the study guide as theoretical ‘cheat sheet’, removed from the immediacy 
of the reading experience, allows us to account for the low status of the 
study guide within the discipline of English Literature. Insofar as it func-
tions as a guide to culture, the study guide is necessarily operating from 
within the closed field of culture into which it seeks to help students gain 
entry. Hence, it is part of culture. But its pedagogical unconcern for the 
importance of immediate and autonomous aesthetic experience means 
that it risks promoting the kinds of habitual responses which practical 
criticism seemingly seeks to avoid. The study guide’s low status resulting 
from its partial membership in mass culture is an expression of a liberal 
humanist disavowal of the study guide which is similar, and intimately 
www.ebook3000.com


The Literature Study Guide: Mastering the Art of English?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
related to, the Arnoldian pedagogical transmission problem. In seeking 
to make canonical literary texts more accessible, the study guide renders 
apparent the impossibility of the liberal humanist principle of subjective 
universality: by borrowing elements from the popular press and adver-
tising, it reveals the necessity for socialization into the liberal humanist 
aesthetic conception of culture. Hence, it admits – implicitly, but contro-
versially – what liberal humanist aesthetics does not recognize: that the 
social and cultural contexts of readers always will intrude upon their 
interpretations, and that aesthetic experience itself is contingent upon 
such contexts. Hence, the study guide does not wholeheartedly conform 
to the disinterested ideal – it is, albeit implicitly, highly provocative 
because it renders apparent the inconsistencies in disinterest’s rela-
tionship with instrumentality, as well as the need for pragmatics in its 
practical application. It therefore illustrates the main point of Bourdieu’s 
sociology of taste, namely that disinterested cultural dispositions are 
also ‘products of learning’ bringing ‘to light the hidden conditions of 
the miracle of the unequal class distribution of the capacity for inspired 
encounters with works of art and high culture in general’.30
The lesson of the study guide
The study guide is fraught with binary tensions: it operates in the space 
between high and low culture; between immediate aesthetic experience 
and habitual stock responses; between liberal humanist ideals of culture 
and its codification; between those who possess cultural capital – who 
are in on the ‘intellectual trade secret’ – and those who do not. The study 
guide can be seen, therefore, both to operate as a sort of manual for taste, 
insofar as taste can be appropriated through such means, and to reveal 
the distaste within the discipline of English for pragmatic codification 
of the lingering Romantic notion of immediate aesthetic experience as 
necessary and subjectively universal.
We can take the following lesson from the literature study guide: in 
defending the discipline against neoliberal education policy, we should 
beware of overly polarized conceptions of the useful and the useless.31 
The call for impact and utility often leads to such overemphases, prompt-
ing a defensive return to exaggerated liberal humanist ideals – risking 
overstatement and consequent misconceptions. If, in the words of Helen 
Small, ‘the effect of the requirement for the humanities to justify their 

 
Mildrid Bjerke
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
public value, or the terms in which they are permitted to do so, is to stifle 
their ability to ask the hard questions of their own intuitions of purpose 
and value then they really will be in trouble’.32 The study guide provides 
an opportunity for English studies to scrutinize its own values and intui-
tions. Because it reminds us of the internal tension between interest and 
disinterest within humanist pedagogy, the study guide lends us a space 
for discussing whether a purely disinterested contemplation of literature 
is possible, necessary or desirable – or whether literature is enriched by 
its many social functions, including its provision of a space for aesthetic 
appreciation and critical thinking, undisturbed by individualized duties 
towards strategic and calculating valuation. As John Guillory puts 
it, aesthetic experience is never pure, but ‘an experience of an always 
composite pleasure’.33 If a disinterested aesthetic sphere, detached from 
utility, is impossible – and to this impossibility the tension within the 
study guide genre testifies – then the study guide cannot compromise 
culture’s integrity. What it can do, and what it does better than its declared 
function of improving examination results – and better than its implicit 
function as a manual for taste – is provide a reason for confronting some 
old disciplinary skeletons lurking in the closet of Literary Studies.
Notes
Chris Baldick, 
 
The Social Mission of English Criticism: 1848–1932, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1983.
My analysis of study guide material extends from its early formation to around 
 
the year 2000. After this, the genre moves onto the Internet and becomes a 
different, and more diverse, phenomenon, the examination of which requires 
us to enter into a range of additional questions – arising, for example, from 
the transnationalization of the study guide market, questions about class and 
accessibility in relation to new media, and so forth – which would take us 
beyond the remit of the specific genealogy I am concerned to elucidate.
Baldick, 
 
Social Mission, p. 213.
Neoliberalism, in its most traditional sense, here refers to an economic 
 
theory which evaluates education according to its profitability as a 
consumer good. On the marketization of (especially humanities) education 
in the UK, see Stefan Collini, What Are Universities For?, London, Penguin, 
2012, and Helen Small, The Value of the Humanities, Oxford, Oxford 
University Press, 2013.
www.ebook3000.com


The Literature Study Guide: Mastering the Art of English?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
See Pierre Bourdieu, ‘The Forms of Capital’, trans. Richard Nice, in John G. 
 
Richardson (ed.), The Handbook of Theory and Research for the Sociology of 
Education, New York, Greenwood Press, 1986, pp. 241–58.
Gerald Graff, 
 
Professing Literature: An Institutional History, Chicago, Chicago 
University Press, 2007, pp. 51–2.
Carol Atherton, 
 
Defining Literary Criticism: Scholarship, Authority and the 
Possession of Literary Knowledge, 1880–2002, Basingstoke, Palgrave, 2005, p. 7.
The REF allocates 25 per cent of its university department ratings to the 
 
demonstration of ‘impact’, i.e. ‘achieving demonstrable benefits to the 
wider economy and society’, not including ‘intellectual influence’ or the 
outcomes of teaching. Research Excellence Framework: Second Consultation 
on the Assessment and Funding of Research, London, HEFCE, 2009, cited in 
Collini, Universities, p. 169. Collini comments that unless the REF guidelines 
are changed, UK university scholars will be forced to become ‘door-to-door 
salesmen for vulgarized versions of their increasingly market-oriented 
“products”’. Collini, Universities, p. 177.
Arnold L. Goldsmith, ‘Literary Study Guides in High School and College: 
 
Supplement or Substitute’, The English Journal, 57. 6, September 1968, pp. 
803–12, p. 805.
Goldsmith, ‘Literary Study Guides’, p. 803.
 
Matthew Arnold, 
 
Culture and Anarchy, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, 1960, p. 51.
John Willinsky, ‘Matthew Arnold’s Legacy: The Powers of Literature’, 
 
Research 
in the Teaching of English, 24.4, December 1990, pp. 343–61, p. 345.
Margaret Mathieson, 
 
The Preachers of Culture: The Study of English and Its 
Teachers, London, Allen and Unwin, 1975, p. 44, and Willinsky, ‘Arnold’s 
Legacy’, p. 345.
Arnold, 
 
Culture and Anarchy, p. 49.
Arnold’s distrust of state machinery is rooted in the ‘self-governing rational 
 
principle’ of aesthetic experience. The principle stems from the Kantian 
notion of ‘subjective universality’, which is external to all forms of social 
organization. See Ian Hunter, Rethinking the School: Subjectivity, Bureaucracy, 
Criticism, New York, St Martin’s Press, 1994, p.13, and Matthew Shum, 
‘Culture and the Institution’, Scrutiny 2: Issues in English Studies in Southern 
Africa, 2.1, 1997, pp. 5–12, p. 7.
Matthew Arnold, 
 
A Bible Reading for Schools: The Great Prophecy of Israel’s 
Restoration, London, Macmillan, 1889, p. v.
Arnold, 
 
Bible Reading, p. ix.
Arnold, 
 
Bible Reading, p. xii.
Arnold, 
 
Bible Reading, p. xii.
Arnold, 
 
Bible Reading, p. xv.

 
Mildrid Bjerke
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0007
Alfred E. Ikin (ed.), 
 
Milton: Paradise Lost Book I, Brodie’s Chosen English 
Texts, London, James Brodie, 1937, n.pag.
Matthew Arnold, 
 
Reports on Elementary Schools, 1852–1882, London, His 
Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1908, pp. 250–51.
Atherton, 
 
Literary Criticism, p. 70 and Baldick, Social Mission, p. 30.
John Carey, 
 
The Intellectuals and the Masses: Pride and Prejudice Among the 
Literary Intelligentsia, 1880–1939, London, Faber & Faber, 1992, p. vii.
See I. A. Richards, 
 
Practical Criticism: A Study of Literary Judgement, London, 
Kegan Paul, Trench and Trubner, 1929; F. R. Leavis, Mass Civilisation and 
Minority Culture, London, Chatto & Windus, 1930; Q. D. Leavis, Fiction 
and the Reading Public, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1979, and F. R. Leavis 
and Denys Thompson, Culture and Environment: The Training of Critical 
Awareness, London, Chatto & Windus, 1964.
Francis Mulhern, 
 
The Moment of ‘Scrutiny’, London, New Left Books, 1979, p. 
328.
Christopher Hilliard, 
 
English as a Vocation: The ‘Scrutiny’ Movement, Oxford, 
Oxford University Press, 2012, p. 37.
Baldick, 
 
Social Mission, pp. 205–7.
Pierre Bourdieu, Alain Darbel and Dominique Schnapper, 
 
The Love of Art: 
European Art Museums and Their Publics, trans. Caroline Beattie and Nick 
Merriman, Cambridge, Polity, 1991, p. 109.
Pierre Bourdieu, 
 
Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, trans. 
Richard Nice, Cambridge MA, Harvard University Press, 1996, p. 29.
Collini, 
 
Universities, p. 39.
Small, 
 
Value of the Humanities, p. 21.
John Guillory, 
 
Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation, 
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1994, p. 336.
www.ebook3000.com

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0008
Present
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0008.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0009
 
3
The Department of English and 
the Experience of Literature
Derek Attridge
Abstract: Derek Attridge draws on Jacques Derrida’s 
lecture ‘The University without Condition’ in order to 
argue that the British university today fails to encourage 
unconditional enquiry; much of the most creative work 
that takes place does so in spite of, rather than as a result 
of, official university policy, producing a situation in which 
academics work both in the open and in what Thomas 
Docherty has called ‘the Clandestine University’. Literary 
study has been distorted by official policies and government 
priorities, in particular by the emphasis on ‘research’ 
as understood in the sciences. Attridge calls for greater 
attention to be paid to the primary act of engaging with 
literary works, where creativity and openness to alterity is 
fostered, both in the classroom and in publications.
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0009.
www.ebook3000.com


The Experience of Literature
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0009
In a lecture entitled ‘The University without Condition’, Jacques Derrida 
explores what he takes to be the most fundamental task of the university, 
which he summarizes as ‘an unconditional freedom to question and to 
assert, or even, going still further, the right to say publicly all that is 
required by research, knowledge, and thought concerning the truth’.1 
That word ‘unconditional’ is important in Derrida’s thought; he uses it in 
discussing the gift, hospitality, forgiveness, justice and a number of other 
terms that are central to Western conceptions of ethics. To envisage a 
university that operates without conditions is, he admits, to envisage an 
impossibility, just as absolute hospitality, the pure gift, total forgiveness 
and complete justice are impossibilities. But in every case, he argues, the 
conditioned and conditional form of the practice should be informed, 
energized and inspired by the force of the unconditioned and uncondi-
tional form – not as a distant ideal to be striven for but as an active pres-
ence in our daily actions. And ‘this principle of unconditionality presents 
itself, originally and above all, in the Humanities.’2 It is in the humanities, 
more than anywhere else in the university, that there is most scope for 
what Derrida calls, in this context, oeuvres: works that are not constative 
accumulations of knowledge but performative events, welcoming other-
ness into the world.
The British university today is even further removed from this vision 
than it was when Derrida first delivered this lecture in 1999. We have 
become familiar with the ‘business-facing university’, the ‘impact 
agenda’, the constant attempt to justify the activities of the university in 
terms of their economic contribution to the nation. Where, in the face 
of this increasing emphasis on the economic, the programmable, the 
instrumental, can we find a space for the research project that is explora-
tory and experimental rather than designed to produce predetermined 
‘outcomes’, the classroom practice that changes students’ lives without 
necessarily making them more productive citizens, the publication that 
brings pleasure and excitement without adding to the coffers of the state? 
How is it possible in this context to question critically all that passes for 
truth, even, as Derrida says, to question the form of the question itself? I 
believe such places do exist, and that the spirit of unconditional enquiry 
is still honoured in them.
I’d like to quote at some length Thomas Docherty’s account of what he 
calls the ‘Clandestine University’, as this is one of the best descriptions I 
know of the conditions under which many of us try to realize something 
like the vision Derrida sets out:

 
Derek Attridge
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0009
The Official University, beloved of government and its agencies, including 
the higher education funding councils, the research councils, Universities 
UK and so on, describes itself by mission statements, mission groups, 
research reports, colourful prospectuses and websites, and YouTube videos. 
It prides itself on an essentially vacuous ‘excellence’, supposedly transparently 
demonstrated by various facts and figures (Information), finally settling into 
position in the multiplying, and often mutually contradictory, league tables 
that various agencies will use as a proxy for an understanding of the life of 
our institutions.
The Clandestine University, by contrast, is where most of us do our daily 
work. As academics, we do not ‘compete’ against colleagues elsewhere for 
research funding; rather, we just want to do the research, and we welcome 
good work wherever it is done. When the research councils come up with 
their next Big Funding Idea, researchers will twist their activity to seem to 
fit the idea’s criteria, while actually carrying out their preferred research. Of 
course, although we know this to be the case, we cannot officially say it.
In the laboratory or library, when our experiments or readings lead 
away from a simple rehearsal of what the grant application said we would 
do, then we divert from the terms of the grant and we engage, properly, in 
research. We do not find what we said we would. But we cannot officially 
say this.
When we enter the seminar room, we do not seek to confirm pre-set ‘aims, 
objectives and outcomes’ for the class: to do so, we would need to circum-
scribe the possibilities that the seminar offers for imaginative exploration of 
our topic, that is, for learning. But we cannot officially say this.3
Docherty ends with a rather half-hearted aspiration: ‘It would be good 
if the Clandestine University could come in from the cold’. It would be 
good, indeed, but we know that it isn’t going to happen. However, the 
Clandestine University hasn’t yet been shut down, as it operates below 
the radar of the official processes of accountability and economic instru-
mentality, and one of the places where it can function most effectively 
is the English Department. And this is largely because the object of our 
attention is the literary work.
There are many kinds of literary study that are amenable to the require-
ments of the regime of accountability and ‘excellence’. (It’s nearly 20 years 
since Bill Readings, in The University in Ruins, exposed the self-serving 
emptiness of this word, but university administrators don’t read such 
books and their mission statements resound with iterations of it.) Most 
of these involve importing into the Literature Department the techniques 
and goals of other disciplines: History, Sociology, Politics, Linguistics, 
www.ebook3000.com


The Experience of Literature
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0009
Theology, Philosophy and more. English department research can 
produce historical accounts of authors and groups of authors, their texts, 
their books as material artefacts and the contexts within which these 
have emerged. Literature can be studied as a sociological phenomenon – 
Cultural Studies, for instance, is often sociological at base – or a politi-
cal intervention, or can furnish useful examples for linguistic analysis. 
Religious writers can be examined for their contribution to theological 
debates; literary works can furnish important questions for philosophical 
discussion. All these are valuable activities, and to a large extent they are 
well suited to grant applications. Also suitable for funding are some of 
the more specifically literary projects, such as editions and bibliographic 
studies.
Yet all these diverse activities arise from a single origin: the pleasur-
able and – most would, I think, agree – valuable experience of reading, 
or hearing, or seeing in performance, particular literary works. The 
works of Percy Bysshe Shelley, to pick an author at random, have had 
huge amounts of time and money spent on them, resulting in editions 
of the poems with meticulously examined and charted texts and labori-
ously accumulated notes, exhaustively researched biographies, extensive 
collections of his letters, accounts of his travels, descriptions of his 
milieu, studies of his portraits – not to mention a splendid example of the 
marble carver’s art in University College, Oxford. All these labours have 
been undertaken, and all this capital expended, for one reason: because 
readers have derived, and continue to derive, from Shelley’s poems (or at 
least a good number of them) a certain kind of pleasure. And the same 
is true of all the many other authors who have generated a large body of 
secondary material of this type.
This pleasure I have described elsewhere as an opening to otherness, 
the introduction of the new and unexpected into familiar habits and 
norms, the sensation of being led into fresh territories of thought and 
feeling.4 But however we choose to describe or define it, it is something 
that all teachers of literature – and, one would hope, a large number of 
their students – have experienced both in re-reading old favourites and 
engaging with untried texts. And it’s in fostering and enlarging such 
experiences, making them available to more people, in readings of more 
texts and in more intense forms, that the most fundamental work of the 
English Department takes place. It’s here that the Clandestine University, 
operating outside the demands of the official institution, flourishes.

 
Derek Attridge
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0009
The place where such work most often takes place is the classroom, 
though I fear that the distortions produced by the features of the 
present-day university I’ve alluded to may be infiltrating this space 
more and more. One version of this infiltration is the expectation many 
British students now have when they arrive in a university English 
department that success will consist in meeting specified ‘Assessment 
Objectives’ in their essays and examinations, resulting in painful disap-
pointment when it turns out that the highest marks go to adventurous 
and risk-taking work for which no prior formula is available. (I like 
to think that this is the work that is rewarded, at any rate.) The best 
teaching of literature is that which encourages students to read with 
an openness to the unfamiliar, and to write in ways that do justice to 
the otherness they have encountered. And there is a lot of this kind 
of teaching happening, under whatever official guise the module in 
 question may be cloaked.
But when it comes to the ‘research’ being undertaken in English 
departments, this fundamental experience at the heart of the literary 
gets short shrift. (I place ‘research’ in quotation marks because the 
term itself is part of the problem, implying as it does that in literary 
studies we do the same kind of thing that is done in physics or biol-
ogy departments.) What I would like to see is fuller acknowledgement 
by those of us in literature departments of the experience that lies 
at the origin of all our activities, and fuller support for teaching and 
publishing that pursues the challenging task of enhancing – and ques-
tioning – that experience for our students and our readers. The bodies 
that are busy enforcing the regime of counting and accumulating and 
enumerating – the funding evaluators, the selection committees, the 
research ‘excellence’ assessors – are made up largely of academics, not 
hardnosed administrators, and it is they who are partly responsible 
for keeping the Clandestine University underground – or, to put it in 
Derrida’s terms, for making the University without Condition nothing 
but a pipe dream.
If the primary activity of reading the literary work as a pleasurable and 
potentially transformative activity could be placed at the centre of our 
practices, even when we serve on funding committees, and the reason 
we value the writers we spend so much time and money on could be 
fully acknowledged, we might be able to taste a little of the unconditional 
freedom that the concept of the university supposedly implies.
www.ebook3000.com


The Experience of Literature
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0009
Notes
Jacques Derrida, 
 
‘The University without Condition’ in Derrida, Peggy Kamuf 
(trans. and ed.), Without Alibi, Stanford, Stanford University Press, 2002, pp. 
202–37, p. 203.
Derrida, ‘University without Condition,’ p. 207.
 
Thomas Docherty, ‘The Unseen Academy’, 
 
Times Higher Education, 10 
November 2011.
See Derek Attridge, 
 
The Singularity of Literature, London, Routledge, 2004.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
 
4
The Public Sphere and 
Worldliness: The Present 
Dialogue within English Studies
Nigel Wood
Abstract: Nigel Wood assesses the contemporary institutional 
status of English and English Studies, addressing three areas 
of concern: the relevance of tertiary level study, changing 
definitions of knowledge and the connection of higher 
education to the ‘public sphere’. Not all present influences 
are unwelcome, he argues. The new investigations possible 
in a digital economy – mining large volumes of data and 
contextualizing individual items with more precision – are 
progressive. Accountability and transparency in promoting 
the ‘public good’, however, incorporate limiting levels 
of scrutiny and self-censorship, inviting the academy to 
conform to external pressures. Truly democratic humanistic 
enquiry should aim at as free and engaged an exchange of 
ideas as possible, bringing a truly critical and ‘oppositional’ 
perspective to bear on the present and the past.
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010.
www.ebook3000.com


The Public Sphere and Worldliness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
Capturing any sense of the present is a complex task, and could simply 
result in a vague species of subjective anecdotage, doomed to a more 
or less immediate transience. Jonathan Swift’s desperate Teller in his A 
Tale of a Tub (1704), whose only certainty is that what is uttered would 
be only ‘literally true this minute’, sensed this for, in addressing ‘Prince 
Posterity’, what he has to utter seems only warranted by its currency, for 
‘what revolutions may happen before it shall be ready for your perusal’ 
no one can predict.1 An understanding of how English Studies has 
evolved should, however, derive strength from those who have tried to 
assess their own present and thereby come to terms with the synchronies 
of their own moment. The aim of this essay is to hold a mirror up to 
some present influences on the study of the subject so as to separate out 
some of the coercions of external agencies from more welcome (and 
inevitable) developments in the subject. It will also cast an eye on certain 
aspects of a history of English so as to help define its core interests and 
thus assess whether they do indeed continue to constitute the subject or 
are now merely vestigial.
Much of the social mission of English in a university context was 
initially sociological (if not religious) in emphasis: a necessity to embrace 
culture to avert anarchy.2 Culture was eventually instrumental in that it 
offered an idea of genuine enlightenment derived from the individual 
mind reading and being sustained by powerfully imaginative literature: 
authenticity of feeling derived from interrogating what we had been 
led to think of as civilized, and subjecting it to a challenge of ‘conscious 
and directed effort ... [a] resistance by an armed and active minority’, as 
Q. D. Leavis termed it, where one ‘armed’ oneself with genuinely criti-
cal skills evinced from close reading.3 But how might this be regarded 
now? Is culture an oppositional force in quite this way? One definition 
of where English might sit in the new order is offered by Mary Poovey 
when constructing her rubric for a module, entitled ‘What is Cultural 
Economy?’:
At the outset, let me say what ‘cultural economy’ is not. Cultural economy is 
not the study of the artifacts and institutions – such as literary texts, media 
forms, or the publishing industry – that are assumed to reside in some rela-
tively autonomous domain called ‘culture’. In fact, cultural economy takes 
as its initial premise the claim that ‘culture’ cannot be separated from the 
other two concepts that have traditionally organized the social and cultural 
sciences: the economy and the social.4

 
Nigel Wood
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
Poovey is distrustful of dwelling on art’s micro-items, where close reading 
is a pre-eminent skill and a threshold requirement of English at tertiary 
level.5 In this, there is a grey area traversed by a figurative ghost where the 
economic might gesture towards a formal study of how wealth is valued 
and distributed derived from an earlier sense of generic organization 
and social placement. The ultimate admonition – that there are ways of 
failing to know the world – is an encouragement to identify these with 
a blindness (encouraged within traditionally demarcated corridors of 
study and evaluation) to the ‘economic conditions’ that in effect underpin 
apparently ‘hermetic environments’.6 There is to hand a ready response 
within the English community, wherein we might claim that we have 
been here before. Cultural Studies and materialist approaches have from 
the first surely stressed the valency of the most isolated traces of aesthetic 
contemplation and creation, and the theory wars of last century have left 
their mark on every close reader.
These more recent battle-lines are significantly different, however, as 
the unstoppable force in this more contemporary iteration is govern-
ment-driven, and, in this, the exchange value of English ‘knowledges’ is 
underwritten by perfectly reasonable student expectation. As with any 
privatized economy, products are guaranteed by status and a process of 
commodification (the conferment of something akin to Pierre Bourdieu’s 
‘cultural capital’).7 One does from this viewpoint empathize with a 
perennial student request as to how one may get a 2:1 or better. With 
the advent from 2013 of the almost universal charging of student fees 
of £9,000 per year in the British university sector, across the board for 
engineering and humanities students alike, the new realism about what 
once could have been celebrated as a haven for disinterested contempla-
tion is not only invasive from a conservative point of view but also quite 
capable of fostering a new English, wherein the medium is the guarantor 
of the message, and digitization plus electronic database capture appear 
as respected objects of study in their own right, promoting a fascination 
just as much with the message as with the bottle.
This is not a projection into the future, but a description of the 
present as many students recognize it daily. Social media and the 
expectations that the archive is simply there, ready for word-searching, 
bring quite different nuances to how one reads, and even how one 
might consider the English canon. Certainly, in John Hodgson’s 
painstakingly compiled report on The Experience of Studying English in 
UK Higher Education (2010), there was evidence of originality in how 
www.ebook3000.com


The Public Sphere and Worldliness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
most students approached reading and aesthetic judgement, yet also 
of an abiding concern that such initiative was not quite welcome. 
Tutor opinion was both welcomed and feared, for – it was often felt – 
 ‘excellence’ depended on it. The report concludes with a vision of how 
a mastery of ‘new media’ would affect the processes of ‘authorship 
and reading’, principally, an answer to a student desire for a radically 
new ‘communication model’ that might foster ‘improved dialogue and 
more communal or collaborative work’.8 The explosion of newly acces-
sible information has conditioned many to regard it – on account of its 
novelty and its undoubted technological attraction – as a substitute for 
something more basic and historically derived in literary and linguis-
tic study, including Creative Writing. The individual mind and work 
seem overwhelmed by such opportunities. Twinned with this relatively 
untried element of research, there is an insistence on vocationality and 
instrumental modes of study, where ‘skills’ are identified as transfer-
able values in an exchange economy. Might we embrace values and 
judgement in and for themselves, as earlier Englishes stressed, or 
should we cultivate perspectives that value valency and networking as 
the enabling condition of ‘knowledge’? A casualty of this is the human-
ist aspiration for both individual betterment and, at the same time, a 
conviction that this form of culture would lead to a properly connected 
community at ease with itself.
There is always the temptation to regard the ‘text’ or ‘work’ as the foun-
dation for further enquiries, and yet the creation of those words on the 
page is really itself influenced by a myriad of greater or lesser extrinsic 
factors free of an individual consciousness – as Poovey notes, albeit in 
an extreme formulation. When we ascribe such intuitive and imagina-
tive talent to Shakespeare, for example, we are apt to elide and exclude 
the efforts of a necessary association of fellow actors, patrons, audiences 
and sources that were enabling and perhaps constitutive elements, both 
materially and spiritually. Authors from this perspective actually perform 
an ‘author-function’ as Michel Foucault has it: a classification system 
arrived at for pragmatic and often commercial purposes.9 However, one 
has to start somewhere, and the confluence-point of authorship allows 
a congregation of ideas and propositions and a test of some accuracy 
in dealing with evidence. The more pressing issue at the moment is not 
the advisability of where or if we apply theory, but rather what political 
(institutional, pedagogic or professional) interests might it serve. Indeed, 
what point would more traditional, empiricist, enquiries confirm?

 
Nigel Wood
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
In several tacit ways, we are in the ‘public sphere’, as Jürgen Habermas 
has it, when we engage with any public.10 We, as tutors, are addressing our 
imagined constituency from some position of authority (real or assumed) 
according to the conventions allowed – of visibility, partisanship, appro-
priate discourse or personal perspective, say, and one’s ‘proof’ is assem-
bled out of the materials that we have to hand. Who would write not to be 
heard? All cultures are not equally open to truly radical conclusions. This 
bourgeois public sphere emerged at a blessed time, the early eighteenth 
century, when by dint of a relaxation of press control, the emergence of 
coffee-house culture and a sufficiently educated and concentrated middle 
class, an uncoerced interchange of ideas seemed possible. Habermas’ 
terms for this democratic potential include the identification of ‘ideal 
speech situations’, where communication was as transparent as possible 
and where status (then: freedom from court and commercial interest 
or advantage) ensured ‘communicative action’: authentically significant 
interaction within a social context that helps us understand each other 
without showy obfuscation or an assumed ‘technical discourse’ that is 
calculated to exclude. This is no utopian economy (a college garden, for 
example), but rather a valuable goal the complete attainment of which is 
improbable and, if achieved, unlikely to endure. To ensure this at present 
it would seem that an awareness of the retrograde consequences of an 
undue reliance on cultural capital should be faced; one should not read 
Kafka or go to the Royal National Theatre for the effect.
Habermas is not without his critics, but it should be recognized that 
his analysis stresses the ‘transformation’ of the public sphere and its 
eventual dismantling, and thus identifies the abiding causes of its value 
and also its short-lived existence:
The domain of ‘common concern’ which was the object of public critical 
attention remained a preserve in which church and state authorities had the 
monopoly of interpretation not just from the pulpit but in philosophy, literature, 
and art, even at a time when, for specific social categories, the development of 
capitalism already demanded a behaviour whose rational orientation required 
ever more information. To the degree, however, to which philosophical and 
literary works and works of art in general were produced for the market and 
distributed through it, these culture products became similar to that type of 
information: as commodities they became in principle generally accessible.11
So, we enter the public sphere with options, but also always at a potential 
cost: there are culture ‘products’ through and through (thereby perhaps 
to gain tenure or fame) and there are also gestures of engagement that 
www.ebook3000.com


The Public Sphere and Worldliness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
contest and perturb. Choice may be more limited than even in the recent 
past, but that is not to lead to a rather fatalistic surrender in the face of 
such odds.
There are three recent developments that are likely to separate some 
teachers from pupils at the present time: concerns with (a) relevance 
(are my studies going to gain me employment?), (b) the accessibility of 
so much information (but how to evaluate it, and use it purposefully?) 
and (c), linked with (b), the adequacy of any adopted methodology (its 
accountability or ‘impact’ within a public realm). Although this seems 
a rather generalized survey, it might strike a chord with many readers. 
These concerns are felt with an intensity that might not have been as 
apparent as recently as a decade ago, but they need to be faced and, if 
understood aright, then the traditions of studying English should be 
responsive to them.
Relevance
Who is to judge relevance? And what time-span or context might one 
discover so as to register the impact of literary and linguistic skills? The 
reliance on a transcendent array of values and judgements avoided such 
questions; indeed, the whole point of culture in Arnoldian vein was to 
achieve perspective and balance by not joining the fray.12 That would not 
be an easy option at the moment, for employability has become almost an 
imperative throughout the graduate market. At its most lumpen, this has 
come to mean a nod towards a conveyor-belt fate for even the most gifted 
of humanities graduates, but it need not have so literal an effect. English 
Subject Centre reports, with the help of the Higher Education Academy, 
have recently addressed this issue and reported upon it in ways that have 
indeed promoted an awareness that even the most traditional of courses 
can produce employable graduates. Embedded within what appear to be 
the most other-worldly disquisitions upon Milton or Aphra Behn, say, 
or semantics and multimodality, one can find expressive possibilities, 
plus a practice in, and awareness of, encoding meanings and a range of 
rhetorical tropes. The cool mastery of an ever-growing communicative 
potential is trusted by most employers.13 What is more, the most effec-
tive syllabus is one that could aid students’ confidence in task-solving: 
‘subject understanding, named skills, efficacy beliefs and metacognition’ 
as the Employability and Enterprise page has it.14 Standing back from 

 
Nigel Wood
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
this, we might qualify some of this corrective zeal. Yes, employability 
is important, and, to be sure, self-aware and energetic graduates are a 
credit to any institution, yet knowledge is sometimes to be prized not 
exactly only for its own sake but because it addresses questions not yet 
voiced or apparent, problems that public scrutiny is not yet aware of, 
issues well outside of accepted ‘subject understanding’ and skills yet to 
be fully named.
This uncategorizable quality is admirable, yet enters the realm of the 
subjective and meets with some distrust. For Bourdieu, such excellence 
is inevitably encoded: the nod of assent is also a guild recognition, an 
exchange of convention, no matter how much we may reach for forensic 
definitions.15 This is not the only test of relevance, however, for there are 
at least two main forms of reading: those attuned to searching for origi-
nal meaning and those attempting to assess any work’s significance, the 
one applying convergent lines of enquiry, the other lateral and/or meta-
textual approaches.16 What is at stake is – if relevance is the yardstick – 
the status of the former. Why should we stay for an answer to the basic 
question: what might the originating intention have been? This is only 
slightly modified by another consideration: any particular creative work 
is only more or less explained by contextual research. The temptation to 
pigeonhole any singular idiolectal expression together with others we can 
discern as operated upon by contiguous forces, is to confuse similarity 
with identity; it is eventually an ontological problem. All analogies break 
down at some point. The strictest search for relevance – and the cognate 
skills that accrue from this quest – is less involved in the intensive search 
for meaning, or assessing the ‘individual discourses, events, institutions, 
or texts’ that Poovey felt might provide inadequate knowledge.
Knowledge
Most universities advise their English doctoral students that a major 
measure of their studies will be that its result should encompass a ‘contri-
bution to knowledge’. However liberal our interpretation of this require-
ment might have been in the past, its basic empiricism was usually stark 
and unremitting: there had to be a recognition that one exhibited an ease 
and direction in managing primary sources, and there would be special 
attention paid to any effort at deduction, the judicious drawing up of 
conclusions from what the facts would appear to be telling us. The stress 
www.ebook3000.com


The Public Sphere and Worldliness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
could, though, fall on ‘appear’, for this was no recipe for innocent inten-
tionalism; letters or other evidence of intention might be eloquent in 
what they hid from view, and creative texts carried sub-texts that might 
indicate a dramatic impasse or the figurative excess of their own making. 
Students on Creative Writing modules often need now to explain their 
imaginative processes, and so supply a cause for their effects; a basic 
principle for advanced language study is to evaluate the data from any 
sampling or case study. This still hovers over most doctoral projects, 
but the expectations for completion are now significantly altered. That 
‘contribution’ is usually now often assessed as an achievement consistent 
not with any abstract goal, but rather with what might be reasonably 
expected from four or so years’ worth of full-time study; one now submits 
more with an eye on the clock than on any totally satisfactory sense of 
completion. The advice that one submits when the project is come to 
fruition has been modified according to progression and completion 
statistics – for which the institution is ultimately accountable.
At the same time, information is now more accessible than heretofore; 
the virtue of amassing information is not what it was, for gaining access 
to an archive or creating one’s own sub-archive is a relatively simple 
undertaking, given the wide currency of electronic databases – that is, if 
you can afford the license, an issue that could be addressed at length on 
another occasion. In the wake of this sudden explosion of available data, 
the aura of a fact (excavated sometimes by dint of an inspired hunch 
or one’s own alert eye for detail) is to some extent dissipated. The very 
dimensions of a volume, held in the hand, and weighed for its simple 
impact as an object, can now seem to be an experience near to a fetish. 
Machine reading, with its non-linear assembling of verbal collocations or 
(that advertising key selling point) the ability to have a read of one’s text 
in the bath on an e-reader without curling pages, is not quite commen-
surable with what reading meant as recently as a few years ago.
It does not do to cite these changes as evidence merely of great loss. The 
exhaustively detailed perusal of a Jane Austen novel or one individual 
speech-act might not be a persuasively significant sample of how mean-
ing was and is now achieved. It also does not do to simplify an opponent’s 
views to help display what seems to be an effortless victory. The process 
of reading never stays quite still, just as readers through history have 
approached the book in various quite distinct ways. From manuscript 
to codex to folio to railway fiction to paperback to online journal is an 
inexorable development; few but fundamentalist antiquarians would 

 
Nigel Wood
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
bar the computer from one’s lighting box in a modern theatre or film 
studio, and few would imagine that any modern Shakespeare or George 
Eliot would spurn technological advantage in the interests of a nostalgic 
primitivism.
The emergent critical practices (as of now) are pervasively linked to 
digital humanistic work in how best to retrieve information, mine data 
and publish one’s research to wider communities, amongst several related 
projects. It is not the fact that the medium stands free of the message, as 
if it were throwaway packaging, for digital opportunities offer a distinctly 
new and challenging literary culture. Take Franco Moretti and Matthew 
Jockers’ Stanford Literary Lab which, since its creation in 2010, has inau-
gurated several quantitative and digital enquiries.17 Instead of the lone 
researcher, the emphasis is more on collaborative enquiry. Instead of the 
definitive monograph, there is a preference for pamphlets and specula-
tive macroenquiries. Its working methods resemble that of laboratory 
culture and address projects that may be short-lived or, in a relay of 
associated ‘experiments’, become standard templates. At the outset, who 
could know?
Moretti’s own (individual) work, for example, Graphs, Maps, Trees: 
Abstract Models for a Literary History and Distant Reading, extols the 
virtues of a methodology of only recent origin: the drawing together 
of data about literature for extensive comparison and contrast. As 
he puts it, importing models from quantitative history, geography 
and evolutionary theory, the ‘reality of the text undergoes a process 
of deliberate reduction and abstraction’ wherein ‘distance’, far from 
appearing as an obstacle, constitutes ‘a specific form of knowledge: fewer 
elements, hence a sharper sense of their overall interconnection. 
Shapes, relations, structures. Forms. Models.’18 Indeed, the single text 
is replaced wherever possible by the model. Thus broad mutations in 
novelistic genres across many years or a gender breakdown of fiction 
authorship in as constricted or as expansive a time-span as needs be 
can be attempted, all represented and explored by means of statistical 
analysis aided by graphics. This allows ‘macroanalysis’, as Jockers terms 
it.19 So, human agency may appear just as an enabling fiction, and there 
is common ground with Foucault’s prizing of ‘discourse’ above subjec-
tivity: ‘discourse is not the majestically unfolding manifestation of a 
thinking, knowing, speaking subject, but, on the contrary, a totality, in 
which the dispersion of the subject, and his discontinuity with himself 
may be determined.’20
www.ebook3000.com


The Public Sphere and Worldliness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
Interesting and potentially radical work is being undertaken under 
the banner of macroanalysis, but nevertheless we should not move to 
espouse it too swiftly. At a generalized level, an individual human inten-
tion can be taken as a series component, and the unconscious impera-
tives that prompt any imaginative act should be our concern. The ‘macro’ 
view helps with this, but not definitively. That an intention might be 
composed of hidden motives and that it operates under the constraints 
of a productive and temporal process is not to efface an individuality of 
origin; if this were to be our aim, then we could predict a text’s features 
merely from its context. In any case, there is an enduring strain of highly 
technical work, concentrated perhaps in the apparatus of any editorial 
task, where research is not narrativized: the footnote, the bibliographical 
array and the list of variants, where ‘microanalysis’ remains immensely 
valuable.
The public sphere
Academic research as signalled in the institutional missions of most 
British universities is now best when it connects with the public. The term 
most in use is ‘engagement’. If one consults the Research Councils UK 
(RCUK) website as of summer 2014, there is advice on how to enhance 
the visibility of one’s work, including a helpful definition of ‘impact’ – 
an ingredient in any submission for Research Assessment and any aid 
from the Research Councils. Impact is derived from a recognition of not 
just academic value but also how one’s thoughts influence – and in turn 
reflect – our economy and society:
Economic and societal impacts embrace all the extremely diverse ways in 
which research-related knowledge and skills benefit individuals, organiza-
tions and nations by
 fostering global economic performance and specifically the economic 
competitiveness of the United Kingdom,
 increasing the effectiveness of public services and policy,
 enhancing quality of life, health and creative output.21
The strands of such an approach to ‘Academic Impacts’ include the 
training of ‘highly-skilled researchers’ and the improvement of teach-
ing and learning as well as contributions to ‘innovative methodologies’ 
and techniques, involving ‘cross-disciplinary approaches’, which, it is 

 
Nigel Wood
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
hoped, might lead to ‘worldwide academic advancement’. Two other 
facets might not be so obvious: ‘enhancing the knowledge economy’ and 
‘contributing to the health of academic disciplines’. The same site links 
to pages on ‘Listening to the Public’ and the National Co-ordinating 
Centre for Public Engagement’s The Engaged University: A Manifesto for 
Public Engagement. The pervasive assumptions in these statements of 
focus and direction are twofold: first, that research should respond to 
‘public aspirations’ that are identified through the ‘lifecycle of research’ 
and then to use this information to ‘help inform Councils’ policies and 
research strategies’.22 Second, that such enrichment ‘helps the university 
to demonstrate accountability in a climate of increasing scrutiny’ to the 
point where an institution’s ‘brand and identity’ is confirmed by ‘public 
appreciation’.23 This extends to matters of intellectual property, where 
the researcher’s institution would usually retain rights to the knowledge 
that emerges from the enabling council funding, but not always, for ‘in 
individual cases’, the research councils could reserve the right to retain 
‘ownership ... for the national benefit’.24
English Studies has traditionally stood clear of such political aims, 
stressing individual scholarly labour as the norm, for it is usual for 
publication to be offered to single authors, and – without the need for 
a laboratory culture – to find originality to emerge from a lone author’s 
reading or enquiry. It is, however, a question often of how to define 
such ‘originality’, for no monograph is an island, entire of itself, or there 
would be no bibliography or learned citations to one’s foundational 
reading. The network is often evident through online publication 
databases or signs of others’ studies and curatorial skill in archiving, 
increasingly brought to us not from the stacks but assembled from 
digital collections: let us not be too squeamish about academic science 
paradigms. The Manifesto for Public Engagement is clear about the need 
to register one’s effect on civil society, to enable a flow of knowledge and 
learning between universities and society at large so as to contribute 
to ‘social justice and corporate responsibility’ where trust and ‘mutual 
understanding’ are established.25 This is a laudable venture, but it is 
perhaps not entirely reassuring to find a well-hidden statement from 
RCUK in its pages on ‘Impact Policies’ about a recognition that ‘not all 
research will have direct or immediate practical application’ and that 
‘the primary criterion for RCUK funding [would] be excellent research’, 
as the obvious needs of accountability and ‘branding’ are by contrast far 
more short term and insistently obvious.26
www.ebook3000.com


The Public Sphere and Worldliness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
Although the use of ‘public’ in these pronouncements does indeed 
recall earlier manifestations of civic humanism (and the need for trans-
parency to aid the common good), it is not beside the point to wonder 
whether less welcome concerns are not camouflaged under such rheto-
ric.27 The difference between knowing oneself and knowing-oneself-in-
the-world is crucial. There is extensive literature about the contemporary 
public interest in the social sciences, and Richard Mulgan’s warning is 
often recognized:
The need to hold the government to account is itself critical to all effective 
attempts to control public power. Without mechanisms for demanding expla-
nation, applying judgement and imposing sanctions, institutions that are 
designed to control will fail to achieve their purpose. So central is account-
ability as a means of achieving control that it can easily be taken to stand for 
control itself.28
Mulgan’s understanding of the public good is less favourably disposed 
than the participatory civic involvement implied by much Renaissance 
thought.
The need to adapt not just to recent developments within the subject 
area but also outside it in the institutional framework of university 
English is now with us, yet there are models of humanistic study that 
need not provide us with an unwelcome epistemological break. There 
are three main questions that the need to demonstrate accountability 
highlights for English students and tutors: (a) why we tackle the work 
we do, (b) how it might be directed to a wider audience and (c) what is 
our connection to any sense of public good? It is also a sobering thought 
that literary evaluation and imaginative creativity, including the rapid 
evolution of linguistic forms, are not exclusively captured, promoted or, 
indeed, evaluated in the seminar room; the networks of social media, 
book club, journalistic debate and audience reaction far exceed the reach 
of normative educational activity in the university.
Some provisional reflections and recommendations
There has always been an ulterior motive for providing the space 
(a) 
and opportunity to ‘do’ English. The state’s stake in supporting any 
linguistic or literary education has been sometimes implicit (a desire 
for cultural solidarity or the training of orators, for example), or 

 
Nigel Wood
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
overt, as is increasingly the case now. This is not to claim, however, 
that academic opinion is to be bought; and we must not expect that 
the needs of a liberal forum for discussion might be safeguarded 
by the requirement that we contribute to the ‘knowledge economy’. 
The invitation to gather information is apt to distract us from its 
evaluation, and ‘common concern’ is never an innocent signified.29 
We should withstand the tendency to commodify our thoughts and 
knowledge as much as possible by clearly identifying whose interests 
are served by our research and its set goals.
All research is to some degree conditioned by an anticipated 
(b) 
audience; even if we engage with the most generous publishing 
house or funding body, there is a return expected. The present 
choices presented to humanities researchers invite interdisciplinary 
enquiries and the archiving of information; short-term ‘projects’ 
are favoured methods of describing and structuring our ideas. Our 
audience is thus not principally cohorts of our students, but the 
wider world of public interest; and yet, there are clearly going to 
be topics that are more relevant, given these criteria, than others 
(or there would be no advertised calls for funding or highlighted 
themes from the Councils). Habermas noted a rift between the 
coffee-house culture of apparently free discourse and the gathering 
challenge of capital and commodification; listening to a public is 
not the same as presenting to that ‘public’ material that might alter 
the advice any focus group would be ready to give.
Our responsibility to our funders might not be to give them what they 
would like, initially, to hear, or attention to any ‘blue-skies’ thinking at 
all would be off the agenda. There is, on the other hand, a problem with 
hermetic communities, where like speaks to like, in that the challenge of 
the ‘real’ (in scare-quotes or not) is rarely faced or recognized. English 
Studies has now to reach out to a wider audience than that composed 
of its traditional readers and audiences. The effect of this is potentially 
profound and is already registered at the most immediate levels, such as 
syllabi, where vocationality, including an inculcation of methodologies 
involving electronic and oral communication, and practice in communal 
problem-solving have appeared in rapid succession this century. There is 
more that the subject can contribute.
Any apology for English has to combat a prominent item of false 
(c) 
support: that it is merely a training in how to deliver beautifully 
www.ebook3000.com


The Public Sphere and Worldliness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
turned sentences, correct spelling or varieties of imaginative 
expression. To be sure, these are inevitable ingredients derived 
from studying the range of texts recommended in the subject’s 
Benchmark Statement. The fear is that this style of linguistic 
choice might just be a reservoir of learned Senior Common Room 
witticisms, part of that apprenticeship in knowing how to harness 
cultural capital. Plato, in his Socratic dialogue Gorgias, wished to 
re-define his own rhetorical traditions. He drew a clear distinction 
between, on the one hand, a style of persuasion, assembled from 
a compendious bag of tricks that seemed valid because of a 
beautifully turned style and emotionally captivating words, and, on 
the other hand, a more philosophically responsible study that took 
seriously rhetoric’s capacity to enshrine a deeper truth about moral 
choice and social responsibility: we are apt to take many issues 
at face value because we are likely to be impressed by immediate 
impact rather than any calm process of assessment.30
Plato’s distrust of beauty and the soothing arts of praise and persuasion 
have their more contemporary analogues, and we might consider two 
further projects for study that might now occupy a more publicly salutary 
role than merely providing passports for future employment. The first is 
that any analytic grasp of history or politics must entail an examination of 
myth-making or symbolic creation. This is the subject of much contem-
porary social psychology and is often merely glanced at in traditional 
English Studies. As George Lakoff and Mark Johnson have it, this forum 
for debate and instruction is a vital component of Cognitive Linguistics, 
where conceptual metaphors are pervasive throughout everyday life and 
form an ineradicable platform for how we actually live: ‘we live our lives 
on the basis of inferences we derive from metaphor.’31 The task to look 
at the present reception of contemporary texts (both imaginative and 
non-literary) and to smoke out current myths and symbols in order to 
investigate afresh how they motivate social thought would derive great 
strength from a cold look at our own reading patterns.
The second project recognizes that criticism is meant to be awkward. 
As Edward Said put it,
Were I to use one word consistently along with criticism (not as a modification 
but as an emphatic) it would be oppositional. If criticism is reducible neither to 
a doctrine nor to a political position on a particular question, and if it is to be 
in the world and self-aware simultaneously, then its identity is its difference 

 
Nigel Wood
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
from other cultural activities and from systems of thought or of method. In 
its suspicion of totalizing concepts, in its discontent with reified objects, in its 
impatience with guilds, special interests, imperialised fiefdoms, and orthodox 
habits of mind, criticism is most itself and, if the paradox can be tolerated, 
most unlike itself at the moment it starts turning into organised dogma. 
‘Ironic’ is not a bad word to use along with ‘oppositional’. ... Its social goals are 
noncoercive knowledge produced in the interests of human freedom.32
Yet we now factor into our sense of English the often-revelatory details 
of student opinion in an enhanced public way. The National Student 
Survey is now a prime contributor to league tables and there are several 
other measures that are designed to impress future applicants (and 
their parents) at open days. This is not to say that academics did not do 
this before, but that now the penalties for not doing so are much more 
drastic. Every student is now, however unwillingly, a consumer, and, 
consequently, has rights enshrined in charters.33 So, if Said’s desire for a 
truly oppositional agenda is to be taken seriously, then it is possible that 
the line of least resistance and most popular infotainment will be in a 
collision course with it. This is, however, not merely an entertainment 
option, for we should be detained by Said’s desire to escape the ritualistic 
and tested as we read and discuss its significance. To oppose freely and 
openly is a bold and difficult step, and we need training in it. Our own 
recognition of democracy should be of a constant contest against many 
non-democratic elements that any elected executive has to tolerate and 
assuage. Imagination often deals in dissonance and irony and contem-
plates risk in a myriad of forms; a living culture is nourished by dissent, 
and most writers now in the safety of the canon actually commenced 
their imagining in daring isolation and a profound dissatisfaction with 
their inheritance.34 From this point of view, English is always ‘in the world’ 
(even when it seems to cast off from its moorings in the figurative and 
utopian), and yet it is also not quite ‘in’ the present public sphere, with its 
invitation to acquiesce and affiliate to our short-term advantage. The real 
task is to acknowledge that our choice of reading and writing is inevitably 
related to pressing worldly concerns and gains strength because it is so.
Notes
Jonathan Swift, 
 
A Tale of a Tub and Other Works, Angus Ross and David 
Woolley (eds), Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1986, p.17.
www.ebook3000.com


The Public Sphere and Worldliness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
 Chris Baldick, 
 
The Social Mission of English Criticism: 1848–1932, Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 1983, pp.1–17.
Q. D. Leavis, 
 
Fiction and the Reading Public, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1979, 
p.213.
A contribution to a module created by Melissa Bailar for Rice University’s 
 
Digital Scholarship series, ‘Emerging Disciplines: Shaping New Fields of 
Scholarly Inquiry in and beyond the Humanities’, OpenStax-CNX, 13 May 
2010, <http://cnx.org/content/col11201/1.1/>. See also Mark Osteen and 
Martha Woodmansee, ‘Taking Account of the New Economic Criticism: 
An Historical Introduction’, in Osteen and Woodmansee (eds), The New 
Economic Criticism: Studies at the Intersection of Literature and Economics, 
London, Routledge, 1999, pp.3–50.
Quality Assurance Agency (QAA), 
 
English Benchmark Statement, 3.2, 2007, 
p. 4. Close reading figures as the first of the ‘Subject-Specific Skills’: ‘critical 
skills in the close reading, description, analysis, or production of texts or 
discourses’; it is, however, just one of ten such skills.
Bailar, ‘
 
Emerging Disciplines’.
Cultural capital is a notion used to help explain the at times drastic 
 
differences in educational achievement quite apart from actual, economic, 
investment, where there is a social rate of return (embedded in indicators 
such as accent, dress or even expression of intellect) derived from a 
particular family’s level of willing sacrifice and mission. The term was first 
used in an article by Pierre Bourdieu and Jean-Claude Passeron, ‘Cultural 
Reproduction and Social Reproduction’ in R. K. Brown (ed.), Knowledge, 
Education, and Cultural Change: Papers in the Sociology of Education, London, 
Tavistock, 1973, pp.71–112. See also Pierre Bourdieu, ‘The Forms of Capital’, in 
John G. Richardson (ed.), Handbook of Theory and Research for the Sociology of 
Education, New York, Greenwood, 1986, pp.241–58.
John Hodgson, 
 
The Experience of Studying English in UK Higher Education, 
Report Series no. 20, The Higher Education Academy, English Subject 
Centre, February 2010.
Michel Foucault, ‘What Is an Author?’ in Paul Rabinow (ed.), 
 
The Foucault 
Reader, New York, Pantheon Books, 1984, pp.101–20.
Jürgen Habermas, 
 
The Theory of Communicative Action, trans. Thomas 
McCarthy, 2 vols, Cambridge, Polity Press, 1984, 1987, 1.273–319, and 2.153–97, 
and The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere, trans. T. Burger and F. 
Lawrence, Cambridge, MA, Polity Press, 1989, pp.89–140.
Habermas, 
 
Structural Transformation, p.36.
This impulse, to ‘snatch up a vehement opinion in ignorance and passion’ 
 
or to wish to ‘crush an adversary by sheer violence’ is to succumb to the 
tactics of the populace. Matthew Arnold, Culture and Anarchy, Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press, 1960, p.107.

 
Nigel Wood
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
See the reports available online: Deborah Cartmell, 
 
English in the Workplace, 
English Subject Centre, April 2003; Rebecca Allan, A Wider Perspective 
and More Options: Investigating the Longer Term Employability of Humanities 
Graduates, Southampton, Subject Centre for Languages, Linguistics and Area 
Studies, March 2006, and Jeanette Sakel and Jeanine Treffers-Daller, Wider 
Perspectives and More Options for English Language and Linguistics Students, 
Bristol, University of the West of England, August 2010.
<
 
http://www.english.heacademy.ac.uk/explore/resources/careers/bother.php>.
 ‘In any given social formation, the PW [pedagogic work] through which 
 
the dominant PA [pedagogic action] is carried on always has a function 
of keeping order, i.e. of reproducing the structure of the power relations 
between the groups or classes, inasmuch as, by inculcation or exclusion, it 
tends to impose recognition of the legitimacy of the dominant culture on the 
members of the dominated groups or classes, and to make them internalize, 
to a variable extent, disciplines and censorships which best serve the material 
and symbolic interests of the dominant groups or classes when they take the 
form of self-discipline and self-censorship.’ Pierre Bourdieu and Jean-Claude 
Passeron, Reproduction: In Education, Society and Culture, trans. Richard Nice, 
London and Beverley Hills, Sage, 1977, pp.40–41. See also Bourdieu, The Field 
of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature, Randal Johnson (ed. and 
trans.), Cambridge, Polity Press, 1993, pp.76–77.
The distinction adopted here is that of E. D. Hirsch, Jr., 
 
Validity in 
Interpretation, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1967.
Some of the pamphlets free to download from their site are ‘Quantitative 
 
Formalism: An Experiment’, 2011, wherein four investigators at Stanford, 
and one at the University of Wisconsin try to establish whether computer-
generated algorithms could ‘recognize’ literary genres; ‘Network Theory, Plot 
Analysis’, 2011, on whether plot elements and types can be quantified; ‘Style at 
the Scale of the Sentence’, 2013, asking to what do we refer when we speak of 
‘style’? And ‘ “Operationalizing’ ”: or, the function of measurement in modern 
literary theory’, 2013, which asks, are there principles at the ‘operational’ 
level that carry over into a range of similar projects, or are they arrived at 
pragmatically and do they belong only to the specific work in hand?
Franco Moretti, 
 
Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History, 
London and New York, Verso, 2005, p.1.
Matthew L. Jockers,
 
 Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History, 
Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2013. See also Susan Schreibman, 
Ray Siemens and John Unsworth (eds), A Companion to Digital Humanities, 
Oxford and New York, Blackwell, 2004, and the special issue of differences 
containing such staunch defences of digital knowledge as Matthew 
Kirschenbaum, ‘What Is “Digital Humanities” and Why Are They Saying 
Such Terrible Things About It?’, differences, 25.1, 2014, pp.46–63, and Fiona 
www.ebook3000.com


The Public Sphere and Worldliness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
M. Barrett, ‘The Brave Side of Digital Humanities’, differences, 25:1, 2014, 
pp.64–78.
Michel Foucault, 
 
The Archaeology of Knowledge, trans. A. M. Sheridan-Smith, 
New York, Pantheon, 1972, p.55.
Research Councils UK, ‘What Do Research Councils Mean by “impact”?’
 
 
<http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/ke/impacts/meanbyimpact/>.
RCUK 
 
Public Engagement with Research Strategy, January 2013, <http://www.
rcuk.ac.uk>, p.3.
National Co-ordinating Centre for Public Engagement, 
 
The Engaged 
University: A Manifesto for Public Engagement, 2010, n.pag.
Research Councils UK, ‘Impact Policies’, <http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/ke/
 
policies/>.
National Co-ordinating Centre for Public Engagement, 
 
The Engaged 
University, n.pag.
Research Councils UK, ‘Impact Policies’, <http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/ke/policies/>.
 
See Cary J. Nederman, ‘Rhetoric, Reason and Republic: Republicanisms – 
 
Ancient, Medieval and Modern’, in James Hankins (ed.), Renaissance Civic 
Humanism: Reappraisals and Reflections, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, 2000, pp.247–69; Steven Pincus, ‘The State and Civil Society in Early 
Modern England: Capitalism, Causation and Habermas’s Bourgeois Public 
Sphere’, in Peter Lake and Steven Pincus (eds), The Politics of the Public Sphere 
in Early Modern England, Manchester, Manchester University Press, 2007, 
pp.213–31; C. G. Nauert, Humanism and the Culture of Renaissance Europe, 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2006, pp.60–101.
Richard Mulgan, ‘Accountability’: An Ever-expanding Concept?’, 
 
Public 
Administration, 78, 2000, pp.555–73, p.566. See also Barry Bozeman, Public 
Values and Public Interest: Counterbalancing Economic Individualism, 
Washington, D.C., Georgetown University Press, 2007, pp.124–26 (on 
justifying public values and collective action) and pp.181–82 (on ‘Public Service 
Motivation’) and Denis McQuail, Media Performance: Mass Communication 
and the Public Interest, London and New Delhi, Sage, 1992, pp.20–34 and Z. 
Papacharissi, ‘The Virtual Sphere: The Internet as a Public Sphere’, New Media 
and Society, 4, 2002, pp.9–27.
See Viktor Mayer-Schönberger, 
 
Delete: The Virtue of Forgetting in the Digital Age, 
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2011, pp.169–95.
Plato
 
, Malcolm Schofield (ed.), Plato: Gorgias, Menexenus, Protagoras, trans. 
T. Griffith, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought, Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press, 2009, pp.462b–472c; pp.480c–492c, where 
the most effective use of discourse is self-examination, not self-defence or 
egotistical display. See also James Boyd White, ‘The Ethics of Argument: Plato’s 
Gorgias and the Modern Lawyer’, The University of Chicago Law Review, 50.2, 
1983, pp.849–95.

 
Nigel Wood
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0010
Mark Johnson and George Lakoff, 
 
Metaphors We Live By, Chicago, University 
of Chicago Press, 1980; from the Afterword, 2003, p.273. See also James Lawley 
and Penny Tompkins, Metaphors in Mind: Transformation Through Symbolic 
Modelling, London, The Developing Company Press, 2000, pp.21–48, 146–72; 
Dan McAdams, The Stories We Live By: Personal Myths and the Making of 
the Self, New York and London, The Guilford Press, 1993, pp.91–132 and Paul 
Ricoeur, The Rule of Metaphor: The Creation of Meaning in Language, trans. R. 
Czerny with K. McLaughlin and J. Costello SJ, Toronto, University of Toronto 
Press, 1977, pp.74–156.
Edward Said, 
 
The World, the Text, and the Critic, London, Faber, 1984, p.29. 
See also his Humanism and Democratic Criticism, Basingstoke, Palgrave, 2004, 
pp.80–82.
Department of Business, Innovation and Skills, ‘Student charters to help 
 
students get the most out of higher education,’ 17 February 2011 (www.gov.
uk); Student Charter Group (January 2011) Student Charter Group Final Report 
(www.gov.uk : UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills).
See Thomas Docherty, 
 
For the University: Democracy and the Future of the 
Institution, London and New York, Bloomsbury Academic, 2011, pp.69–95, 
and Aesthetic Democracy, Stanford, Stanford University Press, 2006, pp.61–88.
www.ebook3000.com

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.

5
The Dilemma of Cognitive 
Literary Studies
Sowon S. Park
Abstract: Sowon Park offers a concise introduction to 
the field of cognitive literary criticism, how it emerged, 
how it is defined and how it interrelates with existing 
criticism. Placing the development of cognitive literary 
criticism in a historical context, Park identifies a key 
issue that runs through interdisciplinary research across 
the divide between the ‘two cultures’ and across time. 
On the one hand, attempts to integrate scientific and 
literary knowledge are fraught with scientific reductions 
of the literary; on the other, attempts to preserve literary 
knowledge as a different-but-equal field of inquiry risks the 
complete exclusion from the hegemonic scientific discourse 
and a further marginalization. What constructive 
possibilities there are in the future in the face of such a 
dilemma are presented and reviewed.
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.

 
Sowon S. Park
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
Cognitive literary criticism emerged as a field of enquiry in the late 
1990s. Traditionally, the term ‘cognitive’ referred to ideas of thinking and 
inference but in this new field, it frequently refers to mental phenomena 
other than thinking, such as feeling, perception, unconscious memory 
and kinesis. The interest in cognitive processes in literary studies reflects 
a major shift in thinking in the late twentieth century called the ‘cogni-
tive turn’. The mechanism and function of mind and brain are now 
considered to illuminate discourses of every kind.
Cognitivism finds its roots in what has been called the ‘cognitive revo-
lution’ in psychology in the 1950s. Aided by developments in computer 
science, linguistics and artificial intelligence, psychological accounts of 
human mental processes merged with those in cybernetics and in other 
fields to produce a new synthesis in psychological studies, cognitive 
science. At about the same time, another new discipline, neuroscience, 
emerged out of psychology and biology. The ‘biological revolution’ of 
the 1950s, made possible by the discovery of the molecular structure of 
DNA in 1953, brought to the study of mental processes an understanding 
of mechanism which had hitherto remained mysterious. And that part 
of neuroscience concerned with cognition, cognitive neuroscience, has 
now become the principal discipline of cognitivism, providing for a joint 
investigation of mental processes. The findings from this new interdisci-
plinary field inform the nascent field of cognitive literary criticism.
Cognitive literary criticism has already produced a wide-ranging 
body of work. The vitality of this subfield was indicated by the Cognitive 
Humanities Network annual conference at Durham University in 
2014, where the topics of more than 100 papers ranged from cognitive 
processing of language to ‘conceptual blending’, to the relations between 
kinesis and writing, to the neuroscience of memory and its relevance 
for literature. Currently, cognitive poetics, cognitive stylistics, cognitive 
aesthetics, cognitive narratology, ‘mindreading’ and fiction, ‘evo’ (evolu-
tionary) literary studies and ‘neuro’ (neuroscientific) literary studies are 
recognized as formal fields of enquiry and under these headings investi-
gations are flourishing.
Nevertheless these are early days and, although the range is diverse, 
the scale and the explanatory scope of the research remain exploratory. 
And although there is no doubt that the developments in cognitive 
neuroscience in the last 50 years are relevant to how we consider art 
and literature, it is often unclear what a scientific finding can or cannot 
contribute to literature or what conclusions we can or cannot draw from 
www.ebook3000.com


The Dilemma of Cognitive Literary Studies
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
it. Though cognitive literary criticism purportedly joins the study of 
literature with scientific investigations, the extent to which science and 
literature can be meaningfully connected is a question about which there 
is no overall consensus. At this stage, there are many issues and problems 
that arise when attempting to generate an interpretive framework that 
can build on knowledge across the divide between literature and science, 
and these problems remain difficult to resolve. In the following section, I 
will discuss the issue of interdisciplinary compatibility and place cogni-
tive literary criticism in a historical context to make salient the problems 
that have arisen in recent years.
II
The idea that the sciences and the humanities are two distinct forms 
of intellectual enquiry, yielding two different kinds of knowledge, has 
a long history in Western thought. The difference between the two has 
been identified at various times as that between the empirical and the 
non-empirical; the quantifiable and the non-quantifiable; fact and value. 
In Britain, this divide can be traced back to the Arnold/Huxley debate 
in the nineteenth century, if not to the so-called dissociation of sensi-
bility in the seventeenth.1 If one were to take a longer view, as Patricia 
Waugh has done, the separation could be seen to be as old as Western 
civilization itself, going back to Aristotle’s ‘exact’ and ‘inexact’ kinds of 
knowledge.2 But the most familiar formulation of the divide comes from 
the classical physicist and novelist, C. P. Snow (1905–80), who in his 1959 
Rede lecture, ‘The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution’, coined 
the phrase that is now part of everyday language.
Snow’s thesis in ‘The Two Cultures’ was that there ought to be just one 
culture, and that the ‘gulf of mutual incomprehension’ between the two 
should be bridged. Rhetorically, his argument conferred parity on the 
two cultures, as different-but-equal realms of knowledge. But in reality, 
Snow placed them in a hierarchy. Scientists, he argued, ‘have their own 
culture ... which contains a great deal of argument, usually much more 
rigorous and almost always at a much higher conceptual level than a 
literary person’s argument.’3 This statement was not merely an impartial 
description of the methods of ‘hard’ science. For Snow, sciences with 
their methodological rigour and empirical and conceptual precision set 
the standard to which the non-scientific, ‘soft’ disciplines should aspire. 

 
Sowon S. Park
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
The following section reveals his impatience about the state of literary 
studies:
A good many times I have been present at gatherings of people who, by the 
standards of the traditional culture, are thought highly educated and who have 
with considerable gusto been expressing their incredulity at the illiteracy of 
scientists. Once or twice I have been provoked and have asked the company 
how many of them could describe the Second Law of Thermodynamics. The 
response was cold: it was also negative. Yet I was asking something which is 
about the scientific equivalent of: Have you read a work of Shakespeare’s? I now 
believe that if I had asked an even simpler question – such as, What do you 
mean by mass, or acceleration, which is the scientific equivalent of saying, 
Can you read? – not more than one in ten of the highly educated would have 
felt that I was speaking the same language. So the great edifice of modern 
physics goes up, and the majority of the cleverest people in the western world 
have about as much insight into it as their neolithic ancestors would have 
had.4
As this rebuke makes clear, Snow’s surface argument may have been 
about the gulf of mutual incomprehension, but his point was not 
so much that there should be a consilience of knowledge as that the 
humanists should learn from the scientists. Thus, Snow presents the two 
cultures not so much as different-but-equal realms of knowledge but as 
disciplines ranked by intellectual worth.
The hierarchization of disciplines that Snow advocated reflected 
the reigning logical positivist orthodoxy of the day. In this intellectual 
climate, the logically rigorous and conceptually exact scientific method 
presented the accepted standard for all intellectual investigation. And 
within this frame of empiricism, theoretical physics prevailed as the 
most authoritative discipline, setting the example for all intellectual 
enquiry, including, as Snow asserted, enquiry in the humanities. During 
the middle of the last century, many disciplines, including traditionally 
non-scientific subjects, aspired to such positivist models of knowledge: in 
Psychology, behaviourism took centre stage focusing exclusively on what 
was directly observable; Linguistics remodeled itself on natural science; 
and in English, there was the rise of New Criticism, which scrupulously 
excluded non-verifiable questions such as intention, affect and meaning 
from interpretation.5
Much has changed and much has not changed since Snow’s lecture 
50-odd years ago. What has not changed is the ascendency of science. 
The scientization of culture has accelerated to the point that, today, 
www.ebook3000.com


The Dilemma of Cognitive Literary Studies
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
‘Have you read a work of Shakespeare’s?’ would be met with indiffer-
ence among a large number of scientists, while most humanists have 
overcome our neolithic ignorance thanks to the growth and the high 
standard of the popular science publishing market. We now live in a 
global science- and technology-based environment where the idea 
that literary intellectuals can be put on a par with scientists has been 
dispelled. The asymmetry between the two cultures has intensified: 
institutional conditions are not comparable and there is a different 
degree of legitimation in the public eye.
What has changed, however, is the kind of scientific ascendancy that 
has occurred in the last 50 years. The revolution that was actually taking 
place in science when Snow presented his argument was not in classi-
cal physics but, as outlined earlier, in the new interdisciplinary area of 
neuroscience, and cognitive neuroscience in particular. From the begin-
ning, cognitive studies was not as narrow in methodology as classical 
physics, and the emergence of cognitive neuroscience coincided with a 
weakening of positivism as the standard of intellectual enquiry. Focusing 
exclusively on the directly observable has been found too restrictive, for 
example in psychology, where behaviourism has been relegated to the 
margins. And though verifiability and experimental replicability remain 
the fundamental methods by which science operates, areas of enquiry 
have become broader than those considered legitimate in the positivist 
tradition.
This development is due in some part to the fact that the scientific 
study of mind and brain must take up topics that previously were consid-
ered to be within the realm of the humanities: consciousness, experience 
and affect. That is to say, though it is not often acknowledged in scientific 
circles, science has moved in the general direction of what used to be the 
province of literature. As David Lodge claimed in his landmark study 
Consciousness and the Novel, ‘literature is a record of human conscious-
ness, the richest and the most comprehensive we have.’6 Likewise ‘affect’, 
currently an active area of neuroscientific research, was previously 
considered a suitable topic only for art and literature and was tradition-
ally bracketed off from scientific enquiry. But by a curious twist, the 
two cultures, 50-odd years on, find a common focus in consciousness, 
in particular human emotions and memory, making the two cultures 
appear less divided and more directed towards common ground. In 
this sense, much has changed since Snow’s argument and much for the 
better.

 
Sowon S. Park
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
And it looks set to continue. One of the striking things about the 
period in which we live is the degree to which neuroscientific and 
evolutionary models are offered to explain every aspect of human life. 
Not only the sciences but law, anthropology, culture, music, literature 
and art are reconsidered in the light of biological mechanism. Currently 
cognitive neuroscience is, with stem cells and genomics, one of the 
best-funded and fastest-growing areas of research. Furthermore, it is 
a rapidly expanding industry: applications of consciousness studies 
have created offshoots like psychoneuropharmacology, neuromarketing 
and neurosecurity, whose growth is prompting a range of ethical and 
political questions, and the formation of new areas like neuroethics and 
neuropolitics. Neurophilosophy, neuropsychoanalysis and neuroph-
enomenology have invigorated traditional investigations by bringing 
in new knowledge about the anatomy and function of the brain. In all, 
cognitivism looks poised to influence every area of study in the first half 
of this century.
In the context of these developments, what does cognitivism mean 
for English studies in particular? What are some of the issues specific 
to interdisciplinary literary criticism? What are the opportunities? And 
how do cognitive approaches interrelate with existing literary criticism? 
The next section will reflect on the relevance and place of cognitive 
theories to English studies and discuss the main dilemma that cognitive 
literary criticism faces.
III
The proper study of English extends over many disciplinary boundaries. 
Philosophy, sociology, linguistics, anthropology, aesthetics and history 
(including history of science) have all been foundational to literature 
research. Combined with the inherently interdisciplinary field of cogni-
tive neuroscience, cognitive literary criticism cannot but be exceptionally 
broad. There is no single cognitive method of literary criticism or even 
a unified school. But disparate though they are, the various subfields 
within cognitive literary criticism have in common the attempt to bring 
to bear upon the study of literature the wide range of discoveries in 
cognitive science and an optimistic belief in this process.
What these subfields also have in common, however, is not related 
to science itself but is germane to the field of English. And that is a 
www.ebook3000.com


The Dilemma of Cognitive Literary Studies
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
reaction against structuralist and poststructuralist thought of the 
twentieth century, in particular that which does not credit nature with 
any validity in interpretation of literature and of culture. This reactive 
spirit of cognitive literary criticism was captured in one of the earliest 
extended explorations of the field, the 2002 special issue of Poetics Today, 
entitled Literature and the Cognitive Revolution. In their introduction, 
Alan Richardson and Francis F. Steen wrote:
A spreading dissatisfaction with the more bleakly relativistic and anti-
humanist strands of poststructuralism has given a new urgency to the 
groundbreaking efforts of these and other literary critics to forge a ‘new inter-
disciplinarity’. ... Contemporary theories of literature and culture, in our view, 
have made remarkable progress in demystifying traditional humanist and 
religious concepts of supposedly timeless categories, such as self, identity, and 
morality, to posit instead historically contingent and culturally constructed 
identities. Such theories have also successfully demonstrated that the category 
of the natural has frequently been invoked to play a rhetorical role in provid-
ing a conceptual backing for particular forms of domination and oppression. 
What the discipline has been significantly less successful in addressing, on 
the other hand, is why and how this rhetoric works. The relative failure on 
these counts is linked to the intense reluctance of literary and cultural studies 
to engage with the natural as a category that has its own history ... [W]e wish 
to address the challenge of reconceptualizing the cultural significance of the 
natural in contemporary terms. Nature can no longer be seen as essentialist, 
normative, and timeless.7
The aim, stated in no uncertain terms, reflects a more widespread 
reaction against the antifoundationalism of poststructuralist theory in 
cognitive literary criticism. Will cognitive approaches ‘revolutionize 
the study of literature by overthrowing the rule of poststructuralism’?8 
As yet, to what degree cognitive literary criticism will overturn, correct 
or complement poststructuralist thinking remains to be seen. The full 
extent of what is possible on such a large scale cannot be estimated at 
this stage, when research is provisional and fragmented.
But if cognitive literary criticism is not providing answers to questions 
left unresolved by existing literary concepts and methods, what then is 
the rationale for importing new scientific ones? Are transfers of cognitive 
knowledge a mere passing trend, a passive adoption of terms from the 
dominant intellectual discourse of our day that is biology? Is cognitive 
literary criticism the implementation of Snow’s recommendation that 
the humanists should learn from the scientists?

 
Sowon S. Park
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
At the most basic level, the rationale for consilience between literary 
studies and cognitive neuroscience can be made on the grounds that 
empirical discoveries have significance for all intellectual enquiry, includ-
ing the study of literature. Snow’s reprimand about humanists’ ‘neolithic’ 
ignorance has validity insofar as accurate understanding of our natural 
world is a precondition for any research. Literary studies is not so excep-
tional that it can be positioned completely outside the rules of the natural 
world. And just as one would not develop an argument based on the 
premise that the Earth is flat, one would not, in the twenty-first century, 
launch an investigation based upon phrenology or unreconstructed 
ideas about hysteria. So at a fundamental level, cognitive literary criti-
cism provides a bridge between literary enquiry and scientific research 
by facilitating the integration of a vast amount of relevant information 
coming from many different areas of scientific research.
Findings in cognitive neuroscience provide not only new information 
but open up the possibility of conceiving new questions. Just as neuro-
science, as a field, progressed as a result of technical advances such as 
brain imaging and cell labeling techniques and continuing insights from 
human lesion studies and comparative animal neurology, so knowledge 
of biological mechanism permits new directions of enquiry about 
literary processes. For example, the neurobiology of reading, writing, 
remembering and forgetting are topics of research that were simply 
beyond conception before the advent of cognitive neuroscience. While 
a full picture of a ‘literary mind’ has yet to be realized, research about 
the biology of literary processes is charting new territory.9 These kinds 
of knowledge transfer do not erode the foundation of literary studies but 
affirm it.
But there are transfers and there are transfers. And there is a distinc-
tion to be made between absorptions of new empirical facts about how 
the mind functions and transfers of scientific knowledge to literary 
studies at the expense of the latter’s central premise. A basic issue that 
arises from bringing the concepts and methods of cognitive neuro-
science to literary studies is whether the transfer of scientific knowledge 
adds anything new to non-verifiable modes of knowledge when, to go 
back to the origins of the divide between the two cultures, humanistic 
discourses were founded precisely on the ground that cannot be derived 
from scientific modes of knowledge. This is a key stumbling block that 
surfaces, in varying degrees, throughout cognitive literary criticism. And 
because the subfield that has suffered most from this obstacle is perhaps 
www.ebook3000.com


The Dilemma of Cognitive Literary Studies
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
evolutionary cognitive criticism (sometimes called ‘evo’ criticism or 
Darwinian literary criticism), in the following section I will take exam-
ples from evo criticism and use them as a springboard for discussing the 
obstacles that lie in the path of interdisciplinarity.
IV
Evolutionary psychologists are virtually unique in scientific circles in 
recognizing literature as a serious and legitimate field of knowledge in 
their search to understand the biological basis of human behaviour and 
experience. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative, 
Jonathan Gottschall and David Sloan Wilson identify literature as ‘a last 
frontier in Human evolutionary studies’.10 Steven Pinker proposes: ‘The 
throbbing question about fiction from an evolutionary viewpoint is what, 
if anything, it is for.’11 Likewise, E. O. Wilson writes: ‘if ... literary produc-
tions can be solidly connected to biological roots, it will be one of the 
greatest events of intellectual history. Science and the humanities united!’12 
Their work represents a step towards consilience of the two cultures.
However, a new interdisciplinarity has yet to materialize. This is in no 
small part attributable to the method of evolutionary cognitive criticism 
which simply reduces literature to data. Finding that narratives lack 
‘biological utility’ in spite of their ubiquity, evolutionary critics try and 
understand this ‘biologically functionless activity’ within the framework 
of evolutionary adaptation. Their evolutionary analyses of literature 
yield reductionist explanations, such as that poetry is the expression of 
our need for oral transmission of complex knowledge, or that we read 
literature in order to acquire the adaptive, evolutionary benefit of having 
empathy with others. To Pinker, the function of literature from an evolu-
tionary perspective is as follows:
The technology of fiction delivers a simulation of life that an audience can 
enter in the comfort of their cave, couch, or theatre seat. ... When we are 
absorbed in a book or a movie, we get to see breathtaking landscapes, hobnob 
with important people, fall in love with ravishing men and women, protect 
loved ones, attain impossible goals and defeat wicked enemies.13
This kind of instrumentalist reduction does very little to illuminate the 
specific nature of literature and our experience of it, though it certainly 
helps our understanding of proto-literary transactions made by some 

 
Sowon S. Park
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
early humans.14 This is not an argument against reduction. If the proc-
ess of reduction is a move in the direction of greater objectivity in the 
sciences, it is also a move towards a more accurate view of the real 
nature of things in the humanities. But some processes of reduction 
lead us straight up a dead end, and thinking that adaptive use value in 
itself elucidates literature is an idea not only incomplete, but possibly 
misconceived, showing a general confusion about what literature is. Of 
course, there are various aspects of literature from the grammatical to 
the ideological among which entertainment and information gathering 
play a part. But in the face of such a drastic reduction which only wafts 
over the surface of realist texts, a reassertion of the basic premises of 
literature seems necessary in order to continue the difficult process of 
integrating scientific and literary knowledge.
The first premise of a verbal work of art is that it is not analysable 
and reducible to more basic speech and it only exists as an indivis-
ible whole whose meanings are symbolic. An unusual level of literal-
mindedness that evo criticism can be prone to, in the enthusiasm to 
search for generalities, only reduces literature to a few simplistic clichés. 
The second premise is the phenomenal nature of the reading process 
and the instability of any given piece of text. The nature of literature 
cannot simply be extracted by treating it as stable data. As Stanley Fish 
argued, a text is not just a material object but also a temporal process.15 
Treating literature as stable data cannot account for the vastly different 
and at times incompatible interpretations a single text often yields. The 
third premise is that literature cannot be accounted for by instrumental 
value alone. If adaptive and functional value remain the only tools for 
acquiring meaning, biology-led ideas of what literature is can have 
little to say about literature that has no discernible adaptive value – for 
example, modernism, the favourite straw target of scientists from Snow 
to Pinker. The fourth premise is that literature is not synonymous with 
entertainment. If literature is categorized as entertainment, within that 
interpretive model there is no room to make qualitative distinctions 
between, say, a Mills and Boon and a Mrs Dalloway. Finally, and most 
importantly, there is the question of the relationship between literature 
and ideology, which is overlooked when the meaning of literature 
is extracted according to the criterion of use value applied similarly 
across all humans. These legitimate questions and many others need 
to be addressed to reach a level of understanding where consilience is 
not merely the scientific reduction of the literary. And though I have 
www.ebook3000.com


The Dilemma of Cognitive Literary Studies
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
discussed these issues with specific reference to evo criticism, they have 
general relevance across the field.
V
If the problems facing cognitive literary criticism are placed on a gradi-
ent, perhaps the scientific reduction of the literary is at the lower, easier 
end. Scaling higher up the incline is the mainstream scientific response 
to cognitive literary criticism, which is so minimal that it is virtually 
non-existent. For example at the 2013 Annual Meeting of the Society 
of Neuroscience in San Diego, where more than 30,000 scientists from 
nearly 80 countries congregated, not a single paper out of 16,000 presen-
tations discussed literature. Memory, emotion, perception and cognition 
were key strands, yet literature and philosophy remained outside the 
realm of neuroscientific enquiry. To scholars of literature and philoso-
phy, the almost total exclusion of literary and philosophical studies 
from mainstream cognitive neuroscience is baffling. After all, does not 
literature provide us with an unbroken history of representations of the 
human mind in its most subtle and complex states? Does not philosophy 
provide us with the most advanced models of human consciousness?
To begin to address these questions, one could do worse than to iden-
tify what are the main barriers from the scientific point of view to inte-
grating the vast amount of relevant information in the humanities into 
scientific research. Were one to identify a single word to sum up these 
barriers, it might be practical. The majority of cognitive neuroscientists 
are unable (or unwilling) to find ways to incorporate non-verifiable 
modes of knowledge about consciousness into materialist scientific epis-
temology, not because they are philistines, as F. R. Leavis once averred, 
but because the kinds of knowledge that humanists accumulate are not 
so much problematic as untestable.16 The fundamental method of enquiry 
in cognitive neuroscience is the experiment. To conduct experiments, 
knowledge about consciousness, however insightful, needs to be practi-
cally applicable to the design of experiments. So we encounter the classic 
problem of how scientists might process what they regard as speculative, 
evidence-free observations (which is what literature amounts to within 
the frame of scientific experiment), when their methodology is confined 
to the strict parameters of testability and falsifiability.17 To a scientist, any 
insights literature might provide are mere ‘pre-experimental speculation’ 

 
Sowon S. Park
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
and necessarily so. The lack of practical ways in which literary knowledge 
can be incorporated into science is an obstacle higher up the gradient of 
problems affecting cognitive literary criticism than the scientific reduc-
tion of the literary.
The sociology and history of science have made clear that scientific 
facts are not disconnected from the culture from which they emerge. 
Patricia Churchland has argued:
For neuroscientists, a sense of how to get a grip on the big questions and 
of the appropriate overarching framework with which to pursue hands-on 
research is essential – essential, that is if neuroscientists are not to lose them-
selves, sinking blissfully into the sweet, teeming minutiae, or inching with 
manful dedication down a dead-end warren.18
But the increasing marginalization of humanist enquiry from dominant 
discourses is making it harder for the scientific community to draw from 
the rich field of non-verifiable knowledge in which they can situate their 
specific questions. As custodians of literary knowledge, humanists bear 
some responsibility for making accessible the rich observations of human 
mind to scientific research. The translation of literary terms into cognitive 
terms and vice versa, which is one of the primary activities of cognitive 
literary criticism, render a valuable service to the course of consilience by 
opening up the possibility of the two cultures talking to one another.
VI
If the aim of cognitive literary criticism is to create a new interdiscipli-
narity, the exchange so far is characterized less by recalibration of the 
relations between the two cultures than the transfer of knowledge from 
the sciences to literary studies. What is to be done to redress this situa-
tion? The field is presented with a dilemma. On the one hand, attempts 
to integrate scientific and literary knowledge are fraught with scientific 
reductions of the literary; on the other, attempts to preserve literary 
knowledge as a different-but-equal field of enquiry risks the complete 
exclusion from the hegemonic discourse and a further marginalization. 
Facing such a dilemma, literary studies, however conceived, needs 
to be more explicit about defending the boundaries of non-verifiable 
knowledge. Literary studies should resist being cast as a subdiscipline of 
cognitive neuroscience.
www.ebook3000.com


The Dilemma of Cognitive Literary Studies
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
As Leavis asserted in his response to Snow, literature is separate from 
other objects of scientific enquiry and has its own laws that go beyond 
positivist calculations. However, he left literary knowledge undefined on 
the assumption that there is general agreement that literature constitutes 
a ‘third realm’ which reconciles the objective with the subjective. The lack 
of a systematic defence of literary knowledge was a damaging omission, 
not least because it reinforced the ground inherited from the enlighten-
ment whereby literary or, more broadly speaking, aesthetic knowledge 
was rendered indefinable as a result of science staking a special claim 
on objective knowledge. And without further elucidation, the prevalent 
supposition that literary knowledge is all about the subjective, the affective 
and the impressionistic gets further entrenched. This is not to privilege 
the role of objective form in literature; but relegating literature to specula-
tive fancy, intuitive imagination and an overflow of powerful feeling is no 
less a dubious act than trying to erase affect and experience from literary 
studies altogether, as was the case for certain strands of literary theory.
Literature is not so much the Other of scientific rationalism, the 
scooping up of mysterious and indefinable experiences left to one side 
by scientific discourses; it is, as Leavis implied, a challenge to the dual-
ism which produced such a divide in the first place. The ‘third realm’, of 
which Leavis spoke, has always been the foundation of literature, provid-
ing us with the kind of general knowledge that has not been purified of 
all singularity, to use Derek Attridge’s term. As Suzanne Langer stated in 
her brilliant but neglected work, Feeling and Form: ‘Although a work of 
art reveals the character of subjectivity, it is itself objective: its purpose is 
to objectify the life of feeling.’19
Seen in this light, the dilemma of cognitive literary criticism is not 
inconsistent with the dilemma that faces literary studies in general. The 
aim of literature, after all, is to capture the truth of reality – the ‘granite’ 
of solid fact with the ‘rainbow’ of sensations, in the words of Virginia 
Woolf.20 The reconciliation of an objective scientific viewpoint with 
the personal realm of private feeling is not an ideal confined to cogni-
tive literary criticism. Thus, humanists need to make every attempt 
to connect with scientific research across all levels, not only because 
scientific advances provide an opportunity to re-examine earlier models 
of the mind represented in literature and to clarify – and even possibly 
extend – existing literary knowledge. Moreover, the attempt is necessary 
to remain faithful to the aims of literature itself, which are to capture the 
whole of human experience, subjective feeling as well as objective form. 

 
Sowon S. Park
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
The balance of faculties required for such a monumental undertaking 
will be struck, if at all, only as a result of dialogue, of which false starts, 
mutual misunderstanding, criticism and modification must necessarily 
be part. And at this stage of interdisciplinarity, what seems most pressing 
is a continual clarification and reassertion of what literary knowledge is 
in relation to rationalist, empiricist knowledge.
Notes
See Thomas Henry Huxley, ‘Science and Culture’ in 
 
Science and Education, 
London, Macmillan, 1893, pp. 134–59, and Matthew Arnold, ‘Literature and 
Science’ in Robert H. Super (ed.) Philistinism in England and America, Ann 
Arbor, University of Michigan, 1974, pp. 53–73, p. 70. T. S. Eliot famously 
argued that thinking and feeling became separated around the seventeenth 
century, in ‘The Metaphysical Poets’, Times Literary Supplement, 20 October 1921.
See Patricia Waugh, ‘Revising the Two Cultures Debate: Science, Literature, 
 
and Value’, in David Fuller and Patricia Waugh (eds), The Arts and Sciences of 
Criticism, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1999, pp. 33–59, p. 34.
C. P. Snow, 
 
The Two Cultures, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1993, p. 11.
Snow, 
 
Two Cultures, pp. 14–5.
New Critics, like John Crowe Ransom, Allen Tate and Cleanth Brooks, 
 
excluded both the author and the reader from interpretation, focusing on the 
internal organization – harmony, paradox, ambiguity and so on – of a verbal 
work of art.
David Lodge, 
 
Consciousness and the Novel: Collected Essays, Cambridge, MA, 
Harvard University Press, 2000, p. 10.
Alan Richardson and Francis F. Steen, ‘Literature and the Cognitive 
 
Revolution: An Introduction’, Poetics Today, 23:1, Spring 2002, pp. 1–8, pp. 2–3.
Tony E. Jackson, ‘Issues and Problems in the Blending of Cognitive Science, 
 
Evolutionary Psychology, and Literary Study’, Poetics Today, 23:1, Spring 2002, 
pp. 161–79, p. 167.
See for example, Gordon M. Shepherd and Kirsten Shepherd-Barr, 
 
‘Madeleines and Neuromodernism: Reassessing Mechanisms of 
Autobiographical Memory in Proust’, Auto/Biographical Studies 13:1, Spring 
1998, pp. 39–60; Russell Epstein, ‘Consciousness, Art and the Brain: Lessons 
from Marcel Proust’, Consciousness and Cognition, 13, 2004, pp. 213–40 and 
Melba Cuddy-Keane, ‘Narration, Navigation and Non-Conscious Thought: 
Neuroscientific and Literary Approaches to the Thinking Body’, University of 
Toronto Quarterly, 79:2, Spring 2010, pp. 680–701. Mark Turner, The Literary 
Mind: the Origins of Thought and Language, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 
1996, is a landmark study in the field of cognitive literary criticism.
www.ebook3000.com


The Dilemma of Cognitive Literary Studies
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0011.
Jonathan Gottschall and David Sloan Wilson (eds), 
 
The Literary Animal: 
Evolution and the Nature of Narrative, Evanston, IL, Northwestern University 
Press, 2005, p. xvii.
Steven Pinker, ‘Toward a Consilient Study of Literature’, 
 
Philosophy and 
Literature, 31:1, April 2007, pp. 161–77, p. 169.
E. O. Wilson,
 
 ‘Foreword from the Scientific Side’, in Jonathan Gottschall and 
David Sloan Wilson (eds) The Literary Animal, Evanston, IL, Northwestern 
University Press, 2005, pp. vii–xi, p.vii.
Steven Pinker, 
 
How the Mind Works, New York, Norton, 1997, p. 539.
See Paul Hernadi, ‘Why Is Literature: A Coevolutionary Perspective on 
 
Imaginative Worldmaking’, Poetics Today, 23:1, Spring 2002, pp. 21–42.
Stanley Fish, 
 
Is There a Text in This Class?: The Authority of Interpretive 
Communities, Cambridge MA, Harvard University Press, 1980.
F. R. Leavis, ‘Two Cultures? The Significance of Lord Snow’ in 
 
Nor Shall My 
Sword: Discourses on Pluralism, Compassion and Social Hope, London, Chatto 
and Windus, 1972, pp. 41–74, pp. 42–3.
See Peter B. Medawar, 
 
Induction and Intuition in Scientific Thought, London, 
Methuen, 1969, pp. 14–21.
Patricia Churchland, 
 
Neurophilosophy, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1989, p. 3.
Suzanne K. Langer, 
 
Feeling and Form, London, Routledge, 1953, p. 374.
In a 1927 essay, Virginia Woolf described ‘truth as something of granite-like 
 
solidity’ and ‘personality as something of rainbow-like intangibility’; for 
Woolf the aim of biography was ‘to weld these two into one seamless whole’, 
to achieve the ‘perpetual marriage of granite and rainbow’. Virginia Woolf, 
‘The New Biography’, in David Bradshaw (ed.), Selected Essays, Oxford, 
Oxford University Press, 2008, pp. 95–100, p. 93, p. 98.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0012
Future
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0012.
www.ebook3000.com

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013

6
Employability and the 
English Literature Degree
Stephen Longstaffe
Abstract: In this essay, Stephen Longstaffe suggests that 
integrating employability into the curriculum of an English 
Literature degree can offer both intellectual challenge 
and practical advantages to students. Using the model 
of the University of Cumbria’s English Literature degree, 
the chapter argues that the subject can better ensure its 
survival as a university discipline by developing a critical 
model of ‘English in the World’ to inform teaching 
and learning throughout the undergraduate degree. It 
suggests that improving students’ employability in this 
way can lead to greater student satisfaction and improved 
graduate employment. Through designing and supervising 
student projects, academics can also engage with a 
range of potential stakeholders with possible benefits for 
understanding how ‘impact’ might be better incorporated 
into future research projects.
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013.

 
Stephen Longstaffe
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
English graduates remain surprisingly employable. For a subject involv-
ing way too much dallying with daffodils, probably yoked by violence 
together, and far too little concern with ‘Facts’, it remains a respectable 
degree for those averse to a life of destitution. For those leaving univer-
sity in 2012, 8.5 per cent were unemployed six months later; for English 
graduates, the proportion was 8.6 per cent.1 As recently as five years ago, 
longitudinal surveys confirmed that, though things take a while to sort 
out (and a very high proportion of English graduates study in other areas 
en route) an English degree was about as good as a Business Studies 
degree in setting you up for a graduate job within three and a half years 
of graduating.2
How secure is English Literature, though? Robert Eaglestone and Simon 
Kövesi have linked the ‘current perilous state of modern languages’ in 
the university to them being made optional at GCSE (General Certificate 
of Secondary Education) level in 2004, and warn of a similar fate for 
English Literature.3 Recent proposed changes to the ways that English 
schools’ performance at GCSE is measured have been modified to make 
the position of English Literature at GCSE more secure, but the situation 
is still extremely volatile.4 In the same article Eaglestone and Kövesi warn 
of an increasing divide between Russell Group and other English depart-
ments, with the former expanding at the expense of the latter.5 Though 
overall numbers attending university in the UK remain capped for now, 
restrictions were removed in 2012, initially on candidates gaining AAB+ 
grades (at least two As and a B) at A-level, as part of a government move 
towards the introduction of a free market into undergraduate recruit-
ment.6 English’s very high entry points scores (more than 50 per cent of 
acceptances onto university English degrees in 2013 had AAB or better) 
mean that the subject has seen the emergence of a fairly sizeable free 
market. Winners and losers are already becoming apparent, the latter in 
the unwelcome form of departmental closures and reconfigurations.
Decisions on departmental closure, of course, are not made by ‘the 
market’ but by university managers, and here too the position of English 
as a discipline has weakened. Recruitment to the Arts and Humanities 
subjects as a proportion of total university admissions has fallen since 
2008, with particularly precipitous falls in admissions to combined 
degrees. It remains to be seen how many departments’ English provi-
sion relied on students on combined degrees, but the news cannot be 
good. There were almost exactly the same numbers of students studying 
English in 2013 as in 2008; but as the total number of undergraduates 
www.ebook3000.com


Employability and the English Literature Degree
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
increased by just under 10 per cent in the same period, the relative 
importance of English to universities has sharply declined in the last five 
years, and this at a time when English has been the most popular A-level 
in the UK.7 Managers could be forgiven for thinking that it is in Business 
Studies, Subjects Allied to Medicine and Creative Arts that the future 
lies. English Language, with its links to growing subjects like Psychology, 
Education and the Social Sciences, looks better placed to ride out this 
particular storm than English Literature.
Are we helpless in the face of these seemingly tectonic shifts? 
Undergraduates may not have abandoned university altogether in the face 
of the increasing costs to them directly of studying for a degree (tuition 
fees were first introduced in 1998, raised in 2004 and raised again – in 
the face of much protest – in order to replace cuts to teaching budgets 
in 2010), but they are certainly shifting into different subjects. English 
may have a good record in getting graduates into employment as teach-
ers, but if English shrinks at GCSE and A-level, as some are predicting, 
then even that traditional avenue will shrink. The kinds of other careers 
English graduates covet – in journalism, the media, arts administration, 
publishing, advertising – are primarily located in London. Jobs in the 
arts more generally are vulnerable to government spending cuts. So if 
you are outside London, and don’t want to become a teacher, why should 
you do an English Literature degree?
In what follows, I will suggest how rethinking the English Literature 
syllabus from the point of view of employability may help to make the 
subject more attractive at undergraduate level, increase student satisfac-
tion and perhaps even serve to redress some of the problems caused by 
the impact of ‘impact’. Rather than offer a conspectus of the pioneer-
ing work already done, to my knowledge, at institutions like UCLAN 
(University of Central Lancashire), Teesside, Oxford, De Montfort and 
Surrey, I will focus on the Lancaster campus provision at my own institu-
tion, the University of Cumbria.8 The university was founded in 2007, and 
a major part of its remit was widening participation in Higher Education 
(HE) within Cumbria, an area where HE provision had previously been 
ad hoc and often provided by institutions whose main focus lay some 
distance to the south or the east. To that end, the English Department 
operates a flexible admissions policy, for example admitting students 
without formal qualifications providing they can write an essay on a liter-
ary topic. A significant proportion of recent graduates gaining first class 
degrees have come through this route. Students are often the first in their 

 
Stephen Longstaffe
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
family to enter HE, or the first to undertake a non-vocational degree. As 
I write, Cumbria students entering an English degree have almost the 
lowest prior educational achievement of any such students in the UK. 
But the English department also has – from the 2013 survey – the best 
National Student Survey (NSS) results for any English degree in the UK, 
and has consistently performed in the top ten nationally in recent years. 
The model that follows can thus be seen as applicable to undergraduate 
studies across the board. You don’t need massive resources, or very high 
achievers, to think about employability afresh, and doing so may not 
only improve students’ prospects, but embed within provision the kinds 
of good practice which the NSS seeks to assess.
The principles upon which the degree is founded are quite simple. All 
students follow a common curriculum with a focus on problem-solving 
and engaging with the world outside the university. This involves them in 
a range of different assessed activities in addition to the common English 
ones of essay writing (within and outside exams) and presentations. A 
common curriculum means a common narrative: students can under-
stand why they are being asked to do ‘stressful activity (a)’ rather than 
being faced with, a la The History Boys, ‘one fucking thing after another’.9 
The intensive guidance that is part of preparing for and steering students 
through this is also an opportunity to reinforce the degree’s overarching 
narrative: that the post-HE world is different, and it is better to introduce 
the student to this within the degree in a supportive environment than 
for them to negotiate it on their own after graduating. All undergradu-
ate single honours students encounter this narrative in all years of their 
degree, and are assessed in the following ways.
The compulsory Level Four (first year, for full-time students) module 
‘Travels in Poetry’ presents the first major solo problem-solving chal-
lenge: following a practice week, there are five weeks of assessed contri-
butions to online forums featuring discussion threads on poetry.10 To 
gain maximum marks, students must contribute to at least four weeks’ 
forums, and to gain a pass mark they must contribute to at least two. 
Each forum opens after a class on the relevant topic, and lasts for around 
six days.
The compulsory ‘English and the Media’ module begins a thread 
within the degree which focuses on the way the texts students read, and 
more generally the academic discipline of which they are part, are repre-
sented in the media. Print media and TV treatment of literary figures 
or debates are read and discussed, as are a range of radio programmes 
www.ebook3000.com


Employability and the English Literature Degree
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
with a literary basis such as Night Waves, The Verb, Open Book, In Our 
Time and Adventures in Poetry. Students’ understanding of the way the 
media represents literary texts is assessed via their own group practice in 
producing an MP3 of a mock radio programme.
The common thread between these two modules is that they do assess 
students’ ‘English’ skills – close textual analysis, for one – but ask them 
to present this understanding in a wider variety of forms to those of a 
more traditional essay–exam–presentation degree.
At Level Five (second year), ‘Texts in the World’ narrows the focus 
of ‘English in the Media’ down to one specific author and his or her 
texts. In doing so, it makes use of the university’s geographical situ-
ation to open out issues of cultural heritage, and their mediation in 
the theory and practice of the local cultural heritage industry. The 
current focus is John Ruskin. As with a more conventional ‘English’ 
module, students have to understand and analyse Ruskin’s texts; but 
here the focus is on how these texts function within the local cultural 
heritage industry. The students begin by studying key Ruskin texts, 
TV programmes about his work and the cultural heritage industry. 
They then visit Ruskin’s home on Coniston Water, Brantwood, now 
a museum run by the Brantwood Trust, as well as the Ruskin Library 
at Lancaster University. At both places they not only engage with the 
spaces and displays, but are given talks by curatorial staff. Their first 
assignment asks them to complete a range of tasks foregrounding the 
relationships between Ruskin’s writing and the contemporary cultural 
heritage industry. The simplest way to explain how this works is to 
quote the assessment guidance directly:
Your analysis should display a confident critical understanding of the ideas 
studied on the module relating to Cultural Heritage and relating to the work 
of John Ruskin. You should engage with a range of relevant data, such as criti-
cal materials on Ruskin and Cultural Heritage, ‘Brantwood’ marketing mate-
rials (e.g. leaflets), the ‘Brantwood’ site itself, and the ‘Brantwood’ website.
Your written report must respond to the following four areas:
Identify 
 
two specific aspects of Ruskin’s writing/thinking (i.e. NOT 
biographical information) which are drawn attention to by the 
Trust (provide evidence based on your fieldtrip and/or study of 
materials published). Do you consider that these two areas are 
successfully made relevant to a contemporary audience? If so, how 
is this achieved? If not, how might it more effectively be achieved?

 
Stephen Longstaffe
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
Point to 
 
one or two specific areas of Ruskin’s writing/thinking (i.e. 
NOT biographical information) which you did not consider to 
be flagged up by ‘Brantwood’ and discuss how these might be 
effectively presented to a contemporary tourist audience.
Based on your critical reading on the Cultural Heritage industry 
 
but also on the curatorial talk given on the day, comment on your 
understanding of the role of curator in managing a literary/artistic 
resource of this kind. Identify at least two specific issues faced in 
managing such a resource with particular reference to ‘Brantwood’.
Using the resource of ‘Brantwood’ as your test case and with 
 
reference to critical debates on Cultural Heritage, comment on the 
role and function of cultural heritage in a) the shaping of regional 
(Cumbrian identity) and b) contemporary culture/society.
This exercise is then followed by a more general study of literary herit-
age websites (such as those dedicated to Austen, Clare, Wordsworth, the 
Brontës and Shakespeare). After some tuition in web page design, the 
students are asked to design a webpage on Ruskin suitable for A-level 
students:
The final item of assessment is the design of a web page on the ideas and writ-
ings of John Ruskin aimed at A-level students. The page should aim to make 
students working at this level interested in Ruskin’s work and ideas and should 
be pedagogically informative. You may choose to offer an overview of some key 
aspects of his thinking or you may focus in on one or two specific areas. You 
should though avoid purely biographical content. Each web page is required to 
contain at least one picture (accompanied by a correct reference) and at least 
one link to an external web page. Credit will be given for considering aspects 
of effective web design practice, and for your ability to process critical ideas 
about Ruskin’s work and prioritise ideas for a specific target audience. There 
must therefore be evidence of engagement with appropriate secondary reading 
on this writer and his work. There is no specific word count for the exercise but 
when planning the written component you should give consideration to layout 
and to appropriate balance between written text and images. The completed 
webpage when printed out should amount to no less than 2 sides of A4 and 
no more than 3 sides of A4. You should submit a printout of the completed 
webpage plus an accompanying bibliography with a completed assessment 
coversheet attached by the deadline given above. You must also email a link to 
an electronic version of the page by the same deadline to your module tutor.
‘Renaissance Genres’ begins in the first week of the second year. It builds 
on the ‘Travels in Poetry’ exercise by doubling the number of forums 
www.ebook3000.com


Employability and the English Literature Degree
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
students must contribute to; their two best weeks count for two-thirds of 
the mark, and the next two best the remaining third. Those students who 
are already organized are rewarded; those whose self-management – 
including when and how to ask for help – is less robust have more 
difficulty. This diagnostic assessment, relying as it does on weekly contri-
butions right at the start of the second year, necessitates a high number 
of early one to one interventions. These allow a further reinforcing of the 
rationale behind the degree as well as supporting students.
A compulsory ‘Research Skills’ module – intended to help prepare 
students for the final year dissertation – presents students with two 
more challenges. The first is another new form of assessment. The first 
assessment, building on taught sessions on research skills, is a portfolio 
exercise for which students have to complete two separate activities. The 
first is to find, organize and evaluate critical material on a text they know 
well (typically a text already studied in HE). This takes the form of an 
overview of key elements in criticism of the text (approaches, influential 
interventions and so on) followed by four evaluations of critical texts 
chosen by the students themselves. The purpose of the exercise is to 
encourage students to become more critical in relation to their second-
ary reading, which is usually undertaken when they do not know the 
text particularly well. Using a text they already know, and indeed may 
have already written on, shifts out of that paradigm. It is also a useful 
preparation for the kind of relation to criticism that their dissertation 
will require – reflective and long-term rather than the quick fix or ‘quotes 
for the essay’. Students have to know the text well in order to assess the 
usefulness of critical material on it.
The second portfolio activity is a reflective re-reading of the original 
primary text. Students are encouraged to explore the different ways they 
themselves read (here, the primary reason is to focus on their reading 
process itself, rather than directed towards an essay or class prepara-
tion). The second half of the module mimics the final year dissertation, 
as the students build on their generic research skills to negotiate a 2,000 
word essay title on a topic they have not studied before. Their work is 
then supported via the same supervisory regime as will be in play during 
their final year dissertation.
By the time students reach their final year at Level Six, and the 
capstone ‘employability’ module ‘English in the World’, they have already 
undertaken a range of problem-solving activities in order to help them 
become more independent learners. They are used to being pushed, 

 
Stephen Longstaffe
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
reflecting on their own learning, and reading module specifications 
to try and work out what is required of them. The module pairs with 
our year-long dissertation module (also 20 credits), so that in their 
final year our single honours students spend almost a third of their 
time on independent work. It is split into two: the first few weeks are 
mostly taken up with taught content from our careers service on career 
planning, self-awareness, skills auditing, opportunity awareness, the 
graduate labour market, effective job applications and constructing CVs 
and covering letters. Students’ learning is then tested through a mock 
application (usually for a real job, though students interested in teacher 
training or postgraduate study have also used it as a dry run for intended 
applications). The work is assessed jointly by careers and academic staff, 
and feedback from both is made available as necessary to the students – 
for example, if it is clear that a student needs more help in presenting 
 themselves effectively in an application.
Once students have had the opportunity to think about their career 
aspirations in some detail, they move on to designing their ‘employability 
project’, during which they are supported via tutorial on the dissertation 
model. They have around six months to complete the project, and have 
a free hand so long as the project generates a portfolio of work meeting 
the specified learning outcomes. The only initial specifications are that 
the project must have something to do with the student’s intended career 
and it must include an element of practical or action research within 
or related to the world of work. This latter stipulation is simply so the 
student will have a ‘shop window’ activity on which they can draw in 
CVs and interviews. The portfolio itself is 3,000 words or equivalent (to 
accommodate the range of material which may be submitted), with a 
minimum of 1,000 words of reflection on process and product. Just as 
the first assessment asks students to re-present themselves to fit a job 
specification, so this one asks students to re-present their project to fit 
the specifications of the portfolio. These are relatively generic:
The ability to critically articulate the general, subject-specific and transferable 
skills developed during the programme;
The ability to formulate relevant research questions; and
The ability to solve complex problems through self-formulated questions, 
supported by the gathering, organization and analysis of relevant materials.
Student feedback on the module is overwhelmingly positive. 
Independence and freedom are the two most valued elements, and the 
www.ebook3000.com


Employability and the English Literature Degree
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
practical guidance for careers and job applications is also often singled 
out. Though the module was not designed with the NSS in mind, its 
activities do speak particularly strongly to the NSS section on ‘personal 
development’ – presenting yourself with confidence, confidence in tack-
ling unfamiliar problems, and improved communication skills.
In the course of thinking about this piece, I contacted several former 
graduates, all of whom are either working or undertaking further study 
or training. I asked them whether the module had helped them in 
searching for a job or other opportunity, whether the project had been 
useful in either job application or interview, and whether the feedback 
on the careers element had been useful. Almost every aspect of the 
module seems to have been helpful in some way. One 2013 graduate, 
now employed as a university administrator, wrote:
I am now much clearer about job roles and the language in person specifi-
cations. I learnt to look at the person specification and to use the language 
to demonstrate how my skills fulfil the criteria and make that easier for the 
person reading the application to be able to identify how I answer the criteria. 
I feel this makes my applications more confident and any jobs I have applied 
for I have secured an interview. I always used to look at the websites etc. of 
places I applied to but now I approach this as a research project and thor-
oughly research the company or department. The act of researching a real 
life project has been transferable to my work and I have used my experience 
of undertaking the project within my current role to be able to define what 
needs to be done for a task, how it can be done and to be able to assess the 
outcomes.
Another 2013 graduate working for Network Rail responded:
The project was one of my strongest tools when applying for work. To be 
able to demonstrate within a single piece of work the type of skills I possess 
was highly beneficial. The reflection aspect of the module also meant being 
able to present my ability to learn: employers do look for people who can 
be proactive and that’s one of the many things the reflection piece can 
demonstrate.
The module was one of the influencing factors in me gaining employment 
with Network Rail. Part of the training with them is to undergo an MSc in 
Project Management; they were dubious as to whether I possessed the right 
skills and mind set to perform within the MSc, however the project was 
direct proof that I did have the ability. The feedback given played a massive 
part within the interview stages as it highlighted to me how I might improve, 
thus I was able to inform the interviewers how I intended to improve.

 
Stephen Longstaffe
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
A former student who graduated in 2014, now working as a contracts 
manager, agreed:
For the first assignment I responded to a job advert, and included a CV and 
an application letter. The feedback from this assignment and the information 
given in the seminars leading up to this assignment enabled me to create an 
improved, professional and effective CV and also gave me the skills needed to 
correctly fill out an application form in a way that highlights and emphasises 
my employability. Since leaving University one month ago I have had four 
interviews from five job applications, and out of those interviews three job 
offers. In each of the interviews and applications I made references to the 
skills gained at University as a whole, but also focused on the English in 
the World module. I discussed the skills and abilities gained in relation to 
employment, and how the module assignments increased my employability. 
I also provided potential employers with a link to my second English in the 
World assignment, which was a blog created for fellow students studying 
English and Creative Writing at the University.
Another 2013 graduate wrote:
English in the World absolutely contributed to my working life post-
graduation. It didn’t specifically benefit the finding of the role I went on to 
undertake. I found that it was more the skills and understanding that this 
module provided that I found to be of most benefit. For instance, now that 
I have a clearer grasp of professional development in practice, I find that I 
often draw on the very same method of self-reflection that I learnt as part of 
this module’s assessment. I am able to identify my own areas of strength and 
weakness (in terms of my employability).
This student is now undertaking postgraduate study after working for a 
year on a Widening Participation project. Finally, a 2010 graduate now 
completing a PhD wrote:
This module helped me with the applications for both my MA, and PhD. 
Filling out forms, and articulating the answers to questions in applications 
was made easier through having completed the module.
This is to some extent uncontroversial stuff. The benefits of engaging 
with careers staff and their expertise are clear and available outside any 
particular programme. But there are several advantages to making such 
engagement compulsory, for it to have a ‘long tail’ back through the 
degree and for English staff to be involved in the resulting assessment. 
Institutions with a major widening participation focus – that is, insti-
tutions which are comparatively less selective – cannot be complacent 
www.ebook3000.com


Employability and the English Literature Degree
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
about students recognizing, or feeling able to access, what might seem 
to others the ‘obvious’ benefits of engaging with careers staff. Not every 
student takes up careers help and advice, and many who do leave it too 
late. The benefits of such provision are often only apparent once the 
student has left (hence the common extension of careers support beyond 
graduation). The recent growth in ‘Career Studies’ as a discipline does 
have some potential, but within humanities subjects one common model 
is the optional stand-alone module, often in the final year, on offer across 
a range of disciplines.11 Anything generic runs the risk of students priori-
tizing their ‘proper’ academic subject, and of perpetuating a disjunct 
between ‘careers’ and ‘subject’. The Cumbria programme offers a degree 
providing a variously experienced and rigorously theorized model of 
‘English in the World’.
Having English staff involved alongside careers staff helps to close the 
loop with the degree as a whole as well as being able to draw on personal 
expertise in, for example, applying for postgraduate study. More impor-
tantly, having academic staff involved helps to communicate that a job 
application is in part a very high-stakes example of the communication 
skills at which English graduates should excel. It demands command of a 
particular discourse in terms of tone, key vocabulary and structure, all of 
which need to fit well with the particular section of the application form 
being completed. Just as a standard English essay would aim to persuade 
a reader of a particular critical interpretation of a text, an application 
form aims to persuade an employer – not to ‘give someone a job’, but 
that the applicant would be able to benefit the organization. Helping 
students to realize the continuity between writing a job application and 
demonstrating the skills they have already developed on their degree is a 
large part of the rationale.
Of course, how employable you are is not just about how well you can 
present yourself. There is only so far that you can make your part-time 
job in retail stretch, and that is why we also ask the students to produce 
a project relevant to their chosen career. It is important that this is final-
ized only after the students have had the experience of putting together 
an application for a particular post. Having to look closely at what they 
have done, and what that can do for them in terms of employability, 
shows up areas for improvement or development. Thankfully, there 
is still time to put some more vita into their vitae. Projects tend to fall 
into one of two categories: the project piggybacking on something the 
student is already doing, and the project created entirely from scratch. 

 
Stephen Longstaffe
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
The benefits to students differ according to which kind of project they 
are doing.
The most frequent piggybacking is upon the school experience neces-
sary for a successful PGCE (Postgraduate Certificate in Education) 
application. Students are doing this anyway in their final year; the aim 
here is to make their school experience part of their own research project 
so that instead of simply ‘seeing how to teach’ they take advantage of the 
environment. This encourages students to become more active and to 
stretch their ‘observer’ status to offer something positive to the schools. 
Projects in the 2014 cycle, for example, included piloting a peer-reading 
scheme in local primary schools, comparing school pupils’ perceptions 
of careers advice with those of university students, trying to improve 
pupils’ engagement with poetry, and scoping the student’s own teaching 
strengths by contributing to lessons in subjects other than English. Past 
students have worked with a teenage metal band at the local YMCA, 
using sonnet and other poetic structures to help them understand 
the construction of the songs they had been writing. Other students 
piggyback their project on their own jobs or roles, for example as 
school governor, administrator, youth worker, drama workshop leader, 
club event organizer or care worker. One student in the first year of the 
course piggybacked, memorably, on his production of a three-disc CD 
set of a very well known recording artist from the 1950s in his capacity 
as prominent member of the artist’s fan club. The key element in all of 
these projects is that they are active: this is not just a matter of ‘reflecting’ 
on what you are already doing, but of attempting to use that activity to 
further, however indirectly, your career goals.
The other main category student projects fall into is the bespoke from 
scratch. These often link more closely to conventional ‘English’ activi-
ties – writing, editing a magazine, producing podcasts, event organiza-
tion, working with a gallery, producing websites or blogs, setting up or 
contributing to university societies. Students’ involvement in local litera-
ture festivals has also contributed several projects, including campaigns 
to increase take-up of concessionary tickets and various analyses of their 
ideological or economic basis. World Book Night is another standby. Last 
year one student, whose career aspirations at the time included library 
work, wrote an article for the local newspaper publicizing the event and 
offering a free book to anyone who would fill in a short questionnaire 
about their reading habits and their understanding of World Book 
Night’s aims. But the beauty of the project is its variety, and paradoxically 
www.ebook3000.com


Employability and the English Literature Degree
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
its uncoupling from actual employment. If a student says that they would 
like to become a literary agent, you can help them to design a project 
where they act as literary agent to Creative Writing undergraduates, 
rather than scratch your head about how to break into publishing. If 
they want to design and produce a website about Van Gogh, they can 
get started – on university time. Such activities in the main are seen to 
add far more to a student’s experience, and certainly to their CV, than 
yet another module on a literary period or topic assessed, as usual, by 
essays or exams. Think of it as a non-exploitative internship, where the 
student gets to design what they will be doing for the next six months 
and where – crucially – how they think of it and how they describe it to 
others is built into the assessment criteria.
I’ve so far concentrated on what such a module – embedded in such 
a programme – can do for the students. I’d like to finish up with some 
suggestions about what it can, and can’t, do for academic staff. Some 
of its advantages, inevitably, are positional. So long as most English 
degrees don’t run like this, our English graduates will have something 
others don’t. This doesn’t necessarily mean the Dean buying you a box 
of chocolates on the back of your DLHE (Destinations of Leavers from 
Higher Education) statistics, though. The positional advantages of insti-
tutional age, prestige, selectivity, resource and many other elements are 
often stacked against the widening participation graduate, before you 
even start to consider the cultural and other kinds of capital they may 
enter university lacking. Increasing students’ employability does not 
necessarily lead to actual employment, at least not quickly enough to 
show up in the Key Information Set, which is based on what graduates 
report they are doing six months after leaving university. It can’t harm 
students’ chances, but in any case the point of the Cumbria programme 
is not narrowly instrumental.12 It asks students to think as hard about 
their careers as they do about literary texts, and thus poses them intel-
lectual as well as practical challenges.
The final point is in relation to ‘impact’. It seems clear that ‘impact’ is 
here to stay: who could argue with ‘enhanced public awareness of and 
engagement with issues concerning nature and the destruction of habitat’, 
‘public engagement with heritage institutions’ or ‘enhancing the public 
understanding of poetry’?13 But this model of ‘impact’ itself is built 
on a funding model which is no longer, if it ever was, open to all. The 
examples of impact noted above were underwritten in part by either large 
grants – Collaborative Doctoral Awards, Knowledge Transfer Partnership 

 
Stephen Longstaffe
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
Grants – or wealthy institutions affording relatively large amounts of time 
in which to work. The introduction of impact to the Research Excellence 
Framework (REF) reverses the direction of travel of the Research 
Assessment Exercise (RAE) 2008, which distributed research funding 
more widely between English departments than ever before. In general, 
the number of impact statements required is sensitive to numbers: if you 
submit between 15 and 24.99 staff you have to submit 3 statements, for 
25 to 34.99 it is 4, and so on.14 It can be gamed, of course; there will be 
departments deciding to submit a couple fewer staff so as to submit one 
fewer impact statement. But you can’t game the bottom end. Whether you 
submit 8 staff or 14.99, you still have to submit 2 impact statements. To put 
it another way, a submission of 8 staff has to submit 2 impact statements; 
a submission of 24 staff has to submit 3. The quality ratings resulting from 
REF 2014 – which will determine the funding available – will inevitably 
be distributed on the basis of size of submission in a way that they have 
not been in the past, and that is without considering the strong likelihood 
that smaller departments will not be entered at all.
How you feel about the impact agenda depends on whether you 
think REF 2014 is some kind of final circling of the wagons around large 
research-intensive institutions or an attempt to nudge all universities into 
different kinds of behaviour by changing their incentives. Politics and 
policy point in two different directions, but assuming policy wins, the 
future of research in English literature will be different, maybe not today, 
or tomorrow, but soon. And it is here, I would suggest, that the ‘English in 
the World’ model has something to contribute. Trying to work out under-
graduate projects engaging with the world of work does get you thinking 
in a much more focused way about the opportunities available to ‘create 
and interpret cultural capital in all of its forms to enrich and expand the 
lives, imaginations and sensibilities of individuals and groups’.15 In order 
to supervise student projects I have had to find out about the therapeutic 
uses of reading, marketing theory, museum studies, researching a novel, 
the uses of social media for the cultural heritage industry, university 
students’ charters: the range is as wide as my students’ imaginations and 
aspirations. I have had to talk to colleagues across a range of disciplines 
(how do you get questionnaires right first time?) as well as working with 
careers, administrative and external relations staff. I am much better 
informed about what it is like to teach in schools, and the issues of policy 
and practice facing that particular profession. I know much more about 
local culture; projects have been based in community radio stations, 
www.ebook3000.com


Employability and the English Literature Degree
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
bookshops, galleries, theatres and festivals. And, while I am certainly not 
going to abandon my hard-won expertise in early modern theatre, I have 
a much better sense of the various industries and constituencies English 
Literature in Higher Education might speak to, and the ways in which it 
might do so. If more academics within English Literature can broaden 
their horizons as I have done, then perhaps the discipline has a future 
outside a few, well-resourced, citadels of Higher Thought.
Notes
See Evan Hancock, ‘Arts, Creative Arts and Humanities Overview’ and 
 
‘First Degree Graduates from All Subjects 2012’, Higher Education Careers 
Services Unit Reports compiled from the Higher Education Statistics Agency’s 
Destinations of Leavers from Higher Education (DLHE) survey (2013) at 
<http://www.hecsu.ac.uk>.
See Higher Education Statistics Agency, 
 
Destination of Leavers from Higher 
Education Institutions: Longitudinal Survey of the 2004/05 Cohort, Key Findings 
Report 2009 available at <https://www.hesa.ac.uk> The figures don’t map 
exactly onto English degrees, as they refer to ‘languages’, but English, broadly 
conceived, is the dominant subject in this category by at least 3:1.
Robert Eaglestone and Simon Kövesi, ‘What happens in The Tempest?’, 
 
Times 
Higher Education Supplement, 2125, 31 October 2013, p. 36.
The Department of Education (whose minister at the time had an Oxford 
 
English degree) revised its guidance in January 2014 in an attempt to ensure 
that English Literature would still be seen as a desirable GCSE for schools, 
following guidance in 2013, which would have made it a far less attractive 
option than English Language. See Department of Education, ‘Update 
on Progress 8 Measure and Reforms to Secondary School Accountability 
Framework’, January 2014, at <https://www.gov.uk>. However, an index of how 
quickly things can change is provided by the 4.4 per cent drop in 2014 entries 
for English at A-level. This is because in 2012 grade boundaries for GCSE 
English were changed at the last minute. Though this is a one-year blip, it 
clearly demonstrates the relationship between GCSE performance and degree 
admissions, and shows how rapidly things can change. See Richard Garner, 
‘Shock Slump in English A-level Candidates Blamed on GCSE Marking Crisis,’ 
The Independent, 28 July 2014.
The Russell Group represents the 24 most successful universities in the UK 
 
in terms of research income and research quality (as measured by successive 
governmental research assessment exercises); members of the Russell Group 
pay substantial annual membership subscriptions. See Paul Jump, ‘Quartet Pay 
Hefty Admission Fee to Join Elite Club,’ Times Higher Education, 30 May 2013.

 
Stephen Longstaffe
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
For a summary of recent policy changes on student number controls and 
 
government attempts to introduce a free market into higher education 
provision, see Andrew McGettigan, The Great University Gamble: Money, 
Markets and the Future of Higher Education, London, Pluto, 2013, pp. 66–78.
See the figures published by HEFCE at <
 
http://www.ucas.com/data-analysis/
data-resources/data-tables/he-subject#>. In 2013, 89,442 people took A-level 
English; fewer than 1 in 7 of those students went on to study English single 
honours at university that year. For the A-level results, see Mona Chalabi, ‘A 
Level Results 2013: The Complete Breakdown’, The Guardian, 15 August 2013. 
In 2014, the fall in those taking up English (noted earlier) led to it being 
overtaken by Mathematics as the most popular subject at A-level.
Thanks to my University of Cumbria English and Creative Writing 
 
colleagues Drs Penny Bradshaw (whose work on the module ‘Texts in the 
World’ I have extensively quoted here), Paul Ferguson and Alizon Brunning. 
Thanks too to present and past Careers colleagues including Sandra Baron, 
Linda Powell and Naomi Oosman-Watts for their constructive engagements 
and hard work. Finally, thanks to those former students of my English in the 
World module who provided the feedback quoted in this essay, and to all 
those students whose feedback has helped to improve the module. Our work 
does of course build on the excellent work of many UK English departments. 
For examples from the noughties, see the projects archived on the website of 
the now-defunct English Subject Centre.
In Alan Bennett’s play 
 
The History Boys, when the boys are being coached in 
university interview technique with mock questions one responds, ‘How do 
I define history? It’s just one fucking thing after another’. Alan Bennett, The 
History Boys, London, Faber and Faber, 2004, p. 85.
This form of assessment was introduced following a visit to Cumbria by 
 
Rosie Miles (University of Wolverhampton) in her capacity as E-learning 
advocate in conjunction with the English Subject Centre. For more on 
online discussion boards, see The Higher English Academy English Subject 
Centre, Online Discussion in English Studies: A Good Practice Guide to Design, 
Moderation and Assessment, Report Series 21, March 2010 at <http://www.
english.heacademy.ac.uk.>.
One stimulating example from the English point of view is the ‘subject-linked 
 
unit in developing employability’ by Dr Geoffrey Hinchcliffe in the 2008 
Career Studies Handbook. The unit is assessed by a piece reflecting on how the 
student has developed their employability and an analysis of a work-related 
topic which could relate the student’s home discipline(s). See Phil McCash, 
Career Studies Handbook: Career Development Learning in Practice, Higher 
Education Academy, January 2008 at <https://www.heacademy.ac.uk>, p. 29.
Sheryl I. Fontaine and Stephen J. Mexal suggest that English students 
 
‘eventually come to find instrumental value in noninstrumental learning’. See 
www.ebook3000.com


Employability and the English Literature Degree
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0013
‘Closing Deals with Hamlet’s Help: Assessing the Instrumental Value of an 
English Degree’, College English, 76.4, March 2014, pp. 357–78, p. 375.
The phrases are from the ‘Research Excellence Framework: Impact Pilot 
 
Exercise’, November 2010, which contains three pilot impact studies for 
English Literature: <http://www.ref.ac.uk/media/ref/content/background/
impact/EnglishLang_Lit.pdf>
The rules can be found at REF 02.2011, 
 
Assessment Framework and Guidance 
on Submissions, July 2011 (updated January 2012), <http://www.ref.ac.uk> p. 28, 
para. 156.
The wording is taken from one of the indicative examples of kinds of impact 
 
provided by the main REF 2014 panel covering English. See REF 01.2012, 
Panel Criteria and Working Methods, January 2012, <http://www.ref.ac.uk>, p. 89.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
 
7
The Future of English and 
Institutional Consciousness: 
Threats and Disengagement
Robert Eaglestone
Abstract: Robert Eaglestone argues that English as a 
subject faces a number of threats. These include: shrinking 
student numbers and departments and the redundancies 
this entails, top-down changes to the GCSE and A-level 
system that embroil the subject in national debates about 
teaching texts and who dictates their suitability, and the 
ongoing debate about open access publishing and what 
this means for English research. However, Eaglestone 
writes, there are positive actions we can take together to 
strengthen and support the discipline. Universities could 
move to an open and self-organized publishing system, 
and take journals – as well as innovative new forms of 
publishing – back in house. Eaglestone also advocates for 
academics and graduate students to become involved with 
English at secondary school level.
Gildea, Niall, Helena Goodwyn, Megan Kitching, 
and Helen Tyson, eds. English Studies: The State of the 
Discipline, Past, Present, and Future. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015. doi: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014.
www.ebook3000.com


The Future of English and Institutional Consciousness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
The future of English is under threat.1 
I don’t mean by this that the discipline is shifting from one literary 
critical ideal, to which I feel attached, to another: I’m not writing about, 
for example, the huge and rather wonderful rise of Creative Writing or 
the diffusion of the subject into the medical-, legal-, animal-environ-
mental-, (insert topic)-humanities, or to assert that the rise of histori-
cism has killed off theory. Nor am I complaining, as emeritus Merton 
Professor of English at Oxford John Carey did, slightly uncharitably 
and uncollegially, about the ‘ill-written, obscure, trivial ... morasses of 
academic literary criticism’ or anything like that.2 I’m afraid I mean it in 
a much more boring, institutional, something-happened-in-a-commit-
tee-you-never-heard-of kind of way. But the threats are real and signifi-
cant, so in this chapter I suggest attitudes that we – the community of 
‘English’, defined as broadly as possible – might adopt which could at 
least mitigate some of the worst threats and might, perhaps, change the 
direction of travel.
The most obvious threat is about numbers. English is still the larg-
est Arts and Humanities subject in secondary education and Higher 
Education (HE), but the numbers of people studying it are gently falling. 
The discipline risks turning into a sort of minority subject like classics 
and art history, and with that, suffering an attendant fall in numbers of 
staff like that which has characterized modern languages. There is also 
evidence that the ‘class profile’ of the discipline is changing, as, in the UK, 
it recruits more and more from one part of the educational ecosystem, 
the fee-paying schools.3 I’m not writing here about the rights and wrongs 
of fee-paying schools, but rather suggesting that student diversity might 
be a good to which we aspire. Moreover, the rapidly changing shape of 
the UK university sector will also have an impact on the discipline. If the 
student number controls are lifted from 2015 as proposed by the current 
government, there will be dramatically increased competition for the 
shrinking pool of English students. English students are cheap to teach 
(compared to medics and physicists, for example) because they don’t 
require huge new capital investment (you don’t need to double your 
laboratory space with new buildings when you double your numbers of 
English students) and they still bring in £9,000 in fees. This means that 
there will be an even more intense competition for them over the next 
few years, with institutions that are seen as more prestigious ‘hoover-
ing up’ students during the ‘clearing’ part of the application process.4 
Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (UCAS) figures indicate 

 
Robert Eaglestone
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
that one major Russell Group institution accepted 70 students in English 
in 2011 and then 177 in 2012. Another increased its acceptances by 39 
per cent and a third has expanded acceptance numbers by 181 per cent 
since 2010. In 2012, the Russell Group’s share of the UK’s total accepted 
undergraduate applications in English overall rose from 34 to 39 per 
cent, as UCAS figures show.5 So this process is already well underway, 
and while the impact on university finances may be positive, the impact 
on the teaching of English may not be: the student satisfaction scores – 
admittedly not an ideal or certain measure – in the places that have 
rapidly increased in size have tended to go down.6 These changes will 
lead to the closure and merger of smaller and – in league table terms – 
less prominent departments and accelerate the tendency to concentrate 
more students in fewer places. This comes along with all the other, wider 
changes in the sector: the focus on STEM subjects (Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics); the growth of private providers – which 
don’t teach humanities – which is already sapping money from the more 
traditional universities; and the further changes led by the Coalition 
government. All this means that most graduate students in English 
will have no chance of working in academia (if that’s what they want: 
there’s plenty of material now available about the ways in which the skills 
gained from graduate study make PhDs gold dust for other professions).7 
Many academics in English now younger than 50 may be looking at 
redundancy well before retirement (see again, sadly, the case of modern 
languages).
But there are other threats, too. The reform of the GCSE in English 
Literature might worry us: it has been made heavier and more challeng-
ing, and more traditionally canonical. For some this is an improvement, 
others worry that this will discourage some students from taking it. 
There was a media fuss in summer 2014 over the fact that Of Mice and 
Men was ‘banned’ from this exam. Apart from the fact that this brou-
haha was nearly a year late (the time to influence opinion was when the 
exam syllabi were being planned, a semi-public process, not when the 
final syllabi were announced) and that it was played out in ignorance of 
how the examination reform system actually worked (Michael Gove, of 
whom more later, did not and could not ‘ban’ a text), this controversy 
showed how contentious, how near the national nerves the discipline is. 
The most recent figures suggest that there has been a growth of students 
taking the exam a year early (in year 10, not year 11); how this will alter the 
discipline is not yet clear. A-level literature isn’t thriving either. Whereas 
www.ebook3000.com


The Future of English and Institutional Consciousness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
there has been a 2.4 per cent increase in students studying English at 
A-level since 2008, there has been a 5 per cent increase in entries to all 
subjects, so English is becoming slowly less popular.
In HE, too, it’s not all rosy: low contact hours in English at leading 
departments have led to questions in the House of Commons and are 
regularly commented on in the press. How is English as a discipline 
responding to the student-as-consumer ethos? How is it supporting new 
staff? The Higher Education Academy (HEA) and University English – 
the body for academics in English departments – run some ‘New to 
teaching courses’, but are these being used widely in the discipline? Many 
of these issues were dealt with by the much-loved and now much-missed 
English Subject Centre, one of the first direct victims of recent cuts to 
the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE)’s budget.
If English teaching is in trouble, so too is English research, where huge 
changes stemming from open access are afoot. The internet is, of course, 
changing everything, including academic publishing (which amounts 
to a third of all publishing globally). The argument runs: academics 
write research and give it to publishers (as articles for journals, mainly) 
who in turn sell this back to universities and the public for a profit (as 
academic journals, for example, to which university libraries subscribe). 
Why should universities and the public pay to get back what they have 
created? Why can’t academics, teachers and students in HE have free, 
open access to this work? Surely this would have a profound impact on 
teachers, who would be able to read, for free, the most up-to-date criti-
cism on the subject? This situation is incredibly fluid, as the publishers 
fight a rearguard action – and here, for us, the threat is just as much an 
opportunity as I will suggest later.
Over some of these threats – wider and profounder social change, the 
construction of a world in which the humanities have less of place – we 
have no control and I’m not going to address these here: for example, I’m 
not at all sure that literary criticism and theory can, by themselves, bring 
down world capitalism and usher in a new age of equality.
But we do have, or could have, much more influence than we know 
over some of these threats. That we don’t consider our ability to influ-
ence events, that we sometimes talk as if we were passive victims, rabbits 
in headlights, reflects, I think, a form of disengagement from the institu-
tion of English by some – perhaps a majority, but with many honour-
able exceptions – from two previous generations of English academics 
in higher education. The disengagement means that thinking about 

 
Robert Eaglestone
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
the discipline as a discipline, or, more, thinking about the discipline as an 
institution seems to have become enervated and deeply unfashionable. 
Oddly, in a discipline seemingly so worried about its social mission, say, 
or its imperial and colonial roots, or what latent ideologies lurk under its 
surface, the (perhaps duller) institutional matters have often been passed 
over in silence.
The causes of this generational disengagement are several. Some of 
them are laudable in their own right but have had unintended conse-
quences. They include: a concentration on research (hot-housed by the 
Research Assessment Exercise/Research Excellence Framework and its 
career demands, of course); the hierarchical structure of universities; a 
focus on one’s own institution (especially if that happens to be one of 
the bigger and more powerful institutions); a focus on historical peri-
ods and the growth of powerful period-based disciplinary associations 
(the British Association of Victorian Studies, the Modernist Studies 
Association and so on); a focus on some wider goal (perhaps political), 
as well as the day-to-day demands of work, teaching and life. Nobody 
can be blamed for being too busy doing their job, or for their own ambi-
tion and interest in their careers or even the sort of (telescopic) philan-
thropism of some wider cause. But the unintended consequences are 
damaging. These factors were mitigated, to some degree, by the English 
Subject Centre, with its care for the discipline and wide remit. It ran 
projects, conferences and training days, and provided a series of reports 
on issues that affected the discipline and helped cement this fissiparous 
subject in a myriad of ways, until it was disbanded.8 But all these factors 
have meant that a sense of the discipline as a whole has decayed and 
needs, I think, to be regenerated. I am going to analyse some part of the 
situation and tell you what I think we can and should do about it, for 
our good and for the good of the discipline. Or rather, the good of our 
institution, because in order to save English, it is no good to think of it as 
a discipline in the traditional sense; indeed, this is perhaps the first step 
in thinking about what we can do. We need a better and more inclusive 
analysis of what English is in a wider sense.
English as an institution
English – like all disciplines – is more than simply a subject: it is an 
institution. To understand it properly, we can borrow some insights 
www.ebook3000.com


The Future of English and Institutional Consciousness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
from a man who was, without question, the most politically influential 
English graduate in the UK until his sudden and unexpected demotion 
in July 2014. Judging from blogs and op-ed columns, those on the left 
misunderstood why the former Sectary of State for Education, Michael 
Gove, liked and quoted Antonio Gramsci. It was not a tease to epaté the 
left; it was not because he approved of Gramsci’s views on education 
per se. Rather, like Raymond Williams and Stuart Hall (whom perhaps 
Mr Gove encountered during his English degree in the mid-1980s), he 
found in Gramsci a sort of anthropology of modern culture and of the 
organizations and channels through which power is deployed. Whereas 
Gramsci’s later interpreters focussed on domination itself (cultural 
hegemony), rather than the boring historical on-the-ground details, 
Gramsci himself was also concerned with the details – with the Italian 
teaching unions, for example. We in the humanities should have learned 
from Gramsci (and from Michel Foucault, and from Jacques Derrida) 
that these boring institutional issues shape our thought more than we 
commonly acknowledge or admit. Institutions are not just corporations 
and bodies (prisons, hospitals, universities, schools) but ways of think-
ing, habits and formations that stem from, shape and reinforce these 
more concrete manifestations. And to effect change, you need to funnel 
your ideas through these contingent channels.
In a liberal democracy like ours, the relationship between the State and 
the institutions that make up the polity is complex and fluid, constantly 
under renegotiation. As we know from Foucault, the State does not fully 
control most institutions, and the flows and movements of power are 
multifarious and diffuse. Universities, for example, are not state organi-
zations, but autonomous establishments that are licenced by the State, 
and sell their services mainly to the State (or to students, lent money by 
the State).9 But Gramsci’s point – and Gove’s, and, although he doesn’t 
share Gramsci’s revolutionary enthusiasm, Foucault’s too – remains the 
same: to change things you need to change institutions.
But what is the institution of English? Institutions are much wider 
than we may at first think and what the institution of English really 
might be I have never once seen addressed in a full sense. So here are 
some aspects – a sketch – of the wider, fuller institution of English. It is 
a complex and variegated institution made up of many more parts than 
simply the work of university English departments.
It can seem that English is a stream of ideas about texts: our numbers 
in the Dewey decimal system, our articles, our journals, our PhDs. But 

 
Robert Eaglestone
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
in a way, this archive is the residue of doing English: the publications and 
research that have come out of the process of reading and criticism. Or – 
to use a kinder metaphor – perhaps these are the seeds, dropped from 
the trees, and slowly germinating underground to produce a renewed 
forest. However, the seeds of trees are only one part of the whole forest, 
and the forest itself is only one part of the whole ecosystem.
Perhaps the academic staff or faculty are the central components of the 
institution of English. It can certainly seem this way to academics. There 
are around 1,500 full-time UK staff in English (rather scandalously, no 
one actually knows how many – this is an estimate) in around a hundred 
departments of English.10 And perhaps around a thousand research 
students too (again, no one knows quite how many). There are those too 
in cognate departments – creative writing, drama and theatre studies, 
cultural studies, some media departments – doing work that might be 
recognized as ‘English’ (but also, of course, work that is radically differ-
ent too). We are certainly one element of the institution of English.
But this is too limited a view of the institution. It excludes those who 
have the experience of being taught and, as it were, the process of teach-
ing itself. As Ben Knights argues:
[B]odies of knowledge and pedagogic practices are inextricably linked. 
Subjects are produced in the dialogues of the corridor and classroom as 
much as in the monograph or learned journal. Professional debates embed 
and promote styles of pedagogy and intellectual history is simultaneously 
the history of educational practices. Disciplines as bodies of knowledge are 
simultaneously communities of practice, performing their own protocols for 
argument and dialogue.11
Our students and graduates, too, are part of the institution, shaped and 
formed by English. The universities and their own complex histories 
have also shaped English as a subject (even if English has often seemed 
to want to be a ‘counter’ institution to the university). For example, the 
success of close reading and New Criticism have been seen as a response 
to the widening of higher education in the USA in the middle of the 
twentieth century. The turn to theory in the UK in the 1980s is some-
times ascribed to the growth of universities without large and ancient 
libraries and resources (and perhaps the rise of the History of the Book 
is a contemporary response to the demand by universities for clear, 
unambiguous archival knowledge following the model of a positivistic 
historicism). And on top of this, the huge range of adult education 
www.ebook3000.com


The Future of English and Institutional Consciousness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
courses and other learners and teachers of English have not only shaped 
the discipline in the past, as recent research has shown, but also continue 
to influence its present.12
But the institution of English is not limited to the academy. It also, 
perforce, includes those publishers and businesses that are intimately 
and explicitly involved in English. Those presses that make money – 
perhaps excessively – from journals are one key part of the institution. 
So are the academic presses who market and sell books written by 
academics by recommending them to our peers, libraries and students. 
But not just academic presses: Penguin, part of Penguin Random House, 
is part of English. A very high percentage of Penguin Classics – that 
is, a crucial and profitable part of their backlist – must presumably be 
sold to English students. Even publishers of contemporary literature are 
connected to English: if you liked your course on neo-Victorian fiction, 
you are more likely to buy the new Sarah Waters. And should your novel 
be ‘canonized’, be widely taught in HE, and then in turn be taught in 
secondary education (by people who studied it in HE) and then arrive (I 
suppose a few years after publication) on the reading lists of the A-level 
exam boards – well, it will make quite a lot of money. Everyone who 
works in contemporary fiction has a bad story about literary agents: I 
wonder how long it will take them to realize that they are slowly biting 
the hand that feeds them. English extends to the media (both paper and 
digital) and to literary festivals, theatre and other forms of culture and 
cultural performance. This is to say, really, that the impact of the subject 
across the social and cultural realm is diffuse but real and powerful, and 
pertains, in some way, to the institution of English. Public engagement 
is not simply something added to the list of academic chores but, in our 
subject at least, intrinsic to it.
Multimillion dollar business though it is, publishing is perhaps not the 
most important part of the institution of English. This is the discipline 
at secondary level education: schools and schoolteachers. This really is 
the huge core of English as an institution: there are more teachers in 
secondary education than in HE (there are just under 5,000 secondary 
schools in the UK while there are around 100 HE English departments). 
Each year some 50,000 students do English Literature A-level (less than 
10 years ago it was around 60,000). The secondary school system is 
not only large in itself, but also has a large penumbra: the exam boards 
(companies and educational charities that make money by selling 
qualifications to schools); publishers who offer texts for this market; 

 
Robert Eaglestone
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
companies – again, usually educational charities, like the wonderful 
English and Media Centre, which support this level of teaching – and, of 
course, the monopoly broker of deals between individuals and universi-
ties: UCAS. But teachers, who were our students and in turn encourage 
and enthuse their students to become our students, are central.
This is a quick and rough sketch of what the institution of English 
actually looks like: much bigger and more diverse and complicated, and 
conflicted, than one might think. It seems to me vital for the future of 
English that we engage more, right across this institution. This is different 
from calls to present the ‘public understanding of English’ for example, 
as if English were simply a positivistic subject in which experts could 
(as, say, we imagine scientists do) find things out and then, simplifying 
to an appropriate level, reproduce these for a wider public. The sort of 
knowledge English often produces – tentative, dialogic, interpretive, 
critical – is not the sort that, for example, more traditional historians 
produce: a narrative supported by selected evidence. Moreover, this failed 
idea suggests that there is a private sphere (the university, the archive, 
the seminar room) and a public sphere (out there) and knowledge can 
simply be translated from one to the other. This is just not the case in our 
subject: it is simply too diffuse. The ‘public understanding’ of English is a 
more complex, and perhaps gentler, more dialogic idea.
Two examples
I suggested earlier that it was only by having a better-informed sense of 
the discipline as a more widespread and inclusive institution that we can 
begin to understand and engage with the threats it faces. I will now offer 
two brief examples of the way we might engage positively with the wider 
institution of English.
In relation to open access, it seems clear that the traditional (legacy) 
publishers – like the music industry, the tourist industry and various 
parts of the high street before them – will lose to both the power of 
the internet and the justice of the argument. It may be that, given the 
amount of free work academics do for journals, universities could move 
to an open and self-organized publishing system, and take journals – as 
well as innovative new forms of publishing – back in house. Instead of 
universities paying thousands of pounds for publications in journals, 
they could use the money – indeed perhaps much less money, as it’s 
www.ebook3000.com


The Future of English and Institutional Consciousness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
not for profit – for academic departments to cover the small extra costs 
of producing the journals and maintaining them online. Indeed, self-
organizing bodies like the ‘Open Library of the Humanities’ are starting 
to explore these sorts of possibilities.13 This is one reformation of the 
institution which stems from a reflection on that institution.
However, it seems to me that the easiest area for academics and 
graduate students to become involved with, and in my view the most 
important area too, is that of English at secondary level. It is here that 
the university students are, in the main, made, and here too that teachers 
need effective support. The ecosystem of English in schools is complex 
and demanding, and school English – much more so than in HE – is 
bound into the state and wider educational debates.
But what are the opportunities for becoming involved? Of course, 
universities do get involved with schools, but should do this even more. 
Individuals can contact schools (phone, ask who the Head of English is, 
then email politely); departments can do the same; networks of teach-
ers can be developed, or it may even be possible to ‘plug in’ to extant 
networks. Here is a case study of how this wider institution operates, 
focusing on how AS and A2 exams used to work, based on my experi-
ence of reviewing Curriculum 2000 in 2005 and on the current more 
haphazard reforms.14 The exam boards – three in England, one in Wales 
and one in Northern Ireland – sell their qualifications to schools and 
colleges. Each exam board in England (AQA, OCR, EdEXCEL) has a 
slightly different history and has developed slightly different A-levels. 
However, under the last government, their syllabi were monitored by 
the Qualification and Curriculum Development Authority. The QCDA 
set up a specification, a guideline for what an A-level in English should 
contain: at least these many texts and these sorts of questions. Because 
all courses are, in addition to everything else, assessment-driven – that’s 
what makes them courses and not reading groups – the QCDA devel-
oped the Assessment Objectives (AOs: descriptions of exactly what is 
being assessed) and then revised these in 2005. This was done through 
a committee of about 12 people for each subject: teachers, educational 
developers and, I was surprised to discover, only one or two academics. 
The exam boards had to match material to these objectives, so in a sense 
the AOs became the deep structure of the examinations.
In English, Assessment Objective 1 asked for a personal but informed 
response and the correct use of critical terms; AO2 was about how struc-
ture, form and language shape texts (we might call that close reading); 

 
Robert Eaglestone
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
AO3 concerned interpretations of other readers (the influence of other 
critics and theorists in understanding a work of literature); AO4 the 
historical context and, interestingly, the contemporary context too. We 
rewrote these AOs in 2005–06 in order to try to bring much of school 
English closer to how English is in higher education – that is, really to 
stress what we might call theory. These AOs sound rather mathematical 
and dry, and indeed they are. But they reflect the need to provide fair 
and equal assessment across the country, for 50,000 students a year, and 
the need to be transparent as far as possible about what is being assessed. 
Because of this dryness, the AOs are not very popular. Often less confi-
dent teachers feel they have to break down responses to texts, percent-
age by percentage, objective by objective, in terribly mathematical and 
inorganic (and ‘unEnglish-y’) ways. A sentiment widely expressed is that 
this is ‘not how we do things’ in English, that how we operate tends to 
the holistic and synoptic.
In response to the QCDA, the exam boards then wrote syllabi that 
met the specifications and submitted them to the QCDA, who looked 
them over, and then agreed that they did (or did not) meet the specifi-
cations. Again, the QCDA here consisted of a small group of teachers, 
academics (two) and educational developers. The QCDA maintained 
oversight on A-level. However, the QCDA was ended on 31 March 2012, 
as part of the government’s cuts (the ‘bonfire of the quangos’). Some of 
its responsibilities were replaced by the Standards and Testing Agency 
and some by the Teaching Agency. However, responsibility for A-level 
basically disappeared, leaving the English Literature A-level without 
oversight. This is one reason the government was so desperate to get the 
Russell Group universities involved: because there is no longer any way 
to enforce what English (or any subject) is at A-level. It is entirely down 
to how the exam boards decide to shape the subject, and to their sales to 
schools and colleges. That said, most of the exam boards have taken this 
very seriously and have advanced carefully, announcing their syllabi in 
summer 2014. But it isn’t clear what might happen if one of their revised 
A-levels is just no good.
Very different pressures, including the creation and judgement of 
assessment objectives (worked on by academics without much right to 
speak for the discipline); the impact of government policy, both educa-
tional and financial; the meeting of different sectors and agencies and 
the interaction of very different motives (political, financial, pedagogic); 
all serve to shape the institution of English. But the issue here is not 
www.ebook3000.com


The Future of English and Institutional Consciousness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
simply one of what has happened, and what might happen in the future: 
it is about the possibilities for engagement. Academics in English must 
become involved in these bureaucratic, committee-led sorts of activities – 
as well as in school visits, forms of support to teachers, and so on – in 
order to shape the subject. However, there was, and is, a tangible reluc-
tance on behalf of HE academics in our discipline to become involved 
in these ways. Despite attempts from, for example, the English Subject 
Centre, there has been a reluctance to find out how A-levels work, what 
texts and ideas might be taught, and even how the architecture of change 
at this level might change what English is more widely (often because of 
the reasons I cited earlier). This is incredibly short sighted.
Conclusion
I have suggested that the future of English is under threat and I have 
suggested ways to begin to address this, or, at least, ways to begin to 
think about how to address this.
While I was involved with the A-level reform process, I was party to a 
conversation about the Assessment Objectives. For History, the point of 
the A-level is to teach students to think as a historian; for Geography, to 
think as a geographer; for Physics, as a physicist; for English, as a – well, 
as some sixth formers I spoke to this year said, as an ‘Englisher’ – more 
properly, and perhaps a bit grandiosely, as a literary critic. All disciplines 
are created by the questions they ask, and the canons and archive they 
create in asking and answering those questions. A geographer looks over 
a beautiful landscape and deepens her appreciation of its beauty and 
interest by asking herself what geomorphological processes created the 
hills and the valleys in such a way; similarly, a literary critic looks over a 
wonderful text and responds personally and by asking the sorts of ques-
tions literary critics ask. In this way, the AOs were supposed to be not a 
prescription of the subject, but a description of the subject: to describe the 
sorts of things that literary critics do. More widely, Ben Knights calls this 
a ‘script’, and says that studying English ‘involves learning certain scripts 
and identifying with the behaviours associated with the script’.15 Some of 
these are formal (styles of reading and writing, for example) and some 
are informal, a range of almost unconscious rituals, assumptions and 
discourses. These make up what one might call part of the ‘disciplinary 
consciousness’ of English, whether in HE or in years 12 and 13.

 
Robert Eaglestone
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
If this ‘disciplinary consciousness’ forms an important but inchoate and 
hard-to-pin-down sense of who we are and what we do, I think we also 
need to develop quickly a sense of institutional consciousness, a sense of 
the wider political, social and educational context in which our discipline 
exists: English as extended family. This wider context doesn’t come from 
simply browsing the news sites (not least because journalists often get 
things muddled, following the headline not the real issues), it comes 
from a detailed and informed engagement with specific areas of this 
institution, an awareness of the problems and difficulties each part faces, 
as well as a self-reflective awareness of one’s own interests and vision (or 
lack thereof). Our disciplinary bodies – University English, the English 
Association, the National Association of Writers in English – have a role 
to play here as well in fostering this. But perhaps most of all, it needs the 
current generation of academics to look up and around and to see what 
threats face them, and how these might be dealt with by their large, active, 
popular and important discipline. My experience of working in this wider 
institution of English has been utterly positive. We have friends and allies 
all around. We are well thought of. We just need to reach out and engage.
Notes
Some portions of this chapter stem from an article which I co-wrote with 
 
Simon Kövesi, ‘English: Why the Discipline May Not Be “Too Big To Fail”’, 
Times Higher Education, 31 October 2013, and a similar piece, Eaglestone and 
Kövesi, ‘The State of English 2014 – A View from Higher Education’, Teaching 
English, 4, 2014, pp. 18–21.
John Carey, 
 
The Unexpected Professor, London, Faber and Faber, 2014, pp. 
205–6. He goes onto say that he resolved ‘never to write such stuff myself and 
to deride it whenever I came across it’.
The data that informs this statement is currently not in the public domain, as 
 
it was disclosed at a confidential exam board meeting.
Clearing is how universities and colleges fill any places they still have on their 
 
courses. See <http://www.ucas.com/how-it-all-works>.
<
 
http://www.ucas.com/data-analysis>.
<
 
http://www.thestudentsurvey.com/>.
A report
 
 published in May 2014 described a ‘long-term academic job market 
that provides tenure-track employment for only around sixty per cent of 
doctorate recipients’: ‘Report of the MLA Task Force on Doctoral Study in 
Modern Language and Literature’, <http://www.mla.org/report_doctoral_
study_2014>, p.1. The situation in the UK is much, much worse.
www.ebook3000.com


The Future of English and Institutional Consciousness
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0014
The Academy’s
 
 ‘legacy’ website is well worth looking at to have a sense of the 
shape of the field: <http://www.english.heacademy.ac.uk/>.
For more on the university 
 
per se, see Stefan Collini, What Are Universities 
For?, London, Penguin, 2012; and, in a more theoretical vein, Simon Morgan 
Wortham, Counter-Institutions: Jacques Derrida and the Question of the 
University, New York, Fordham University Press, 2006.
The University English website lists 97 English departments in the UK:  
 
<http://www.ccue.ac.uk/links/english-departments.html>.
Ben 
 
Knights, ‘Intelligence and Interrogation: The Identity of the English 
Student’, Arts and Humanities in Higher Education, 4.1, 2005, pp. 33–52, pp. 
33–4.
Alexandra Lawrie, 
 
The Beginnings of University English: Extramural Study, 
1885–1910, Basingstoke, Palgrave, 2014.
<https://www.openlibhums.org/>.
 
In 2000 the A-level (traditionally an exam taken at the end of two years of study) 
 
was reformed, bringing in a two-year modularized programme consisting of AS 
(Advanced Subsidiary) level in the first year, and A2 in the second year.
Knights, ‘Intelligence and Interrogation’, p. 34.
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
 
Bibliography
Adams, Richard (2014) ‘University of London Plan 
to Close Institute of English Studies on Hold’, The 
Guardian, 23 May.
Allan, Rebecca (2006) A Wider Perspective and More 
Options: Investigating the Longer Term Employability of 
Humanities Graduates, Southampton: Subject Centre for 
Languages, Linguistics and Area Studies.
Arnold, Matthew (1889) A Bible Reading for Schools: 
The Great Prophecy of Israel’s Restoration, London: 
Macmillan.
Arnold, Matthew (1908) Reports on Elementary Schools, 
1852–1882, London: His Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Arnold, Matthew (1960) Culture and Anarchy, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Arnold, Matthew (1974) ‘Literature and Science,’ in Robert 
Henry Super (ed.) Philistinism in England and America, 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. pp. 53–73.
Atherton, Carol (2005) Defining Literary Criticism: 
Scholarship, Authority and the Possession of Literary 
Knowledge, 1880–2002, Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Attridge, Derek (2004) The Singularity of Literature, 
London: Routledge.
Bailar, Melissa (2010) ‘Emerging Disciplines: Shaping 
New Fields of Scholarly Inquiry in and beyond the 
Humanities’, Rice University’s Digital Scholarship 
series, OpenStax-CNX, <http://cnx.org/content/
col11201/1.1/>.
Baldick, Chris (1983) The Social Mission of English Criticism: 
1848–1932, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
www.ebook3000.com


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
Barrett, Fiona M. (2014) ‘The Brave Side of Digital Humanities’, 
differences, 25.1, pp. 64–78.
Becher, Tony and Paul R. Trowler (2001) Academic Tribes and Territories: 
Intellectual Enquiry and the Cultures of Discipline, Buckingham: Open 
University Press.
Bennett, Alan (2004) The History Boys, London: Faber and Faber.
Bohannon, John (2013) ‘Who’s Afraid of Peer Review?’, Science, 4, 
342.6154, pp. 60–5.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1986) ‘The Forms of Capital’ in John G. Richardson 
(ed.) Handbook of Theory and Research for the Sociology of Education, 
New York: Greenwood, pp. 241–58.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1990) The Logic of Practice, trans. Richard Nice, 
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1993) The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and 
Literature, Randal Johnson (ed. and trans.), Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1996) Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of 
Taste, trans. Richard Nice, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre and Jean-Claude Passeron (1973) ‘Cultural 
Reproduction and Social Reproduction’ in Richard K. Brown (ed.) 
Knowledge, Education, and Cultural Change: Papers in the Sociology of 
Education, London: Tavistock, pp. 71–112.
Bourdieu, Pierre and Jean-Claude Passeron (1977) Reproduction: In 
Education, Society and Culture, trans. Richard Nice, London and 
Beverley Hills: Sage.
Bourdieu, Pierre, Alain Darbel and Dominique Schnapper (1991) The 
Love of Art: European Art Museums and Their Publics, trans. Caroline 
Beattie and Nick Merriman, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bozeman, Barry (2007) Public Values and Public Interest: Counterbalancing 
Economic Individualism, Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University 
Press.
Bruce, Susan (2012) ‘Using Your Profanisaurus: Comparisons, 
Analogies, and Cultural Capital in Two English Literature Seminars’, 
Arts and Humanities in Higher Education, 12.1, pp. 53–69.
Bruce, Susan, Ken Jones and Monica McLean (2007) ‘Some Notes on a 
Project: Democracy and Authority in the Production of a Discipline’, 
Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to Teaching Literature, Language, 
Composition, and Culture, 7.3, pp. 481–500.
Buurma, Rachel Sagner and Laura Heffernan (2012) ‘The Common Reader 
and the Archival Classroom’, New Literary History, 43.1, pp.113–35.

 
Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
Carey, John (1992) The Intellectuals and the Masses: Pride and Prejudice 
Among the Literary Intelligentsia, 1880–1939, London: Faber and Faber.
Carey, John (2014) The Unexpected Professor, London: Faber and Faber.
Cartmell, Deborah (2003) English in the Workplace, English Subject 
Centre, <http://www.english. heacademy.ac.uk/projects/archive/
careers/careers2.php>.
Chalabi, Mona (2013) ‘A-Level Results 2013: The Complete Breakdown’, 
The Guardian, 15 August.
Churchland, Patricia (1989) Neurophilosophy, Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Collini, Stefan (2012) ‘ “The Chatto List”: Publishing Literary Criticism 
in Mid-Twentieth-Century Britain’, Review of English Studies, 63, pp. 
634–63.
Collini, Stefan (2012) What Are Universities For?, London: Penguin.
Collini, Stefan (2013) ‘Sold Out’, London Review of Books, 35.20, pp. 3–12.
Cuddy-Keane, Melba (2010) ‘Narration, Navigation and Non-Conscious 
Thought: Neuroscientific and Literary Approaches to the Thinking 
Body’, University of Toronto Quarterly, 79:2, pp. 680–701.
de Certeau, Michel (1984) The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven F. 
Rendall, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Department of Business, Innovation and Skills Student Charter Group 
(2011) ‘Student Charters to Help Students Get the Most Out of 
Higher Education’.
Department of Education (2014) ‘Update on Progress 8 Measure and 
Reforms to Secondary School Accountability Framework’, <https://
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/269438/update_progress_8_measure_secondary_school_
accountability_framework_reforms.pdf>
Derrida, Jacques (2002) ‘The University without Condition’ in Derrida, 
Peggy Kamuf (trans. and ed.), Without Alibi, Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, pp. 202–37.
Docherty, Thomas (2006) Aesthetic Democracy, Stanford: Stanford 
University Press.
Docherty, Thomas (2011) ‘The Unseen Academy’, Times Higher 
Education, 10 November.
Docherty, Thomas (2011) For the University: Democracy and the Future of 
the Institution, London and New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Eaglestone, Robert and Simon Kövesi (2014) ‘The State of English 
2014 – A View from Higher Education’, Teaching English, 4, pp. 18–21.
www.ebook3000.com


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
Eaglestone, Robert and Simon Kövesi (2013) ‘English: Why the 
Discipline May Not Be “Too Big to Fail” ’, Times Higher Education, 31 
October.
Eaglestone, Robert and Simon Kövesi (2013) ‘What Happens in The 
Tempest?’, Times Higher Education Supplement, 2125, 31 October.
Eagleton, Terry (2008) ‘The Rise of English’ in Literary Theory: An 
Introduction, 3rd edn, Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 15–46.
Eliot, T. S. (1921) ‘The Metaphysical Poets’, Times Literary Supplement, 20 
October.
Ellis, David (2013) Memoirs of a Leavisite: The Decline and Fall of 
Cambridge English, Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Epstein, Russell (2004) ‘Consciousness, Art and the Brain: Lessons 
from Marcel Proust’, Consciousness and Cognition, 13, 2004, pp. 
213–40.
Evans, Colin (1993) English People: The Experience of Teaching and 
Learning English in British Universities, Buckingham: Open University 
Press.
Finch, Janet, et al. (2012) Accessibility, Sustainability, Excellence: How to 
Expand Access to Research Publications, Working Group on Expanding 
Access to Published Research Findings.
Fish, Stanley (1980) Is There a Text in This Class?: The Authority of 
Interpretive Communities, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Fontaine, Sheryl I. and Stephen J. Mexal (2014) ‘Closing Deals with 
Hamlet’s Help: Assessing the Instrumental Value of an English 
Degree’, College English, 76.4, March 2014, pp. 357–78.
Foucault, Michel (1972) The Archaeology of Knowledge, trans. A. M. 
Sheridan-Smith, New York: Pantheon.
Foucault, Michel (1984) ‘What Is an Author?’ in Paul Rabinow (ed.), The 
Foucault Reader, New York: Pantheon Books, pp. 101–20.
Garner, Richard (2014) ‘Shock Slump in English A-level Candidates 
Blamed on GCSE Marking Crisis’, The Independent, 28 July.
Goldsmith, Arnold L. (1968) ‘Literary Study Guides in High School and 
College: Supplement or Substitute’, The English Journal, 57.6,  
pp. 803–12.
Gottschall, Jonathan and David Sloan Wilson (eds) (2005) The 
Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative, Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press.
Graff, Gerald (2007) Professing Literature: An Institutional History, 2nd 
edn, Chicago: Chicago University Press.

 
Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
Guillory, John (1994) Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon 
Formation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gunn, Vicky (2014) ‘Mimetic Desire and Intersubjectivity in 
Disciplinary Cultures: Constraints or Enablers to Learning in Higher 
Education?’, Studies in Continuing Education, 36.1, pp. 67–82.
Habermas, Jürgen (1989) The Structural Transformation of the Public 
Sphere, trans. Thomas Burger and Frederick Lawrence, Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Habermas, Jürgen (1984, 1987) The Theory of Communicative Action, 
trans. Thomas McCarthy, 2 vols, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hancock, Evan (2013) ‘Arts, Creative Arts and Humanities Overview’, 
Higher Education Careers Services Unit Reports, <http://www.hecsu.
ac.uk/assets/assets/documents/Wdgd_arts_humanities_2013.pdf>.
Hernadi, Paul (2002) ‘Why Is Literature: A Coevolutionary Perspective 
on Imaginative Worldmaking’, Poetics Today, 23.1, pp. 21–42.
Higher Education Statistics Agency, Destination of Leavers from 
Higher Education Institutions: Longitudinal Survey of the 2004/05 
Cohort, Key Findings Report 2009, <https://www.hesa.ac.uk/dox/
dlhe_longitudinal/0405/Long_DLHE_0405_WEB.pdf>.
Hilliard, Christopher (2012) English as a Vocation: The ‘Scrutiny’ 
Movement, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hirsch, Eric Donald (1967) Validity in Interpretation, New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1967.
Hodgson, John (2010) The Experience of Studying English in UK Higher 
Education, Report Series no. 20, The Higher Education Academy: 
English Subject Centre.
Hunter, Ian (1994) Rethinking the School: Subjectivity, Bureaucracy, 
Criticism, New York: St Martin’s Press.
Huxley, Thomas Henry (1893) ‘Science and Culture’ in Science and 
Education, London: Macmillan, pp. 134–59.
Ikin, Alfred E. (ed.) (1937) Milton: Paradise Lost Book I, Brodie’s Chosen 
English Texts, London: James Brodie.
Jackson, Tony E. (2002) ‘Issues and Problems in the Blending of 
Cognitive Science, Evolutionary Psychology, and Literary Study’, 
Poetics Today, 23.1, pp.161–79.
Jancovich, Mark (1993) The Cultural Politics of the New Criticism, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jockers, Matthew L. (2013) Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary 
History, Champaign: University of Illinois Press.
www.ebook3000.com


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
Johnson, Mark and George Lakoff (2003) Metaphors We Live By, 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jump, Paul (2013) ‘Quartet Pay Hefty Admission Fee to Join Elite Club’, 
Times Higher Education, 30 May.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew (2014) ‘What Is “Digital Humanities” and Why 
Are They Saying Such Terrible Things About It?’, differences, 25.1, pp. 
46–63.
Knights, Ben (2005) ‘Intelligence and Interrogation: The Identity of the 
English Student’, Arts and Humanities in Higher Education, 4.1, pp. 33–52.
Knights, Ben (2010) ‘The Implied Aesthetic of English Teaching’, 
WordPlay, 3, <http://www.english.heacademy.ac.uk/explore/
publications/magazine/wordplay3/knights.htm>.
Knights, Ben and Chris Thurgar-Dawson (2006) Active Reading, 
London: Continuum.
Langer, Suzanne K. (1953) Feeling and Form, London: Routledge.
Lawley, James and Penny Tompkins (2000) Metaphors in Mind: 
Transformation Through Symbolic Modelling, London: The Developing 
Company Press.
Lawrie, Alexandra (2014) The Beginnings of University English: Extramural 
Study, 1885–1910, Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Leavis, F. R. (1930) Mass Civilisation and Minority Culture, London: 
Chatto and Windus.
Leavis, F. R. (1943) Education and the University: A Sketch for an ‘English 
School’, London: Chatto and Windus.
Leavis, F. R. (1952) The Common Pursuit, London: Chatto and Windus.
Leavis, F. R. (1972) ‘Two Cultures? The Significance of Lord Snow’ in 
Nor Shall My Sword: Discourses on Pluralism, Compassion and Social 
Hope, London: Chatto and Windus, pp. 41–74.
Leavis, F. R. (2011) Education and the University, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Leavis, F. R. and Denys Thompson (1964) Culture and Environment: The 
Training of Critical Awareness, London: Chatto and Windus.
Leavis, Q. D. (1979) Fiction and the Reading Public, Harmondsworth: 
Penguin.
Lodge, David (2000) Consciousness and the Novel: Collected Essays, 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Martin, Philip W. (2006) ‘Introduction: The Condition of the Subject’ in 
Philip Martin (ed.) English: The Condition of the Subject, Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 1–18.

 
Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
Mathieson, Margaret (1975) The Preachers of Culture: The Study of English 
and Its Teachers, London: Allen and Unwin.
Mayer-Schönberger, Viktor (2011) Delete: The Virtue of Forgetting in the 
Digital Age, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
McAdams, Dan (1993) The Stories We Live By: Personal Myths and the 
Making of the Self, New York and London: The Guilford Press.
McCash, Phil (2008) Career Studies Handbook: Career Development 
Learning in Practice, Higher Education Academy.
McGettigan, Andrew (2013) The Great University Gamble: Money, Markets 
and the Future of Higher Education, London: Pluto.
McQuail, Denis (1992) Media Performance: Mass Communication and the 
Public Interest, London and New Delhi: Sage.
Medawar, Peter B. (1969) Induction and Intuition in Scientific Thought, 
London: Methuen.
Modern Languages Association (2014) ‘Report of the Task Force on 
Doctoral Study in Modern Language and Literature’, <http://www.
mla.org/report_doctoral_study_2014>.
Moretti, Franco (2005) Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary 
History, London: Verso.
Moretti, Franco (2013) Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary 
History, Champaign: University of Illinois Press.
Morgan Wortham, Simon (2006) Counter-Institutions: Jacques Derrida and 
the Question of the University, New York: Fordham University Press.
Mulgan, Richard (2000) ‘Accountability’: An Ever-Expanding Concept?’, 
Public Administration, 78, pp. 555–73.
Mulhern, Francis (1979) The Moment of ‘Scrutiny’, London: New Left Books.
National Co-Ordinating Centre for Public Engagement (2010) The 
Engaged University: A Manifesto for Public Engagement.
Nauert, C. G. (2006) Humanism and the Culture of Renaissance Europe, 
2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nederman, Cary J. (2000) ‘Rhetoric, Reason and Republic: 
Republicanisms – Ancient, Medieval and Modern’ in James Hankins 
(ed.), Renaissance Civic Humanism: Reappraisals and Reflections, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 247–69.
Newbolt Report (1921) The Teaching of English in England, London: His 
Majesty’s Stationery Office.
OECD (2010) Performance-Based Funding for Public Research in 
Tertiary Education Institutions: Workshop Proceedings, OECD 
Publishing.
www.ebook3000.com


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
Osteen, Mark and Martha Woodmansee (1999) ‘Taking Account of 
the New Economic Criticism: An Historical Introduction’, in Mark 
Osteen and Martha Woodmansee (eds), The New Economic Criticism: 
Studies at the Intersection of Literature and Economics, London: 
Routledge, pp. 3–50.
Papacharissi, Zizi (2002) ‘The Virtual Sphere: The Internet as a Public 
Sphere’, New Media and Society, 4, pp. 9–27.
Pincus, Steven (2007) ‘The State and Civil Society in Early Modern 
England: Capitalism, Causation and Habermas’s Bourgeois Public 
Sphere’, in Peter Lake and Steven Pincus (eds), The Politics of the Public 
Sphere in Early Modern England, Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, pp. 213–31.
Pinker, Steven (1997) How the Mind Works, New York: Norton.
Pinker, Steven (2007) ‘Toward a Consilient Study of Literature’, 
Philosophy and Literature, 31.1, pp. 161–77.
Plato (2009) Plato: Gorgias, Menexenus, Protagoras, Malcolm Schofield 
(ed.), trans. Tom Griffith, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political 
Thought, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Quality Assurance Agency (2007) Subject Benchmark Statement: English, 
3.2, QAA.
Quiller-Couch, Arthur (1916) The Art of Writing, New York: Putnam.
Readings, Bill (1996) The University in Ruins, Cambridge, MA and 
London: Harvard University Press.
Research Councils UK (2013) Public Engagement with Research Strategy.
Richards, I. A. (1929) Practical Criticism: A Study of Literary Judgement, 
London: Kegan Paul, Trench and Trubner.
Richardson, Alan and Francis F. Steen (2002) ‘Literature and the 
Cognitive Revolution: An Introduction’, Poetics Today, 23.1, pp. 1–8.
Ricoeur, Paul (1977) The Rule of Metaphor: The Creation of Meaning in 
Language, trans. R. Czerny with K. McLaughlin and J. Costello SJ, 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Robbins, Lord (Lionel) et al. (1963) Report of the Committee on Higher 
Education, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Rosenblatt, Louise M. (1978) The Reader, the Text, the Poem: The 
Transactional Theory of the Literary Work, Carbondale, IL: Southern 
Illinois University Press.
Said, Edward (1984) The World, the Text, and the Critic, London: Faber.
Said, Edward (2004) Humanism and Democratic Criticism, Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan.

 
Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
Sakel, J. and J. Treffers-Daller (2010) Wider Perspectives and More Options 
for English Language and Linguistics Students, Bristol: University of the 
West of England.
Schreibman, Susan, Ray Siemens and John Unsworth (eds) (2004) A 
Companion to Digital Humanities, Oxford and New York: Blackwell.
Shepherd, Gordon M. and Kirsten Shepherd-Barr (1998) ‘Madeleines 
and Neuromodernism: Reassessing Mechanisms of Autobiographical 
Memory in Proust’, Auto/Biographical Studies, 13:1, pp.39–60.
Shum, Matthew (1997) ‘Culture and the Institution’, Scrutiny 2: Issues in 
English Studies in Southern Africa, 2.1, pp. 5–12.
Small, Helen (2013) The Value of the Humanities, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Snow, C. P. (1993) The Two Cultures, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Swift, Jonathan (1986) A Tale of a Tub and Other Works, Angus Ross and 
David Woolley (eds), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
The Higher English Academy English Subject Centre (2010) Online 
Discussion in English Studies: A Good Practice Guide to Design, 
Moderation and Assessment, Report Series 21.
Turner, Mark (1996) The Literary Mind: The Origins of Thought and 
Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Van Noorden, Richard (2014) ‘Publishers Withdraw More than 120 
Gibberish Papers’, Nature, 24 February.
Waugh, Patricia (1999) ‘Revising the Two Cultures Debate: Science, 
Literature, and Value’, in David Fuller and Patricia Waugh (eds), The 
Arts and Sciences of Criticism, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.33–59.
White, James Boyd (1983) ‘The Ethics of Argument: Plato’s Gorgias and 
the Modern Lawyer’, The University of Chicago Law Review, 50.2, 1983, 
pp. 849–95.
Wilder, Laura (2002) ‘ “Get Comfortable with Uncertainty”: A Study of 
the Conventional Values of Literary Analysis in an Undergraduate 
Literature Course’, Written Communication, 19.1, pp. 175–221.
Wilder, Laura (2012) Rhetorical Strategies and Genre Conventions in 
Literary Studies: Teaching and Writing in the Disciplines, Carbondale, IL: 
Southern Illinois University Press.
Willinsky, John (1990) ‘Matthew Arnold’s Legacy: The Powers of 
Literature’, Research in the Teaching of English, 24.4, pp. 343–61.
www.ebook3000.com


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0015
Wilson, E. O. (2005) ‘Foreword from the Scientific Side’, in Jonathan 
Gottschall and David Sloan Wilson (eds) The Literary Animal, 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, pp. vii–xi.
Woolf, Virginia, (2000) To the Lighthouse, Stella McNichol (ed.), 
London: Penguin.
Woolf, Virginia (2008) ‘The New Biography’, in David Bradshaw (ed.), 
Selected Essays, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 95–100.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0016
 
Index
A-level examinations
in English Literature, 10, 85, 
88, 98, 102–3, 107, 109–11
study guides for, 26, 28
general system of, 11, 32, 
100, 113
university entry grades in, 
84, 97
see also study guides, GCSE
access, widening, 8, 10, 16
accountability, 8, 9, 44, 48, 53, 
58–9
advertising, 29, 55, 85
aesthetic experience, 8, 29–32, 
34, 36–8, 39
affect, 70, 71, 79
archives, 11, 50, 55, 106, 108, 111
Aristotle, 69
Arnold, Matthew, 8, 26, 29–35, 
37, 53, 69
A Bible Reading for Schools, 8, 
25, 31–4
Culture and Anarchy, 63
Art of English conference, 5, 6
assessment, 5, 21, 87–90, 92, 95, 
98, 109–10
Assessment Objectives 
(AOs), 46, 109–11
Atherton, Carol, 27, 34
Attridge, Derek, 7, 8, 79
Austen, Jane, 55, 88
authorship, 51, 56 
author-function, 51
Baldick, Chris, 7, 26, 34
see also intellectual trade 
secret, social mission
behaviourism, 70, 71
benchmark statement, 61
biography, 19, 81
Birmingham, University of, 19
see also cultural studies, 
Stuart Hall
boundary practice, 6, 16
Bourdieu, Pierre, 17, 36, 37, 50, 
54, 63, 64
see also cultural capital, habitus
Brantwood, 87, 88
Brantwood Trust, 87
British Association of 
Victorian Studies, 104
canon, 17, 19, 50, 62, 111
canonical texts, 37, 102, 107
careers, 98, 90–1, 92–3, 95, 96, 104
career studies, 10, 93
career planning, 90, 91, 94
Carey, John, 35, 101
Central Lancashire, University 
of (UCLAN), 85
Churchland, Patricia, 78
classroom, the, 18–20, 42, 43, 
46, 106
clearing, 101, 112
cognitive approaches, 68
Cognitive Humanities 
Network, 68
cognitive linguistics, 61
cognitive literary criticism, 
9, 67–9, 71–5, 77–80
www.ebook3000.com


Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0016
Collaborative Doctoral Awards, 95
Collini, Stefan, 3, 5
What are Universities For?, 3
comparative literature, 6
Comprehensive Spending Review, 4
consilience, 70, 74, 75, 76, 78
consumer culture, 18, 62
creative writing, 6, 22, 51, 55, 92, 95, 98, 
101, 106
Crisis in the Humanities, 3
cultural capital, 8, 21, 26, 37, 50, 52, 61, 
95, 96
definition of, 63
see also Pierre Bourdieu
cultural economy, 49
cultural heritage, 12, 87–8, 95, 96
cultural studies, 6, 19, 45, 50, 73, 106
see also University of Birmingham, 
Stuart Hall
Cumbria, University of, 10–11, 12, 83, 
85–6, 93, 95, 98
curriculum, 30, 83, 86, 109
Curriculum 2000, 109
databases, 50, 55, 58
de Certeau, Michel, The Practice of 
Everyday Life, 21
democracy, 30, 62, 105
De Montfort University, 85
Derrida, Jacques, 105
see also university without condition
Destinations of Leavers from Higher 
Education (DLHE), 95
digital humanities, 56
disinterestedness, 8, 25–9, 31, 34, 36–8, 
50
dissociation of sensibility, 69
Docherty, Thomas, 42, 43–4
see also clandestine university, 
official university
Durham University, 68
Eaglestone, Robert, 4, 7, 10, 11, 12, 84
Eagleton, Terry, 16
education, 26, 28, 30, 36, 38, 59
of adults, 6, 15, 18, 23, 106
aesthetic education, 26, 33
policies regarding, 8, 27, 29, 35, 37
secondary level, 27, 35, 84, 100, 101, 
107, 109–11
state education, 4, 3, 33, 34, 105, 109
transmission model of, 7, 19
see also higher education
eighteenth century, the, 9, 52
Eliot, T. S., 80
see also dissociation of sensibility
employability, 10–11, 53–4, 83, 85–6, 90, 
92–93, 95, 98
engagement, 19, 34, 52, 57, 92, 111
disengagement, 103–4
with public, 58, 95, 107
English and Media Centre, 108
English Association, 112
English Departments, 2, 6–7, 11, 42, 
44–6, 84–6, 96, 100, 103, 105–7
English in the World module, 83, 89, 
92–3, 96
English language, 3, 6, 17, 22, 85, 97
English literature, 3, 22, 25, 32, 34–6, 
44, 83–5, 96, 97
A–levels, 10, 26, 107, 110
GCSE, 10, 84, 102
degrees in, 10, 83, 85–91
as object of study, 6, 8, 45, 72
teaching of, 7, 16–20, 28, 34, 45, 46; 
at secondary school level, 27, 30, 
35
English studies, 1, 2, 4–11, 27–8, 38, 
48–9, 58, 60–1, 72
Institute of, 7
English Subject Centre, 53, 103, 104, 111
essays, 19, 20, 28, 46, 85, 86–8, 89, 93, 
95, 111
Evans, Colin, 3
examinations, 29, 36, 38, 46, 86, 87, 95, 
102, 109
examination boards, 11, 107, 109, 110
see also A–level, GCSE, study  
guides
excellence, 44, 46, 51, 54
feedback, 90–2

 
Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0016
fees, 101
protests regarding, 4
rise in, 4, 10, 50, 85
Fish, Stanley, 76
Foucault, Michel, 51, 56, 105
see also author function
funding, 3–5, 9, 44–6, 58, 60, 95–6, 103
GCSE, 10, 11, 84, 85, 97, 100, 102
see also examinations, A-level
Girard, René, 19
see also mimetic desire
Gottschall, Jonathan, The Literary 
Animal: Evolution and the Nature of 
Narrative, 75
Gove, Michael, 11, 102, 105
government, 3, 5, 9, 42, 44, 59, 84–5, 
101, 109–10
House of Commons, 103
UK Coalition, 4, 102
graduate labour market, 53, 84–5, 90
Graff, Gerald, Professing Literature: An 
Institutional History, 23, 26
Gramsci, Antonio, 11, 105
Guillory, John, Cultural Capital: 
the Problem of Literary Canon 
Formation, 38
Gunn, Vicky, 19
Habermas, Jürgen, 9, 52, 60
see also public sphere
Hall, Stuart, 10, 105
Higher Education (HE), 4, 16, 22, 44, 
48, 97, 98, 110
cuts in funding to, 4
and English, 22, 101, 103, 110
Higher Education Academy (HEA), 
53, 103
Higher Education Funding Council 
for England (HEFCE), 12, 103
in USA, 106
see also Destinations of Leavers from 
Higher Education (DHLE)
Hilliard, Christopher, English as a 
Vocation: the ‘Scrutiny’ Movement, 
35
History Boys, The, 86
history of the book, 106
Hodgson, John, The Experience of 
Studying English in UK Higher 
Education, 50
humanism, 25–9, 34, 36–8, 48, 56, 
70–71, 73–4, 77–9
civic humanism, 9, 59
humanities, 4, 5, 6, 8, 19, 29, 37–8, 43, 
84, 93, 101–3, 109
origin of term, 3
researchers in, 60, 105
sciences and, 69, 70, 71, 75, 77
students of, 50, 53
Huxley, Thomas Henry, 69
ideology, 4, 30, 76, 94, 104
impact, 9–10, 27, 37, 53, 55, 61, 83, 85, 
95, 107
definitions of, 23, 39, 57
impact agenda, 43
impact policies, 58
impact statements, 96
measurement of, 4–5, 29
institution, English as an, 11, 31, 48, 59, 
104–12
institutionalization, 25, 27, 30–1,  
34
instrumentality, 1, 8–10, 21, 25–30, 34, 
37, 43, 49, 51, 75–6, 98
intellectual trade secrets, 7, 34–7
intentionality, 54–5, 57, 70
interdisciplinarity, 9, 60, 67, 68, 69, 71, 
72, 75, 78, 80
internet, the, 38, 103, 108
Jockers, Matthew, 56
see also macroanalysis
Johnson, Mark, 61
journalism, 20, 85, 112
journals, 5, 55, 100, 103, 105, 106, 107, 
108–9
Kant, Immanuel, Critique of the Power 
of Judgement, 26
Key Information Set, 95
www.ebook3000.com


Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0016
Knights, Ben, 2–3, 6–7, 11, 23, 106, 111
‘The Implied Aesthetic of English 
Teaching’, 7
knowledge, 2, 6–7, 15, 18–19, 21, 43, 51, 
54–7, 69–70, 73–80
contribution to, 54
literary knowledge, 9, 10, 11, 50, 54–7, 
67, 75–80, 106, 108
noncoercive knowledge, 62
non-verifiable knowledge, 10, 78
knowledge economy, 58, 60
research-related knowledge, 57–8
Kövesi, Simon, 84
Lakoff, George, 61
Langer, Suzanne, 10, 79
Feeling and Form, 79
league tables, 44, 62
Leavis, F. R., 8, 19, 20, 26, 30, 35, 77, 79
The Common Pursuit, 19
Two Cultures? The Significance of Lord 
Snow, 79
Leavis, Q. D., 8, 20, 26, 35, 49
linguistics, 6, 19, 44, 68, 70, 72
literary criticism, 8, 18–19, 27, 36, 101, 103
cognitive literary criticism, 9, 67–9, 
71–5, 77–80
evolutionary cognitive literary 
criticism, 68, 75–7
literary history, 19
literary studies, 8, 9, 10, 19, 27, 38, 46, 
67, 68, 70, 74, 77–9
Lodge, David, Consciousness and the 
Novel, 71
macroanalysis, 56–7
see also Franco Moretti
marketing theory, 96
Martin, Philip W., 3
mass culture, 18, 19, 35, 36
mass literacy, 35
McGettigan, Andrew, The Great 
University Gamble, 4
media, 17, 49, 51, 85, 86, 87, 102, 107, 108
media studies, 6, 106
medieval studies, 18
Mills and Boon, 76
modern languages, 84, 101, 102
modernism, 18, 19, 76
Modernist Studies Association, 104
Moretti, Franco, 56–7
Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models 
for a Literary History, 56
see also distant reading, 
macroanalysis, Stanford Literary 
Lab
Mulgan, Richard, 9, 59
Mulhern, Francis, 35
museum studies, 96
National Association of Writers in 
English, 112
National Co-ordinating Centre for 
Public Engagement, The Engaged 
University: A Manifesto for Public 
Engagement, 58
National Student Survey (NSS), 62, 
86, 91
neoliberalism, 25, 26, 34
neoliberal study guide, 28–9
neoliberal education policy, 8, 37
neoliberal university, 21
neuroscience, 68, 71–2, 74, 77, 78
New Criticism, 18, 70, 106
Of Mice and Men, 102
open access publishing, 11, 100, 103, 
108–9
see also publishing, journals
Open Library of the Humanities, 109
Oxford, University of, 45, 85, 101
Parsons, Ian, 19
Pedagogical Criticism Workshops, 7
pedagogy, 5, 16, 22, 38, 106
English pedagogical practices, 6–7, 
11, 15, 18–21, 27, 36
instrumental character of pedagogy, 
27–30, 34
Matthew Arnold and pedagogy, 8, 
30–5, 36–7
see also teaching

 
Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0016
Penguin, 107
Performance-based research funding, 
4–5
see also research assessment, 
Research Assessment Exercise 
(RAE), research councils, 
Research Excellence Framework 
(REF)
PhD, 92, 102, 105
philology, 6, 18, 17
philosophy, 17, 45, 52, 72, 77
physics, 46, 70–1, 111
Pindar, 33
Pinker, Steven, 75, 76
Plato, Gorgias, 61
pleasure, 8, 19, 21, 38, 43, 45
Poetics Today, 73
poetry, 18, 19, 36, 75, 86, 87, 88, 94, 95
granted status as a subject in English 
schools, 30, 31
Poovey, Mary, ‘What is Cultural 
Economy?’, 49–50, 51, 54
positivism, 3, 11, 70, 71, 79, 106
postgraduate study, 55, 90, 92, 93, 94, 
100, 102, 106, 109
see also PhD
Postgraduate Certificate in Education 
(PGCE), 94
poststructuralism, 73
practical criticism, 17–20, 25, 35–6
private providers in higher education, 
growth of, 102
privatization, 4, 50, 102
professionalization, 7, 19
psychoanalysis, 17
public sphere, 8, 9, 11, 48, 52–3, 57–62, 
108
see also Habermas, Jürgen
publishing, 11, 19, 46, 49, 85, 95, 103, 
107
academic publishing, 5, 11, 46, 56, 
60, 100, 103, 107, 108–9
non-academic publishing, 11, 107
popular science publishing, 71
see also Open Library of the 
Humanities, Penguin
Qualification and Curriculum 
Development Authority (QCDA), 
109
Quality Assurance Agency Subject 
Benchmark, 22, 63
Queen Mary, University of London, 5
Quiller Couch, Arthur, 16
reading,
close reading, 19, 22, 36, 49–50, 63, 
106, 109
distant reading, 56
efferent reading, 21
machine reading, 55
neurobiology of reading, 74
phenomenal nature of reading,  
76
pleasure of reading, 8, 45, 46, 55
therapeutic uses of reading, 96
Readings, Bill, The University in Ruins, 
2, 44
regional identity, 88
relevance, 48, 53–4
research, 4–5, 7, 9, 11, 16, 19, 42–6, 51, 
56–8, 60, 100, 103, 104, 106
research assessment, 4–5, 7, 16, 46, 
57–9, 96–7, 104
research councils, 44, 57–8, 60
research funding, 4–5, 60
Research Assessment Exercise (RAE), 
4, 7, 16, 19, 96, 104
Research Councils UK (RCUK), 57, 58
Research Excellence Framework 
(REF), 4–5, 7, 16, 17, 27, 96–7, 104
reviewers, 17
Richards, I. A., 8, 26, 30, 35
see also practical criticism
Richardson, Alan, 73
Robbins Report, 18, 23
Rosenblatt, Louise M., The Reader, the 
Text, the Poem: The Transactional 
Theory of
the Literary Work, 21
see also efferent reading
Ruskin, John, 87–8
Russell Group, 84, 97, 102, 110
www.ebook3000.com


Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0016
Said, Edward, The World, The Text, and 
The Critic, 61–2
schools, 94, 105
English in schools, 11, 15, 17, 22, 27, 
30–3, 84, 109–11
Fee-paying schools, 101
secondary schools, 100, 107
state schools, 34
Victorian schools, 8, 30–3
science, 3, 4, 5, 42, 49, 58, 102
and literature, 9–10, 16, 69–72, 75–6, 
77–80
popular science, 71
see also interdisciplinarity, 
knowledge, neuroscience, C. P. 
Snow, two cultures
Scrutiny, 18, 19, 30
see also F. R. Leavis, Q. D. Leavis
seminar, 11, 18–20, 44, 59, 108
see also classroom
Shakespeare, William, 51, 56, 70, 71, 88
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 45
singularity, 8, 79
skills, 53–4, 57, 87, 102
critical skills, 49
research skills at undergraduate 
level, 89–94
transferrable skills, 51, 90
Small, Helen, The Value of the 
Humanities, 37–8
Snow, C. P., 9, 69–71, 73, 74, 76, 79
‘The Two Cultures and the Scientific 
Revolution’, 69
see also, two cultures
social media, 50, 59, 96
social mission, 26, 27, 29–31, 34–8, 49, 
104
see also Chris Baldick
social sciences, 5, 49, 59, 85
Society of Neuroscience, Annual 
Meeting, 77
sociology, 44, 72
Standards and Testing Agency, 110
Stanford Literary Lab, 56
see also distant reading, Matthew 
Jockers, Franco Moretti
state, the, 2–3, 4, 43, 52, 59, 105, 109
Steen, Francis F., 73
STEM (Science, Technology, 
Engineering, Maths), 5, 102
structuralism, 73
student loans, 21
see also fees
student number controls, 84–5, 101
study guides, 7–8, 25–38
Brodie’s Chosen English Texts, 32–3
Brodie’s Notes, 26, 32
Brodie’s Notes on Chosen English Texts, 
32
Cliffs’ Notes, 27
Macmillan Master Guides, 26
York Notes, 26
surrealism, 17
Surrey, University of, 85
Swift, Jonathan, A Tale of a Tub, 49
taste, 17, 27, 34, 36, 37, 38
teacher training, 90, 94
training for university teaching, 103
see also English Subject Centre, 
Postgraduate Certificate in 
Education (PGCE)
teaching, 5, 103
budgets, 4, 85
contact hours, 103
English teaching, 5, 7, 16–20, 27, 
31–8, 43–6, 86–91, 103
Teaching Agency, 110
Teesside, University of, 85
Thatcher, Margaret, 4
theatre studies, 6, 94, 106
theory, 6, 51, 73, 79, 101, 103, 106, 110
theory wars, the, 50
two cultures, the, 9–10, 67, 69–71, 74, 
75, 78
see also C. P. Snow
undergraduate applications, 102
undergraduate recruitment,  
84–6
Universities and Colleges Admissions 
Service (UCAS), 11, 101, 102, 108

 
Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137478054.0016
university,
business-facing university, 43
clandestine university, 42–6
funding of English universities, 4, 102
idea of the university, 1, 2, 8, 42, 
43–4, 46, 106
neoliberal university, 21
The University in Ruins, 2, 44
university without condition, 42, 
43, 46
University English, 103
USA, 3, 18, 106
utilitarianism, 8, 26, 28, 29, 30
utopianism, 21, 52, 62
value, questions of, 5–6, 8, 10, 18–20, 
27–30, 34, 36, 38, 46, 51, 53, 57, 76
Waters, Sarah, 107
Waugh, Patricia, 69
webpage design, 88
widening participation, 10, 85–6, 92–3, 
95
Wilder, Laura, 20
Williams, Raymond, 105
Wilson, David Sloan, The Literary 
Animal: Evolution and the Nature of 
Narrative, 75
Wilson, E. O., 75
Woolf, Virginia, 79
Mrs Dalloway, 76
To the Lighthouse, 21
Workers’ Educational Association, 6, 
11, 18
World Book Night, 94
www.ebook3000.com

