Enhancing Learning  
and Teaching in 
Higher Education 
Engaging with the 
Dimensions of Practice  
Edited by John Lea
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Enhancing Learning and Teaching 
in Higher Education
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Enhancing Learning 
and Teaching in 
Higher Education
Engaging with the Dimensions of Practice
Edited by John Lea
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Open University Press
McGraw-Hill Education
McGraw-Hill House
Shoppenhangers Road
Maidenhead
Berkshire
England
SL6 2QL
email: enquiries@openup.co.uk
world wide web: www.openup.co.uk
and Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121-2289, USA
First published 2015
Copyright © John Lea, 2015
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of 
criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the 
publisher or a licence from the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited. Details of such 
licences (for reprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright Licensing 
Agency Ltd of Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library
ISBN-13: 978-0-33-526416-2 
ISBN-10: 0-33-526416-6
eISBN: 978-0-33-526417-9
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
CIP data applied for
Typeset by Transforma Pvt. Ltd., Chennai, India
Fictitious names of companies, products, people, characters and/or data that may be used 
herein (in case studies or in examples) are not intended to represent any real individual, 
company, product or event.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

 
v
“This volume not only brings together a huge volume and range of research 
and scholarship on teaching and learning but does so in an extremely 
­accessible and engaging way. This is a book that seeks to encourage thinking, 
and thinking oriented to helping to enhance higher education and everyone’s 
experience of it at that. It is a splendid book from which everyone can gain.”
Ronald Barnett, Emeritus Professor of Higher Education, 
UCL Institute of Education
“John Lea’s book explores a rich spectrum of themes relating to teaching and 
learning in higher education in general, and to the notion of professionalism 
in HE teaching in particular. Not shying away from the profoundly contested 
nature of higher education, it offers a comprehensive picture of current issues, 
with contributions from an impressive range of scholars and practitioners. 
The text stimulates critical, intellectual analysis, but also provides 
research-informed, practical examples of creative ways forward for the 
­sector.” 
Dr Dilly Fung, Director of the Centre for the Advancement 
of Learning and Teaching, UCL
“This book is a long overdue and hugely welcome addition to the literature 
on HE professional practice: a text that provides a clear and highly 
engaging introduction to debates about how academic practices shape 
university teaching. For far too long introductory HE teaching programmes 
and their associated texts have tended to provide hints and tips, tools and 
answers; they have closed down debate and ignored critical voices. Such an 
anti-intellectual approach rightly generates frustration and cynicism. 
John Lea’s book explicitly sets out to showcase key debates, disagreements 
and differing voices, opening up the discussion and ­reflective critique that 
should be at the heart of enhancing professional ­practices in learning and 
teaching in HE. The novel construction provides expert introductions to key 
themes in academic practice each followed by equally magisterial critical 
Praise for this book
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

vi
  PRAISE FOR THIS BOOK
responses. ­Further contributions from students and explicit links to the UK 
Professional Standards Framework for Teaching and Supporting Learning 
in HE remind us that these are not just theoretical debates but central to 
the purposes of HE, our intentions and actions as educators and the 
learning experiences of our students. This book should become a core text 
for new lecturer programmes and is essential reading for anyone with an 
interest in the nature and purposes of Higher Education.”
Dr John Peters, Head of Academic Practice, 
Newman University, UK
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

List of illustrations
ix
Preface
x
List of contributors
xii
Figure credits
xvii
Acknowledgements
xviii
1	
Introduction: the scholarship of teaching and learning,
the Higher Education Academy, and the UK Professional 
Standards Framework
1
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
Opinion piece: on internationalisation
Brigitte Stockton
17
2	
Enhancing student learning
20
CORDELIA BRYAN
Opinion piece: transforming the experience of students through 
assessment: a case study
Yaz El-Hakim
44
Debate: the limits of learning outcomes
Patrick Smith and Trevor Hussey
46 
Debate: A case for learning outcomes in HE
David Gosling
48
3	
The nature of academic time
54
JOHN LEA
Opinion piece: on academic identity
Bruce Macfarlane
73
Debate: on academic allegiance
Chris Stevens and 
75
Ralph Norman
77
Contents
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

viii
Contents
4	
The nature of academic space
83
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM
Opinion piece: on distance learning
Wayne Barry
103
Debate: online vs face-to-face learning
Anna McCormick and
106
Emily McCormick
108
5	
The nature of academic knowledge
113
JOHN LEA
Opinion piece: on employability
Ruth Lawton
131
Debate: on the nature of academic knowledge
Celia Popovic and
133
Dennis Hayes
135
6	
Students as partners in learning 
141
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL, AND ALAN JENKINS
Opinion piece: on Researching, Advancing and Inspiring 
Student Engagement (RAISE)
Colin Bryson
163
Debate: on the authority of the HE teacher
Frank Furedi and
165
Mike Neary
167
7	
The landscape of higher education
173
JOHN LEA
Opinion piece: on college-based higher education (CBHE)
Jonathan Eaton
190
Debate: on marketisation in HE
Patrick Ainley
192
Ted Tapper and David Palfreyman
194
8	
Conclusion: Raising the profile of learning and teaching,
being reflective and scholarly, and becoming a Fellow
of the Higher Education Academy
198
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
Opinion piece: on sustainability
Katja Hallenberg
214
Glossary of Key Terms/Stations (see Transport Map)
217
Appendix 1 UKPSF dimensions of practice and elements
235
Appendix 2 The UKPSF Descriptors (D1–D4)
236
Appendix 3 Scholarship of Teaching and Learning Transport Map
239
Bibliography
240
Index
262
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Illustrations
Figures
1.1	 Depictions of Boyer’s (1990) four scholarships
2
1.2	 Depiction of the rationale for the book’s chapters
3
1.3	 Contrasting a competency approach to standards with the UKPSF
9
2.1	 The three components in constructive alignment
29
2.2	 Biggs’ SOLO Taxonomy
31
3.1	 Dimensions of academic practice
56
3.2	 Boyer’s (1990) four scholarships depicted as integrated practice
60
3.3	 Uniting staff and student activity
64
5.1	 Dimensions of a Higher Education
115
5.2	 Higher education as an enactment of Maslow’s self-actualisation
119
6.1	 Areas of engagement in working with students as partners
142
6.2	 The nature of research and inquiry
152
7.1	 The role and purpose of HEIs as a Venn Diagram
188
8.1	 A Learning cycle (after Kolb)
206
8.2	 The UKPSF Dimensions of Practice triangle
206
8.3	 A continuing professional development triangle
207
Tables
6.1	 Examples of ways in which learners may engage with Boyer’s 
four scholarships
151
6.2	 The nature of research and inquiry by students
152
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Preface
This book has two broad aims. First, it speaks directly to the contested nature of all 
aspects of higher education, and invites readers to interrogate the evidence which 
supports the various claims being made, particularly about how aspects of academic 
practice relate to learning and teaching. Second, and as a consequence of that interro­
gation, it is designed to help academics – and others who support learning and teaching 
in UK higher education (HE) – put together applications to become fellows of the 
Higher Education Academy (HEA). This might be through an application directly to 
the HEA; within a university or college accredited framework; or as part of a taught 
programme, such as a PG Cert HE programme. If the book is instructive, its general 
aim is to give readers some things to think about rather than tell them what to think, 
and is designed not to appear too much like a textbook. The subtitle of the book also 
alludes to these two broad aims in being a reference to the three dimensions of the UK 
professional standards framework (UKPSF) (see Chapter 1) and also to academic 
practice in general.
Chapter 1 on The Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, and 
Chapter 8 on Becoming a Fellow of the Higher Education Academy, introduce and 
­conclude the book. Both are practical in focus, aimed at explaining the role of the HEA 
and the UKPSF as means to enhance the scholarship and effectiveness of teaching and 
learning in UK HE. Chapter 1 focuses more on the ways in which the UKPSF can be used 
to benchmark both individual and institutional continuing professional development 
(CPD). It also offers advice to help practitioners decide which category of fellowship is 
the most appropriate for them given their role – associate fellowship, fellowship, senior 
fellowship or principal fellowship (see Chapter 1 for detailed information). Chapter 8 
focuses more on the mechanics of actually putting an application together.
The middle chapters of the book look in detail at different aspects of academic 
practice and how they relate to learning and teaching, beginning with ideas centred on 
enhancing student learning and finishing with a look at the broader landscape of UK 
HE and the implications for learning and teaching. Other chapters focus on the nature 
of academic identity; learning landscapes; academic knowledge; and students as part­
ners respectively. Each chapter begins with an overview and includes case studies, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Preface
xi
practical examples and activities. Each chapter finishes with a range of stimulus pieces 
including:
•	
an opinion piece;
•	
a debate presenting two opposing arguments;
•	
student-authored ‘Dear Lecturer’ pieces;
•	
extracts from successful fellowship applications relating to the themes of the 
chapter.
The book was not written to compete with, or replace, existing books aimed at enhanc­
ing learning and teaching in higher education, for example, Ramsden (2003); Biggs and 
Tang (2007); Fry, Ketteridge and Marshall (2014). Indeed, this book assumes that read­
ers will be either familiar with those books, or will access them if they require more 
information on some of the underpinning conceptual and practical applications of rel­
evant pedagogical tools and ideas. Also, in a book such as this, it is naturally imposs-
ible to offer tailored support for individual applications for fellowship status with the 
HEA, in which case it is important to seek out those colleagues within each university 
or college who can offer that kind of support, particularly where an application is 
being made within a specific university or college accredited scheme. In the case of 
those who work independently from an employing institution, the HEA also has its own 
support services.
The book is avowedly centred on UK HE, but this comes with two important cave­
ats. First, although one of the key aims of the book is to offer advice on the fellowship 
application process with the UK-based HEA, the book may also be of interest to read­
ers around the world, particularly where similar learning and teaching accreditation 
schemes are in operation, and/or where concerted efforts are being made to raise the 
profile and scholarship of teaching and learning. And, second, many of the reforms 
that the book discusses might be best characterised as an ‘English experiment’ rather 
than being UK-wide. Here, I simply ask for a sympathetic ear from those practitioners 
living and working in the UK but outside of England, and hope that some of the general 
direction of travel for UK HE might be at least gleaned from what has been happening 
in England.
It is also important to remember that a lot of higher education takes place outside 
of designated universities, in which case I have tried to use the word ‘university’ only 
when it was merited by the context of the accompanying sentences. In all other cases 
I have used the term ‘higher education’ as a better, more inclusive, term.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Patrick Ainley is Professor of Training and Education at the University of Greenwich 
School of Education and Training (as was). He blogs and publishes free downloads 
with Martin Allen at: http://www.radicaledbks.com/. Their latest book, Work, Class, 
State, Education: New Inequalities in Uncertain Times, will be published by Radical­
read in June 2015.
Jane Allcroft is in her final year of a BA Hons English degree at Newman University, 
Birmingham. She works part-time in the university as a note-taker and Writing Mentor. 
A working single mum; she came to university following redundancy and hopes to 
have a future working in HE.
Wayne Barry is a learning technologist at Canterbury Christ Church University where 
he is actively involved in enabling learning mediated through the use of educational 
and social technologies. Wayne’s research interests include social media, e-portfolios, 
learning spaces and professional learning. He is an Associate Fellow of the HEA.
Helen Beetham has been writing, researching and consulting in the field of e-learning 
since 1999, including on Design for Learning, Open Educational Resources and Digital 
Literacies. Her edited volumes, Rethinking Pedagogy for a Digital Age and Rethinking 
Learning for a Digital Age (Routledge, 2007; 2010) are widely used set texts.
Catherine Bovill is a Senior Lecturer in the Academic Development Unit, University 
of Glasgow. She has extensive experience of co-ordinating and teaching programmes 
of study for new academics. Her research focuses on students and staff co-creating 
curricula; conceptualising curricula; peer observation of teaching; and the internation­
alisation of higher education.
Cordelia Bryan SFHEA, is a freelance HE consultant with broad experience gained in 
the secondary, further and higher education sectors. She has led four successful Higher 
Education projects enhancing different aspects of learning, teaching and assessment 
and co-edited Innovative Assessment in Higher Education (Routledge, 2006).
Contributors
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Contributors
xiii
Colin Bryson is Director of the Combined Honours Centre at Newcastle University. 
He is a researcher, advocate and practitioner of student engagement and partnership, 
and privileged to work with outstanding students and colleagues. He co-founded and 
chairs RAISE and was awarded an NTF for this work in 2009.
Martha Canfield is a PhD student in Psychology at the University of Roehampton 
where she is also teaching a few research topics for Psychology undergraduate stu­
dents and carrying out tutorial activities.
Jenni Cannon is a recent graduate from Newcastle University where she studied 
Combined Honours in English Literature with Psychology, and was keenly involved in 
student engagement and representation. Jenni is now on the Civil Service Fast Stream 
graduate programme.
Jonathan Eaton is Research and Engagement Manager at Newcastle College. He 
completed his PhD at Queen’s University Belfast and has taught in FE, HE and adult 
education. Jonathan is a Senior Fellow of the Higher Education Academy and a Fellow 
of the Royal Society of Arts.
Yaz El-Hakim is the Director of Student Engagement at the University of Winchester, 
Co-Leader of the Transforming the Experience of Students through Assessment 
(TESTA) national project, and the Vice-Chair of SEDA. His teaching and research inter­
ests are: Assessment and Feedback, Technology Enhanced Learning, Learning Envi­
ronments and Student Engagement.
Frank Furedi, is an Emeritus Professor of Sociology at the University of Kent. He is 
the author of Wasted: Why Education Is Not Educating. His study of the history of 
teaching reading will be published by Bloomsbury in October 2015.
David Gosling is Visiting Professor of Higher Education at the University of Ply-
mouth. He has written widely on topics relating to educational development, learning 
and teaching in higher education and in applied philosophy. He is currently engaged 
in supporting the Southern African Universities Learning and Teaching (SAULT) 
Forum.
Katja Hallenberg is a Senior Lecturer in Criminal Psychology, Criminology and 
Police Studies at Canterbury Christ Church University which she joined in 2012 after 
completing her PhD at the University of Manchester. Her key research interests 
include police education and professionalisation, and the links between justice and 
sustainability.
Dennis Hayes is the Professor of Education at the University of Derby. He is the 
founder of the campaign group Academics For Academic Freedom (AFAF). His pub­
lications include The McDonaldization of Higher Education (2006), The Dangerous 
Rise of Therapeutic Education (2009), and The ‘Limits’ of Academic Freedom 
(2015).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

xiv
Contributors
Mick Healey is an HE consultant and researcher, an emeritus professor at the Univer­
sity of Gloucestershire, visiting professor at UCL, and adjunct professor at Macquarie 
University, Australia. He was one of the first to be awarded a National Teaching 
Fellowship and to be made a Principal Fellow of the HEA.
Trevor Hussey is an Emeritus Professor who has taught philosophy and some psychol­
ogy in Buckinghamshire New University and philosophy in the University of Oxford. He 
has published work in philosophy of science, the philosophy of nursing and of educa­
tion, including The Trouble with Higher Education with Professor Patrick Smith.
Alan Jenkins long taught and researched geography and was a founding editor of the 
Journal of Geography in Higher Education. He is now an educational developer and 
Emeritus Professor at Oxford Brookes University. His expertise is on the relations 
between teaching and discipline-based research and embedding undergraduate 
research (http://alanjenkins.info/).
Ruth Lawton is University Learning & Teaching Fellow for Employability at Birmingham 
City University. Ruth joined the university as a careers adviser in 1991 but is now Pro­
gramme Director for the PG Cert Learning & Teaching in HE, and is also MEd module lead 
for ‘Embedding Employability in Your Practice’.
John Lea is Head of Academic Professional Development at Canterbury Christ Church 
University. His previous books include: Political Correctness and Higher Education: 
British and American Perspectives (Routledge, 2009) and Supporting Higher 
Education in College Settings (SEDA, 2014). He is a Principal Fellow of the HEA, and 
a Fellow of SEDA.
Diane Locke is a third year undergraduate studying youth and community work at 
Newman University, Birmingham. She is interested in the emergence of dyslexia as a 
positive attribute rather than a difficulty that needs support, and in using creativity in 
the curriculum as a means to engage students.
Sam Louis is a recent graduate of Newcastle University in English Literature, Business 
and Psychology. He is currently planning an extensive trip across Canada, after which 
he hopes to start his own business venture.
Bruce Macfarlane is Professor of Higher Education at the University of Southampton. 
He has previously held chairs at universities in the UK and Hong Kong. His publications 
have developed concepts related to academic practice, ethics and leadership. He is a 
Fellow of the Society for Research into Higher Education.
Anna McCormick graduated from Trinity College, Cambridge in 2010 with a degree in 
English Literature. She now works in strategy and project management in London.
Emily McCormick is a third year undergraduate at Loughborough University. She is 
currently in her placement year working at King’s College Hospital in London as an 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Contributors
xv
information and performance analyst for paediatric neurosciences, creating and devel­
oping data management processes within the NHS.
Mike Neary is Professor of Sociology at the University of Lincoln in the School of Social 
and Political Sciences. While Dean of Teaching and Learning at Lincoln (2007–2014), 
Mike promoted the development of Student as Producer in higher education.
Ralph Norman is Principal Lecturer in Theology at Canterbury Christ Church Univer­
sity. His teaching concentrates on aspects of Philosophy of Religion and Historical 
Theology, and has included a series of seminars on Newman’s The Idea of a Univer­
sity. His most recent publications have been on the history of British philosophy.
David Palfreyman is the Bursar and a Fellow of New College, Oxford, and the Direc­
tor of the Oxford Centre for Higher Education Policy Studies. He is co-author of The 
Law of Higher Education (OUP, 2012) and Reshaping the University: The Rise of the 
Regulated Market in Higher Education (OUP, 2015).
Celia Popovic is Director of the Teaching Commons at York University, Toronto. Celia 
enjoyed a 20-year career in HE in the UK before moving to Canada in 2011. She has 
taught across numerous subjects in schools, colleges and universities giving her an 
eclectic view of education.
Nigel Purcell joined the HEA in 2011 as Academic Lead for the UKPSF/Recognition, 
after a career teaching in Further Education and then Medical Education development. 
His first task was to help oversee the launch of the revised UKPSF and he continues to 
be closely involved in its subsequent development.
Kate Riseley recently graduated with a 2:1 in English Literature from Canterbury 
Christ Church University. While studying she engaged in various Student Engagement 
initiatives which fuelled her desire to pursue employment in HE. Her interests for fur­
ther study include exploring the notion of ‘Being, Belonging and Becoming’ through 
narrative accounts.
Patrick Smith is an Emeritus Professor at Buckinghamshire New University. Author of 
several books, more recently on work-based learning, he was also responsible for the 
development of the University’s highly successful MA in Leadership and Management. 
Patrick has worked in the UK and abroad as a programme designer and facilitator.
Chris Stevens is an historian who taught history and politics at successively QMUL 
and Teesside University, between 1981 and 2001. He is currently Director of Quality 
and Standards at Canterbury Christ Church University. His publications include work 
on grass-roots conservatism in the late nineteenth century and electoral change in the 
twentieth.
Brigitte Stockton is Director of Programmes at the Winchester School of Art, University 
of Southampton, Dalian Campus, China. Her current research and publication interests 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

xvi
Contributors
are in: transnational education; pedagogy and assessment in the arts; and sustainable 
consumer cultures.
Ted Tapper is an Emeritus Professor of Politics, University of Sussex, and currently a 
research fellow at the Oxford Centre for Policy Studies, New College, Oxford. His 
research embraces the politics of higher education and the political struggles gener­
ated by the relationship of the private and public sectors of schooling.
Dave Thomas is an Occupational Therapist employed at Canterbury Christ Church 
University and currently studying an MSc in Public Health. Last year, as an undergrad­
uate, he was a pioneering Student Ambassador for Learning and Teaching (SALT), 
where he undertook a project exploring the inclusivity of the HE curriculum.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Front cover images:
Photograph of the statue of Wilhelm von Humboldt, at the Humboldt University of 
Berlin, Germany, by Adam Carr (public domain image)
Logo from ‘Student as Producer’ poster, courtesy of The University of Lincoln, UK
Photograph of the Reinvention Room at Warwick University, by Mike Neary, courtesy 
of the University of Warwick, UK
Photograph of Ernest Boyer at the podium, Drexel University in Philadelphia, PA (1987), 
courtesy of the Ernest L. Boyer Center Archives at Messiah College, USA. Available at: 
http://www.messiah.edu/info/21417/ernest_l_boyer_center_archives
Figure credits
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

This book is very much a collaborative effort. Although I am the main author and the 
editor, it never made any sense to me, from conception to execution, to see this book 
as anything other than being wholly dependent on the contributions made by all the 
authors who agreed to take part in the project. I am extremely grateful for every con­
tribution, both large and small.
On the large contribution side, those from Cordelia Bryan, Mike Neary, Helen 
Beetham, Mick Healey, Alan Jenkins and Cathy Bovill were integral to giving the book 
its overall coherence. I also wish to formally thank them for the speed and diligence 
they all exercised in turning my sketchy outlines into the fully formed chapters they 
became. I am also extremely grateful to Nigel Purcell, from the HEA, who worked 
­diligently and patiently with me on Chapter 1 and Chapter 8, and particularly when my 
ideas were in danger of becoming unwieldy (which happened regularly).
On the opinion pieces and the debates I am hugely indebted to every author, none 
of whom needed much persuasion, and none of whom wrote beyond the word limit of 
1,000 words, making the job of editing extremely straightforward. It should also be 
noted that for the debate pieces no authors read the opposing author’s piece in advance 
of writing their own, which, again, made the editing task much easier, and prevented 
any catfights about who should go first and second in the debate; that decision was left 
to me, and I am grateful to everyone for that.
Two of the most distinctive features of the book are the contributions from the 
student authors and the extracts from successful fellowship applications. On the for­
mer I am extremely grateful to the students who enthusiastically took part in this proj­
ect, both by reading drafts chapters of the book, and then contributing as authors. And 
on the latter, I am naturally indebted to colleagues up and down the country who 
agreed to allow me to use extracts from their successful fellowship applications (which 
I anonymised).
I am also grateful to the many colleagues who agreed to look at drafts of vari­
ous parts of the book, particularly Anita Cooper, Jonathan Simmons and Phil Poole, 
and to Nicky Galer who helped with the various figures and checked the referencing 
before submission of the manuscript. I am also extremely grateful to the Higher 
Education Academy for their help and endorsement of the project, particularly 
Acknowledgements
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Acknowledgements
xix
Stephanie Marshall and Raj Dhimar. I am also indebted to Fiona Richman, at the 
Open University Press, for trusting me to pull all this together, and particularly at 
those points when it must have looked like a publisher’s nightmare. And, finally, 
I wish to thank Tris Ariss enormously for doing an amazing job on re-presenting my 
rather amateur drawing of the transport map, which appears at the end of the book.
John Lea, March 2015
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

1
Introduction
The scholarship of teaching and learning, the Higher 
Education Academy, and the UK Professional 
Standards Framework
John Lea and Nigel Purcell1
The scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL)
What we urgently need today is a more inclusive view of what it means to be 
a scholar – a recognition that knowledge is acquired through research, 
through synthesis, through practice, and through teaching. We acknowledge 
that these four categories – the scholarship of discovery, of integration, of 
application, and of teaching – divide intellectual functions that are tied 
inseparably to each other.
(Boyer 1990: 25)
Twenty-five years on from this statement it is tempting to say that things have moved 
on enormously in the direction of Ernest Boyer’s revisioning, not just in the United 
States (the country that Boyer was primarily referring to), but throughout higher edu­
cation around the world. However, one might equally argue that things have changed 
very little. Ask a random group of academics today to whom or to what they owe their 
primary allegiance and you are probably still more likely to hear them refer to their 
subject-based research than any scholarship related to teaching and learning. Pursue 
this further with the same group and you might also discover that though some of them 
will not be happy with that situation, it is a case of needs must. That is, reward and 
recognition, and career progression in general are more likely to occur the sooner one 
turns Boyer’s proposed cycle of academic activities back into the linear ladder he was 
arguing against; with the scholarship of discovery (or original research) on the top 
rung, and the scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) on the bottom (and the other 
forms of scholarship somewhere in the middle) (Figure 1.1).
We will be exploring this issue in some detail in Chapter 2, but for now it will serve 
as an introduction to the whole book, and for two reasons. First, it highlights the con­
tested nature of some of the primary aims of higher education, and this notion of con­
testability will be a consistent theme running throughout the book. And, second, it 
raises the question of the relationship between learning and teaching and all other 
aspects of academic practice. In this regard, each chapter of the book looks at how the 
status of learning and teaching might be enhanced within academic practice overall, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

2
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
but also how the various dimensions of academic practice might be better integrated. 
To begin this process, and after explaining the structure of the book, the rest of this 
introductory chapter will focus on the role of the Higher Education Academy (HEA) 
and the UK Professional Standards Framework (UKPSF) in seeking to raise the profile 
of learning and teaching in UK HE along the lines that Boyer advocated.
Academic practice and the main themes of the book
Apart from Chapter 1 and Chapter 8, the book is divided into six chapters, reflecting 
different aspects of academic practice and how they relate to teaching and learning: 
Chapter 2, ‘Enhancing Student Learning’; Chapter 3, ‘the Nature of Academic Time’; 
Chapter 4, ‘the Nature of Academic Space’; Chapter 5, ‘the Nature of Academic 
Knowledge’; Chapter 6, ‘Students as Partners in Learning’; and Chapter 7, ‘the Land­
scape of Higher Education’.
The first of these (Chapter 2) looks at the theme of learning, teaching and assess­
ment: how the three are related; how they affect each other; and how ideas relating to 
each dimension have changed over the years, particularly in them all becoming more 
student-centred. In Chapter 3, we look at the question of academic identity and aca­
demic allegiances, and the contested nature of academic work; that is, what academics 
do with their time. The fourth chapter will look at the changing nature of academic 
space; how the architecture of higher education is shaped and is being reshaped in 
both face-to-face situations and in terms of digital space. Chapter 5 explores issues 
associated with academic knowledge and asks whether an expanded understanding of 
what constitutes knowledge is enhancing or diminishing the nature and aims of higher 
education. In Chapter 6, we look at the various ways in which we might enhance the 
role of students in all aspects of academic life, including the role of students as 
scholars – involved in the production of knowledge – rather than simply as consumers 
of knowledge. Chapter 7 looks at the changing landscape of higher education in 
Figure 1.1  Depictions of Boyer’s (1990) four scholarships.
Scholarship
of Teaching
Scholarship
of
Application
Scholarship
of Discovery
Scholarship
of
Integration
Discovery
Application
Integration
Teaching
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE SCHOLARSHIP OF TEACHING AND LEARNING
3
­general, including the expansion of higher education outside universities, and the 
movement towards increased marketisation in the sector. Chapter 8 will return to the 
main themes, but couched squarely this time in the context of providing practical 
advice to readers on preparing an application to become a fellow of the HEA.
Figure 1.2 depicts the rationale for the order of the chapters. At the top, Chapter 2 
links directly to Chapters 4 and 6, with a focus on the immediate learning context. At 
the bottom, Chapter 5 links directly with Chapters 3 and 7, with a focus on the wider 
aspects of academic practice and how they relate (or could be better related) to learn­
ing and teaching. But each chapter contains threads and themes from previous chap­
ters to explore the means to integrate all the aspects of academic practice, and this is 
depicted by the outer circle.
Each chapter begins with an overview of the main themes, mapping out some key 
ideas and concepts and referring to relevant academic and policy literature on those 
themes. This is followed by more punchy, polemical, opinion pieces where the authors 
offer their own perspectives on a key theme of the chapter. Then follow debate pieces 
where the contributors were chosen precisely because of their opposing stances on an 
issue that relates to each chapter. Next there is a ‘Dear Lecturer’ piece written by stu­
dents in response to the main themes of the chapter. The text is peppered with activi­
ties demonstrating how the themes of the chapters might be incorporated into 
applications for fellowship status with the HEA. And each chapter ends with quotes 
from anonymised successful fellowship applications.
The Enhancing Learning and Teaching Transport Map
In Appendix 3, you will also find a ‘transport map’ which depicts each of the chap­
ters as an underground line and the main concepts used in each chapter as the 
underground train stations on that line. Transfer stations on the map indicate where 
Figure 1.2  Depiction of the rationale for the book’s chapters.
Enhancing Student Learning
The Landscape of HE 7
6
5
4 The Nature of Academic Space
The Nature of Academic Knowledge
Students as Partners
2
3
Academic Time
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

4
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
different chapters have some key overlapping conceptual discussion and, again, the 
aim here is to show how the wider aspects of academic practice are interrelated and 
can be drawn together to enhance learning and teaching in Higher Education (HE). 
At the end of the book you will also find a glossary of these key concepts (stations) 
where the relevant concept is discussed.
The role of the Higher Education Academy (HEA) in the changing 
HE context
The HEA is the national body for enhancing learning and teaching in higher 
education (HE). We are committed to excellent learning and teaching, 
­supporting UK HE organisations with an emphasis on improving the student 
experience.
  With a robust evidence base to underpin all our work, we: help individuals 
­realise professional learning and teaching ambitions; support organisations to 
achieve their strategic ambitions to enhance teaching and learning; work across 
the sector to shape the future of HE.
(HEA website)
The HEA was formed in May 2004 from a merger of the Institute for Learning and 
Teaching in Higher Education (ILTHE) and the 24 subject centres of the Learning and 
Teaching Support Network (LTSN) and the National Coordination Team for the Teach­
ing Quality Enhancement Fund. The ILTHE was founded in 2000 as a result of the 
report of the National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education (Dearing 1997), and 
in this regard the HEA can be considered a natural extension of a much broader move­
ment in the UK aimed at raising the profile of the scholarship of teaching and learning, 
and in keeping with the initial critique and subsequent revisioning of academic prac­
tice, as undertaken by Ernest Boyer and his colleagues in the USA in the 1980s (Boyer 
1990).
The HEA is a registered company, limited by guarantee and is a registered charity 
in England and Wales, and is owned by Universities UK (UUK) and GuildHE. It is pub­
licly funded by the four HE Funding Councils in England, Northern Ireland, Scotland 
and Wales and by subscription from universities, colleges and other organisations 
with a vested interest in HE teaching. It also offers a range of bespoke services com­
mercially to HE providers in the UK and overseas. As a professional body, it is there­
fore not owned by its individual members, and the members do not pay an annual 
registration fee (as in the case of many professional bodies). However, and like most 
other professional bodies, it is moving in the direction of requiring its fellows to pro­
duce annual evidence of ‘staying in good standing’, with reference to an accompany­
ing professional code. It is also not the only professional body representing higher 
education learning and teaching. For example, the Staff and Educational Develop­
ment Association (SEDA) has been running since 1992, and has its own fellowship 
scheme aimed at educational developers, but also has a much wider professional 
development framework aimed at anyone teaching and supporting learning in higher 
education.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE SCHOLARSHIP OF TEACHING AND LEARNING
5
The UK Professional Standards Framework (UKPSF)
Either as an academic, or as someone working in the professional services which sup­
port learning and teaching in higher education, you will probably be involved in a wide 
range of professional roles at any one time and throughout your career. Taking Boyer’s 
work as a starting point, you may at times be a: teacher, tutor, supporter of learning; 
leader and manager at the curriculum, faculty/school, or institution-wide level; sub­
ject-based and/or pedagogic researcher and scholar; and/or consultant for a commu­
nity or company and/or public intellectual. The UK Professional Standards Framework 
(UKPSF) provides a conceptual framework – written from the perspective of the prac­
titioner – to aid understanding of this full range of teaching and learning roles, aimed 
at helping support the enhancement of scholarly approaches to teaching and learning, 
and encouraging practitioners to reflect on how these roles can be integrated into the 
wider aspects of academic practice, including aspects of leadership and management, 
consultancy, and work as a public intellectual.
It was also developed to support both institutional and individual responses to the 
rapid and substantial changes to the role and nature of higher education, and specifically 
in relation to how those that impact directly on teaching and supporting learning. 
These changes include:
•	
increasing student numbers;
•	
the implications of widening participation, particularly in respect of non-traditional 
learners, and first generation entrants to higher education;
•	
the increased involvement of students in all aspects of higher education provision;
•	
the major changes to fee and loan structures, particularly in England, and the 
increasing policy divergence among the UK nations;
•	
reductions in per capita teaching budgets, which, for example, will be close to 6 
per cent for 2014–2015 (Grove 2014);
•	
substantial innovation in learning technologies and the rise of massive online open 
courses (MOOCs) and online learning in general;
•	
increasing diversification of HE institutions (HEIs), including a growing college-
based HE (CBHE) offer and the development of the private sector university;
•	
issues regarding employability and what employers are looking for in graduates;
•	
changes in societal attitudes to professionals, including a perceived loss of trust 
and an increasing expectation of external accountability in the performance of 
professional roles;
•	
increased concern over issues relating to sustainability, both within and outside 
the formal curriculum;
•	
the positioning of UK higher education within an increasingly globalised HE sector.
Some of the dimensions and implications of this last point are featured in the first opin­
ion piece in the book, which appears at the end of Chapter 1, and the issue of sustain­
ability will be the subject of the final opinion piece at the end of Chapter 8.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

6
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
The UKPSF began its life in 2005 when the HEA ran a consultation exercise on the 
establishment of a professional standards framework for UK HE focused on learning 
and teaching. The subsequent framework (known as the UKPSF from that point) is 
housed by the HEA but was designed to be used flexibly by universities, colleges and 
individuals as a means to benchmark their own continuing professional development 
(CPD) activities, aimed primarily at enhancing the effectiveness and scholarship of 
learning and teaching in UK HE. The first version of the UKPSF was published in 2005 
and was strongly influenced by the earlier ILTHE set of standards. Following an exten­
sive consultation process with the sector in 2010–2011, the 2005 edition was revised and 
the current version was published in November 2011 (HEA 2011). The UKPSF is endorsed 
by all major HE sector bodies including, Guild HE, the Scottish Funding Council, the 
Department for Employment and Learning, the Higher Education Funding Council for 
England, the National Union of Students, the Higher Education Funding Council for 
Wales and Universities UK. As such, it enjoys a legitimacy in the sector which greatly 
enhances its value at a national level.
Its five stated aims (HEA 2011) are:
1	
To support the initial and continuing professional development of staff engaged in 
teaching and supporting learning.
2	
To foster dynamic approaches to teaching and learning through creativity, 
innovation and continuous development in diverse academic or professional 
settings.
3	
To demonstrate to students and other stakeholders the professionalism that staff 
and institutions bring to teaching and support for student learning.
4	
To acknowledge the variety and quality of teaching, learning and assessment 
practices that support and underpin student learning.
5	
To facilitate individuals and institutions in gaining formal recognition for quality-
enhanced approaches to teaching and supporting learning, often as part of wider 
responsibilities which may include research or management activities.
The language and structure of the UK Professional Standards Framework
The Framework has been developed by the HEA on behalf of the sector as a whole 
and so it is the property of all of those with a direct interest in the HE sector.
(HEA website)
In describing the professional role of teaching and supporting learning in higher 
education, the language employed in the UKPSF is intentionally descriptive rather than 
evaluative. It is not highly technical or jargon-laden and for a document of its kind, it 
is very concise. This allows it to be used flexibly by, and within, institutions wishing to 
develop their own emphases and interpretative principles, albeit within the wider con­
straints of the national standards coordinated by the HEA through their fellowship 
scheme (see below). It is important to note here that though the UKPSF itself can 
be interpreted in a number of ways, the fellowship scheme belongs to the HEA, and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE SCHOLARSHIP OF TEACHING AND LEARNING
7
therefore those seeking HEA fellowships must engage with that scheme in the manner 
prescribed by the HEA or as prescribed by the various HEA-accredited fellowship 
scheme frameworks running in universities and colleges throughout the UK.
The UKPSF is not directly based on any particular theoretical framework, though 
it does tie in with Boyer’s (1990) suggested four levels of scholarship (see above), the 
implications of which will be discussed throughout this book. It is targeted specifically 
at teaching and learning support and, indeed, has been criticised because of this nar­
row focus, but its avowed intention is not to undermine other aspects of academic 
practice but to seek ways in which the scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) 
may be enhanced within a holistic and integrated approach to academic practice. And 
it recognises ‘that the scholarly nature of subject inquiry and knowledge creation, and 
a scholarly approach to pedagogy, together represent a uniquely embedded feature of 
support for student learning in universities and colleges’ (HEA 2005).
The UKPSF thus encourages and facilitates an integrated approach to academic 
practice through its emphasis on both discipline and pedagogic scholarship, and par­
ticularly since the revision in 2011, with an enhanced emphasis on management and 
leadership responsibilities, particularly in the new Descriptor 3 and Descriptor 4 cate­
gories (see below). Finally, and while recognising that pedagogy, as both a generic 
discipline, and through subject pedagogies (i.e. teaching and learning as related to 
particular discipline contexts), will have conceptual and theoretical underpinnings, the 
framework’s key orientation is towards applying scholarship directly to the enhance­
ment of practice in teaching and supporting learning in HE; put simply, the framework 
seeks to enact theory in practice.
It is also important to emphasise that it is a framework for, and not a set of, stan­
dards. It does not attempt to specify detailed performance criteria (as in a compe­
tency approach) and this has made it a much more flexible and adaptable tool for a 
wide range of CPD. In this context, the framework may also be contrasted with other 
professional standards frameworks which have been developed for the wider post-
compulsory education sector, including by Lifelong Learning UK (LLUK), and by the 
National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ). The National Vocational Qual­
ification (NVQ) system with its elements, performance criteria, evidence require­
ments and knowledge and understanding statements are all designed to comprehen­
sively outline in specific detail exactly what is required in order to meet the relevant 
standard. This inevitably leads to very extensive documentation, for example, the 
logbook for an Edexcel NVQ in Learning and Development Level 4 is 263 pages long 
(in contrast to the 183 words for the entire UKPSF description). And while this 
approach to professional development, and education and training in general has 
been robustly defended (Jessup 1991), it has also been the subject of vociferous cri­
tique (e.g. Hyland 1994; Grugulis 2000).
The old LLUK standards (2005–2012), aimed mainly at further education college 
(FEC) lecturers, have also been contrasted with the UKPSF in two related projects 
undertaken for LLUK and the HEA respectively:
the LLUK framework contains several references to the need to be ‘compliant 
with’, as opposed to ‘engage with’, which seems to be the general inference in the 
UKPSF. Following on from this, it could also be inferred that the LLUK framework 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

8
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
tends to define professionalism in terms of effective engagement with the roles 
and activities it specifies, whereas the UKPSF tends to define the professionalism 
in terms of one’s commitment to the reflection and evaluation of one’s own 
practice.
(Lea 2011: 9)
The LLUK standards are considered to be outcome- or competence-based stan­
dards whereas the UKPSF is regarded as a descriptor-based set of standards. The 
latter set out to assess the capability of individuals to engage with and make sense 
of aspects of the student learning experience for themselves within the parameters 
of their subject discipline and broader pedagogy. The former appear to require 
professionals to demonstrate that they respond to dozens of behaviourally-
oriented expectations. The forerunner to the LLUK standards, the FEnto standards, 
were often criticised as leading to the atomisation of learning programmes miti­
gating against a holistic and coherent learning experience that may inhibit per­
sonal and professional development.
(Price 2011: 9)
While it may be possible to use the UKPSF as a structure for defining and applying 
standards, in itself it is probably insufficiently detailed and lacks the qualitative 
statements which would be needed to specify a standard. Rather, it is much better 
viewed as a framework through which a wide range of professional practice in 
teaching and supporting learning in HE can be reviewed, evaluated and devel­
oped. In this regard, it is designed to facilitate the kinds of critical reflective prac­
tice inspired by the work of Donald Schön (Schön 1983). And what seems clear 
from the two aforementioned projects is that the UKPSF appears much more 
developmental, and even ipsative in its approach, in that it provides opportunities 
for individuals to benchmark their own CPD, rather than provide evidence that 
someone is fit, or competent, to practise (albeit within the constraints imposed by 
the various fellowship schemes and frameworks in terms of how that CPD needs 
to be documented).
In summary, we offer Figure 1.3 as contrasting statements concerning the two 
approaches to standards.
The UKPSF has two key components:
1	
the three dimensions of practice;
2	
the four descriptors (D1–D4).
The three dimensions of practice
The dimensions provide three complementary perspectives reflecting the complex­
ity and multi-faceted nature of the professional role of staff engaged in teaching 
and supporting learning. They are intended to cover what are considered to be the 
three fundamental aspects in the professional role of teaching and/or supporting 
learning.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE SCHOLARSHIP OF TEACHING AND LEARNING
9
A competency approach:
1.	
Tends to fix the definition of a specified role, which unavoidably reflects the 
views and opinions of the authors of the framework (subject to consulta­
tion). Even if this is well done, it will tend to embed a consensus view of a 
profession and be resistant to more radical minority approaches and is thus 
likely to be conservative in its approach.
2.	
Is necessarily generic and may therefore not be fully appropriate for the 
particular circumstances, policies, systems, culture, etc. of an individual or 
institution.
3.	
No matter how detailed and carefully written, is unlikely to cover all even­
tualities of any complex professional role and specific phrases, and terms 
will still remain open to variations in interpretation, possibly leading to 
ambivalence and potential confusion.
4.	
In a rapidly changing professional environment it can crystallise standards 
which become out of date leading to awkward misalignment with real practice 
(and which it is not practical to correct more frequently than every few years).
5.	
Particularly where the evidence-gathering process is very detailed, is very 
likely to succumb to a tick box approach to compliance.
The UKPSF ‘Framework’ approach:
1.	
Does not privilege one particular approach or methodology and therefore 
allows alternative, and perhaps minority approaches to be used and rec­
ognised.
2.	
Allows individuals, teams and organisations to fully contextualise their 
interpretation of the framework to their particular circumstances, roles and 
institutional contexts and strategic objectives.
3.	
While recognising there may be some difficulty in interpretation of specific 
elements in the framework, it produces a set of statements from which to 
begin the interrogation, and subsequent enhancement, of one’s own teach­
ing and learning regime in relation to other aspects of academic practice.
4.	
Recognises the need to update (on a five-year cycle) but mid-cycle it is fully 
adaptable to current practice, in only ever outlining the broadest range of 
dimensions of practice.
5.	
Recognises that alignment with a Fellowship category is a demanding but 
thoughtful process of critical reflection on one’s own practice. The Frame­
work encourages practitioners to adopt a scholarly and developmental nar­
rative account, which is authentic and meaningful.
Figure 1.3   Contrasting a competency approach to standards with the UKPSF.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

10
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
The three dimensions are:
1	
A: the areas of activity undertaken by teachers and supporters of learning within 
higher education (with the emphasis on ‘what you do’);
2	
K: the core knowledge that you need to gain and apply to carry out those activities 
at the appropriate level. This includes both relevant factual and propositional 
knowledge as well as the practical skills to put that knowledge into practice (with 
the emphasis on ‘how you do it’).
3	
V: the professional values that you embrace and exemplify in performing these 
activities (with the emphasis on ‘why you do it’).
The three dimensions are often depicted in a cyclical way in order to encourage prac­
titioners to consider them holistically, that is, how aspects in one dimension can be 
related to the others. For example, in developing a new mode of assessment on a 
course, this might have been informed by a recognition that some (if not all) students 
were previously being inhibited by the ways in which they were asked to engage and 
demonstrate their learning. Here the elements A3, K3 and V2 are being combined (see 
Appendix 1). And in a particular narrative context, this might also include engagement 
with A2, K2 and all the other values. Appendix 1 illustrates the different dimensions of 
practice and elements found in the UKPSF. The extracts from the HEA fellowship appli­
cations show these dimensions, added.
Apart from the values (which, obviously are value-laden), the areas of activity 
and the core knowledge statements are almost wholly descriptive, apart from the very 
mild adjectives like ‘effective’ and ‘appropriate’ (which are themselves open to inter­
pretation by individual practitioners), and the values are intended to invite interroga­
tion and interpretation of their meaning in practice.
The dimensions, particularly the core knowledge, are intended to describe knowledge 
in action rather than just propositional knowledge – ‘knowing how’ rather than just ‘know­
ing that’ (see Eraut 2000), in which case, the framework encourages practitioners to look for 
examples of where conceptual and theoretical understanding have been applied in practice.
Some illustrations of how the areas of activity might be interpreted in 
practice
When you prepare to teach or support students, you would typically design and plan at 
least an outline of the intended learning experience(s) in advance (A1). Then put your 
plans into practice (A2), either in the classroom or other physical or virtual environ­
ments as appropriate. As part of this support, you would generally undertake some 
kind of assessment of the learning; sometimes before the activity, to gauge prior 
knowledge; sometimes during the learning process, to evaluate progress and adapt the 
experience appropriately; and sometimes afterwards to ensure the intended learning 
has taken place, to identify gaps and in some cases to provide a summative – perhaps 
certificated – assessment of outcomes (A3).
The environment both real and virtual, of course, strongly influences the learning 
experience and you would plan for and effectively use it during delivery (A4a). And, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE SCHOLARSHIP OF TEACHING AND LEARNING
11
generally, as your students engage with learning, whether in formal sessions or in 
other locations, you would seek to provide careful and sensitive support to help them 
with their questions and issues (A4b).
And as part of your commitment to do the best for your students, you would be 
careful to keep up to date with the relevant subject matter, to evaluate by various 
means the methods you have employed and to modify and develop your approaches 
and methods as appropriate (A5).
It would be an oversimplification to represent the five areas as a straightforward 
linear sequence in which you always begin with design, followed by delivery, etc., and 
not forgetting, of course, each individual has a unique teaching profile. In practice, you 
may well be responsible for teaching/supporting a number of different groups of learn­
ers (or individual learners) simultaneously. So at any one time you may be at different 
stages in the activity cycle in respect of different groups.
Some illustrations of how the core knowledge might be interpreted 
in practice
Clearly, you would generally have a full grasp of the relevant content of any subject 
you are teaching and/or supporting and would use all of the usual means to keep up to 
date with your subject (K1). You would also have a good knowledge of a range of 
appropriate methods for teaching, learning and assessing in your discipline area (K2) 
and your choice and application of methods and approaches will be determined by 
your understanding of how students most effectively learn in your discipline (K3) and 
of the potential of current technologies to enhance learning (K4).
In order to continue to develop and enhance your teaching or learning support 
role, you would generally evaluate your progress and performance and make changes 
in response to the information from those evaluations (K5). And all of your work is, of 
course, set in a wider higher education context of policy reform, which you need both 
to be aware of and to respond to appropriately (K6).
Some illustrations of how the values might be interpreted 
in practice
‘Respect for individual learners and diverse learning communities’ (V1) influences your 
attitude towards your students and to the various learning communities with which 
you engage. The key term in that element is ‘respect’ and while this term is not unprob­
lematic and is open to a range of nuances in interpretation, the fundamental principle 
of seeking to do your very best for your students and of acting in their interest is surely 
not in dispute.
‘Promote participation in higher education and equality of opportunity for learners’ 
(V2) focuses on your commitment to establishing and enhancing inclusive educational 
practice. Again, these terms are open to a wide range of interpretations and it is import­
ant to realise that they are to be understood and applied in context. But the broad 
principle that all students (including prospective ones) are entitled to appropriate sup­
port and help to engage with their learning, regardless of potentially discriminatory/
limiting characteristics, is surely uncontroversial.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

12
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
‘Using evidence-informed approaches and the outcomes from research, scholar­
ship and continuing professional development’ (V3) emphasises your commitment to 
your own development and in particular to you taking a thoughtful, reasoned, and 
scholarly approach to your teaching and supporting learning activities. To do this, you 
will draw on a range of sources in evaluating and enhancing your practice and seek to 
keep up to date with methods, approaches and issues in teaching and learning in your 
field, and possibly contribute in a variety of scholarly ways to that evidence base.
‘Acknowledge the wider context in which higher education operates, recognising 
the implications for professional practice’ (V4) stresses the need for you to be aware of 
the wider context in which HE operates, globally as well as nationally, and to be able 
to respond appropriately – within your discipline and professional context – to policy 
reform and general social trends which impinge on higher education provision.
The UKPSF Descriptors
The Descriptors are four set of statements which draw on the dimensions of practice to 
outline the key characteristics of staff performing at four broad categories of typical 
teaching and learning support roles within Higher Education (see Appendix 2).
Appendix 2 presents the UKPSF Descriptors (D1–D4). Each category corre­
sponds with a fellowship category: D1 Associate Fellowship; D2 Fellowship; D3 
Senior Fellowship; D4 Principal Fellowship, and the descriptors thereby outline what 
somebody, typically, would need to demonstrate evidence of doing, in their every­
day practice, in order to make a claim (in a fellowship application) to be awarded the 
relevant fellowship.
It is important to stress that the four fellowships are not intended to be viewed as 
a hierarchy. Rather, they correspond to the activities that practitioners typically 
engage with in their everyday practice. In this regard they are role-related, but not 
necessarily job-role related. That is, it is your role in enhancing learning and teaching 
which the descriptors seek to capture. For example, a Professor of (say) Chemistry 
might be an internationally renowned scholar in their discipline context, but may have 
little or no responsibility for assessing students’ work; little or no responsibility for 
institution-based learning and teaching strategies; or have a research profile that 
relates only to Chemistry as a subject, not its pedagogical implications. In this exam­
ple, Associate Fellowship would probably be the most appropriate fellowship category 
for this professor.
Related to 1 and 2 above, the descriptors are also designed to help prospective 
fellows engage with the three dimensions of practice in appropriate ways and in accord 
with their roles. Each fellowship category is there to enable a practitioner to seek rec­
ognition for what they either actually already do in this respect, or might do (as forms 
of CPD) in seeking to become a fellow of the HEA. Once again, all fellowship catego­
ries are equal in status in that respect. And here, the descriptors would perhaps be 
better always depicted horizontally rather than vertically. That said, a change in role 
might well prompt someone to consider making a further claim for a different cate­
gory of fellowship than one already held.
If you are unsure which fellowship category you might consider applying for, here 
is a quick reference guide followed by some key questions to ask yourself:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE SCHOLARSHIP OF TEACHING AND LEARNING
13
•	
Descriptor 1 is appropriate for all ‘Individuals able to provide evidence of effec­
tiveness in relation to their professional role(s) which, typically, will include at 
least some teaching and/or learning support responsibilities. This teaching and 
learning role may sometimes be undertaken with the assistance of more experi­
enced teachers or mentors.’
•	
Descriptor 2 is appropriate for all ‘Individuals able to provide evidence of broadly 
based effectiveness in more substantive teaching and supporting learning role(s). 
Such individuals are likely to be established members of one or more academic 
and/or academic-related teams.’
•	
Descriptor 3 is appropriate for ‘Individuals able to provide evidence of a sustained 
record of effectiveness in relation to teaching and learning, incorporating for 
example, the organisation, leadership and/or management of specific aspects of 
teaching and learning provision. Such individuals are likely to lead or be members 
of established academic teams.’
•	
Descriptor 4 is appropriate for ‘Individuals, as highly experienced academics, able 
to provide evidence of a sustained and effective record of impact at a strategic 
level in relation to teaching and learning, as part of a wider commitment to aca­
demic practice. This may be within their institution or wider (inter) national set­
tings’ (UKPSF 2011).
You might also ask yourself the following questions:
•	
D1 or D2? – When looking at the five elements in the areas of activity are there 
any that you know you have no responsibility for in your current role/range of 
activities? To make a claim for Associate Fellowship you only need to demonstrate 
engagement with two areas of activity.
•	
D2 or D3? – Do you have a leadership role in your current practice related to 
teaching and learning? For example, do you have responsibility as a programme, 
course, or framework director, or do you mentor colleagues in some capacity? If 
you answered yes here, then D3 may be the appropriate descriptor to look at more 
closely.
•	
D3 or D4? – Have you had some responsibility for, and could demonstrate clear 
impact on, teaching and learning-related strategies which are institution-wide, or 
do you have a national/international profile/standing with respect to learning and 
teaching within your discipline context or HE in general? If you answered yes 
here, then D4 may be the appropriate descriptor to look at more closely.
Engaging with the UKPSF
It is important to remember that the UKPSF is a framework which can be used in a 
number of ways. For example, an individual might use it informally to help him or 
her put together an application for an academic post, using it to demonstrate the nature 
of engagement they have had with a range of teaching and learning activities. Or an 
institution might use it as part of a CPD framework, which individuals are either 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

14
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
encouraged, or mandated, to engage with in some capacity (and which may be related 
to promotion opportunities). In both of these cases there may be no formal qualifica­
tion or claim for fellowship attached to these activities.
Alternatively, an institution may have had their CPD framework accredited by the 
HEA and thereby be enabled to award HEA fellowships to their staff, and in accord 
with how that institution expects the engagement with the UKPSF to be demonstrated. 
For example, you may be required to present your case for fellowship orally in front of 
a group of peers, or by written application, or by registering for a taught award (and 
achieve a fellowship upon successful completion of that award), or by choosing from 
any number of options which the institution in question permits.
For those who work independently of an employing HE institution, or who work 
for an institution which does not subscribe to the HEA, you may still be able to access 
an accredited-institution scheme which uses the UKPSF (or awards fellowships) by 
approaching the person responsible for the scheme. Indeed, this might be encouraged 
where there is a partnership agreement between a number of universities or where, for 
example, there is a university and further education college consortia, particularly 
where the latter offers degree programmes validated by the university. In these cases 
always ask about what fees might apply in your individual case. And of course, all 
individuals working to support learning in any capacity in a higher education context 
can apply for a fellowship directly through the HEA’s own fellowship scheme.
Conclusion
The UKPSF provides a comprehensive and coherent framework for considering all 
types of teaching and learning support roles in HE. It is practical, it is widely accepted 
within the sector, and it can be used developmentally both by individuals and strategi­
cally by HE institutions. However, it is not without its detractors, particularly those 
who view the HEA as a kind of watchdog or quango, who have been charged with 
overseeing and implementing a robotic approach to teaching and learning in HE, by 
making HE teachers subscribe to a prescriptive and limiting set of competency-based 
standards for teaching and learning, and in the process leading them away from a 
research-led approach to teaching and learning in UK HE. Yes, it may be possible to use 
the UKPSF in this way, but because individuals and institutions are free to use it in a 
range of ways, our hope is that it will continue to be used in a much more personally 
reflective (and possibly ipsative) manner, and in keeping with the aspirational and 
non-prescriptive way in which it was originally conceived. On this point it is worth 
noting, as recommended in the two Lingfield Reports (Lingfield 2012a, 2012b), that the 
wider post-compulsory sector in England has now adopted an approach to standards 
which is very similar to the UKPSF (Education and Training Foundation 2014).
That said, the HEA does own the fellowships – after all, practitioners are becoming 
fellows of that body – and we should not forget the HEA’s wider remit to help raise the 
profile of learning and teaching in HE and the scholarship of teaching and learning 
(SoTL). On the fellowships, the HEA encourages universities and colleges to have 
accredited a range of activities and approaches to CPD, and thereby enable fellow­
ships to be awarded in a number of different ways and to suit the requirements of 
particular institutional contexts. However, on its wider remit, we quickly find ourselves 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE SCHOLARSHIP OF TEACHING AND LEARNING
15
back on much more contested terrain. For some, the HEA’s expansion of the work of 
the original 24 subject centres, and its sponsorship more generally of a wide range of 
pedagogically related research and other collaborative projects, have all been of enor­
mous service to the sector. But, for others, it has been easy to find evidence that none 
of these activities has produced what one might call a ‘step change’ in the nature of the 
profile of learning and teaching in UK HE.
Clearly the jury is still out on how best to raise the profile of learning and teaching, 
and it may well be out for some time to come. There may be several reasons for this. It 
may take many years to adjust reward and recognition within higher education to bet­
ter reflect the efforts of those who excel in teaching and learning-related activities as 
opposed to subject-based research activities. Some universities now have routes to 
readerships and professorships which fully recognise contributions to the learning and 
teaching landscape, but others don’t, relying on the traditional measures related much 
more closely to what Boyer referred to as the scholarship of discovery. But this whole 
area is further complicated by contested notions of desired relationships between 
teaching and research generally in higher education. Some of these issues will be dis­
cussed in more detail in Chapter 3.
Furthermore, the whole question of HE pedagogy is itself a contested notion. Is 
there actually a pedagogy associated with higher education, which is different, say, 
from further education? Are there any generic pedagogic principles and theories upon 
which we can all agree, or are there only subject pedagogies, and are these based on 
sound epistemological foundations, or merely conventions of narrowly focused disci­
pline practice? And what is the best way to prepare academics for teaching roles – 
through generic teaching awards; through PhD programmes; through informal forms 
of mentoring? Can teaching be viewed as a science, based on hard experimental and 
accumulated knowledge of how people learn, or is it better viewed as a craft, or some­
thing entirely different altogether, and better conceived in terms of critical reflective 
(or reflexive) practice – in the spirit of authors like Schön (1983) and Mesirow (2000)? 
Evidence can be found to support claims in all these directions, and much of it is con­
tained in the following report.
Relevant HEA project
Parsons, D., Hill, I., Holland, J. and Willis, D. (2012) The impact of teaching devel­
opment programmes in higher education. Available at: www.heacademy.ac.uk/
sites/default/files/resources/HEA_Impact_Teaching_Development_Prog.pdf
Using the following chapters in support of making a fellowship claim
We hope that each chapter will provide some food for critical thought on how aspects 
of your academic practice already relate to, or could be better related to, aspects of 
learning and teaching. To aid this process we begin each chapter with some comments 
from colleagues who speak negatively to the themes of that chapter. This device is 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

16
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
used to offer a challenge to the contributing author(s) to respond to those comments. 
Chapter 1 starts somewhat uncontroversially with the theme of enhancing student 
learning, but even here it is clear that we need to consider carefully what it means to 
be ‘effective’ as ‘higher’ education teachers, because both terms are themselves con­
testable. More broadly, the chapter also raises the question of whether we might be in 
a position to say that ‘we are all now student-centred in our approach to teaching and 
learning’ (and what that might actually mean in practice).
We also hope that the open way in which we have presented the UKPSF in this Intro­
duction will be viewed as a tandem invitation to openly engage critically with the con­
tested nature of all aspects of academic practice (particularly as they relate to teaching 
and learning), and to use this in the construction of a coherent, critically reflective, and 
scholarly narrative account of your own professional practice, and for this to form the 
basis of a claim for a HEA fellowship. Chapter 8 will then return to the fellowship 
application process itself, offering some practical advice on preparing an application 
– be it within an accredited scheme or directly through the HEA. Each chapter also con­
tains some self-assessment questions (activities). Each of the activity exercises (four in 
each chapter) is split between a question aimed more at people considering an applica­
tion for Associate Fellowship/Fellowship, with a follow-up question aimed more at peo­
ple who might be considering Senior Fellowship/Principal Fellowship.
Each chapter finishes with some quotes from successful fellowship applications, 
which we hope will also be useful in encouraging engagement with the various ele­
ments of the UKPSF. These extracts were randomly chosen from those that were kindly 
made available to us, subject to two simple selection criteria: (1) they should come 
from a range of discipline contexts; and (2) they should represent the full range of 
fellowship categories. The applicants supplied their complete applications, some of 
which were direct applications to the HEA and some were from university-based 
accredited frameworks. We then chose the actual extracts to reflect a range of engage­
ments with various aspects of academic practice and the dimensions of the UKPSF. 
Four of the applications were from Senior and Principal Fellows, but the extracts we 
chose from these applications reflect in equal measure their engagement with aspects 
of learning and teaching as well as their academic leadership. The extracts were taken 
directly from the applications and only slightly edited where particular sentences 
didn’t make sense out of the institutional context in which they were written.
We anonymised the applicants, using the following identifiers: Dr Brown (Senior 
Fellow) – Senior Lecturer in Psychology; Mr Blonde (Associate Fellow), Learning Tech­
nologist; Dr Blue (Principal Fellow) – Associate Dean Business and Law; Dr Orange 
(Fellow) – Lecturer in Forensic Chemistry; Mr Pink (Senior Fellow) – Senior Lecturer Art 
and Design; Ms White (Principal Fellow) – Head of Professional Development. Chapter 8 
also includes three more sets of extracts from different applicants, which we used to 
exemplify forms of reflective writing in general, and across the range of fellowship 
­categories. In all the quoted application extracts used throughout the book, the applicant 
has added the lettered references to the various component parts of the UKPSF.
To introduce these extracts, here is Mr Blonde, in his role as a learning technolo­
gist, reflecting on how he worked with academic staff to support their engagement 
with various learning technologies through the university’s Digital Experience Build­
ing in University Teaching (DEBUT) project.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE SCHOLARSHIP OF TEACHING AND LEARNING
17
Mr Blonde (AFHEA)
From my own evidence-informed practice (see Ferman 2002; Sharpe 2004; Knight 
et al. 2006; Mainka 2007) and from staff feedback and evaluations on the learning 
activities that have been devised (especially from the evaluative work undertaken as 
part of the DEBUT programme), I know that academic staff are most engaged when 
they find the subject material intellectually stimulating and pertinent to their teach­
ing practice; they have an opportunity for discourse and debate; and are able to 
share practice with colleagues who work within different faculties or subject disci­
plines [K1, K5, K6, V3, V4]. In the seven years that the DEBUT programme has been 
running, over 150 staff from academic and professional services departments have 
been introduced to a range of technologies of their choosing, which have been situ­
ated within their own personal and professional context [K1, K2, K4, V1, V2, V4]. The 
programme specifically builds in the chance for staff to ‘play’ with the technologies 
within a ‘safe immersive environment’; opening up a discourse among the partici­
pants; enabling the sharing of ‘good practice’ within a rich multidisciplinary forum; 
and providing networking opportunities for staff from multi-campus sites [K2, K3, 
K4, K5, V1, V2, V3].
Alongside the contributions from student authors and the debates on various 
aspects of academic practice, each chapter also contains a short (1,000-word) opinion 
piece. To introduce these, here Brigitte Stockton looks at the notion of ‘Brand UK HE’; 
how UK higher education has managed to position itself as a ‘quality’ provider in an 
increasingly globalised HE market place and knowledge economy (issues relating to 
which, will be discussed in Chapter 7). The piece refers to the role of the Quality Assur­
ance Agency (QAA) in these developments, which will be discussed in Chapter 3. It also 
refers to some of the ways that UK HE providers have been able to articulate a distinct 
(albeit to some, western) learning experience for students, the essence of which will be 
discussed in detail in Chapter 2.
Opinion: On internationalisation
Brand UK HE: a global experience
Brigitte Stockton
Internationally valued, globally renowned and historically respected, UK higher 
education may be viewed as a profitable and reliable brand, offering a variety of 
products (mainly qualifications). Through association and collaboration, transnational 
host countries have invested in this brand to provide a gateway for postgraduate 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

18
JOHN LEA AND NIGEL PURCELL
success and ultimately, to develop the skills and knowledge of future generations. 
For host countries, this investment is a demonstration of progressive behaviour and 
a statement of confidence in their continuing growth.
Recently, the Department for Business, Innovation & Skills (BIS) concluded that 
‘the dominant motivation … for study in the UK [was] to lead to impact once they 
[students] returned home’ (CRAC 2013). And outside of the Bologna Agreement 
boundaries, UK higher education (HE) providers have expanded to meet this demand. 
But, in some countries the initial enthusiasm for collaboration along with the some­
times rushed, ill-conceived, programmes have threatened relationships, the quality 
of provision, and ultimately the brand name of UK HE. However, a clearer informed 
vision with informed expectations is emerging. So is now the time to establish alter­
native motivational drivers and debate the expectations of both parties?
Counting the cost of off-shore management and resources, many UK higher educa­
tion providers have discovered the significant economic benefits envisioned are less 
lucrative than initially forecasted. This realisation creates an opportunity to shift the 
focus away from consumerism and economic gain to establish alternate institute, social 
and academic rewards, exemplified through unique student experiences that evolve 
within a diverse cohort, alternate platforms for staff development, opportunities for col­
laborative global research and promotion of equality and cross-cultural understanding.
To reproduce this desirable authentic UK experience it is now recognised that a 
shared understanding of quality standards and the removal of misconceptions and 
misapprehensions are required. Superficial processes built through egotistical or 
unsound ideologies quickly unravel when placed under the Quality Assurance Agency 
UK Higher Education (QAA) spotlight in a higher education review. And effective risk 
management from the onset will ensure the UK Quality Code (QAA 2013a) acts as a 
reference tool from which collaboration can evolve, thereby avoiding potential con­
frontation and an air of postcolonial superiority, which can occur once programmes 
are running and processes are imposed as an afterthought.
QAA international reviews (QAA 2013b, 2014) strongly recommend onsite lead­
ership and management of an overseas campus, ensuring ‘rigorous, comprehensive 
and systematic’ quality processes led from within the off-shore campus; with external 
UK support being essential for overall success (Fielden 2011). Thus, this highlights 
how proactive, rather than reactive, onsite management tackles or identifies potential 
problems while acknowledging the holistic impact. By contrast, a reactive satellite 
management system is often unaware of, or can misunderstand, localised trends, 
causal effects and the true context or extent of a problem.
A celebrated component of the brand may be the advertising catchphrase of the 
‘UK-style learning experience’. Unfortunately, this phrase can be misunderstood. In 
some cultures there is an ingrained expectation that this implies application of didac­
tic pedagogies or conservative prescribed learning outcomes, unaware of the variable 
norms of UK HE, the reality of experimentation, seminars and the use of timetabled 
self-directed study aimed at promoting the independent learning of academic or tech­
nical skills, all of which are integral to education in the UK, and this misunderstanding 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE SCHOLARSHIP OF TEACHING AND LEARNING
19
Note
1	 Throughout this chapter Nigel Purcell writes in a personal capacity and not as a representa­
tive of the Higher Education Academy. 
can be disconcerting for all parties. In countries where the collective voice is predom­
inant, or there is a culture of non-verbalised debate and unspoken thought, these 
attributes may not be valued or fully understood by students, parents and possibly 
the collaborative partner. However, this cultural shift in learning is essential if the 
environment is to mirror the UK higher education experience, where self-expression, 
debate between peers and professors and individual academic direction underpin the 
success of graduates. This cultural shift enables attributes such as time manage­
ment, active learning and confidence to develop and be evidenced; creating opportu­
nities for students to demonstrate emotional maturity and intelligence through 
engagement, retention and successful attainment. Whether this divergent methodol­
ogy evidenced through pre-defined UK parameters is suitable across all cultures con­
tinues to be debated across subjects, yet currently this methodology remains a 
prerequisite for most qualifications and essentially a key component of the brand.
Whereas a brand may have national differences, it is in the curriculum content 
where this can be observed to effectively embrace cultural differences and the appli­
cation of international perspectives on localised events, shifting cultural learning 
styles through familiar subjects to achieve the desired brand outcome. Yet this can 
only be achieved through empathetic staff mentoring and training that support the 
initiation of an inventive curriculum that positively explores ideologies and collective 
or individual responses.
We recognise that the transnational brand experience will continue in variable artic­
ulation, collaboration and progression agreements and the holistic student journey 
will take many forms. One argument that supports the idea that the western learning 
culture should remain unchanged is the familiarity it offers students during their 
transition in the UK, for example, expectations of engagement are already estab­
lished, communication methods pre-activated with consistent email addresses, 
known student voice platforms and awareness of support mechanisms. This reduces 
the difficulties observed when creating diverse teams and which are at times repli­
cated in the studio/classroom: ‘reduced interaction, conflict regarding task alloca­
tion, high turnover, absenteeism, reduced cooperation and commitment … [and 
taking] time for the benefits of diversity to show through’ (Leadbeater 2008).
Whether the brand can be led by these drivers and focus on individual ele­
ments will continue to be debated. What is acknowledged is how the UK Quality 
Code for Higher Education can become the reference guide that promotes consis­
tency, if consistency is required, regardless of the location. However, the recogni­
tion that the collaborative partner may offer opportunities to improve the brand 
through autonomy in pedagogy, delivery and research should not be overlooked. 
Thus, this ultimately ensures a global student receives a UK higher education expe­
rience to support their progression and to become a global graduate.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

There’s just no evidence that one method of teaching is any better than 
another, is there?
Surely, teaching sociology isn’t the same as teaching engineering, so is there 
any point in talking about generic principles?
What’s the point of students marking their own work? Won’t they just award 
themselves high marks?
Introduction
The assumptions inherent in the statements above may well need to be challenged, but 
they also highlight how our professional practice can get rooted in our everyday cus­
toms, routines and experiences, sometimes producing tacit forms of knowledge, and 
often leaving those customs unquestioned (Polanyi 1967; Eraut 2000). This chapter 
looks to open up some of these unexamined aspects of teaching and learning practice 
in higher education.
The word ‘unexamined’ is, however, a tricky one. For example, I heard a young 
lecturer say this recently in a PG Cert HE taught session: ‘Facilitating student learning 
is a bit of a cop-out as the lecturer doesn’t need to prepare as much material compared 
with a traditional lecture or seminar.’ The comment is clearly reflective, but it is debat­
able whether it was designed to interrogate existing practice or simply to defend it. 
The response from another lecturer at the time was that, far from being a cop-out, 
facilitating learning requires not only a thorough knowledge of the subject material, 
but also some knowledge of how students learn.
This chapter will focus on this question of how students learn by looking at current 
pedagogic literature and examples of practice which are informed by that literature. 
This will be preceded by looking, first, at various dimensions of the notion of stu­
dent-centred learning, followed by learning activities aimed at enhancing student 
engagement, and finally by looking at how forms of assessment and feedback might 
best complement these ideas and principles of learning. But before we embark on this, 
there is another comment I have not heard voiced as often as I would like: ‘What can 
2
Enhancing student learning
Cordelia Bryan
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
21
we learn by looking at some of the great pedagogic thinkers and reformers of the 
past?’ Like all disciplines, pedagogy has a history and this chapter begins by looking at 
the influence of key thinkers and reformers of the university upon whose shoulders we 
stand. The ideas of these thinkers will also feature throughout the book as underpin­
ning threads.
Some key thinkers on teaching and learning in higher education
In the eighteenth century, Wilhelm von Humboldt, a liberal thinker and German man of 
letters, posed questions relating to the purpose of university education. His questions 
are as relevant today and still occupy governments, policy-makers, teachers and stu­
dents (Mueller-Vollmer 2011). Von Humboldt asked, What is education good for? What 
are you supposed to get from your university studies? Is it a liberal arts education 
which forms you into a good, knowledgeable and democratic citizen? Is it science/
technology/economics forming you into a part of a production wheel in society’s eco­
nomic growth? Is it a road to free your creative spirits and intellectual capacity?
Von Humboldt lay the foundations of a new educational system in Prussia, leading 
to the liberal arts education of the twenty-first century. His ideas on a modern educa­
tion theory have been attracting increasing attention in recent years and may have a 
renaissance in our new information age. In the short period from 1809 to 1810, as head 
of the section for ecclesiastic affairs and education in the Ministry of the Interior, von 
Humboldt was able to institute radical reform of the Prussian educational system from 
elementary and secondary right through to the university level. His reforms were 
based on the principle of free and universal education for all citizens. His radical idea 
of combining both teaching and research in one institution guided him in establishing 
the University of Berlin in 1810 (today’s Humboldt University) and the structure he 
created for this institution became the model not only throughout Germany but also for 
modern universities in most Western countries (Mueller-Vollmer 2011).
In the nineteenth century, John Henry Newman wrote in his discourses, published 
as the Idea of a University (Newman [1852] 1996) that university is a place of teaching 
universal knowledge. In order to achieve this, he believed that the university required a 
close relationship with the church. He was not advocating that the main characteristics 
of a university should be changed by its incorporation of church, but rather that its 
performance in its office of intellectual education would thereby be steadied. The 
steadying influence of the church for Newman is about integrity and pursuing truth: 
University, he asserts, ‘educates the intellect to reason well in all matters, to reach out 
towards truth, and to grasp it’ (Newman [1852] 1996: 92).
The ever increasing marketisation and managerialism pervading all aspects of 
university life (see Chapters 3 and 7 in particular) cause deep concern to those who 
still hold dear the liberal ideals of Newman and von Humboldt’s university. Some fear 
an erosion of the fundamental ideals of universality, academic freedom and ‘pure 
research’ which do not easily sit within current Quality Assurance mechanisms. Mit­
telstrass (2010), addressing a European HE Conference, talks of the dangers of seeing 
teaching and research as just another job rather than Newman’s ideal of pursuing truth 
as a way of life. The current discourse of the university with its strange administrative 
and economic language, he argues, no longer corresponds to any theory or idea: ‘We 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

22
CORDELIA BRYAN
need to beware of letting the university system erode in this manner. Such a system 
would lose research to extra-university institutions once and for all, and universities 
would evolve into mere teaching institutions’ (Mittelstrass 2010: 188).
The teaching–research nexus has long been debated (e.g. Boyer 1990; Neumann 
1992; Ramsden and Moses 1992; Jenkins et al. 1998; Light 2003; Nicholls 2005; Brown 
and Smith 2013) and more recently also includes students’ perceptions in its discourse 
(Healey et al. 2014a) (see Chapters 3 and 6 for further discussion of these dimensions of 
academic practice). This is also being further complemented by forms of cooperative 
scholarship where our teaching practice is both informed by research findings of oth­
ers and is the subject of our own research, and often undertaken in active collabora­
tion with students, where they are true participants rather than just respondents, as in 
most forms of action research (AR) (McNiff 2001).
Unlike a lot of other empirical research, AR places the researcher at the centre 
of the enquiry in a self-reflexive capacity where s/he is continually self-evaluating 
practice in relation to pedagogic theories. AR often begins with an idea or hunch that 
is then developed (e.g. the feedback I provide doesn’t seem to be making much differ­
ence to student performance). The teacher/researcher interrogates her/his own work, 
questioning why things are done a particular way and whether that way best serves 
the intended student learning. Data may also be generated by asking the students for 
their views and experiences and, in some cases, even including them in the tutor’s self-
reflexive process in focus groups or individually. In this model of AR, the teacher is not 
only sharing and modelling the research journey but also exposing his/her vulnerabil­
ity as the person at the centre of the whole process. Engaging students in self- and peer 
assessment and other collaborative approaches to their learning is steadily gaining 
ground with compelling arguments for a system that supports symbiosis rather than 
competition and conflict (Brown and Smith 2013). And these approaches might 
also become an integral component in your own claim for HEA fellowship status (see 
Chapter 8).
Boyer (1990) made a compelling pedagogic case for teaching and research to be 
better integrated as complementary activities which, together, should be able to 
enhance the professional and scholarly practice of the career academic. As we saw in 
the quote which began the first chapter to this book, he identified four distinct types of 
scholarship pursued in universities: the scholarship of discovery, of integration, of 
application and of teaching. He makes a case for each to be considered as equal in 
status and advocates that academics be afforded the career opportunities to engage 
with all four, rather than becoming experts in only one. Advancing arguments for a 
more holistic and integrated view of academic practice, such as Boyer’s, will be a 
recurrent theme throughout this book (and will be a particular focus in Chapter 3).
In von Humboldt and Newman’s idea of the university, epistemological concerns 
were paramount. There had until this point been little or no mention of the part the 
learner plays in the acquisition of knowledge and search for truth. Their work acts as 
a significant corrective to that, but more on the level of the acquisition and pursuit of 
knowledge. Considering how, for example, life experience, state of mind, motivation 
and aspirations of the learner might affect his/her capacity to learn is a more recent 
interest of higher education research. What has become known as the student-centred 
approach to learning builds on the work of the psychologist, Carl Rogers (1989) and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
23
his client-centred approach to therapy which he developed and applied in an educa­
tional context. Rogers claims that a person cannot teach another person directly; a 
person can only facilitate another’s learning (Rogers 1957: 301). The belief is that what 
the student does is more important than what the teacher does, and this might be 
argued to enrich the von Humboldt and Boyer notions of scholarship. But it also recog­
nises that each student will process what s/he learns differently depending on what 
s/he brings to the classroom.
Rogers’ person-centred approach brought about a conceptual shift in the focus of 
subsequent pedagogic research. Interest began to be focused on the learner, identify­
ing, for example, multiple learning styles, cultural, gender and economic influences 
and prior educational experience as some of the key factors that might determine how 
a student approaches his/her learning when entering university. This paradigm shift in 
our understanding of how students learn has had huge implications for academic prac­
tice, which the rest of this chapter aims to highlight.
Student-centred learning
The illiterate of the 21st century will not be those who cannot read and write, but 
those who cannot learn, unlearn and relearn.
(Alvin Toffler, available at: http://www.alvintoffler.net/?fa=galleryquotes)
Student-centred learning is not new, as the connection between the work of von Hum­
boldt and Rogers demonstrates. If we place that history lesson alongside the current 
practices of student-centredness we can see that the combined effect has been to 
slowly discredit the ‘knowledge transmission’ model in which the teacher simply lec­
tures to students in the erroneous belief that they are learning what s/he wants them to 
learn. Students may share some common understanding of the lecturer’s input but we 
have only limited ways of knowing to what extent, if any, individual student learning 
has occurred as a result of such lectures. Traditional forms of assessment have not 
helped in this regard – regurgitation of lectures in exams cannot be said to equate with 
or promote an appetite for ‘life-long learning’.
Dear Lecturer
On student-centred learning
Jane Allcroft
I have learned more when I have had the opportunity to discuss ideas with lecturers 
in seminars and tutorials; where their greater knowledge and experience were used 
to prompt me into new ways of thinking, to challenge my initial reactions to concepts 
and, through discussion, to allow me to find new ways of understanding. The least 
useful approach has been the traditional didactic lecturer as fountain of all knowl­
edge regurgitating it to a room full of people. For instance, we had one lecturer who 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

24
CORDELIA BRYAN
It is worth just flagging up that the term ‘student-centred’ is carefully crafted for 
linguistic effect, not unlike ‘pro-choice’ for abortion or ‘non-violent’ to describe a 
radical form of communication. Each is crafted to portray an opposite which is 
intended to be seen as undesirable or even ridiculous – against choice or pro-
violent-communication. Like its political counterpart, the educational debate around 
student-centred approaches is more complex and nuanced. While strong pedagogic 
arguments are made here, and throughout the academic community, for adopting a 
student-centred approach, it is not the intention of the authors of this book to present 
any pedagogy as uncontested. We would encourage the continuation of discussions 
in favour of teacher-centred or non-student-centred teaching philosophy and prac­
tice if or when there may be legitimate claims to be made for its effectiveness.
I have, for example, run staff development workshops where the focus has overtly 
been teacher-centred with titles such as: ‘How to survive the increasing pressures of 
large-group facilitation: a teacher-centred perspective’. If tutors are becoming ill 
because of the daily pressures placed upon them, their well-being, or indeed profes­
sional survival, is obviously worth considering as a priority. A workforce consisting of 
exhausted, demoralised or long-term absent academics serves nobody, least of all 
those at the heart of our student-centred world. Addressing teacher concerns head-on 
with workshops reviewing pedagogic practices which might help to alleviate the pres­
sure they experience by reducing their workload, I claim, is a legitimate teacher-
centred approach to the situation.
Reducing teacher input and enhancing student engagement in tutorials
In both 1:1 and group tutorials, require your students to come ‘primed’ and ready to 
discuss key issues about their work on which they would like help and support. This 
approach is moving in the direction of the ‘flipped classroom’ which will be discussed 
later in this chapter.
To begin, for first year students, you might devise a set of questions/tasks to help 
them identify exactly what it is that they need and post this on the VLE, e.g.:
simply put up PowerPoint pages and read them out to us. If the way to understand 
new concepts is to have them read aloud, then there would be no need for lecturers 
at all – we could simply read the information aloud to ourselves or each other. The 
chance to ask questions, to have space to flounder and experiment with approaches 
and ideas, to hear other students’ questions and the lecturer’s answers – these are 
the ways in which new concepts become meaningful to me.
To develop this one step further, I have found that to fully embed new knowl­
edge and understanding I have needed to apply it, or discover it, through active 
engagement. For instance, I can recall and discuss knowledge gained through con­
ducting my own research, in partnership with university staff, whereas information 
found only to use in an essay or worse, an exam, enters my short-term memory for 
the period during which I need to use it and is then gone and forgotten.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
25
•	
In your own words, write a couple of sentences explaining what you understood 
from the feedback you received and what, if any, action you have subsequently 
taken.
•	
What aspect of the feedback did you find hardest to deal with?
•	
Can you explain why you found this most challenging?
•	
What would help you most in improving this piece now and after the session?
Pair up students so that one acts as scribe, noting suggested actions or records the 
conversation while the other’s work is being discussed. Having a good record of tuto­
rial discussions is particularly helpful when students are working independently and 
struggling to know where to begin or how to improve their work.
•	
With reference to your own discipline context, in what ways have you 
sought to actively manage the continuum from teacher-centredness to 
­student-centredness? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in seeking to articulate a distinct 
learning and teaching strategy for your school/faculty or institution overall?
Activity 2.1
Teaching as facilitation of learning is a much richer and more complex business 
than the old knowledge transmission model. Factors which pointed to the need for a 
different approach to teaching included the mass expansion of UK HE from around 
8–10 per cent in the 1980s to a target 50 per cent (set by the then Prime Minister Tony 
Blair in 1999, as a target for 2010, and discussed in Chapter 7). Widening participation 
(WP) attracted students from more diverse economic, ethnic and social backgrounds. 
Despite the fact that many more students from higher-income backgrounds partici­
pated in HE before the recent expansion of the system, the expansion acted to widen 
participation gaps between rich and poor (Blanden and Machin 2004).
The increasingly diverse student population required of its lecturers a radically 
different approach to their teaching and it quickly became evident that a large propor­
tion of students were no longer served by the teacher-centred approach to teaching. 
Perhaps for the first time in higher education, lecturers were faced with the same chal­
lenges commonly experienced by teachers in schools and in further education, for 
many of whom diversity was, and is, the norm.
As universities embraced diversity and academics began serious pedagogic 
research in the 1980s and 1990s, there was a gradual acknowledgement that studies 
were needed to broaden concepts of HE learning and seek innovative ways of engag­
ing all students within the changing HE demographic. (e.g. Boud et al. 1985; Warner- 
Weil and McGill. 1989; Duke 1992; Bryan and Assiter 1995; Bourner et al. 2000; Thomas 
2001; Savin-Baden 2003; Knight and Yorke 2003; Haggis 2009; O’Mahony 2014).
Sandwich courses and other work-based learning (WBL) schemes began to be 
seen not only as important to provide students with ‘real-life’ experience, but also as 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

26
CORDELIA BRYAN
potential organisations of HE learning (Watson 2000). While it had long been rec­
ognised that such schemes enhanced students’ inter- and intra-personal skills, such as 
self-confidence, leadership and team working, researchers now set out to ascertain 
whether work-based learning might also enhance students’ cognitive, higher-order 
thinking skills, previously perceived as exclusively the domain of higher education. 
Once it had been ascertained that cognitive learning could and did occur outside the 
university, questions of how this learning might be better facilitated, formally rec­
ognised and accredited by institutions were addressed (Bryan and Assiter 1995). Today 
WBL is common practice and even becoming successfully embedded within human­
ities courses with no obvious employer connection or direct relationship (Stibbe 2013).
APEL (Accreditation of Prior Experiential Learning) was another development in 
response to diversity. APEL was to provide a route to higher education for young and 
mature people who might not have the required formal qualifications but who could 
prove that they had equivalent knowledge, skills and potential to benefit from HE 
study. Although sound in principle, APEL was never taken up in a big way, mainly 
because of the time-consuming nature of collating, assessing and processing individ­
ual claims (Warner-Weil and McGill 1989). Another problem was, in order for academic 
credit to be granted, the experiential learning had to be ‘appropriately’ framed. Pre­
senting appropriate evidence for APEL required an ability to critically reflect on one’s 
experiences as well as a sophisticated knowledge of academic language, thereby often 
excluding the very people it was designed to serve.
However, initiatives such as APEL and WBL marked a significant regulatory shift 
towards a more accessible university system. Pedagogic pioneers, initially in the poly­
technics (before 1992) where the student demographic was changing most rapidly, 
became focused directly on student learning – wherever this may have taken place. 
Educational developers committed to widening participation in HE and keen to accept 
non-traditional students were often at the forefront of the WP initiative.
The scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL)
The notion of a higher education pedagogy, and the development of a scholarship of 
teaching and learning (SoTL) seemed to take off in the 1980s and 1990s – pioneered in 
the UK particularly by the work of Lewis Elton (e.g. Elton 1992). Unsurprisingly, per­
haps, researchers drew heavily on the already existing conceptual and theoretical 
framework of constructivism. Although Piaget’s and Vygotsky’s views on constructiv­
ism differ in that the former gives primacy to individual cognitive processes and the 
latter to social and cultural processes, both believed that knowledge is constructed by 
the learner as s/he tries to make sense of experiences. This, they discovered, applied 
equally to adult learners as it did to the process of developing children’s intellectual 
capacities (Richardson 1997).
So, if we accept that knowledge is constructed by the learner, how has the almost 
infinite knowledge as information so easily accessible via the internet affected the role 
of the university teacher? The traditional knowledge-transmission model of teaching 
becomes even more redundant. However, selecting what knowledge is to be included 
in the curriculum is still a legitimate concern and there is an ongoing academic and 
political discourse on priorities for inclusion within and across the subject disciplines. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
27
The focus for us as teachers is to be creative in finding multiple ways of actively engag­
ing the diverse student population in their learning. Modelling and teaching how to 
think critically are central to this aim.
Barnett has defined different types of critical thinking, pointing to a need for stu­
dents to engage in the wider context of their education as a sort of critique in society 
(Barnett 1997). He asserts that higher education has become a world of ‘supercomplex­
ity’ and rapid change, and that in this world of uncertainty and contestability, our 
frameworks for understanding ourselves and the circumstances in which we operate 
have had to become increasingly complex.
He perceives a gradual shift away from university teaching centred primarily upon 
critical thinking and cognitive development to include a wider concept of ‘critical 
being’ which incorporates ontological concerns (see Chapter 5). He explores ideas of 
critical self-reflection and considers how we as teachers may facilitate our learners in 
acquiring and sustaining this all-important will to learn (Barnett 2007).
The concept of cultivating a will to learn is not new. Steiner, an early twentieth-
century philosopher and educationalist, founded an entire curriculum designed to 
awaken in children and young people a will to learn and to be eternally curious about 
life (Steiner 2005). The Steiner curriculum aims to balance the ‘physical, behavioural, 
emotional, cognitive, social, and spiritual’ aspects of the developing person, encourag­
ing thinking that includes a creative as well as an analytic component (Woods et al. 
2005). That holistic pedagogic ideas should now be incorporated into the discourse of 
higher education is indicative of a rapidly shifting landscape. Barnett and others 
(e.g. Perkins et al. 1993; Haggis 2003; Dall’Alba and Robyn 2007) have challenged the 
traditional approach to higher education where ontology has tended to be subordi­
nated to epistemological concerns.
Acquiring knowledge and the development of higher cognitive skills, it is argued, 
is insufficient for twenty-first-century ‘super-complex’ life without also giving due con­
sideration to the learner’s commitment and existential involvement. In other words, 
personal aspects of self-identity such as culture, class, gender, mental health and 
well-being all play their part in how we approach life and learning. Maslow’s (1943) 
hierarchy of human needs, still so loved as a motivational business scheme, illustrates 
how attention should be paid to all the needs if one hopes to operate in the top section 
of his pyramid and achieve or aspire to self-actualisation, where he claims high-level 
problem solving and creativity reside (see Chapter 5 for further discussion of this 
theme).
Facilitating student learning may feel a long way away from helping individuals in 
achieving self-actualisation. Indeed, it could be argued that this is not what you ‘signed 
up for’ as a lecturer. Be that as it may, it is undoubtedly the case that without having 
the basic physiological, social and economic needs reasonably satisfied, HE learning 
will be severely hampered as students are unlikely to focus their undivided attention 
on the task in hand.
While this may be self-evident to readers, it is patently not always understood or 
acted upon by new entrants to university. The increasing demands made on student 
support services is testament to the need for a more holistic approach to be taken – one 
in which we, as a learning community, consider how we encourage self-regulated learn­
ers and support in them what Barnett (2007) terms that all- important will to learn.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

28
CORDELIA BRYAN
Learning as student engagement
Baron and Corbin (2012) argue that ideas of student engagement in the university con­
text are often fragmented, contradictory and confused. They maintain that the student 
experience as a whole is the key to achieving engagement and assert that efforts to 
engage fully students cannot be successful until a ‘whole-of-university’ approach is 
adopted. Achieving a ‘whole-of-university’ approach is complex and fraught with diffi­
culties, not least due to the different perceptions of key pedagogic issues between 
senior management and teaching staff. For example, in a study of the changing HE 
landscape carried out by Stevenson et al. (2014), the term ‘teaching excellence’, rou­
tinely employed in institutional marketing and used by senior managers, was fre­
quently rejected or contested by some staff, while others claimed that ‘teaching 
excellence’ had become synonymous with ‘student satisfaction’ in ways that rendered 
both terms vague and ambiguous.
While we acknowledge there are compelling arguments for developing a 
‘whole-of-university’ approach and support open dialogue to achieve this, we shall 
limit our focus here to student engagement in relation to our role as facilitators of their 
learning. What do we need to know and do in order to engage all our students and cre­
ate inclusive learning environments? The question of students as full or engaged part­
ners in learning will be the focus of Chapter 6.
The Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) is clear about the 
importance of inclusive learning communities:
Widening access and improving participation in higher education are a crucial 
part of our mission. Our aim is to promote and provide the opportunity of success­
ful participation in higher education to everyone who can benefit from it. This is 
vital for social justice and economic competitiveness.
(HEFCE, n.d., http://www.hefce.ac.uk/whatwedo/wp/)
It has already been argued that teaching can never be innocent due to the cultural, 
psychological and political complexities of learning and how it may either function as 
an instrument to engender conformity or a desire to participate in the transformation 
of the world (e.g. Freire 1970). With this in mind, many attempts have been made to 
develop inclusive learning environments.
One such attempt is Universal Design for Learning (UDL) which offers a set of 
principles for curriculum development that give all individuals equal opportunities to 
learn (http://www.cast.org/udl/index.html). What this means to us as teachers and sup­
porters of learning is adopting flexible approaches that can be customised and adjusted 
for individual needs.
UDL has as its goal ‘to develop purposeful and motivated, resourceful and knowl­
edgeable, and strategic and goal-directed learners’. Colleagues, especially in the 
humanities and arts, might wish to further include the notoriously hard to measure 
qualities which students may also develop in HE which include personal growth, 
self-identity and creativity. To explore further ideas about inclusion and how to create 
inclusive learning environments, readers might initially refer to Smith’s (2011) anno­
tated bibliography.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
29
A theory, which is now used worldwide as a framework for good course design, teach­
ing and assessment is the conceptualisation of outcomes-based learning developed 
from the concept of constructive alignment (Figure 2.1) (Biggs and Tang 2007).
•	
With reference to your own discipline context, in what ways have you 
actively sought to establish an enabling/inclusive learning environment? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in seeking to embed an enabling/
inclusive learning and teaching philosophy/strategy for your school/­
faculty or institution overall?
Activity 2.2
Figure 2.1  The three components in constructive alignment.
Source: after Biggs and Tang (2007).
Learning Outcomes
What you want students
to learn
Assessment
What evidence you
require to know that
learning has occurred
Learning Activities
What activities you use to
engage students in their
learning
Constructive alignment basically states that the intended learning outcomes, the 
learning activities and the assessment tasks in a course/programme must be properly 
aligned to facilitate the learner in constructing his or her knowledge and skills. Thus, 
the intended learning outcomes (what we want the learners to know) must be sup­
ported by appropriate use of learning activities (how we facilitate the learners in their 
learning) and the assessment tasks including the languages employed (how we ascer­
tain what the learners have learnt). It is vitally important when we design our course/
programme so that these three components are carefully considered and conceived so 
as to enhance student learning.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

30
CORDELIA BRYAN
Good teaching sees ‘motivation as an outcome of teaching, not as its precondition. 
Good teaching makes students want to engage with the tasks … the learner has to 
expect success’ (Biggs and Tang 2007: 57; original emphasis). For the inexperienced 
facilitator, this view of good teaching may seem daunting, especially when s/he is 
expected to motivate students in large mixed ability classes. The good news is that 
there is a growing body of online, freely available Open Educational Resources (OERs) 
with subject-specific activities, tasks, targeted reading, audio and visual materials, all 
specifically intended to engage students in their learning. These multitude resources 
are, however, insufficient to do the job on their own and there is still an important and 
highly skilled role for the teacher/facilitator to manage the learning environment to 
ensure that all students are able to engage with the work.
To help us understand the challenge we face as teachers aiming to engage all 
learners, let us use Biggs and Tang’s archetype students, Robert and Susan. Susan is 
academically committed, bright, interested in her studies and wants to do well. When 
she attends lectures, she comes prepared with sound background knowledge, possibly 
some questions she wants answering and generally operates in an ‘academic’ way 
making her own connections by reflecting on what she encounters. Students like Susan 
take a deep approach to their learning, they virtually teach themselves and do not typ­
ically need much help from us (Biggs and Tang 2007: 9–11).
Robert finds himself at university not out of a driving curiosity about a particular 
subject but to obtain qualifications for a decent job. A few years ago he would not have 
considered going to university. He is less committed than Susan, possibly not as aca­
demically attuned and has little background of relevant knowledge. He basically wants 
to do whatever is necessary to pass and may consequently take a surface approach to 
his learning. Our challenge then is to teach and scaffold knowledge so that the Roberts 
learn more in the manner of the Susans and are encouraged to take a deep approach to 
their studies. The basic distinction between a deep and surface approach to learning 
and assessment is in the intention of the learner. In the former, the learner is aiming 
towards understanding, and in the latter s/he is aiming to reproduce material in a test or 
exam rather than actually understand it (see Marton and Saljo 1976; Ramsden 2003).
Biggs’ SOLO taxonomy (Biggs and Tang 2007) describes levels of increasing com­
plexity in a student’s understanding of a subject, through five stages, and it is claimed 
to be applicable to any subject area. SOLO is an acronym for Structure of Observed 
Learning Outcomes (Figure 2.2).
At the Pre-structural stage, students are simply acquiring bits of unconnected 
information, which have no organisation and make no sense. At Unistructural, simple 
and obvious connections are made, but their significance is not grasped. At Multi­
structural, a number of connections may be made, but the meta-connections between 
them are missed, as is their significance for the whole. The final two levels are those 
we should be aiming at in higher education. Rational level is where the student is now 
able to appreciate the significance of the parts in relation to the whole. At the fifth and 
final level, Extended Abstract, the student is making connections not only within the 
given subject area, but also beyond it, able to generalise and transfer the principles and 
ideas underlying the specific instance. Not all students get through all five stages, of 
course, and indeed not all teaching (and even less ‘training’) is designed to take them 
all the way (Biggs and Tang 2007).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
31
While Biggs’ SOLO taxonomy focuses on students’ cognitive development, there is 
a parallel movement known as the Capability approach which is concerned with 
higher education’s role in human development and quality of life, particularly poverty 
reduction and equality (Walker 2006: 27–43). A recent study suggests that well-being 
among some students in higher education is lower than in the general population (HEA 
and HEPI 2014).
Individual human capabilities and the fostering of these capabilities through 
social arrangements, such as how we manage classroom discussions by openly 
acknowledging and attempting to redress power imbalances, now become central 
to creating a more just society. A starting point for some serious critical reflection 
as a professional teacher might be to consider that ‘pedagogy is not neutral or 
“uncontaminated” by the institutional and social context in which it operates but 
acts as a complicated carrier for the relations of power and privilege’ (Walker 2006: 
39–40).
In seeking to establish an open, inclusive and democratic learning environment, 
Brookfield and Preskill (1999) advocate that students name and learn some disposi­
tions of democratic discussion which they, as facilitators, also model. Though they 
admit to a mixed success, they claim that even the naming of the dispositions is useful 
in helping students become more collaborative and develop respectful communication. 
Figure 2.2  Biggs’ SOLO Taxonomy.
Source: http://www.johnbiggs.com.au/academic/solo-taxonomy/ (used with permission of 
the author).
Competence
The SOLO Taxonomy with
sample verbs indicating levels of understanding
Incompetence
Prestructural
Unistructural
Multistructural
Relational
Extended Abstract
One relevent
aspect
Several relevent
independent aspects
Integrated into
a structure
generalized to
new domain
Combine
Describe
Enumerate
Perform serial skills
List
Analyze
Apply
Argue
Compare/
  contrast
Criticize
Explain causes
Relate
Justify
Create
Formulate
Generate
Hypothesize
Reflect
Theorize
Fail
Incompetent
Misses point
Identify
Name
Follow simple
  procedure
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

32
CORDELIA BRYAN
They list the dispositions of hospitality (an atmosphere in which people feel invited to 
participate), participation, mindfulness (paying attention), humility, mutuality (trying 
to ensure that all participants benefit from the discussion), deliberation (a willingness 
of participants to discuss issues fully supported by evidence-based arguments and 
counter-arguments), appreciation, hope, and autonomy (Brookfield and Preskill 1999: 
7–11).
Adding a relatively new and innovative dimension to inclusive and democratic 
learning environments is a move to incorporate spirituality, health and well-being 
into mainstream curricula (Marshall and Morris 2011). The draft module description 
outlines an approach which has benefits for CPD across subject disciplines both for 
the health of staff and to enable them to support the health and well-being of their 
students. The approach has been extensively trialled with staff and volunteers in a 
hospice environment.
Health, well-being and spirituality: a holistic approach to the health 
benefits of spirituality
Module overview
This module explores a holistic (Bloom 2001, 2005) approach to the theory and practice 
of the health benefits of spirituality. It is delivered via face-to-face lectures, experien­
tial workshops and small group peer support meetings. Participants will be required to 
submit a portfolio containing a reflective log of their learning and one written assign­
ment reflecting on their overall understanding of the connections between spirituality, 
health and well-being.
Aims
This module aims to enable participants to acquire knowledge of the biological, psy­
chological and cultural factors that inform spirituality, health and well-being. Within a 
framework that is person-centred and experiential, participants will learn practical 
models and skills that can be used to support their own health and well-being and that 
of their colleagues, service users and service providers.
They will develop practical communication skills and techniques to become more 
effective care-givers and educators, maximising the opportunities to improve support 
and self-care in their work and life situations.
Module learning outcomes
Participants will develop the concepts and skills that enable them to do the following:
•	
communicate effectively about the cultural, political and scientific context of the 
links between health and spirituality;
•	
communicate effectively with people of all cultural backgrounds, of diverse faiths 
and no faith, about the benefits of spirituality to physical and psychological health;
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
33
•	
enable others such as colleagues and service users to explore, identify and develop 
their own best approach to self-care;
•	
practise, demonstrate and enable the core skills of:
	
•	
meditative self-care;
	
•	
values-driven self-development;
	
•	
appropriate retreat, meditation and rest;
	
•	
giving and receiving compassionate care.
•	
adopt caring practices that encourage autonomous self-care;
•	
evaluate and develop their own self-care for resilience, personal and professional 
development;
•	
reflect on and use feedback on their caring skills to develop future practice;
•	
reflect on and articulate the risks of spiritual concepts and practices in relation to 
mental health.
Mode of delivery
This module will be delivered through a series of workshops, consisting of lectures, 
practical exercises, periods of self-reflection, plenary and small group discussion. 
Learning will be collaborative with the module tutors both facilitating and modelling 
reflective participation.
During this module, participants will work through course materials and readings. 
Students will also be required to participate in small peer support groups, which can 
meet online or in person, and to log their experience of these meetings.
Participants will be observed during workshop sessions and formative peer and 
tutor feedback will be given.
Summative assessment
Students are required to submit a portfolio consisting of a reflective log of learning 
from each workshop session and peer group meetings. Students will also submit a 
written assignment of between 3,000 and 5,000 words.
•	
pre-requisite module: N/A
•	
15 Level 7 CPD credits = 150 learning hours (30 tutor and peer-facilitated and 
120 independent study).
© William Bloom 2014 http://www.williambloom.com/
events/soulution-140.htm
Since Schön’s (1983) seminal text on the reflective practitioner, which looked at how 
a range of professionals gained the knowledge which underpins their theory and 
practice, the notion has become integral to many courses, particularly professional 
learning courses. Indeed, facilitating forms of reflective learning and striving to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

34
CORDELIA BRYAN
become reflective practitioners are an approach which has now gained wide recogni­
tion (e.g. Boud et al. 1985; Brockbank and McGill 1998; Clegg et al. 2002; Bryan and 
Green 2003; Grossman 2009; Brigden and Purcell 2013; Cowen 2013). And as we saw 
in Chapter 1, it is a key concept underpinning the UKPSF.
Learning how to be critically reflective about our experiences and our learning 
does not come naturally to some learners, as is evident from recurring online discus­
sions on the subject within the Staff and Educational Development Association (SEDA 
2014). It is, therefore, our role as teachers to help to scaffold for these learners a frame­
work. The intention being to progress reflection from what often starts with some hazy 
notions of descriptions of experiences to a more analytical perspective, drawing on 
literature, on relevant theories and on personal experiences and examining the inter­
play between the different elements. Whichever framework may be employed for this 
purpose, we need to acknowledge the potential changing identities of the learners as 
they engage in ever more critical and reflective processes which may challenge some 
of their assumptions and beliefs.
Fostering student reflective capabilities simultaneously requires our own reflex­
ive professional learning and is at the heart of the renewed academic professionalism 
associated with SoTL. Edward Said suggests that our professionalism should not be 
based on ‘doing what one is supposed to do’ but on asking ‘why one does it, who bene­
fits from it, how it can connect with a personal project and original thoughts’ (Said 
1994: 62). And as such, is therefore concerned equally with educational aims, processes 
and outcomes. It is also at the heart of the kinds of scholarly narratives that the HEA 
is encouraging us, as professional learning and teaching practitioners, to produce 
when claiming a HEA fellowship (see Chapter 8).
The process of reflective learning is dialectical; it looks inward at our thoughts 
and thought processes and outward at the situation under scrutiny. This interaction 
between the internal and external propels us towards further thought and action. The 
reflective dialogue may take place as a solo activity in our minds, perhaps subse­
quently recorded, or it may also be facilitated between pairs or within groups; it may 
use words or work in conjunction with embodied knowledge and other means of com­
munication (Bryan and Green 2003).
Facilitating learners in this process continues to be one of the ongoing challenges 
for teachers. How we convey to students this meta thinking, or ‘thinking about think­
ing’, in which we consider the relationship between our thoughts, feelings and action in 
a particular context can also provide a real stimulus for innovatory curriculum design. 
The learning activities we devise thus become key to scaffolding the development of 
students’ critical and meta thinking capacity.
At the centre of this reflective thinking lies the concept of ‘critical thinking’, 
but this is also a highly contested notion, and opinion among theorists is divided 
about whether critical thinking or ways of reasoning are universal or culture- and 
context-specific, and indeed what constitutes this critical thinking in the first place 
(Mason 2008). What is clear is that both critical thinking and reflection may be 
viewed in many different ways. The two examples, drawn from different disci­
plines each use direct prompts to get participants started on the critical reflection 
process.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
35
Example 1 from a Post Graduate Learning and Teaching in Higher 
Education programme
In your reflective journal consider and address some of these questions as you 
progress through the programme:
•	
What does it mean to be a Critical Reflective Practitioner in your discipline area?
•	
What is the difference between critical reflection and ‘just thinking about things’?
•	
Did you experience any uncomfortable moments in your learning?
•	
How are you feeling now?
•	
Was all the learning relevant to your needs?
•	
If you could change anything about your learning experience, what would it be?
•	
How might you begin to DO that?
•	
Do you feel there are any gaps in your understanding and can you remedy that?
•	
What do you need to do now? (Action Plan?)
Example 2 from a BSc (Hons) Nursing programme
•	
Describe events as you understood them.
•	
Describe your feelings about this event.
•	
What have you learned from this event?
•	
Given a similar situation in future, how would you behave and what support 
would you like?
•	
In what ways do the theories of psychology, sociology, biology, philosophy and 
nursing research underpin the situation you have witnessed?
Distinctions are also made within the pedagogic literature between reflection-
in-action (at the time but drawing on past experience or learning) and reflection-on-
action (after the event, reflection for the purpose of learning more). They each have 
their uses but it is no good, for example, expecting a drama student to reflect-in-action 
during a performance or s/he will probably forget her lines!
Argyris (1976) proposes double loop learning theory which is a form of reflective 
practice that helps to challenge and potentially to change underlying values and 
assumptions. The focus of the theory is on solving problems that are complex and 
ill-structured and which change as the problem-solving advances.
An important aspect of the theory is the distinction between an individual’s 
espoused theory and their ‘theory-in-use’ (what they actually do); bringing these two 
into congruence is a primary concern of double loop learning. Typically, interaction 
with others is necessary to identify the conflict.
The double loop is a step-change in the depth of the reflection. Without it, you might 
still achieve some satisfactory results but at higher education level, it is necessary to be 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

36
CORDELIA BRYAN
able to articulate not only what is achieved, but also why it was achieved in the chosen 
way. It could also flag up what might be done differently next time. Ideas such as these are 
now at the centre of many HE courses, particularly those that prepare students for entry 
to a range of professions, but they are also increasingly featuring on some of the more 
traditional academic courses, and, as we have already shown, they lie at the heart of what 
the HEA understands by adopting a scholarly approach to HE learning and teaching.
It is also worth noting that in developing critical and reflective thinkers, the teacher–
student relationship as co-learners engaged in joint inquiry is further consolidated. That 
is, students with highly developed critical thinking skills directed towards their own 
learning are much less likely to accept didactic teaching, or a teacher-centred approach, 
as the main teaching strategy afforded them at university. We might also suggest here 
that the potential to see reflective practice not just as reflection on existing knowledge 
and practice, but also as a construction site for new knowledge, could qualify reflective 
practice for threshold concept status or troublesome knowledge (Meyer and Land 2006), 
that is, conceptual understanding which has the potential to take students (and ourselves 
as professional learners) to new and higher levels of understanding.
Another important dimension to these forms of active learning has been engaging 
students in dialogue with their own peers. And the ‘flipped’ or ‘reversed’ classroom is 
now advocated to maximise opportunities for active engagement with both peers and 
with tutors (e.g. Berrett 2012; Bishop and Verleger 2013). In this educational model, 
students are required to view videos or listen to podcasts of the lectures in their private 
study time and engage in active learning activities during their contact time with 
tutors. The merits of a ‘flipped’ classroom include the opportunity for students to view 
material wherever they choose prior to the session and to stop and restart the lecture 
as often as they like. Content can include recorded lectures, demonstration videos, 
adaptive quizzes, performances or anything the lecturer deems suitable. Class time can 
be used for higher-order questioning, discussion, experiments, group activities, role 
play and other active learning approaches.
The ‘Goldfish bowl’ model is an example of a highly flexible ‘flipped classroom’ 
method designed to actively engage students in problem solving. It works by selecting 
some participants to silently observe and then provide feedback on the working pro­
cesses of their peers, as though watching them from outside the ‘goldfish bowl’. It enables 
students to step outside the problem-solving activity to focus on group dynamics, and 
other collaborative processes while still keeping abreast of the task in hand. This model 
and other innovative methods to engage students in their learning were successfully 
employed in Colleges of Further Education decades before entering HE pedagogy.
The ‘Goldfish bowl model’ outlined as a generic vehicle for enhancing 
collaborative problem solving
Before the session
Set appropriate pre-reading, viewing, exercises or research for your topic to be 
actively explored through group discussion in the session (i.e. what you think they 
should know to engage intelligently with the subject matter).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
37
Plan your task for discussion and write clear instructions for the outcome(s) you 
expect from the ‘problem solving’ discussion within a specified time
The task should be sufficiently complex so that there is not any possibility of a ‘right 
answer’ but rather a necessity to discuss and collaborate on different approaches to 
achieve your specified outcome(s).
Task setting might also entail writing a few key questions to get the discussion 
started; some guidelines on democratic discussion techniques; suggestions for 
electing a Chair, time keeper, note taker, etc.
Depending on what role you want for your observers, you might want to write 
them some instructions on what you would like them to focus on. It might be to 
provide feedback on the structure of the discussion and how this served/hindered 
the achievement of the task, or it might be to focus on the group processes (how 
participants engaged) and how well these served or hindered the achievement of the 
task. It could be both, or one student focusing on one task while the other focuses 
on group dynamics.
If you have ample time and wish to explore assessment issues, you can introduce 
a simple grading system. Only do this if you are prepared for some heated discussions 
and are confident to handle any or all aspects of assessments with your students!
During the session
Divide the class into groups of 7–15 students where each group has at least two observ­
ers. If there are multiple groups in one large space, organise into circles, as far apart as 
possible but with sufficient space for observers to circulate around the outside.
•	
Distribute the task sheet to all.
•	
Distribute the instruction sheet to observers.
•	
Start the exercise and say exactly how long groups have to complete the task.
•	
Circulate around the room with as little interference as possible and maybe give 
a 5-minute warning before the allocated time is up.
Observers giving feedback
Invite observers to give the group some feedback (according to the criteria you have 
devised for the exercise).
It can be helpful to request that all group members remain silent while receiving the 
feedback (no justifying, no explanations, etc.). Only after all observers have fed back, 
you may then open up discussions for anyone, including the tutor, to comment on what 
worked well, what might be done differently next time and how it felt to be observed etc.
As this model may initially require an element of ‘teaching how to run productive 
group discussions’, it is an ideal time to raise potential cultural differences and 
invite input from overseas students so that they may help to shape the group ‘rules 
of engagement’.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

38
CORDELIA BRYAN
The flipped classroom represents a unique combination of learning theories once 
thought to be incompatible – active, problem-based learning activities founded upon a 
constructivist ideology as advocated throughout this chapter, and instructional lec­
tures derived from direct instruction methods founded upon behaviourist principles. 
There is considerable scope for teachers to offer creative alternatives to ‘instructional 
lectures’ as evidenced by the burgeoning industry designing OERs (Open Educational 
Resources).
Reports of student perceptions of the flipped classroom are somewhat mixed, but 
are generally positive overall (Bishop and Verleger 2013). Anecdotal evidence suggests 
that student learning is improved for the flipped compared to the traditional class­
room. However, there is very little work investigating student learning outcomes 
objectively. Bishop and Verleger recommend that future work studies investigate the 
learning outcomes using controlled experimental or quasi-experimental design.
•	
With reference to your own discipline/subject context, in what ways have 
you sought to embed active and engaged forms of student learning in your 
teaching and learning regime?
•	
In what ways have you been involved in seeking to articulate a notion of 
student engagement to underpin your school/faculty or institution-wide 
learning and teaching strategy?
Activity 2.3
Assessment and feedback as forms of dialogue
As we have seen, assessment forms one of the three pillars of a constructively aligned 
curriculum:
Assessment defines what students regard as important, how they spend their time 
and how they come to see themselves as students and as graduates. It is a major 
concern of those who learn, those who teach and those who are responsible for the 
development and accreditation of courses.
(Knight 2001: http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/resources/
detail/assessment/assessment_series)
Within the wider society, there is a discourse of assessment that historically has empha­
sised measurement and grade over opportunity and a political agenda that emphasises 
product over process. This discourse is mirrored in higher education by our concern 
with accounting and legitimising knowledge. Historically, as educators, we have, there­
fore, tended to delude ourselves in the belief that assessment has scientific reliability. 
While this may hold true for simplistic quantitative tests, the idea of precise and scien­
tific reliability as applied across diverse HE practices is a nonsense and one which has 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
39
rightly been challenged (Clegg and Bryan 2006: 216). How can an acting role, a musical 
performance or a portfolio of work be meaningfully summated in a single number?
A major shift in emphasis has occurred regarding the purposes of assessment in 
higher education. Where assessment used to be primarily concerned with the measure­
ment of students’ performance and consequent classification of award, i.e. assessment 
of learning, it now takes centre stage as a formative process and tool to enhance learn­
ing, i.e. assessment for learning. Much that has been written on Assessment for Learn­
ing (AfL) has been presented as fragmented or partial implying, for example, that 
formative feedback is the major driver of learning.
To address this fragmentation, Gibbs (2006) and others involved in the National 
Assessment Project Network, devised a conceptual framework outlining 11 conditions 
under which assessment supports learning. The framework is based on the findings 
from the student Assessment Experience Questionnaire (AEQ) (Gibbs and Simpson 
2003) clustered under the headings used to structure the questionnaire. A summary of 
the 11 conditions appears below. It is included here as it offers a holistic approach to 
assessment in the form of a comprehensive guide which may be used as a check-list for 
anyone involved in curriculum design or who seeks to enhance his/her pedagogic prac­
tice through the promotion and application of AfL.
Underpinning the 11 conditions under which assessment promotes learning is a 
need for assessment activities, support and feedback to be powerful and integrated 
features of learning within the curriculum. For these activities to be valuable they 
need: (1) to enable students to fulfil the learning outcomes of their work; (2) to provide 
information on the ability and progress of the student in fulfilling the aims of their 
course; and (3) to relate closely to their academic development.
Eleven conditions under which assessment supports student 
learning
Quantity and distribution of student effort
1	
Assessed tasks capture sufficient study time and effort. This condition concerns 
whether your students study sufficiently out of class or whether the assess­
ment system allows them to get away with not studying very much at all. This 
is the ‘time on task’ principle linked to the insight that it is assessment, and not 
teaching, that captures student effort.
2	
These tasks distribute student effort evenly across topics and weeks. This condi­
tion is concerned with whether students can ‘question spot’ and avoid much of 
the curriculum, or stop turning up to class after the last assignment is due in.
Quality and level of student effort
3	
These tasks engage students in productive learning activity. This condition is 
partly about whether the assessment results in students taking a deep or sur­
face approach and also about quality of engagement in general.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

40
CORDELIA BRYAN
Assessment tasks may have diagnostic, formative or summative aspects which may 
determine when and how you use them in your teaching (QAA 2006):
•	
diagnostic assessment provides an indicator of a learner’s aptitude and prepared­
ness for a programme of study and identifies possible learning problems;
•	
formative assessment is designed to provide learners with feedback on progress 
and to feed forward to inform development;
•	
summative assessment provides a measure of achievement or failure made in 
respect of a learner’s performance in relation to the intended learning outcomes of 
the programme of study.
So, having established the major role assessment plays in orientating all aspects 
of student learning, why are we advocating assessment and feedback as forms of 
dialogue?
We have already argued that dialogue is an essential aspect of social learning 
theory (Vygotsky 1978) and that students construct knowledge, rather than repro­
duce it. Self- and peer assessment are forms of dialogical engagement with assess­
ment criteria. In applying methods of AfL, students are, therefore, actively 
constructing knowledge and developing critical judgement. Holistic models of 
AfL advocate assessment tasks which incorporate dialogue at their centre, thereby 
4	
Assessment communicates clear and high expectations to students. This is partly 
about articulating explicit goals that students understand and can orient them­
selves towards, and partly about the level of perceived challenge.
The remaining conditions concern feedback.
Quantity and timing of feedback
5	
Sufficient feedback is provided, both often enough and in enough detail.
6	
The feedback is provided quickly enough to be useful to students.
Quality of feedback
7	
Feedback focuses on learning rather than on marks or students themselves.
8	
Feedback is linked to the purpose of the assignment and to criteria.
9	
Feedback is understandable to students, given their sophistication.
Student response to feedback
10	 Feedback is received by students and attended to.
11	 Feedback is acted upon by students to improve their work or their learning.
See Gibbs (2006).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
41
creating social and collaborative interactions between students and tutors, and 
between students and their peers.
AfL models draw on a social perspective of how people learn, and in particular on 
the work of Lave and Wenger (1991) in creating communities of practice. Lave and 
Wenger’s social learning theory proposes that through dialogical engagement in com­
munities of practice (in this case, communities of learning), student participation may 
at first be legitimately peripheral but that it increases gradually in engagement and 
complexity. Participation in the social group therefore becomes an essential part of 
the learning.
Social learning of this sort has much in common with the apprentice model in 
which the apprentice acquires skills, knowledge and ‘ways of being’ from senior prac­
titioners, peers and others within the community. In higher education contexts, dialog­
ical assessment is integral to pedagogic communities of practices which aim to foster 
engagement with academic knowledge and to encourage learners to develop their indi­
vidual voices and discover their identities (Wenger 1998).
Active engagement in self- and peer assessment, just like critical reflection, does 
not come naturally to a majority of students. In fact, peer assessment is often vehe­
mently resisted by students initially before they subsequently experience its multifari­
ous benefits to learning (e.g. Stephanie et al. 2001; Smith et al. 2002).
One study which supports and extends previous research on students’ perceptions 
of peer assessment identified the following dimensions as to why it is so frequently 
resisted as ‘discomfort’, ‘difficult’ and ‘problems with implementation’ (Stephanie et al. 
2001). That it is uncomfortable and difficult to have to judge our peers should come as no 
surprise, and may indeed be an experience mirrored by some staff engaging in any sort 
of peer evaluation or appraisal scheme. Assessment is an emotive business and feelings 
of anxiety allied to self-esteem and feelings of ‘not being good enough’ are common to us 
all. When discussed and shared openly and honestly, thereby becoming normalised, 
these negative emotions lose some of their hold and may be considerably reduced.
As to students citing problems with implementation, this is again a common expe­
rience and one which has been addressed in the literature. It is widely acknowledged 
that for peer assessments to run smoothly, there may be a need for heavy ‘front-load­
ing’ of effort devising appropriate tasks and preparing students to participate in activ­
ities which may be unfamiliar to many of them. Added to this is a need for regular 
practice so that all concerned become familiar and comfortable with the process 
(Bryan 2006: 151–5).
In the same study, students identified the following positive dimensions for engag­
ing in peer assessment. These were: ‘gained better understanding of marking’; ‘produc­
tive’ (including learning benefits and improved work); ‘read others work’; and 
‘developed empathy’ (with assessing staff); and ‘motivation’ (especially motivation to 
impress peers) (Stephanie et al. 2001).
The following example of peer assessment designed to enhance group learning, 
illustrates further some of the pedagogic benefits of dialogical assessment. Students 
were briefed to follow a step-by-step process: they received guidance and discussed 
positive ways to give and receive feedback; they devised their own criteria; and they 
engaged in structured post-performance debriefing. The following student comment is 
typical:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

42
CORDELIA BRYAN
I was one of the ones who said how unfair it is not to get marked on how well we 
work together in our group projects but I had no idea how difficult it is to do it 
properly. I have learned so much from watching our group and having to articu­
late the grades I gave.
(Second-year Drama student, cited in Bryan 2006: 152)
Yet another benefit of dialogical feedback and assessment is how evaluative processes 
we may have used for many years are shared and may require justification or updating 
in the light of curricula change. Dialogical assessment can, therefore, be said to trans­
form tacit into explicit knowledge, as the following student comments illustrate.
At first I couldn’t see the point of deciding our own assessment criteria but having 
done so now on three separate occasions, I realise how it helped the whole group 
think and agree what was most important and should therefore carry most marks.
(PGCE Drama student, cited in Bryan 2006: 153)
Everyone knows the rules if you have to set the assessment [criteria] together so 
we don’t waste time arguing when we’re working without the tutor.
(First-year Jazz student, cited in Bryan 2006: 153)
The pedagogic arguments for applying methods of AfL are compelling. As designers of 
assessment and learning activities, we need to be mindful of the relationship of the 
assessment task to the context in which it is set. When the two are appropriately 
aligned, the assessment may be said to be ‘authentic’ (Birenbaum 2003; Gulikers et al. 
2008).
To this we would reiterate the importance of regular practice so that self- and peer 
assessment simply become an integral part of our classroom and professional prac­
tice. Achieving effective dialogical assessment may well require us to ‘teach’ and, 
where necessary, model for students some fundamental principles and rules of engage­
ment. Students will need us to provide ample opportunities where they may practise 
the ‘art’ of giving and receiving critical feedback. Only by repeated practice can we 
expect that their skill and collaborative participation in dialogical assessment pro­
cesses will indeed increase to be able to encompass the inherent complexities of 
assessment (e.g. Lave and Wenger 1991; Lewis and Allan 2005; Bryan 2006).
There are numerous resources on assessment, many of which also offer case stud­
ies which may easily be emulated or amended for differing contexts (e.g. Schwartz and 
Webb 2002; Bryan and Clegg 2006; Black and Rust 2006; Bures et al. 2010; Sambell et al. 
2012; http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/assessment; http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/palatine/
AGP/index.htm).
Some key pedagogic benefits of engaging in dialogic methods of assessment 
include:
•	
development of vocabulary in the language of academic assessment (often 
described in student surveys as a complete mystery to them);
•	
development of evaluative skills including realistic self-assessment and recogni­
tion of high-quality work;
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
43
•	
introduction to the complexities inherent in all assessment – whether it is encoun­
tering positivistic principles of reliability and validity or having to contend with a 
more interpretivist approach to assessment, commonly applied in arts and design 
programmes;
•	
development of communities of learning in which tacit knowledge is transformed 
into explicit knowledge;
•	
inculcation of the belief that the learner is empowered to exert significant control 
of his/her learning so as to enhance individual and collaborative performance 
(self-regulated learner);
•	
inculcation of the belief that assessment processes need not be feared and are 
integral to achieving and demonstrating programme learning outcomes.
•	
With reference to your own discipline/subject-context, in what ways have 
you sought to embed a notion of assessment for learning in your teaching 
and learning regime? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in seeking to integrate assessment 
policy and practice into the learning and teaching regime/strategy for your 
school/faculty or institution overall?
Activity 2.4
Conclusion
This chapter has introduced some key pedagogic approaches aimed at enhancing stu­
dent learning, and contextualised it within the broader history and development of the 
pedagogy of HE as a distinct discipline. Themes running throughout have illustrated a 
changing higher education landscape in which curricula are evolving and in which a, 
still relatively new, dimension to academic practice and academic professionalism is 
being advanced: a distinct scholarship of learning and teaching for HE, with its own 
(albeit contested) concepts, and principles. And which has a focus on HE pedagogy as 
a researchable subject, with a growing (albeit contested) evidence base. We take the 
view throughout this book that the contested nature of this emerging discipline is a 
healthy sign, and not evidence that it is weak or pre-paradigmatic (Kuhn [1962] 2012).
Academic practice in twenty-first-century Western universities also now clearly 
spans traditional subject-based research, leadership and management, and, increas­
ingly, business functions too. These will be discussed in subsequent chapters, and spe­
cifically how they relate to learning and teaching. However, it would be remiss not to 
restate here in the conclusion of a chapter entitled enhancing student learning, the 
implicit need for us as professionals to continually enhance our learning, and particu­
larly in partnership with our students. We hope that the way we introduced the UKPSF 
in Chapter 1 will act as an encouraging spur to use it to develop your own critically 
reflective narrative account concerning your current learning, teaching assessment 
regime. And, particularly if have you have not thought about this already, how that 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

44
CORDELIA BRYAN
Opinion: Transforming the Experience of Students Through 
­Assessment: a case study
Yaz El-Hakim
Since the National Student Survey (NSS) began to reveal that assessment and feed­
back were a key aspect of the learning process that needed further development 
(from the student satisfaction scores), it has become a central point of focus for 
institutions across the HE sector. Many projects were subsequently funded through 
a variety of bodies to enhance this aspect of the student learning experience. This 
led to the project, ‘TESTA’ (Transforming the Experience of Students Through Assess­
ment) being funded by the Higher Education Academy, through the National Teach­
ing Fellowship Scheme Project Strand.
The TESTA project team devised a methodology to be able to collect and trian­
gulate data relating to the assessment and feedback experience of students, in 
relation to their programmatic experience. The three tools of the methodology were: 
an Audit, the Assessment Experience Questionnaire (Gibbs and Dunbar-Goddet 
2007) and Focus Groups with students. These tools were then trialled at four 
Cathedral group universities: the University of Winchester, the University of Chich­
ester, the University of Worcester and Bath Spa University. Key trends that became 
narrative could become part of your own growing pedagogic research and/or schol­
arly profile, as an academic or someone who supports learning activities in UK HE. 
Chapter 3 explores in more detail some of the themes and issues related to this aspect 
of academic practice.
Gone are the days in which academics like Professor K.G. Reason, a fictitious 
character with whom you will become better acquainted in subsequent chapters, might 
proudly proclaim: ‘My teaching is fine; I’ve done things like this for 30-plus years and 
heard no complaints from any students.’ Or perhaps better, gone are the days when 
proclamations like this will go unchallenged, with colleagues increasingly demanding 
that such statements be accompanied by some scholarly evidence to support them.
Opinion Piece, Debate, Dear Lecturer, and Fellowship Application 
extracts
In the following opinion piece, Yaz El-Hakim reflects on his involvement in the Trans­
forming the Experience of Students Through Assessment (TESTA) project and some of 
the important messages to have emerged from this. This is followed by a debate 
between Patrick Smith and Trevor Hussey, on one side, and David Gosling, on the 
other, on the uses and limitations of learning outcomes in higher education. To finish, 
Kate Riseley, a recent graduate from Canterbury Christ Church University, reflects on 
the chapter overall. This is followed by three extracts from successful HEA fellowship 
applicants who discuss some of the aspects of academic practice which feature in this 
chapter.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
45
apparent from the data across the sector revealed that degree programmes in the 
UK were:
•	
Heavily biased towards the quantity of summative assessment over formative 
assessment.
•	
Creating unclear students, regarding the goals and standards expected by staff. 
This was mostly attributed to marker variation and perceived inconsistencies in 
marking practice against the criteria. Unique assessments were also dotted 
throughout the programmes creating anxiety in students who were unclear what 
would be expected due to no previous practice at such assessments.
•	
Ineffective in producing consistent student effort as effort did not seem to be 
distributed across academic years and the different modules within them; but 
rather, followed a peak and trough (Graham Gibbs’ fondly named ‘Alps’) model 
of bunched assessments deadlines in the middle and at the end of each mod­
ule/semester.
•	
Lacking in intra-programme awareness, specifically by members of programme 
teams, as to how their individual modules connected with the other modules 
within the programme. This meant a heavy bias in the types of assessments, 
as the module leaders set the assessment types in line with accepted institu­
tional or subject norms, e.g. an essay and exam.
•	
Not mapping assessments across a programme in order for programme leaders 
to become clear on the amount, timing, variety and overlap of assessments. 
The audit process often led to logical and evidence-informed reflections and 
some ideas as to the types of changes against the literature alone.
•	
Giving inconsistent feedback, which students perceived to have limited use at 
the end (or later) of each module due to the next module being with a different 
academic, on a different topic and/or a different assessment type. Subse­
quently, there was a feeling that feedback from one module was not as trans­
ferable to others, as staff may have assumed.
More detailed findings and data are well documented (Jessop 2012; Jessop et al. 
2014a, 2014b).
Some key reflections on TESTA so far
•	
Formative assessment has played second fiddle to a burgeoning of summative 
assessments through the modularisation and massification of HE over the last 
20 years. Largely, the assessment experience of students has been an evo­
lution to this point, with more modules being created and refined to include 
more summative assessment points, as staff believe that summative assess­
ments drive students’ efforts. Ironically, for staff looking to create learning 
environments that support critical, self-reflective, autonomous and mas­
tery-focused students, a constant series of high stakes (counting to degree 
classifications) assessments are more likely to create dependent learners, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

46
CORDELIA BRYAN
who struggle to internalise standards tacitly held by individual staff and 
become more instrumental (Black and Wiliam 1998; Ryan and Deci 2000; 
Nicol and McFarlane-Dick 2006).
•	
Modules appear to be the focal point for staff teaching them whereas programmes 
are the focal point for students studying them. This point alludes to the need for 
staff to reflect upon how assessments could align across modules within pro­
grammes. This may also create greater awareness in the programme team 
about coherence and timings of assessments. This may afford more feedback 
from summative points to be used formatively within the year.
•	
Programme teams are separated by workload, and create less ‘quality time’ or 
‘useful data’ to reflect upon in order to enhance the programmatic experience for 
all. For example, marking workshops where academics compare different mark­
ing practices and standards on an essay may allow for tacit understandings of 
criteria to be explained and shared.
•	
That staff and programmes are willing to change (quite substantially at times) if 
the evidence for the change(s) is presented in a collegiate way that engenders the 
teams’ autonomy, and is both useful and resonates with the team. A weighting of 
assessment and feedback literature to support and guide innovations and 
changes being proposed or undertaken by the team has also created more 
confidence in some academic teams that may not have the same assessment 
and feedback literacy as central development units.
In summary, the useful, relevant and relatable data collected by TESTA (www.testa.
ac.uk), which has led to collegiate programme team discussion, has been ­compelling 
to the institutions and staff within them. So much so, that the process has continued 
to spread, by largely word of mouth, to be used in over 50 universities in 2014, 
nationally and internationally (that we are aware of), and potentially transforming 
tens of thousands of students’ experiences of assessment and feedback, hopefully 
for the better (as well as the experiences of assessment and feedback, for staff 
too).
Debate: the limits of learning outcomes
Patrick Smith and Trevor Hussey
Why is it that what so often starts as a perfectly reasonable idea eventually trans­
mutes into an intellectual harness, complete with bearing rein? When first discussed, 
the suggestion that learning outcomes are preferable to learning objectives seemed 
reasonable, if hardly revolutionary. In the UK it was soon taken up, elaborated and 
eventually mandated by the Quality Assurance Agency (QAA 2007). In 2013, their 
Europe-wide use was reviewed positively in a conference in Thessaloniki (ECDVT 
2013). Educators at all levels now appear obliged to use them.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
47
In 2002, we published an article entitled ‘The trouble with learning outcomes’ in 
which we accepted that it is often a good idea for a teacher to make clear to them­
selves, and to their students, what learning is intended during a teaching session, 
but we argued that there are dangers if this becomes too formalised and rigid. In 
brief, learning outcomes can do educational harm and become a vehicle for an 
excessively bureaucratic accountability.
The educational harm can come about in several ways. First, there are situations 
in which precise and explicit learning outcomes are inappropriate or of little use. A 
teaching session, especially in higher education, can be designed as an exploration 
in which what is learned is unpredicted except at a very general level, even by the 
tutor. In many circumstances, sticking rigidly to stipulated learning outcomes can be 
stultifying: it can lure a teacher into ignoring or suppressing what learning emerges 
during a session, and deter students from pursuing personal lines of enquiry. Nothing 
encourages students more than when a skilled teacher picks up what emerges from 
a discussion, irrespective of whether it was one of the stipulated learning outcomes.
In other situations the tutor may have certain learning in mind but may not tell 
the students, and so employ a tactic of surprise. In situations where several groups 
of students are following up, say, a shared lecture, and are using a range of forms 
of interaction, from seminars to virtual learning environments and social media sys­
tems such as Facebook, Linked-in and Twitter, parity of coverage may be impossible 
and within weeks any intended learning outcomes, beyond the most general, become 
meaningless.
Second, learning outcomes can be excessively rigid. Consider the idea that they 
can be specified using precise ‘descriptors’, such that at one level the students will 
recall, repeat and describe, while at the next they will comprehend, understand, 
define and explain, and at the next they will evaluate, analyse, integrate, criticise 
etc. This is mistaken in any discipline and is ridiculous in some, such as philosophy 
and literature. What is meant by describing without comprehension? What is ‘under­
standing’ without some degree of evaluation? Can we know without comprehension? 
And so on. Can any subject, from primary to doctoral level, be taught in such a frac­
tured way? Sit and watch an infant classroom for half an hour and you will find plenty 
of evidence of analysis in operation – analysis, that is, relative to their level of oper­
ation. Since Bruner’s spiral curriculum we have recognised the importance of return­
ing to a topic several times at different levels, each time gaining knowledge, 
understanding and critical awareness.
Third, the supposed clarity and precision of pre-specified learning outcomes is 
largely spurious and illusory. Would ‘Students will be able to describe the structure 
and function of the mammalian heart’ be adequately and positively confirmed by the 
answer ‘It is a pump with four chambers that forces blood around the body’? Perhaps 
it would be among 12-year-olds but not at degree level. Learning outcomes appear 
precise only because the teacher and the students know roughly what is required at 
their level. What is expected from the students emerges during the course of learn­
ing: given by the level of the teaching materials, classroom discussion, feedback on 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

48
CORDELIA BRYAN
coursework, and so on. Most learning is demonstrated by what students can do – 
‘knowledge how’ – and this can rarely be captured precisely by verbal descriptions.
Fourth, learning outcomes, stipulated using the prescribed ‘descriptors’ will not 
capture many of the outcomes that the teacher most desires. Such statements as ‘Stu­
dents will develop a love of poetry’ or ‘Students will come to see the point of philosophy 
and enjoy it’ describe outcomes that most good teachers of those subjects would value 
before all others, but they are unlikely to be accepted by an accrediting authority.
Finally, the extension of learning outcomes to cover the description of whole 
educational courses is very questionable. In designing modules, courses and degree 
programmes, teachers almost always begin by deciding on the content and suitable 
reading and teaching material, and teaching methods. To re-write this in terms of 
broad learning outcomes adds nothing to the documents except extra words. 
Courses, especially at university level, need to be flexible so as to accommodate 
contemporary events. Imagine sticking doggedly to the stipulated learning outcomes 
on an economics or banking course designed before 2008/9 (Mirowski 2013).
There is a real danger that the demand that teachers formulate precise learning 
outcomes, whether for each teaching session or whole courses, can be part of an 
oppressive bureaucratic regime designed for the benefit of managers. If the intended 
learning could be specified with the clarity and precision purported to belong to 
learning outcomes, a teacher’s performance could be monitored by generic manag­
ers with no understanding of teaching. Although we have argued that such clarity 
and precision are illusory, that need not deter the façade being maintained out of 
managerial convenience.
There is a supreme irony in the fact that institutions whose concern is with 
learning and education, prove to be so comprehensively immune to the process of 
learning themselves. Of course, people coming into the teaching profession need 
guidance, and it makes sense to advise them to think clearly about what they want 
their students to learn, but this ought not to result in them wearing learning out­
comes like a chastity belt, just in case they go astray.
Debate: A case for learning outcomes in HE
David Gosling
The distinctive feature of acts of teaching is that they are directed towards the 
achievement of learning – and not just any learning but learning of particular areas 
of knowledge, skills, and values. In this respect they are unlike conversations, 
requests, protests, prayers, performances, and other speech acts. In so far as 
these other speech acts include the intention to learn something, they are, in part, 
teaching acts. What is intended to be learnt may be more or less explicit, more or 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
49
less articulated, more or less precise. Disciplines differ in the extent to which it is 
possible to articulate precisely what it is that students are expected to learn. But it 
does not follow that because the ends of teaching are difficult to specify that there 
are no ends. The ends remain even if they have not been articulated by the teacher.
When the intended ends of teaching have not been articulated, students must 
discover what they are. Placing the responsibility on students to discover what they 
are supposed to learn has been, and is, used as a means of discriminating between 
those students who ‘get it’ and those who don’t. By refusing to articulate the ends of 
teaching, tutors engage in mystification while controlling the assessment process.
The act of assessment implicitly specifies the objects of learning (or at least 
those important enough to be assessed) – both by selecting what is assessed and 
how grades are allocated. Both these determinants are, in higher education, within the 
power of the teacher – even if the teacher’s freedom is restricted by professional bod­
ies. Of course, this is why students look at past papers to work out what they will be 
assessed on. However, this is a highly fallible process with a large element of guess­
work involved. Pre-specified learning outcomes are intended to take this element of 
mystification and guesswork out of the process. The reasoning is that learning is more 
effective when it is focused.
It also helps teachers to design teaching programmes and individual teaching 
sessions. The process of thinking carefully about what students need to learn – 
rather than simply what content is being taught – helps the lecturer to think critically 
about the teaching, learning and assessment process. It encourages lecturers to 
design activities that will maximise relevant learning rather than leaving what stu­
dents learn to chance or sometimes misguided guesswork. That is not to say that 
learning cannot emerge in unpredictable ways and be all the better for that, never­
theless, the core outcomes on which students will be assessed should be in the 
public realm rather than hidden and discoverable only through a secret ritual con­
trolled only by the lecturer. Put simply, students have a right to know where their 
learning is heading and on what they will be assessed.
It has been argued that most lecturers pay no attention to learning outcomes 
once their courses have been approved, implying that the only purpose for writing 
them was to satisfy quality assurance officers. This may be right, but it does not 
show that learning outcomes have no other purpose than satisfying quality assur­
ance protocols – only that their potential for sharpening-up the design of courses 
and assessment is not being recognised and used.
Lecturers are faced with a demand by university authorities to write learning 
outcomes without there being any discourse about the educational justification for 
an outcomes-based approach and the implications for course design. Furthermore, 
by making an outcomes-based approach a regulatory matter, all other legitimate 
forms of course design are ignored or devalued. In these circumstances, specifying 
learning outcomes becomes a technocratic chore, not an educational choice.
Much of the resistance to learning outcomes derives from lecturers’ dislike of 
being accountable to quality assurance regimes and the implied loss of teacher 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

50
CORDELIA BRYAN
autonomy. But teaching, within public institutions, should not be a private and secre­
tive transaction between a lecturer and his/her students and should be available for 
scrutiny and monitoring. However, that scrutiny should not be overly obtrusive and 
be fit for purpose. Unfortunately quality assurance processes often become 
over-specified and rule-bound, where the emphasis on writing correctly formulated 
learning outcomes becomes a fetishistic replacement for real judgements about 
quality. The act of approving learning outcomes for a course does not assure the 
quality of the course nor does it guarantee that successful students have reached a 
pre-determined ‘level’ of learning. The quality of student learning is influenced by, 
but not determined by, their experience of the teaching they receive. The learning 
outcomes students actually achieve are significantly influenced by their own efforts, 
attitudes to and motivation for learning as well as the quality of the learning environ­
ment. The act of specifying learning outcomes is a useful tool in course design but 
is clearly not sufficient to ensure the quality of learning achieved.
Some of the opponents of learning outcomes believe that teaching should be 
more like a conversation where the learning achieved is unpredictable and they 
argue that clarity and explicitness in learning outcomes are ‘largely spurious’. Fur­
thermore, they argue that their use can be restrictive.
There are certainly dangers in an over-positivist approach. At best, learning 
outcomes are indicative of the threshold learning that students are required to have 
achieved in a subject at a specified level. Where credit accumulation is used to 
define qualifications, some statement of the thresholds are needed, but we should 
never fall into the trap of thinking that such statements offer a full and rich descrip­
tion of what any individual student has learned or what has been taught. The claim 
that learning outcomes are ‘largely spurious’ is based on a false expectation of the 
function they have in the teaching and learning process.
To escape the seemingly endless recurrence of the debate about learning out­
comes, we require a more realistic understanding of their purpose, what they can 
achieve and their limitations. We need statements of learning outcomes that are 
useful to students and not simply written to meet the requirements of quality assur­
ance processes, which often fail to assess quality and rarely give the assurance 
sought. The valuable debate we could have is not for or against learning outcomes, 
but about the many and varied ways of motivating and inspiring learning, within 
which the value of articulating learning outcomes may be fairly considered.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
51
Dear Lecturer
On my state of becoming
Kate Riseley
University is a place full of possibilities. Sure, some students are there because 
society dictates that their chosen profession requires it, some because it’s just what 
you do, some because their parents told them to be there, but imagine just being 
there because you want to learn.
I worked hard academically and personally to become ready for university. I had 
earned my place and no doubt my being there ticked a few widening participation 
boxes but none of that mattered to me. University suspends time; we go there, leav­
ing the real world behind temporarily. It is a chance to discover who we are, to grow, 
to learn as Newman said ‘to reach out towards truth, and to grasp it’. But we, as 
students, need to know more of this as we begin our studies.
Reading the draft of the chapter of this book made me think, hold on! It’s all 
very well focusing on how teachers should teach, how about sharing with learners 
how and why we learn? Hearing about von Humboldt, Newman, Rogers was all new 
to me. Why don’t we, as students, know this stuff? Armed with just this first chapter 
of this book my peers and I could have used our time so much more effectively. We 
could have actively engaged with our being and our learning rather than just accept­
ing at the end that, apparently, we now have some transferable skills. I suppose 
I was one of the lucky ones, I was at university because I wanted to be. Okay, I might 
have sold it to my family under the guise of improving my employability (isn’t it sad 
we have to justify learning) but really I just wanted to be there.
It’s now six months since I finished my degree in English Literature. I loved my 
degree programme but I probably could have studied anything, I just wanted to be in 
the environment that encouraged learning. Being at university made me feel like 
royalty, I loved the automatic doors that literally opened for me as I walked towards 
them, this made me smile every day.
It was in this state of being that I could really learn, and interact with lecturers. 
I sought part-time work, I engaged with feedback, I did everything a student is sup­
posed to do. Yes, my knowledge has grown, I am theoretically more employable but 
the thing I enjoyed most was walking towards those doors, acknowledging a little 
flutter in my tummy in case this was the one time they didn’t open and then the 
euphoria as they swept majestically open, welcoming me to be.
As I write this, I am still reeling from the news this week (November 2014) from 
Education Secretary Nicky Morgan warning young people that choosing to study arts 
subjects at school could ‘hold them back for the rest of their lives’. Hold them back! 
A true love of learning, anything, can only take you forward. To the me that was 
quietly be-ing on campus the only thing that really mattered were the boundless 
possibilities it created for me be-coming.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

52
CORDELIA BRYAN
Extracts from successful HEA fellowship applications
Dr Orange (FHEA)
I am a strong believer in encouraging students to engage with their own learning by 
providing them with a traffic light card 10 minutes before the end of the lecture. On 
this piece of card they have three headings under which they must write: STOP: 
Which parts of the lecture you did not enjoy; START: Which parts of the lecture you 
would like improvements on and suggestions of how; CONTINUE: Which parts of the 
lecture you enjoyed and why. Lastly they would be asked to note down … ‘Are there 
any concepts you would like to be revisited next week?’
The students would then place the anonymised card in a box as they exit the 
lecture room. The answers to the questions would be placed onto the study space 
for students to read. The student feedback from the end of module evaluation forms 
has indicated that they enjoyed this form of interaction with the lecturer. With this 
style of interaction it is possible that any difficulties that students are having with 
their learning can be identified early on and I am able to evaluate the method of 
delivery and revise it as necessary. Students in particular enjoyed this method of 
providing feedback to the lecturer as some stated: ‘I was able to let the lecturer 
know if I was stuck on something’ [K5].
Dr Brown (SFHEA)
In my first post as Senior Lecturer, I continued to research the learning experience 
through internal research funding, and to explore the experiences of mature learners 
[K3] returning to education and wishing to enter the teaching profession. This peda­
gogic research and enquiry was embedded in my teaching which was from this point 
increasingly research-led and research-based [V3]. My methodology of choice was 
established by now, through my PhD and subsequent and parallel undertakings. 
Using my counselling skills and understanding of the therapeutic alliance, I used 
free associative narrative interviewing techniques (Hollway and Jefferson 2000) to 
gather biographic, rich data, wherein the lines of narrative could be traced and exam­
ined; the play of word and metaphor explored, and the speaker’s hopes and plans 
for reparation (a psychosocial understanding of justice) could be traced.
Dr Blue (PFHEA)
One of the issues many students face in HE is being able to read the feedback they 
receive. Research indicates that speedy, constructive feedback can have a major 
impact on student learning (Gibbs and Simpson 2004). While typing feedback was 
strongly recommended, this tended not to happen and many said they lacked the 
typing skills. I decided to run a pilot on ‘paperless’ online marking. The use of the 
term ‘paperless’ was purposive, the focus was not on the technology but on 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ENHANCING STUDENT LEARNING
53
­sustainability and the student experience. The first year of the pilot was quite suc­
cessful, but only a small number of ‘early adopters’ took part. After communicating 
the findings of the pilot I expanded this the following year, and persuaded the Dean 
to offer all staff taking part new equipment (large screens, connectable laptops) to 
encourage staff to try out the system. Student feedback was so good we decided to 
roll-out online marking across the faculty, making it the preferred option for any work 
that could be submitted to Turnitin. Sensitive to the resistance this decision would 
lead to, I initiated a major communication drive, including ten workshops in computer 
labs where staff were able to try out the system and ask questions. I led these 
workshops myself as they were an important part of the change process. I started 
each session by explaining the rationale for the move and the impact this would have 
on student learning. During that year, the knowledge I was able to bring to university 
committees led to a decision to move the entire university to online submission and 
feedback and my work enabled this to be implemented immediately.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

If the people judging the validity of my work are outside the institution 
which employs me, what’s the point of me caring about my institution?
If I could get someone else to do my teaching, wouldn’t that give me more time 
to do research and to publish?
I didn’t become a professional in order to be line-managed, particularly by 
somebody who doesn’t do any academic work.
Introduction
To whom or what do we owe our allegiance as academic practitioners? From the fol­
lowing list where would you place the emphasis?
1	
Primarily, my allegiance is to my department.
2	
Primarily, my allegiance is to my discipline or subject.
3	
Primarily, my allegiance is to my institution.
4	
Primarily, my allegiance is to my students.
5	
Primarily, my allegiance is to my research and knowledge creation.
6	
Primarily, my allegiance is to my teaching and knowledge dissemination.
If, like me, you were torn on these choices, you may have opted to say that allegiance 
is shared between all of them, and that they naturally overlap. You may also have felt 
that, while you would like to put the emphasis on one or two of these, there are reasons 
why, in practice, your allegiance has ended up coalescing around one or two of the 
others. Of course, you might also have said that your allegiance lies somewhere else 
entirely. This chapter looks at these questions from three angles. First, asking how 
these allegiances are formed and become part of our academic identities. Second, ask­
ing how teaching and learning might become a more integral part of everyone’s aca­
demic identity. And, third, looking at the ways in which accountability and quality 
enhancement have become key features of our academic identities. The general theme 
3
The nature of academic time
John Lea
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
55
of the chapter is to look critically at how we spend our time. Throughout the chapter 
we will also be hearing from two fictitious academic colleagues, Professor K.G. Reason 
and Dr M. Bracewell, who will be interjecting from time to time with their views.
The nature of academic identity
When I reflect on the staff development events I have attended over the years, there 
seem to be two broad purposes to them: either, there is an offer relating to institutional 
induction, that is, to learn something about ‘how we do things round here’, or, there is 
an offer as to how I might enhance one of my academic abilities, for example, how to 
be a better researcher, writer, or teacher. These two sets of broad purposes need not be 
in conflict, but because they are often run by different people, working for different 
departments, a different emphasis will be evident. At the extreme, institutional induc­
tion events often feature slide shows demonstrating the health of the institution, stra­
tegic targets for the institution, and include line management structure diagrams, and 
a corporate logo on each slide, whereas academic ability events tend to be more dis­
cursive, often speaking to discipline-based forms of peer review, national and interna­
tional networks, and a sense of an academy beyond institutional walls, or an ‘invisible 
college’ (Halsey and Trow 1971). But do these emphases just reflect different aspects 
of our academic identities, or are they evidence of conflicting allegiances? Indeed, 
might we find evidence here of a battle between traditional forms of collegiality and 
more contemporary forms of corporatism (Fanghanel 2012), and continuing evidence 
of the general demise of academic rule or ‘donnish dominion’ (Halsey 1992)?
The notion of discipline (or subject-based) allegiance has been depicted as one 
comprising ‘tribes and territories’ (Becher 1989; Becher and Trowler 2001), where the 
conflict is not necessarily between allegiance to discipline vs. allegiance to institution, 
but a conflict between discipline boundaries, for example, between so-called hard and 
soft subjects, and between competing epistemological paradigms. This is also a ques­
tion of ‘how we do things round here’, but here the induction is into how one’s subject, 
discipline or department distinguishes itself from others; how discipline-based ques­
tions are raised and particular research methods employed, and how new knowledge 
is taught and disseminated (Kreber 2008). Within an institution this can create a ‘bal­
kanised’ existence (Hargreaves 1994) for a particular department or subject, who pride 
themselves on their distinctive nature, and who might actively oppose themselves to 
other departments. On occasion, they might even view other departments or subjects 
as epistemologically weak or flawed in some way. These entrenched attitudes, partic­
ularly when presented as a pride in the validity and reliability of a subject’s history of 
knowledge production and dissemination, can go on to create powerful discipline alle­
giances way beyond a particular institutional setting. This is what prompted Barnett’s 
comment: ‘[T]he typical academic might know better and feel more connection with 
other researchers in his or her discipline on the other side of the world than with 
an academic in another discipline in the same university, even in the same building’ 
(2012: 51).
Reconciling these academic conflicts may prove difficult and require careful 
management (which we will return to later), but equally, the conflicts might be over­
blown. For example, if I am granted a term’s study leave in order to complete my 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

56
JOHN LEA
ground-breaking discipline-based book, I may feel some guilt that I will be letting 
down my students, particularly those who have chosen my third year research-led 
module, for which I am known to be a leading figure in the field. But, looked at another 
way, on my return after Christmas, those students will now get the benefit of my new­
found knowledge, and might learn first hand of my experiences of, say, interviewing 
a number of important political figures in the process of completing that book. Simi­
larly, my university will now be able to enter my work in the forthcoming Research 
Excellence Framework (REF) exercise (REF 2012), which in turn may attract more 
research funds to my institution in the future. And, I may now be in a position to com­
plete that application for a professorship, which requires that I demonstrate success 
in discipline-based knowledge production and dissemination. Here we see those con­
flicts begin to evaporate, because even though it is the university that grants me my 
professorship, it does so largely on my standing within those discipline-based net­
works. This makes universities complicated institutions because the environment in 
which a particular institution enhances its reputation is heavily dependent on activi­
ties which take place beyond its confines. Put crudely, academics need to get out 
more if their university is to thrive.
Another way to approach the question of academic identity is to borrow the socio­
logical (Durkheimian) term ‘organic solidarity’, and consider the extent to which it is 
the differences between us all that actually hold us together. In this approach the com­
bined effect of all the staff development activities is to enable us to find which aspects 
of academic identity we are best suited to, so that we then might excel by concentrating 
Figure 3.1  Dimensions of academic practice.
X
Research and
Publication
Leadership
and
Management
Teaching
and
Learning
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
57
on enhancing those skills, while others concentrate on the other dimensions. Of course, 
this may occur of necessity rather than desire because it might be simply impossible 
to balance all aspects of academic activity in one career. But the net result is a division 
of labour, which should unite us rather than divide us. A simple depiction is given in 
Figure 3.1.
Depicting academic identities as a Venn diagram in Figure 3.1 offers the potential 
to consider the size and extent of any overlaps, indicating, for example, that it might 
be possible to balance excelling in teaching and learning with excelling in leadership 
and management, and so on. Indeed, these overlaps might speak to the existence of 
separate and distinct roles themselves. For example, excelling in teaching and learn­
ing is one thing, as is excelling in research and publication, but, equally, there may be 
a distinct role for those who are able to work successfully at developing a unique 
overlapping academic identity – maybe, in this case, as a pedagogic researcher. 
Equally, on the other side of the diagram there may be a particular set of skills 
required to be an effective academic programme leader, which is neither born of 
excellence in teaching and learning exclusively, nor wider leadership and manage­
ment, but is a unique identity in its own right. To complete the diagram, there is an X 
in the middle, which might be interpreted as ‘the X factor’– a unique individual who is 
able to combine aspects of all three areas of activity, or alternatively, X as a cross, 
indicating that universities are just too complicated for someone to be able to perform 
effectively in this way.
Relevant HEA project
Locke, W. (2014) Shifting academic careers: implications for enhancing profession­
alism in teaching and supported learning. Available at: www.heacademy.ac.uk/
node/10079
A simpler way to look at academic identity would be to say that all the roles 
which could be identified in Figure 3.1 constitute the different dimensions of aca­
demic practice. Or that these are the core activities that help define a university as 
university. To go any further than that, that is, to look at which roles overlap; are 
complementary; or are in conflict with one another, can only be determined by look­
ing at one particular institution, and then only at one point in its history. Or, to argue 
that one particular configuration is more in accord with the essence of what a univer­
sity is, or is more likely to help a university thrive, will inevitability ignore the unique 
context of each institution. That said, those who have staked their careers on strong 
allegiances to their disciplines may quickly discover that a core feature of a success­
ful academic identity is the ability to negotiate a somewhat split, ambivalent and 
culturally schizophrenic relationship with their employing institution, which might 
be summarised by challenging them on whether they think they work at or for an 
institution.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

58
JOHN LEA
Prof. Reason:  I’m glad this issue has been raised because I don’t see why I should be 
embarrassed about saying that I work at this university not for it. I’ve been accused of 
being disloyal for saying that, but it’s only ever said by those who don’t really under­
stand where this university’s standing actually comes from. It’s people like me that 
make this university what it is. It’s because I publish in peer-reviewed international 
journals, and go on world conference tours, that this university appears in any league 
table. I should be respected for that. In fact, come to think of it, that Venn diagram 
could be simplified – if someone is not actively engaged in knowledge production, or 
actively supporting those people, they are not engaged in academic practice, and 
shouldn’t even appear in the Venn diagram. They’re the ones who are disloyal.
Dr Bracewell:  I can see why you get angry about this, but we’re not going to get very 
far by provoking a catfight. Look, someone’s got to manage time, resources, and 
estate around here, and clearly that’s not going to be you. Why not look at it from 
the division of labour perspective? If you’re going on a world tour promoting your 
latest research, for goodness sake, someone’s got to be looking after the shop, or 
what is it that you will be coming back to? And how about, instead of sending your 
apologies all the time, why not come along to some staff development and manage­
ment events and explain your position, and help look for common ground? And what 
about the students? It’s not just a question of putting a timetable together. What 
about the curriculum, including its learning, teaching and assessment regime? Are 
you saying that these activities are not part of academic practice?
Teaching and learning as academic practice
In the USA, in 1990, Ernest Boyer published what has became a seminal text for those 
who were seeking to raise the status of teaching and learning in higher education 
(Boyer 1990). The Dearing Report, published in 1997, was also instrumental in putting 
this debate on the policy agenda in the UK (Dearing 1997). But some of the underpin­
ning issues in both texts – about undervaluing teaching and learning in the university – 
are not new and the point was made succinctly by Cardinal Newman over 150 years in 
his own now seminal text (or lecture notes as they were originally):
[I]t [a university] is a place of teaching universal knowledge. This implies that its 
object is, on the one hand, intellectual, not moral, and, on the other, that it is the 
diffusion and extension of knowledge rather than the advancement. If its object 
were scientific and philosophical discovery, I do not see why a University should 
have students …
(Newman [1852] 1996: 3)
We might translate this statement provocatively to suggest that anyone can do 
research, and anywhere; it cannot and should not therefore be a defining characteristic 
of a university. But, outside of a university, how often do we see concerted attempts to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
59
bring together all that research and help students navigate through it all? Or, ‘It’s the 
university curriculum, stupid!’ And there is a scholarship associated with it, but one 
which has, for several reasons, been undermined. For Boyer, the main reason lay in the 
gradual elevation of original research (or the scholarship of discovery, as he referred 
to it) as the most valued activity in the university. The effect of this has been clear; that 
even those academics who might wish to develop in other ways have been marshalled 
into believing that their status can only be significantly enhanced by success in this 
field of activity. As we saw at the beginning of Chapter 1 of this book, Boyer makes the 
point succinctly:
What we urgently need today is a more inclusive view of what it means to be a 
scholar – a recognition that knowledge is acquired through research, through syn­
thesis, through practice, and through teaching. We acknowledge that these four 
categories – the scholarship of discovery, of integration, of application, and of 
teaching – divide intellectual functions that are tied inseparably to each other.
(Boyer 1990: 25)
Another way to look at this has been explored by Steve Fuller, who argues that this 
elevation of the research agenda in universities was, in part, brought about by making 
the PhD the required (and pinnacle) qualification to work in a university, which, in the 
process relegated the Master’s qualification (Fuller 2013). This was a double-whammy, 
because the PhD qualification – aimed essentially at validating research ability – not 
only knocked the Master’s qualification off its university employability perch, but also 
helped cement it as a mere stepping stone to a PhD, rather than as a qualification in its 
own right, and one originally conceived in pedagogical terms. Put simply, in the Bach­
elor’s qualification, you prove you know your subject, and in the Master’s qualification, 
you prove you can disseminate it.
•	
What strategies do you use to manage and integrate the various dimen­
sions of your academic practice? 
•	
In what ways do you actively seek to mentor/induct new members of staff 
into their various academic roles, and how do you help them to manage the 
demands of a varied academic identity?
Activity 3.1
In Figure 3.2, we see Boyer’s four scholarships depicted, with multiple arrows to 
indicate the ways in which all four scholarships might begin to be connected and help 
form a more rounded scholar.
A key implication for Boyer of such a depiction is that an academic career should 
provide opportunities for academics to excel in one area, but also enable them to shift 
career path between them, and, importantly, that this should be welcomed and cele­
brated rather than frowned upon and viewed as evidence of a failed academic life. 
Indeed, each scholarship should be accorded equal status. These are all normative 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

60
JOHN LEA
statements, indicating not only that they are an ideal to be aspired to, but also that they 
might be courting controversy. For example, many academics might feel that though 
the balance has (perhaps) tipped too far in the direction of the scholarship of discov­
ery, nonetheless activities associated with that scholarship do require the greatest 
effort and creativity, and that the others are – to some extent at least – parasitic upon 
that. Furthermore, there may be very practical reasons why excelling in one area alone 
is the only realistic option, for it may take many years to develop expertise in a partic­
ular scholarship, and could a department realistically afford to take a risk by allowing 
an excellent teacher to bid for a high profile research grant just because they have 
asked for a career shift? If nothing else, this speaks for a need to manage the career 
cycle of activities very carefully in a particular departmental context.
Equally, one might make a case for arguing that any of the other three scholar­
ships could be viewed as the pinnacle activity, particularly if a university has an 
avowed mission in one direction, for example: ‘this university is proud of its links with 
local industry and commerce and students coming here will be encouraged to use their 
knowledge in applied scholarly ways by working collaboratively with faculty mem­
bers and local employers.’ Here we see the scholarship of application being elevated, 
or what in the UK has become increasingly known as knowledge exchange. Indeed, 
many of the new higher education providers (including FE colleges) might argue that 
this is precisely the kind of higher education provision they are interested in offering. 
Some universities might also see little point in trying to compete with other more 
wealthy research-intensive universities, deciding instead to develop aspects of the 
scholarships of integration (including curriculum development) and of teaching, and 
become avowedly teaching-led universities. Boyer was counselling against such 
moves, and they would certainly appear to undermine the German Humboldtian tradi­
tion upon which many UK and US universities were founded, one where research and 
teaching take place in the same institution and feed off each other, and, importantly, 
actively invite students to enjoin in scholarly endeavour:
Figure 3.2  Boyer’s (1990) four scholarships depicted as integrated practice.
Scholarship of integration
Scholarship of
application
Scholarship of
teaching
Scholarship of
discovery
Well rounded
scholar
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
61
The relationship between teacher and learner is … completely different in higher 
education from what it is in schools. At the higher level, the teacher is not there for 
the sake of the student, both have their justification in the service of scholarship.
(von Humboldt [1810] 1970, quoted by Elton 2008: 225)
That said, and particularly in a REF context, the sheer pressure to produce a high vol­
ume of original research may mean that the other scholarships simply have to take a 
back seat, including in some cases teaching itself, let alone teaching underpinned by 
scholarship, or co-joined forms of scholarship with students (see Chapter 6). Equally, 
knowing that one’s institution is not likely to fare well in a REF exercise overall (i.e. it 
is unlikely to attract large sums of research money in the near future) might force a 
senior management team to concentrate efforts in other directions, possibly to com­
pete for funds associated with widening participation, which may have the subsequent 
effect of academic practice having to be heavily skewed in the direction of proactively 
supporting non-traditional learners or first generation entrants to university – in both 
academic and non-academic ways (Thomas and Quinn 2006). To date, UK universities 
have resisted the teaching-only designation, but in practice many may already see this 
as their prime activity. Equally, some of the research-intensive universities in the UK 
may feel quite comfortable in contemplating giving up on offering a full undergraduate 
teaching programme, and concentrate instead on offering research-only post-graduate 
degrees.
Clearly, the relationship between teaching and research (or nexus) is multi-
layered and offers many permutations (see Neumann 1992; Elton 2001; Brew 2006; 
Healey and Jenkins 2009; and Kreber 2013, for detailed discussions of the various 
dimensions to the research-teaching nexus). For example, for an academic to claim 
that their teaching is underpinned by research might mean that they use their 
subject-based research in their teaching, but it might also mean that their teaching (as 
in pedagogical methods) is underpinned by research. In this regard, the former might 
be referred to strictly as ‘research-led teaching’ (RLT) and the latter strictly as 
‘research informed teaching’ (RIT), but there is no common usage of these terms. 
There might also be a further distinction to be made between teaching being led and/or 
informed by research, where in the former case the teacher has actually undertaken 
the research (or collected the primary data) and in the latter they are informed of the 
(secondary source) research of others. Clearly, the permutations can start growing 
quickly, and with no strict agreement on the use of appropriate terms. This is further 
complicated by those who distinguish between being scholarly about teaching and 
learning and the scholarship of teaching and learning, where in the former case adopt­
ing a critically reflective approach to HE pedagogy is contrasted with ‘going public’ 
on pedagogic research findings (Kreber 2013). And where, in the former case, peer 
review is understood as internal to the institutional setting, and, in the latter, as exter­
nal to that setting.
The question is also complicated by a consideration of whether simply knowing 
about aspects of HE pedagogy will necessarily have a positive effect on student 
learning, and, perhaps more controversially, whether bringing one’s subject-based 
research knowledge to the classroom will necessarily have a positive impact on stu­
dent learning. Nonetheless, there seems to be something intuitively seductive about 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

62
JOHN LEA
wanting to claim that this must be true to some extent in both cases. Gibbs has put a 
lot of effort into exploring the former claim and Hattie and Marsh sought to unpack 
all the dimensions involved in the latter claim (Hattie and Marsh 1996; Gibbs 2010). 
And, at the risk of losing the wood for the trees in all this variable analysis, Lewis 
Elton has captured what seems to be at the heart of the matter (particularly if one is 
serious about student learning): ‘A positive research and teaching link primarily 
depends on the nature of the students’ learning experiences, resulting from appropri­
ate teaching and learning processes, rather than on particular inputs or outcomes’ 
(Elton 2001: 43).
Prof. Reason: This is getting far too complicated for me. I don’t need any variable 
analysis to know some simple facts. I do my research, and I use that in my third 
year module, which was designed around my research findings, and the students 
benefit from me adding little golden nuggets each week, taken from my on-going 
research on the same subject. I will admit that giving these lectures does eat some­
what into my research time, but, generally speaking, I’m happy to deliver them. 
I also run a Master’s module on research methods, which I unashamedly use to test 
student knowledge of those methods, which helps me decide who I should take on 
as PhD students. One of the privileges for those students then becomes the oppor­
tunity to teach my second year module as GTAs [Graduate Teaching Assistants]. 
That suits me and it suits them. You can call that a nexus if you want but I’d just say 
it’s all common sense. Okay, I will also admit that occasionally I do deliver the odd 
first year lecture, mainly to tell the students about my second and third year 
­modules. I don’t see any point in doing much more, because a lot of them seem to 
fall asleep after about twenty minutes into the lecture.
Dr Bracewell: Well, I’m struggling to know where to begin on this one. Let’s take 
those GTAs. Do they get any training in being a teacher? Do you at least observe 
them teaching? On second thoughts, probably not a good idea that you do that! And 
that Master’s module sounds like a right bundle of fun! Don’t they get a chance to 
actually do some research themselves? And those poor first years! Probably best 
you stay away all together on that front. Don’t get me wrong, remember, I’m an 
active researcher in my subject, but I also do pedagogic research, often with my 
students, and I use the evidence from that research, particularly in my first year 
teaching. Yes, it’s really important that they get a good grounding in the concepts 
and theories that underpin my discipline, but at the same time they need to develop 
good study and higher learning skills. My subject-based research just has to stay in 
the background for that context. And you know, you really are missing out on some 
fantastic opportunities for your students to become much more scholarly in their 
studies. It’s ironic, because if your students were more like this by the time they 
came to your third year module, you’d probably find you wouldn’t need to lecture at 
them so much, giving you and them time to work collaboratively on advancing knowl­
edge in your field.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
63
Dear Lecturer
On research-led teaching
Jenni Cannon
As a student, I definitely came across a few lecturers who clearly believed that their 
students’ role was to be a passive recipient of their academic knowledge, and that 
the ability to impart cutting-edge research is the mark of a good teacher. To me, this 
missed the point of coming to university completely. I didn’t want to be a sponge, 
soaking up information which I could regurgitate on cue on graduation! I wanted to 
be part of a discussion; for my teachers to give me the skills to assimilate and ques­
tion what I was learning, in order to form my own views. I’m not saying research-led 
teaching isn’t important, but I think it’s naïve to believe that ‘golden nuggets’ of new 
knowledge allow your students to get the best out of you.
I felt I was much better served by the teachers who believed that production of 
knowledge was a collaborative and dynamic process that involved the students, our 
thoughts and our development as learners and future academics; as opposed to some­
thing that was done in a vacuum and then showed to us in its perfect, finished form.
•	
In what ways do you seek to use your research (and the research of ­others) 
in your teaching and learning regime?
•	
In what ways have you been involved in seeking to integrate the various 
forms of scholarly activity in a school/faculty or institution framework or to 
integrate separate strategies for research, learning and teaching, etc.?
Activity 3.2
Some of the issues being raised by Reason and Bracewell can be depicted in 
Figure 3.3 (Healey et al. 2014b). At the bottom of Figure 3.3, we see students learning 
about research methods, and academic staff engaging in research but not (for what­
ever reason) using it in their teaching. As we move up the diagram, we see students 
becoming more actively involved in doing some research themselves and academics 
actively using their research findings in the their teaching. But it could still be argued 
that the diagram is incomplete, because without the final slice of pie at the top, we 
would be missing the invitation to work more collaboratively with students on research 
projects, and ensuring that the learning and teaching and assessment regime itself is 
being researched (possibly also collaboratively with students). These types of activity 
would certainly seem to accord with von Humboldt’s notion of staff and students both 
working in the service of scholarship, but also Boyer’s vision of seeing scholarly activ­
ity more holistically (see Chapter 6).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

64
JOHN LEA
Figure 3.3  Uniting staff and student activity.
Enhanced learning experiences
Collaborative projects
Research-informed teaching
Wider notions of scholarship
Teaching from
subject-led
research interests
Undertaking
own research
project or inquiry
Separate research
and teaching
Understanding
research methods
Student experience
of research
Teacher experience
of research
The top slice of the pie chart in Figure 3.3 also opens up the possibility of incorpo­
rating more action research into an academic’s scholarly profile – where the academic 
explores aspects of their own professional practice, and works more collaboratively 
with their research subjects (McKernan 1996, 2007: McNiff 2001, 2009). But, on the 
other hand, this type of research practice is not always considered to be true research 
activity, and may even damage an academic’s career, particularly if they wish to excel 
in the field of original research, or the scholarship of discovery. Indeed, according to 
REF definitions of research, a lot of the scholarly activity in the top slice of the pie 
chart would not be admissible in a REF submission (REF 2012).
When the Higher Education Academy was established in 2004, one of its first tasks 
was to consult the sector on the proposal for a UKPSF (as it subsequently became 
known). As mentioned in Chapter 1 of this book, that proposal recognised ‘that the 
scholarly nature of subject inquiry and knowledge creation, and a scholarly approach 
to pedagogy, together represent a uniquely embedded feature of support for student 
learning in universities and colleges’ (HEA 2005). The following comment was also 
made at the same time: ‘[w]hile research endeavour and teaching endeavour are 
believed to be conceptually related in higher education, that relationship needs active 
management and explicit support since the pressures to split the two apart are power­
ful’ (Atkins, quoted in Jenkins and Healey 2005). Placed alongside each other, both 
comments would appear to still have clear resonances ten years on.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
65
Managing academic practice
The Dearing Report of 1997 not only spoke of the need to raise the profile of learning 
and teaching in UK HE, but also how this might be levered up by new forms of account­
ability. In some cases that accountability should be at the heart of every teaching ses­
sion, that is, that students should always be clear about the purpose of a taught session 
and the nature of the learning that will be required of them. This, in essence, is a learn­
ing outcomes approach to teaching, and was discussed in Chapter 2. But what was also 
proposed was a series of wider checks, which collectively became known as the aca­
demic infrastructure for higher education (now subsumed under a wider Quality Code) 
(QAA 2011). This included: programme specifications, so prospective students would 
know in advance exactly what the nature of the learning experience would be on a 
particular course of study; subject benchmark statements, making it clear, in essence, 
what a degree subject needs to contain in order for it to carry that title; level descriptor 
statements, making it clear the nature of the skills required to be met at each year/level 
of study – from first year to PhD; and a series of other precepts, compliance with which 
would be taken as evidence that academic standards were being maintained, and, cru­
cially, enable the standards of achievement in one institution to be compared with 
other institutions. The new Quality Code is not only more comprehensive but also now 
includes new sections relating explicitly to expectations about higher learning and 
teaching, student development and student engagement (Chapters B3, B4, B5).
Since 1997, in the UK, the guardian of this accountability regime has been the Qual­
ity Assurance Agency (QAA). This is not the place to chart the history of the QAA, 
suffice it to say that in its early days its main mechanism for calling institutions to 
account was a subject-by-subject review, conducted by a team of ‘peer reviewers’, 
which resulted in a written report and summary mark from 0–24 for each subject area, 
based on the reviewers’ perceived maintenance of academic standards. This was 
changed to become a process of Institutional Audit (IA), administered on a five-year 
cycle in each university and centred on statements of confidence that the QAA review­
ers had in a university overall. In the last couple of years all higher education institu­
tions (including further education colleges and private providers with degree-awarding 
powers) have come under a new unified system of Higher Education Review (HER), 
along with a gradual movement in the direction of a risk-based approach to review – 
such as concerns about variance from the norm of statistical data compiled for the 
new Key Information Set (KIS) (HESA 2014), which in future might contain statistical 
data on the number of qualified teachers in a particular institution.
It is worth noting that teaching quality has been the focus of these reviews. The 
quality of research in UK universities was already being monitored and measured by 
a separate accountability exercise – the Research Assessment Exercise (RAE), the 
first of which was in 1986, and has been conducted every four years since then. This 
has been reformed to become the Research Excellence Framework (REF), with an 
enhanced emphasis on research impacts (see Chapter 7) (REF 2012); and the first 
results of which were published in December 2014. Again, this is not the place to 
chart the history of this exercise, but simply to note, particularly in the light of the 
previous discussion in this chapter of the book, there has been no concerted effort to 
bring both exercises together, or even consider – formally, in terms of national 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

66
JOHN LEA
accountability – the results of one exercise in terms of the other. This may go some 
way in explaining the comment right at the beginning of this chapter, namely, that 
some allegiances may have been forced on us because of the separate need to per­
form well in these exercises. There are no brownie points – in terms of national 
accountability measures – in actively seeking to bring research and teaching together, 
and significantly, no brownie points for individuals or institutions, in considering the 
impact that research has on student learning (see Chapter 6).
Returning to our Venn diagram in Figure 3.1, and Atkins’ comment about the need 
to carefully manage the relationship between research and teaching, the roles of the 
head of department or school (and those above that level) would appear to be crucial. 
For, not only do they need to keep one eye on the QAA, and one eye on the REF, but 
they also need to manage the aspirations of individual academics in what is often a 
large team of staff. And if Boyer’s notion of a well-rounded scholar is taken seriously, 
the head may well find him or herself involved in a crusade, which may be supported 
in some quarters but not in others (including the senior management team). Heads 
may also feel personally torn between their own allegiance to the discipline and sign­
ing a management contract which commits them more to institutional allegiance.
More controversially perhaps, an ironic outcome of Dearing’s demand for more 
accountability, which he clearly saw as an enhanced form of professionalism, has for 
many academics been experienced as a form of de-professionalisation; and a creeping 
perceived obsession not with managing but managerialism (Deem and Brehony 2005; 
Deem et al. 2008) - which might be defined as ensuring that all behaviour fits predeter­
mined categorisation, or ensuring that action is performed in accordance with what is 
prescribed, and typified not by accountability but surveillance, not audit but compli­
ance. Here we are talking more about managed academics rather than academic man­
agers (Fanghanel 2012), and where, for example, being deemed ‘research active’ no 
longer means being involved generally in research, but ensuring that one’s actions fit 
prescribed categories of behaviour; it is now ‘managed activity’ (e.g. having generated 
a certain amount of research money for the institution that employs you). In this sce­
nario, managing professionals becomes an oxymoron, for why train to become a pro­
fessional, the hallmark of which is to be accorded an autonomous status, when one is 
destined to become an academic worker, judged by meeting management targets often 
one has no say in?
Prof. Reason: At last, we’ve got to the point! I’m not an academic worker, account­
able to a non-academic manager. This is a recipe for this place to go slowly down 
the proverbial pan. Universities are successful because they are able to recruit 
highly motivated academics, who are dedicated to the work of producing and dis­
seminating new knowledge. The person who said that managing professionals is 
like herding cats was absolutely right, and we should learn that lesson, not try to 
turn cats into dogs. You simply can’t manage academic life as if it was some kind 
of 9–5 job. No more than you can manage a classroom as if learning was some 
kind of tap you just turn on and off at will. In fact, if you did try to manage academic 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
67
productivity, it would definitely go down! I get most of my good ideas at 2 in the 
morning, and sometimes I have a snooze in the afternoon, while the unproductive 
are all attending a management meeting. This place should consider itself lucky 
that it has such dedicated people working for it; not try to manage them into some 
kind of robotic monotony, where because you’ve met some made-up target you 
can then congratulate yourself. And come on, let’s be honest, a manager is simply 
a failed academic. Given a choice, wouldn’t you rather be teaching, researching 
and publishing? It’s only people who are no good at those things who are manag­
ers, who then have to resort to messing around with performance indicators, or 
whatever they call them – it’s what their performance indicates that’s the real 
problem.
Dr Bracewell: Well, I’m glad I’m not your line manager! Whether you like it or not, this 
university is subject to audit and somebody’s got to manage that process. And if 
somebody doesn’t manage that well, there simply will be no space for you to do that 
ground-breaking work you wish to be left alone to do at 2 in the morning. We need 
some smart people with leadership and management skills keeping their eye on the 
ball when it comes to these matters, even if you are ungrateful and ungracious 
about that. Have you never heard of horizon scanning? I’ll grant you that some man­
agers are not particularly good at their jobs, but then neither are all academics. Are 
you seriously saying that academics shouldn’t be called to account by their employ­
ing institutions? And, remember, your discipline doesn’t pay your wages; this univer­
sity does. My experience of working with my line manager, who is my Head of 
Department, is that we sit down each year, as a department, and discuss how we 
could enhance the reputation of the department; which research funds we might 
collectively target; which projects will be most manageable, particularly given our 
teaching commitments; and what will be the best division of labour between us all. 
That then forms the basis of my own plan for the year, including the balance between 
my teaching load and projected scholarly outputs, which my Head enables me to 
achieve through an individualised workload plan, upon which I will be appraised. We 
don’t call them performance indicators, but that’s essentially what these things are. 
For goodness sake, how else are you going to judge the quality of work – be that 
research, teaching, or anything else?
•	
In what ways do you engage with forms of peer review to identify any CPD 
needs, and how do you go about meeting those needs? 
•	
What management and leadership principles and strategies underpin your 
appraisal and development of your colleagues?
Activity 3.3
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

68
JOHN LEA
Audit cultures also bring to the fore notions of gaming and performance (or perfor­
mativity), as in ensuring that one complies with what is required but more through 
paying lip-service than any real or significant investment. This has been referred to as 
‘scripted communication’ (Lea 2009) or ‘ventriloquism’ (see Macfarlane in the Opinion 
box on p. 73). And it also has the potential of shifting motivation to act in accordance 
with winning the game. For example, I might be persuaded that it would be better to 
have my work published in a peer-reviewed international academic journal, rather than 
a locally produced monograph even though my intended audience is much more likely 
to read the latter than the former. Here I may well come to see impact as defined by an 
‘impact measure’, not a general idea that my research could have some benefits (Brown 
and Carraso 2013). But are these broader notions of benefit fast becoming rather quaint 
in the wider commercialisation of higher education, to which we are now accountable?
As with any business, survival depends on producing what the customer wants, and 
education is a commodity that customers can purchase from many sources on the 
open market. The commoditization of the research enterprise has transformed 
research knowledge into intellectual capital and intellectual property. This has been 
going on for decades. The commoditization of the teaching enterprise has just started, 
transforming courses into software, the activity of instruction itself into commercially 
viable proprietary products that can be owned and bought and sold in the market.
(Noble 1998, quoted in Birnbaum 2001: 92–3)
This quotation comes from an American context, leaving us in the UK to contemplate 
whether we have just been a bit slower to catch on or catch up. This also seems to 
demand of us that we consider carefully to whom or to what we are actually being 
made more accountable. To some academics, it may appear that they are being made 
more accountable to university managers, but in reality the managers themselves are 
also being made accountable to forms of academic capitalism (see Chapter 6).
Another significant way in which academics have been called to account in recent 
years in the UK is the National Student Survey (NSS), which has been running since 2005, 
but gaining in significance and impact on an annual basis, to such an extent that it is 
almost impossible (or very brave) for a UK university to ignore its results. The survey is 
administered annually by the independent marketing company Ipsos MORI, and the 
results are public knowledge. It is important to note that students access the survey 
directly through Ipsos MORI, implying that universities cannot refuse to take part. This 
is unlike the counterpart survey in the USA – the National Survey of Student Engage­
ment (NSSE) – where individual universities pay the administering company in order to 
take part. The NSS is aimed at final year students who answer questions on a range of 
topics (currently 24 in total) where they rate their experience of being an undergraduate.
Not only are the results subject to detailed scrutiny by each university, who often 
employ specific people to undertake this work, but the survey itself has been the sub­
ject of vociferous debate. Aside from the more epistemological considerations – about 
its reliability and validity as data – broader questions have also been raised about the 
value of a survey which seems to be more about how satisfied students are with their 
university experience, rather than how much their learning has been enhanced (Gibbs 
2010). The point is a significant one, particularly for those who are interested in raising 
the scholarly profile of learning and teaching, because the data does not lend itself 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
69
readily to taking steps to enhance learning. Indeed, being administered at the end of 
the third year, it offers no opportunity for students to enhance their own satisfaction, 
let alone their learning. Furthermore, many of the questions seemed to be more con­
cerned with what the university has done for the student, rather than what the student 
has done for themselves. In which case, these questions could be argued to be out of 
kilter with a key purpose behind any undergraduate programme, that ‘every student is 
enabled to develop as an independent learner’ (QAA 2012, Chapter B3).
A somewhat ironic comparison may be made with the American survey – the 
National Survey of Student Engagement (NSSE) – ironic, because in a country well-
known for its wish to keep the customer satisfied, the NSSE clearly attempts to mea­
sure the degree of the student’s own engagement in their studies. Whereas the NSS 
asks students questions about whether teachers have been good at explaining things; 
whether they have received detailed comments on their work; and whether their 
courses are well organised and running smoothly, the NSSE asks questions like: how 
often have you come to class without completing readings or assignments?; how often 
have you worked with classmates outside of class to prepare assignments?; and have 
you participated in a community-based project as part of a regular course? It could be 
argued that neither survey is actually centred on measuring the amount of learning 
that has taken place, nor does either help students maximise learning gains, but the 
NSSE seems to be more in keeping with what is increasingly being considered to be at 
the heart of higher learning, namely, student engagement (Harper et al. 2008; Dunne 
and Owen 2013; Nygaard et al. 2013; Bryson 2014).
Relevant HEA projects
Buckley, A. (2013) Engagement for enhancement: report of a UK survey pilot. 
Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/Engagement_for_
enhancement_FINAL_0.pdf
Buckley, A. (2014) UK engagement survey 2014; the second pilot year. 
Available at:https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/UKES_
report_2014_v2.pdf
The term ‘student engagement’ has become a pivotal term in explaining why some 
students do better at university than others. Whereas ability on entry (as measured by 
success in previous educational tests), and social background – including class, race, 
gender and other cultural factors – have long been understood as key variables in 
explaining academic success, and indeed, access to university itself, the more engaged 
a student is in their own learning and in the life of the university is now considered to 
be equally significant. And many universities have been able to report very positively 
on projects and initiatives aimed precisely at enhancing student engagement (Bryson 
2014). Furthermore, some universities have been experimenting with the use of their 
own surveys which seek to measure the impact of these initiatives, and a national 
engagement survey may emerge on the back of that work. The work of Graham Gibbs 
in the past few years might also be taken as testimony to the importance of these 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

70
JOHN LEA
developments (Gibbs 2010, 2012) because he is clear that students who are engaged in 
these ways are the ones who make the most learning gains.
More generally, for Gibbs, he is also clear that we do now have sufficient evidence 
on all the factors which are most likely to enhance learning, and it is high time, therefore, 
that we were all made accountable to that evidence, be that personally as individual 
academics who teach, or nationally, through, for example, QAA peer review processes. 
A somewhat alarming factor in that context is the attention being given to the number of 
class contact hours that students have with their teachers. Indeed, this is a KIS figure. It 
is alarming because a high figure is considered, by definition, a good one, but there is no 
real evidence that high-class contact enhances student learning. Indeed, if the aim of 
higher education is to produce an independent learner, one might claim that more time 
spent with teachers could well bring about the opposite. In reality, the relationship is a 
complicated one, and was well understood by Carl Rogers who claimed that a good facil­
itator of learning is one who takes students from a state of dependency to a state on 
autonomy, or freedom to learn (Rogers and Freiberg 1994). An HEA-commissioned proj­
ect refers to the transitional stage as ‘directed independent’ learning, which sounds oxy­
moronic, but not if the whole process of learning is taken into account.
Relevant HEA project
Thomas, L. (forthcoming) Effective practice in the design of directed independent 
learning opportunities. Available at:https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/project/350 
Other factors on Gibbs’ hit list include the fact that small groups are qualitatively supe­
rior to large groups, so why therefore is this statistic not in the KIS? And there is some 
evidence now that qualified teachers are having a marked positive effect on student 
learning (Gibbs 2012). Indeed, qualified HE teacher status may well appear in the KIS 
in the future. But the key seems to be an overall environmental consideration – the 
concerted effort to create a learning environment which actually focus on maximising 
learning, without which, a small group might well turn out to be worse than a large 
group, and so on. The big lesson in terms of quality overall, however, seems to be the 
question of whether we will continue to be more interested in keeping the customer 
satisfied or will move in the direction of focusing more squarely on maximising learn­
ing. In this context perhaps, we should all be made accountable to the answers that 
•	
What key evaluation tools underpin your evidence base for enhancing your 
teaching and learning regime? 
•	
In what ways have you been actively involved in responding to, and enhanc­
ing, the quality assurance regime in your school/faculty or institution overall?
Activity 3.4
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
71
students might give to these three questions at the end of their degree programmes: 
(1) Do you still need your teachers?; (2) Can you set your own learning outcomes?; and 
(3) Can you accurately mark your own work? (Lea 2012b).
Conclusion
Calling academics to account might be said to have heightened some of the tensions 
which exist in academic practice between allegiance to discipline and allegiance to 
institution. But some of those tensions also relate to the call to raise the status of teach­
ing and learning, because this is often happening in contexts where research output is 
recognised as being not only where most of the status is for individuals, but also where 
most of the money is for institutions. Managers are also put in difficult positions here, 
because they may end up very often having to ensure that everything complies with 
the needs of the various quality measuring devices, and in the process annoy the very 
colleagues who are trying to produce the things which are in need of measurement. 
This can also become tribal, where academics start creating bulwarks around their 
work to prevent encroachment from what are perceived as unwarranted management 
directives. In this context, managers can quickly become overly managerial at the very 
point when it is their leadership that is most required. But some responsibility might 
also be laid at the door at the professoriate, requiring them to take a more active role 
in general academic leadership, rather just focusing on their discipline-based research 
(Macfarlane 2012).
Lombardi speaks of the American university as having an academic core and an 
administrative shell, and where the latter enables the former to operate (Lombardi 
2013). Here, the word administration is used in the American sense to include all the 
activities associated with management and leadership. This balance is important, and 
if it becomes unhealthy the university will (in the end) suffer. This is very likely to 
happen when some of the entrepreneurial spirit of the administration – in seeing the 
university as a profit-making enterprise – clashes with some of the core principles of 
academic practice. Here, whereas a university may be a business, higher education is 
not, even if the university can profit from its academic activities. Leaders and manag­
ers are essential in ensuring that this balance remains a healthy one. And in this con­
text, Lombardi reminds us that academics are primarily members of guilds and, in 
practice, actually work for those guilds. This is a unique feature of universities and just 
as academics need to be reminded that universities must remain economically viable, 
equally, administrators need to be reminded that the core activity on which the univer­
sity rests largely takes place outside the walls of the institution: or, ‘the national guild 
establishes the intellectual standards for their [academics’] work; the local university 
deals with their employment and work assignments’ (Lombardi 2013: 2).
This scenario is complicated by the fact that there are many guilds, often operating 
with their own academic conventions, and notions of valid knowledge (see Chapter 5). 
To some extent this explains the kinds of balkanisation we often see, and also might 
explain why moves towards adoption of more generic professional standards and 
codes might be resisted. It is also complicated by the presence of students who will be 
invited by administrators to see themselves as belonging to the university, but by many 
academics as being inductees into particular subjects, disciplines, and even the guilds 
themselves. If nothing else, this contextualising of academic practice makes the question 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

72
JOHN LEA
of academic freedom a very complicated one. Although it might be argued to be at the 
heart of what enables an academic to pursue knowledge (see Chapters 5 and 7), the 
duty one has to disseminate the results of those pursuits both to students within their 
employing institution, and within a prescribed framework of research excellence, may 
mean that notions of freedom and responsibility are one minute just two sides of one 
academic coin, but the next minute the means by which academic freedom is hope­
lessly compromised by incursive forms of accountability.
Academics and managers might also be considered to have a duty to each other. 
Rowland speaks of enquiry as representing the tension between contestation and com­
pliance, and the need to remind managers of academic values rather than just remind­
ing academics of their management responsibilities (Rowland 2006). Again, this needs 
a healthy balance, and a partnership approach, reminding us that managers and aca­
demics are both professional colleagues. And in this context, applying the word ‘mana­
gerialist’ to academic practice may just be a signal to both parties that something is 
wrong and in need of rebalancing: ‘Educational management based on educational 
values is not managerialist’ (Birnbaum 2001: 126), that is, it does not pretend that all 
decisions are simply technical ones. Birnbaum also reminds us at the same time that: 
‘Higher education does not need more good management techniques; it needs more 
good managers’ (Birnbaum 2001: 239).
Some lessons may be very simple, such as recognising the need for individuals to 
assimilate change, and providing the space required for reflection, conversation, and 
interrogation of deeply held values (Kezar 2014), and a reminder that good ideas can 
still be badly managed and therefore fail to take hold (Fullan 2008). But we also need to 
recognise that those who have the strongest views about what a university is for – often 
those most involved in the ‘production of knowledge’ process – are much less likely to 
adopt a new and contagious idea; that contagion tends most to affect people without a 
place in that core process (Birnbaum 2001). Managing academics can also easily under­
mine their very professionalism, and, perhaps even worse, produce forms of ‘contrived 
collegiality’ (Hargreaves 1994) with an emphasis on team work, but only as the means 
for managers to have their decisions appear to have been the result of consultation.
Finally, and as Birnbaum consistently reminds us, universities are unlike most pri­
vate companies in many ways, including the fact that, for many academics: ‘produc­
tion in higher education … is not the transformation of resources into tangible products; 
rather it is the transformation of resources into desired intangible qualities of human 
beings’ (Bowen 1977, quoted in Birnbaum 2001: 228). And as the old cliché goes, when 
you only measure the easily measurable, you may well miss what is of true value. It is 
further complicated by the fact that universities are broad churches with contested 
notions of what they are for (see Chapter 6), in which case university leaders and man­
agers might find their jobs a lot easier if only we could all ‘come to some agreement on 
which way to aim the pointy end’ (Seymour 1995, quoted in Birnbaum 2001: 99).
Opinion Piece, Debate, Dear Lecturer, and Fellowship Application 
extracts
In the following opinion piece, Bruce Macfarlane asks whether we need to radically 
reconsider the notion of academic allegiance. And in the debate, two of my senior 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
73
colleagues, Chris Stevens and Ralph Norman, consider the question of whether aca­
demics should primarily see themselves as working at or for their employing universi­
ties. To finish, Kate Riseley, a recent graduate from Canterbury Christ Church 
University, reflects on the chapter overall. This is followed by three extracts from suc­
cessful HEA fellowship applicants who discuss some of the aspects of academic prac­
tice which feature in this chapter.
Opinion: On academic identity
Bifurcation and ventriloquism in a performative age
Bruce Macfarlane
Primarily, my allegiance is to strive to tell the truth, without fear or favour. To me, and 
others (e.g. Watson 2007), this is what makes academic identity really special. 
Without this collective commitment to protect and promote academic freedom, we 
are little more than paid employees. I believe that this duty cuts across teaching and 
research functions which are too often bifurcated in models of academic life.
Most conceptions of academic identity also tend to exclude the service or 
academic citizenship role of the academic (Kennedy 1997; Macfarlane 2007). In 
reality, academics spend far more of their time doing things which are not directly 
related to either teaching or research. They spend time out of class giving feedback 
to a student, attend department meetings, review papers for journals, serve the 
community (such as being a school governor), or mentor a new colleague during a 
coffee break. This is the day-to-day stuff of academic life. It’s not that glamorous 
but nonetheless essential to both the health of academe and wider society. This is 
service or academic citizenship as I prefer to call it (Macfarlane 2007). It is not just 
‘administration’ or ‘management’.
Sadly, service functions are increasingly marginalised by a performative culture 
obsessed by superficial measures of teaching and research quality – student evalu­
ation scores, research grant income, citations, and so on. We should not forget that 
the things that are not audited, notably service activities, are often much more 
important than the ones which are. This performative culture also leads to a kind of 
ventriloquism: saying one thing but believing in another. We have all learnt to do this 
by espousing commitment to the language of performativity according to the audi­
ence or context (e.g. ‘its important to evidence our key performance indicators’) 
while quietly thinking the opposite (e.g. ‘this is nonsense’). However, it is also rap­
idly corrupting academic life.
I can give an example of ventriloquism from my own practice. I was until recently 
an Associate Dean for Learning and Teaching and a professor of higher education at 
a research-intensive university. I took a new assistant professor (or junior lecturer) 
for a cup of coffee with my departmental mentor ‘hat’ on. Yes, it’s the service role 
again! During our conversation, my new colleague asked me how they might balance 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

74
JOHN LEA
teaching and research within their workload. My response was that far from balanc­
ing it, they should try to imbalance these roles as much as possible. My advice was:
Teach as little as you can and build up your research profile. In terms of teach­
ing, try to get as many doctoral students as you can. The workload formula is 
heavily stacked in favour of supervision. Otherwise, design your own special­
isms and electives which suit your interests and expertise best. But, most 
importantly, get research grants and publish papers in ISI journals. This is what 
really counts if you want a successful academic career. Being able to teach is 
treated as a benchmark activity. It’s not career-shaping like research.
For this conversation, as I told my colleague at the time, I was wearing my mentor’s 
‘hat’ and not that of the Associate Dean for Learning and Teaching – a clear example 
of ventriloquism!
In advising my new colleague I also knew that they were ambitious to develop a 
successful career as an international research academic rather than spend their life 
within a single institution. In understanding academic work and careers, I believe 
that there is an important distinction which operates here between ‘locals’ and ‘cos­
mopolitans’, originally made by the American sociologist Robert Merton in relation 
to organisational life (Merton 1947). ‘Locals’ are loyal to the organisation, knowl­
edgeable about how it works, mainly relate to internal colleagues but have a limited 
skill set. Cosmopolitans, by contrast, have a wider set of professional skills but are 
less loyal and their identity is externally rather than internally focused.
This distinction illuminates the division between teaching-focused and organisa­
tionally loyal ‘local academics’, and research-oriented, mobile and more outwardly 
connected ‘cosmopolitan academics’, whose first point of commitment is their disci­
pline rather than the institution they work in. This means that the university’s partic­
ular mission is of less relevance to the cosmopolitan academic. In the academic 
labour market, what counts is your research profile. Other things, especially teach­
ing experience, tend to be of secondary importance. On the other hand, someone 
who is content to stay in a single institution for their whole career may be able to 
forge a successful path by being a local, especially if it has policies that genuinely 
value good teaching rather than simply paying lip service to this commitment. Man­
agement roles also provide a route for academics as locals to thrive.
But what are we to make of those attempts to raise the profile of teaching and 
learning in higher education? The Dearing Report resulted in the widespread develop­
ment of teaching programmes for new lecturers in UK universities and other initiatives 
linked to promoting ‘teaching excellence’. Boyer’s model has spawned the scholar­
ship of teaching and learning (SOTL) movement which advocates more reward and 
recognition for those committed to pedagogic investigation and critical reflection on 
practice.
However, while the aims of the Dearing Report and the SOTL movement were 
well intentioned, I believe that their effects have been largely negative, even to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
75
the point of being counter-productive. This is because staking out teaching excel­
lence and SOTL as rallying points only plays into the hands of those in powerful 
positions who define elite territory in academic life. This has led, for example, to 
‘pedagogic research’ being cordoned off from ‘subject research’, lowering its 
status in the process. Institutional and national ‘teaching excellence’ schemes 
have been perceived as largely tokenistic and have had the effect of entrenching 
the divide between ‘research’ and ‘teaching’. Meanwhile international survey 
data indicates that since the early 1990s, academics have less interest in teach­
ing while an increasing proportion see research as their main focus (Locke 
2008).
Where does this all leave us? Yes, there are now lots of ways in which modern 
academics are being ‘called to account’. But academic identity has always been 
based on something more personally meaningful than fulfilling performative mea­
sures. At heart, this is about a generosity of time and spirit toward students rather 
than the pursuit of self-interest. While the lopsided nature of modern reward sys­
tems has begun to dangerously erode such commitments, they still remain the 
bedrock of the academic profession and need to be constantly reaffirmed if they are 
not to fall victim to the audit culture.
Debate: On academic allegiance
The importance of working for a university
Chris Stevens
It has become a cliché that, when academics are asked what they do for a living, 
they answer that they work at a university, not for a university. It has long been a 
fact of professional life that professions have dual responsibility both to their 
employer and to their profession, whether it be law, medicine or architecture. Aca­
demics, too, have a duty to the profession that underpins their academic area. It 
might, however, be suggested that academics see themselves, not as semi-autonomous 
professionals, but as independent scholars, whose venue of work is as irrelevant to 
their occupational status, as were the colonnades to the Lyceum of Athens, where 
Aristotle wended his peripatetic way. In this view, academics are given what amounts 
to a stipend by the state. It just happens to be remitted via a university, which 
extracts the task of teaching as a quid pro quo.
This caricature does not do academics justice. For every academic who takes 
the cynical view of students, there are very, very many more whose academic raison 
d’être is the creation of the best possible student experience. Working closely with 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

76
JOHN LEA
academic colleagues and recognising that the university, at which they work, plays 
a fundamental role in providing resources, is essential to this. There is, neverthe­
less, more to the caricature than is comfortable. Academics do not, it might be 
suggested, feel at ease with the activities of the Higher Education Academy and 
institutional-based CPD, seeing themselves as academic subject specialists, rather 
than as practitioners of pedagogy. They expect to have their research ambitions 
supported, even if this means diluting teaching resources. They feel uncomfortable 
with peer observation, and a notion of learning goals. Some feel strongly that the 
whole idea of embedding employability skills in academic study is an assault on the 
liberal purpose of education. Indeed, the notion that the state, as the funder of 
higher education, can require universities and academics to meet social goals is 
often an anathema. We are still stuck in the Oxbridge model of independent intellec­
tuals, delivering pure knowledge to those whose job aspirations come primarily from 
their social location rather than their higher education.
This model of universities, which was fully in place by the time that the Univer­
sities of Durham and London appeared in the early nineteenth century, has been 
remarkably resilient. The ‘new universities’, established in the large cities and towns 
in the late nineteenth century to support the industrial skills base of Victorian Britain, 
have since become ‘old universities’, indistinguishable in their academic ambitions 
from Oxford and Cambridge. The ‘new universities’ established in the 1960s, often 
predicated on different academic strategies, have joined them. Even the former poly­
technics, which spent the first quarter century of their existence as vocational bod­
ies under local authority control, now have more in common with the traditional 
model than their former selves. The abolition of the binary divide in 1992 privileged 
the three-year degree, in which skills and vocational development are squeezed into 
traditional academic structures. The development of foundation degrees after 2001 
was intended to up-skill and re-skill the workforce. In reality, these too have been 
absorbed into the traditional system, extending, rather than revolutionising, voca­
tional opportunities. Higher education is intrinsically linked to the English obsession 
with its own class structure. If nineteenth-century Oxford and Cambridge functioned 
as the intellectual finishing school of the gentry and high professions, the academic 
degree is still seen by many as the entry gate to the English middle classes. The 
academic that works at rather than for a university is perhaps still consciously or 
subconsciously the guardian of that entry gate.
Discussions about the role of the university often lead to the statement that it 
is the purpose of the university to produce and to share knowledge for knowledge 
sake. This, however, is to reify universities, suggesting that they have a preordained 
purpose, when, in reality, universities are social constructs, which need constantly 
to negotiate their goals with the society of which they are part. Nor should we, per­
haps, speak of the role of universities, as if they were singular, with one definition. 
The university or universities sector might reasonably be seen as containing a num­
ber of different types of university, with different goals and different functions. What 
happened when the binary divide was abolished in 1992, and, at first, polytechnics, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
77
and, then, most institutions of higher education were given a university title, is itself 
contestable. On the one hand, it might be seen as an admission that a vast diversity 
of higher education institutions could rightly be called universities, whatever their 
mission. On the other hand, it has been taken to suggest that all institutions of 
higher education should demonstrate the ‘protected characteristics’, both real and 
imagined, of pre-1992 universities, rather than to populate the sector with different 
models of higher education. This latter view, which is probably the one that domi­
nates, has led to debates as to what areas of study ‘belong’ in universities, whether 
some institutions fully deserve the title of university, and, consequently, whether 
there needs to be stronger regulation, and, if so, whether it should apply to the 
whole sector, and in doing so, could potentially damage world class institutions.
Underpinning such arguments are debates around university governance. Prior 
to 1992, university governance was based on trust, while the polytechnics were 
subject to the regulation of the Council for National Academic Awards, Her Majesty’s 
Inspectors of Education and the Local Authority. The latter model went with the 
binary divide. Since 1992, UK governments have avoided regulation, but abandoned 
trust; while in 2010, the Coalition Government flirted with, but did not adopt, marke­
tisation as a means of regulating higher education. The result, it might be sug­
gested, has pleased no one, perhaps, least of all, those who pride themselves in 
working at rather than for universities.
Please note that this is a polemical piece, written for the purpose of argument, 
and represents neither the views of the author, nor of the university, for which and 
at which he works.
Debate: On academic allegiance
The importance of working at a university
Ralph Norman
Of course we work in higher education institutions, but do we work for them? What is 
the end goal of our activity: what are we aiming for?
It was once possible to answer such questions, as John Henry Newman did, 
with the argument that knowledge was its own end (Newman [1852] 1996). 
A decade or so later, Walter Pater made a somewhat analogous argument for poetry, 
encapsulated in the phrase, ‘Art for art’s sake’. Newman and Pater both justified 
what they did in non-utilitarian terms. This is no longer realistic. The idea that 
academic research is done for its own sake makes little sense in the socio-political 
environment known as the knowledge economy. Knowledge is now an economic 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

78
JOHN LEA
good, used within the new socio-economic order. Knowledge is now an outcome, 
quantified and measured by managers, an objective by which performance is 
subjected to audit and measurement. According to the dogmas of managerialism, 
anyone working in this system who attempts to serve the interests of their disci­
pline is now ‘a problem’. They are described as ‘just polishing stones or collecting 
footnotes’, since they fail to relate their work ‘to the needs of the whole’ (Drucker 
1989: 120). Management systems discourage any academic work which is done 
for its own sake, for in the knowledge economy, academic activity is directed 
towards the objectives of the strategic plan of the higher education institution.
Britain is now less a free market economy than a corporate market economy, run 
to serve the interests of corporate institutions. Warnings of the dangers of the pres­
ence of the business agenda in education have long been understood. The turn of the 
millennium saw a flurry of books on the corporate takeover of the planet. In The Silent 
Takeover, Noreena Hertz described how global corporations had become more power­
ful than national democracies and economies (Hertz 2001). She revealed ways in 
which ‘internationalisation’ actually represented an attempt to trump the demands of 
democratic politics. In Captive State, George Monbiot described the corporate take­
over of the UK, and dedicated a chapter to the impact this had on universities. Mon­
biot argued that ‘academic freedom’ had been ‘compromised by … funding 
arrangements’ (2000: 284). In No Logo, Naomi Klein examined the situation in the 
USA, and warned of the ‘branding of learning’ in universities. She identified academic 
preoccupations with identity politics and postmodernism as a correlative of the corpo­
rate takeover of universities (Klein 2001). On the one hand, the ‘politics of personal 
representation’ had been ‘co-opted by branding’. On the other, the ‘postmodernist 
realization that truth itself is a construct … made it intellectually untenable for many 
academics to even participate in a political argument that would have “privileged” any 
one model of learning (public) over another (corporate)’ (Klein 2001: 104–5). This 
was a good old Marxian criticism of identity politics and postmodernism, the sort of 
argument familiar from Terry Eagleton. Post-structuralism has its own economic ground 
in consumer capitalism: Foucault, Derrida and Lyotard had much to say about the 
collapse of meta-narratives, yet economics remained as the last grand narrative in 
their work, the secret servant of the corporations (Eagleton 1996; see also Mansfield 
2003: 129–46).
People no longer blink at the use of the phrase ‘knowledge economy’. Such 
language is derived from the teaching of the management guru, Peter Drucker. In 
1969, he began to preach that, ‘What matters is that knowledge has become the 
central “factor of production” in an advanced, developed economy’ (Drucker 1969: 
248). Drucker asserted: ‘Education fuels the economy’ (Drucker 1990: 236). He 
redefined knowledge to suit the needs of the managerial ideology.
Academia defines knowledge as what gets printed. But surely this is not 
knowledge, it is raw data. Knowledge is information that changes something or 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
79
somebody – either by becoming grounds for action, or by making an individual 
(or an institution) capable of different or more effective action.
(Drucker 1990: 242)
The demands placed on academics for ‘knowledge exchange’ and ‘research impact’ 
are a direct result of Drucker’s dogma. So, too, ‘achievable, measurable learning 
outcomes’ represent the application of Drucker’s ‘management by objectives’ to the 
student experience. Druckerism affects just about everything the contemporary 
academic does. The unquestioning assumption of Druckerism by universities is 
astonishing. I suppose that universities have become a mechanism for the normali­
sation of managerialism in the minds of students and staff alike – a kind of surrep­
titious programming or indoctrination, through which, whatever the subject studied, 
the individual imbibes the basic expectation of being managed by objectives so that 
they can serve the corporations.
As the knowledge economy demands that academic work changes things, has 
‘impact’, it is crucial that knowledge is transmitted – rather like an economic good – 
from one pair of hands to another. Information technology and learning technology 
are vital to this process of transmission (indeed, Drucker had much to say about the 
‘new learning technology’) (Drucker 1990: 240f). But this same transmission also 
dissolves the boundaries of disciplines. In The Age of Discontinuity, Drucker 
expressed this view with a swipe at Newman:
[There] is a symptom of the shift in the meaning of knowledge from an end in 
itself [Newman] to a resource, that is, a means to some result. What used to be 
knowledge is becoming information. What used to be technology is becoming 
knowledge. Knowledge as the central energy of a modern society exists alto­
gether in application and when it is put to work. Work, however, cannot be 
defined in terms of disciplines. End results are interdisciplinary.
(Drucker 1969: 238)
Druckerism thus erodes disciplinarity. You may think of yourself as, for example, a 
creative film maker or playwright, but your managers will be measuring your perfor­
mance with reference to your ability to move outside the sphere of your discipline. 
There can no longer be art for art’s sake.
Should we put up with this? Can one attempt an ethical critique of the system? 
Drucker made some very questionable remarks on the subject of business ethics and 
prostitution. In 1994, he declared: ‘Such things as the employment of call girls to enter­
tain customers are not matters of ethics but matters of aesthetics’ (Drucker [1974] 
2011: 295). Is the world according to Peter Drucker the kind of place we want to live?
Critique was once ‘a struggle against the absolute state’ (Newman [1852] 
1996: 76–91). Perhaps, then, critical academic work could now become an argu­
ment against the absolutism of managerialism, a struggle against working for the 
institution, and a recovery of art for art’s sake.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

80
JOHN LEA
Dear Lecturer
Be true to yourself
Kate Riseley
It seems to me that there is little difference between staff and students when 
it comes to mixed allegiances. It’s just that the student list might look a little ­
different:
1	
Primarily my allegiance is to my subject.
2	
Primarily my allegiance is to my proposed employment.
3	
Primarily my allegiance is to my family’s expectations.
4	
Primarily my allegiance is to securing funding.
5	
Primarily my allegiance is to attainment.
The key thing I learnt during my academic journey (which began with an access 
course and culminated by graduating with a degree in English Literature in June 
2014) was the opportunity it provided me to demonstrate true allegiance to myself. 
Of course, by being at university, issues of employability, future funding and attain­
ment were naturally being addressed. But, because I wouldn’t get this chance 
again, every hour had to count; I simply could not get to the end and regret any 
decisions.
I took a module which examined both art and literature. I chose it for pure 
enjoyment, I knew nothing about art and thought it would be a nice alternative to 
words for a while. The first assignment brief suggested that it did not have to fol­
low the normal guidelines. There was an approximate word count and grading cri­
teria but how it was presented was up to me. Students were encouraged to maybe 
produce some artwork or include images within their essay, they could look at art, 
literature or both. Most students went into melt down, ‘But how many words should 
I write?’, ‘If I put in an image will I be marked down?’, ‘Will I lose marks if I just 
write an essay?’, ‘If I don’t get a first, I don’t get the Master’s bursary.’
I wrote my essay comparing Picasso’s ‘The Old Guitarist’ and Wallace Stevens’s 
poem ‘The Man with the Blue Guitar’ in traditional format. But then I printed it on blue 
fading sugar paper, just because I could, because it reflected the weight of the paint­
ing and poem in a way that shiny white copier paper couldn’t. I did not care what 
mark the assignment gave me, I had thoroughly enjoyed its creation and my engage­
ment with the module. That assignment also happened to return me my highest 
mark that term.
Primarily my allegiance is to myself and I urge academics to do the same. 
It’s a risk, but one worth taking, because as the momentum of individuals becom­
ing their true selves gathers, institutions will naturally and organically find their 
identity, and that identity will be real and authentic; whether it be ­primarily as a 
research institution or a teaching one, or one which comfortably embraces both.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC TIME
81
Extracts from successful HEA fellowship applications
Mr Pink (SFHEA)
As an External Examiner, international co-ordinator and key member of staff with our 
faculty, my leadership roles have given me valuable insight into a wide range of L&T 
methodology. This has led me to continuously develop my areas of activity, core 
knowledge and professional values and bring valuable knowledge to my own courses. 
Our Faculty (Faculty of Art, Design and Architecture) relies on bringing in a large 
number of HPL staff alongside those on small fractions. This enables our courses to 
bring in a vital mix of preeminent practitioners to teach who are cognizant of up-to-
date practice and developments within the creative industries. However, this can 
also result in having colleagues who are less knowledgeable about best pedagogic 
practice. Therefore, I have taken the mentoring of these staff seriously. I have initi­
ated a thorough induction process that methodically goes through L&T and feedback 
essentials in a clear and succinct manner [K2, K3]. I have succeeded in creating 
systems both paper-based (thorough guidance notes in user-friendly terminology 
and diagrams of our systems) and one-to-one mentoring schemes [A2]. I believe that 
this thorough guidance has lent a significant contribution to our exemplary NSS 
scores [A3]. New and junior members of the team, teaching at any level, are person­
ally and fastidiously guided through systems that can, at first, seem extremely 
complex or daunting [K3]. Under my management and coordination, these supervi­
sion processes have been rolled out to other members of staff throughout the fac­
ulty and have also been disseminated at university conferences and lectures at 
home and overseas [V4].
Ms White (PFHEA)
I consider leadership as something to be explored as a social process; as such, it is 
how I work with others to make sense of initiatives or issues that leads to action and, 
ultimately, success. This is not because my role does not allow for direct influence: 
it is more a result of appreciating the contributions of others, which can help to refo­
cus a discussion and add alternative perspectives. For me, therefore, the most effec­
tive style of leadership is when it includes using my ability to work with others in a 
facilitative capacity. For this type of leadership to succeed, I need to encourage 
ownership of the problems or issues by those with whom I am working (Gastil 1997). 
If these become a responsibility of all those with a stake in the situation, with oppor­
tunities for them to share and participate, there is a higher likelihood that they will 
‘buy in’ to the solution as they have been able to participate and add their insights. 
In turn, thinking through an issue and appropriate responses gives an incentive to 
act and to see an action through to its conclusion.
If a university is to be a true learning community, then opportunities to engage 
in reflection have to be available to all. These opportunities enrich the working envi­
ronment tremendously and have a knock-on effect for the institution as a whole. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

82
JOHN LEA
As Jarvis suggests: ‘Reflective practice is more than thoughtful practice. It is that 
form of practice which seeks to problematise many situations of professional per­
formance so that they can become potential learning situations and so that the 
practitioners can continue to learn, grow and develop in and through practice’ (Jarvis 
1992: 180).
Dr Blue (PFHEA)
As part of the management team within a matrix structure, I have to ensure that 
I influence and implement through engagement and rational argument rather than 
positional power. To this end, I immediately began a series of monthly ‘Learning, 
Teaching & Assessment’ (LTA) workshops for the faculty. I also brought in an exter­
nal speaker from the QAA to the faculty annual LTA conference, to give the event a 
higher profile. I work on the basis of evidence-based and relevant information to 
persuade staff of the need for change (for example, including links to research). This 
is to ensure that staff understand the evidence and rationale behind change, feel 
they are being treated as academics, and minimize the perception that senior staff 
are remote from such research, they are then more likely to engage, increasing the 
chance of enhancing student learning (e.g. Bryman 2007).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

4
The nature of academic space
Mike Neary and Helen Beetham
Why do we keep spending money on learning centres; why not just buy some 
more books for the library?
I’m not sure there’s any point to seminars and workshops; students don’t 
come prepared, so why not just lecture at them?
I’m not knocking VLEs but they only seem to work when they look and feel 
like Facebook, so what’s the point?
This chapter focuses on inhabiting learning spaces. The first half, written by Mike 
Neary, focuses on physical spaces, and their potential to be experienced in liberating 
ways. The second half, written by Helen Beetham, focuses on virtual spaces, and par­
ticularly what it takes to create successful hybrid spaces – between the physical and 
the virtual.
Inhabiting learning spaces1
Mike Neary
Introduction
Over the last two decades, many universities have invested in eye-catching architec­
ture aimed at attracting investors and business, as a way of transforming their insti­
tutions into marketing-driven ‘brands’. In the process students now became 
‘customers’, and providing a positive satisfying customer experience is a paramount 
preoccupation for university managers and a key instruction for architectural briefs 
(Glancey 2010).
In this chapter I want to challenge this phenomenon by looking at some univer­
sity architecture designs based on very different ideals for higher education: not the 
‘business ontology’ (Fisher 2009) of university managers, but alternative, more uto­
pian ideals; and, in this way, to provide inspiration and motivation for current and 
future designs for teaching and learning spaces in higher education. Of particular 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

84
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
interest is the relationship between material spaces and technology which, in the 
most extraordinary cases, have sought to meld not just the real with the virtual, but 
the physical, the emotional and the intellectual, to create dynamic patterns of stu­
dent mobility, generating a more intimate relationship with our pedagogic environ­
ment, and which can counter the alienating effects of any consumerist-style models 
of building design.
I am basing my more utopian university of the future on ready-made visions and 
already-built university buildings, focusing, first, on campus universities in the 1960s, 
as well as designs for futuristic universities that were never built in the same period. 
I will supplement this with research I did at the University of Lincoln into academic 
involvement with the design of learning spaces, 2008–2010, as well as an account of a 
teaching space, The Reinvention Classroom, that I developed with colleagues and stu­
dents at the University of Warwick in 2006. This discussion will then enable me to 
present six principles for the design of teaching and learning spaces.
But, first, I want to begin in another space, the John Henry Brookes Building, a 
new addition to Oxford Brookes University estate, opened in 2014, as an exemplar of 
contemporary university design.
The John Henry Brookes Building, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford
The John Henry Brookes Building stands in the centre of the Gipsy Hill Campus at the 
Oxford Brookes University. John Henry Brookes (1891–1975), after whom the building 
and the University are named, was a key figure in the development of higher and fur­
ther education in Oxford. He was a compassionate and effective leader, as well as a 
talented artist and silversmith and a committed teacher of art (Addison 1979). Along 
with these abilities, Brookes was a conscientious objector, refusing to fight in World 
War I. Interestingly, the founding Director of Oxford Polytechnic, as Oxford Brookes 
was formerly known, Brian Lloyd (1920–2010), had also been a conscientious objector 
in World War II. The principled position taken by these two men demonstrates a pro­
found anti-war sensibility by inspirational figures associated with this institution.
The building, constructed in the style of Hi-Tech Modernism, presents itself as ‘a 
gateway’ to the University. In its citation for selection as a candidate for the Stirling 
Prize, the University describes the building, somewhat blandly, as ‘designed to meet 
the University’s vision for a holistic approach to enhancing the student experience. 
Oxford Brookes’ campus redevelopment provides an adaptable and flexible environ­
ment for a dynamic range of teaching and learning spaces’ https://www.brookes.ac.uk/
about-brookes/news/john-henry-brookes-building-judged-to-be-one-of-top-15-new-
buildings-in-the-country/ (accessed 17 July 2014).
Despite its award-winning credentials, not all architectural critics are convinced, 
describing the façade as ‘there’s something of the glossy business/technology park 
about it’, so that it resembles more of an ‘office block’ than a university. The effect is 
‘shiny and just a bit sterile at first glance’ (Pearman 2014). Although once inside the 
building the same critic gushes with praise, describing the inside as ‘remarkable’, the 
social spaces a ‘teeming mosh pit of what’s called the Forum’. The Atrium has ‘interest­
ing things ramming into it from all sides’ (Pearman 2014), including a lecture theatre 
‘hanging in the space’, a walkway that works like ‘a supercharged minstrel’s gallery’ 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
85
and a physically accessible ‘library without walls’. Interestingly, the teaching rooms, 
situated away from the central area, are described as ‘more conventional’. But overall, 
this is an ‘intelligent building’ and more than an icon (Pearman 2014).
While the student experience is presented as being one of the main rationales for 
the building, students were not involved in the design:
Certainly we had interaction with end users who were part of the Steering Group 
who were part of the process of understanding how the building was going to be 
made to work. I think, in truth, in terms of interaction with students, it has been 
fairly limited … the reasons for that probably are the scale and programme of 
projects like this don’t necessarily fit in with programmes in term of education 
programmes … at times … there could have been more of it [interaction], I sus­
pect, in terms of that process, but in terms of end-users, there was good interaction 
with the client end side of things.
(Richard Jobson, architect for the building. http://www.brookes.ac.uk/
space-to-think/campuses/headington-campus/john-henry-brookes-
building/build-talk-videos/build-talk-1/, accessed 26 December 2014)
Despite its claims, there is nothing exceptional about the John Henry Moore Building; 
it is an example of what Hatherley might describe as a pseudo-modernist building:
That is, the Modernism of the icon, of the city academies [though he could just as 
well have said universities] where each fundamentally alike yet bespoke design 
embodying a vacuous aspirationalism [evident in its own Stirling statement]; a 
Modernism without the politics, without the utopianism, or without any concep­
tion of the polis; a Modernism that conceals rather than reveals its functions; Mod­
ernism as a shell.
(Hatherley 2011: xxiv)
Also, in the words or another architectural critic, who in a further politicisation of 
Hi-Tech architecture describes this kind of building as an ‘anaesthetized formal 
language … a perfect complement to the hollowed out shell of social democracy’ 
(Murphy 2012: 92).
In spite of the vacuousness of its self-description, these are not vacuous spaces, 
but have their origins in Fordist factories designed and built in the USA in the early part 
of the twentieth century: huge sheds ‘more glass that structure … vast impersonality … 
the last word in architectural rationalism’ (Wilkinson 2014: 207). It was in these mas­
sive structures where the new mass production automated labour processes were 
invented, based on the principles of clockwork scientific management and the logic of 
time and motion: the space-time of capitalist production (Wilkinson 2014). There is no 
pleasure in these factories, only an orgy of sado-masochism, where people might be 
made to love their pain through the injection of wages and consumerist fantasies 
(Wilkinson 2014). The industrial aesthetic that frames these structures was very influ­
ential for European Modernist architects, futuring buildings to cast a new process of 
production out of ‘the white heat of technology’ (Wilkinson 2014: 219). But, as we now 
know, this vision of the future was to appear always tantalisingly out of reach.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

86
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
This short account of the emergence of a new university building could probably 
apply to many other similar buildings all around the UK. It speaks to a surface-like 
seduction, which underneath quickly reveals a more alienating core, particularly as a 
space for more intimate and democratic forms of pedagogy. So how might we do 
things differently, as designs for teaching and learning spaces, in a way that attempts 
to fully engage the challenges of the future? In what follows, I want to explore some 
buildings that self-consciously have attempted to create a futuristic university.
•	
In what ways have you been actively involved in extending teaching and 
learning space beyond timetabled classroom space? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in any campus design decisions and 
new builds and/or sought to ensure that students and academics are 
actively involved in any campus estates decisions?
Activity 4.1
University of the Streets (East London, 1962)
The ‘University of the Streets’, or the Fun Palace, as it was officially known, was to 
provide higher education as a form of play and entertainment for the local population 
of East London. The idea was developed in the early 1960s by Joan Littlewood (1914–
2002), actor and communist activist, who combined her interest in education with 
avant-garde theatre based on the principles and practices of Bertolt Brecht and 
Russian Constructivism (Mathews 2005 and 2007); and Cedric Price (1934–2003), an 
anti-establishment architect and committed left-wing socialist (Mathews 2007: 15) 
with ‘a rational, collaborative approach to design’ (Mathews 2007: 21). The Fun Palace 
was not a building in any conventional sense, but a scaffolded-construction made up 
of prefabricated temporary structures, manipulated by a number of tower cranes: 
more like a shipyard than a building, within which indeterminacy was the design prin­
ciple, with an instruction from Price that the building should not stand for more than 
ten years (Mathews 2007).
The design was based on thinking derived from the social sciences, in particular, 
Game Theory and Cybernetics, in a way that allowed for variation and real structural 
change. The structure was to respond to the recorded activity of its users, which would 
be converted into malleable data and algorithms to further develop the space, built 
initially as a series of zones: for research, film-making and scientific experimentation. 
The Fun Factory was to be an exemplar of anti-form and anti-function, where the 
structure found a way of articulating a vision of its users through a type of ‘anticipa­
tory design’ (Mathews 2007: 41), or ‘calculated uncertainty’ (Mathews 2007: 41), that 
took into account cultural and social issues as well as aesthetics. The building was to 
be literally and figuratively alive (Colombino 2012).
This was not really a building at all, but a sort of ‘interactive machine, a virtual 
architecture merging art and technology’ (Mathews 2007: 13). The main issue for Price 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
87
and Littlewood was not the aesthetics of the structure, but how to create a framework 
or armature on which a model for the improvement of the social world could be built, 
and in which ‘an extraordinary interactive and cybernetic model of architecture would 
be arrayed’ (Mathews 2005: 90).
This development of the building was preoccupied with the issue of work, and 
more particularly, the future of work in a society in which it was anticipated that 
work would be increasingly automated and workless. Work was the central issue for 
Littlewood and Price, i.e. the design for their futuristic universities was based on a 
vision of non-alienated human activity (Mathews 2005). The Fun Factory was designed 
in a way that would reclaim subjectivity through increased leisure.
The Fun Palace was never built, though a scaled-down version did appear as the 
Interchange Project in 1976 in North London. This structure was based on a steel 
frame that could be manipulated through the arrangement of ready made plug-in 
Porta-kabins, containers and other industrial artefacts, all imbued with ‘the sense of 
potential for expansion and contraction’ (Murphy 2012: 98). The structure was used 
for community activities and education until it was demolished in 2003 on Price’s 
insistence (http://www.audacity.org/SM-26-11-07-02.htm).
Thinkbelt (The Potteries, 1965)
During the same period, the mid-1960s, Price worked on another building project based 
on a vision for the future of higher education. Left to himself, this solution was alto­
gether more instrumental, though it had at its core ideas to reconsider the nature of 
work in the context of higher education. His plan was to create an environment that 
regenerated UK industry and technology to support the new ‘white heat of technology’ 
revolution (Hardingham and Rattenbury 2007). Thinkbelt, as the project was known, 
was not a university but ‘a plan for advanced educational industry’ (Hardingham and 
Rattenbury 2007: 13), against the notion of campus-style universities, of which the 
nearby Keele University was a prime example. Price considered Keele too detached 
from the local population and with almost no contact with local industry. Thinkbelt 
was meant to convert a post-industrial wasteland in the Potteries region into an educa­
tion-technology park, in which not only would strong connections be made between 
industry and learning, but higher education would become its own industry. All of this 
would revitalise existing industries, e.g. ceramics, acting as a catalyst for further 
improvement in the local socio-economic environment and encourage enterprise so 
that, over time, all of the Potteries would be revolutionised.
This was a large site, more than one hundred square miles, across North Stafford­
shire, with space for 20,000 students. The site would be designed around the concept 
that ‘cities can be made by learning’ (Architectural Design 1966: 484, in Hardingham 
and Rattenbury 2007: 37), including housing and amenities that could be used by the 
local population, with space for up to 40,000 residents. The accommodation would be 
based on modular prefabricated housing of different types: crate – pressed steel con­
tainers in a 13-storey concrete frame; sprawl – timber-framed units built on a tray-like 
structure; capsule – fibreglass living spaces in a steel frame built primarily for single 
occupation, and battery – living units in a sealed environment with their own services 
enabling progressive expansion (Hardingham and Rattenbury 2007: 46).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

88
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
Roughly triangular in shape, each vertex of the Thinkbelt site would contain a 
Transfer Area, promoting rapid mobility, with accommodation for staff and students 
as well as laboratories and workshops. These transportation links could be used by 
Faculties as sites of mobile learning, in train carriages and specially situated rail sidings 
as well as buses. The teaching accommodation would include self-teaching carrels, 
areas for fold-out decking and inflatable units for up to 30 students. Thinkbelt was to 
be built around a highly developed transport and electronic communications network, 
connected to national and international transportation links, including air travel, with 
the intention of creating a ‘literate, skilled and highly mobile society’ (Hardingham and 
Rattenbury 2007: 18). Anticipating Wikipedia and the Web, the pedagogy and teaching 
styles of this new institution would encourage students to make use of electronic 
communication equipment so as to create connected sites in an ‘information store, 
which lets student develop their own patterns of study’ (Hardingham and Rattenbury 
2007: 18).
At the heart of the Thinkbelt design lay a reconceptualisation of time and the 
future of work. Students would be paid a salary, ‘If people are doing a job society 
wants them to do, they must be paid for it’ (Price, in Architectural Design 1966: 484, in 
Hardingham and Rattenbury 2007: 37). Professors at Thinkbelt would work part-time 
in industry and spend the rest of their working time at the Thinkbelt; but for Price, time 
was not just to be redistributed, rather it was to be distorted: Thinkbelt was designed 
to ‘distort time … to devise not a new aesthetic, but to give an aesthetic quality to the 
ideas of indeterminacy’ (Hardingham and Rattenbury 2007: 99); and through the exten­
sion of education time, what Price referred to as ‘lifelong learning’ before the term 
was commonly used: ‘This is what education should do … to distort time in order to 
allow you more control and to bring benefit to yourself and by extension other people’ 
(Hardingham and Rattenbury 2007: 99).
Taking these two university designs together, the Fun Palace and Thinkbelt, the 
key design principle was ‘total invention and imagination’ (Hardingham and Rattenbury 
2007: 85), with designs that show ‘absolutely no compromise’ so as to ‘create conditions 
hitherto thought impossible’ as part of ‘a continuous manifesto for education’ (Hard­
ingham and Rattenbury 2007: 11). Price’s work consciously confronts university build­
ings designed in the way of Fordist factories and assembly line production, ‘challenging 
the hegemony of this idea, with all its pseudo-functionalist and deterministic baggage’ 
(Hardingham and Rattenbury 2007: 71), producing ‘a very serious critique of what was 
becoming an imprisoned way of thinking about university building’ (Hardingham and 
Rattenbury 2007: 71), as a sort of lightness made real by the removal of architecture 
(Hardingham and Rattenbury 2007: 107).
The campus university
There are other visionary architectural buildings on which we can draw inspiration, 
built as part of the expansion of higher education in the UK and around the world in the 
1960s, characterised by their campus-style construction and location. The building of 
university campus(es) formed part of a ‘utopianist mood’ (Muthesius 2000: 1), or, at the 
very least, a commitment to ‘social architecture’ (Muthesius 2000: 282) that managed to 
convey both an idealistic and practical frame of mind (Muthesius 2000: 290), in what 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
89
amounted to a form of ‘New University Modernism’ (Muthesius 2000: 2). What distin­
guishes these buildings in the UK is that they were:
Not animated only by concerns for cost and utility … but also by less quantifiable 
considerations: beauty, visual drama and, above all, ideas of higher education, 
old and new … [as] art and machine … aimed to embody utopian principles and 
to facilitate their realization … to provide a place that gave memorable expres­
sion to a philosophy. If the talk was of revolution, of a bright start, tradition and 
memory continued to maintain a central presence.
(Ossa-Richardson 2014: 131)
To focus on one campus: the University of York set out to be different. At York, there 
was much thought put into providing a collegiate system so that staff and students 
were in close proximity across different subject areas and disciplines, including the 
Arts and Science:
The intention was to replace the anonymity of the mass lecture, the isolation of 
over-specialisation and the tyranny of end of course examinations with tutorials, 
multidisciplinary connections and novel, multiforms of continual assessment. At 
the heart would be colleges, places not just of learning and teaching but of resi­
dence and living … the core faith in college and community.
(Smith and James 2008: 40)
The colleges would be made up of men and women, with public spaces for students, 
academics, porters and cleaners to ‘stop and talk, eat and drink, or walk on’ (Muthesius 
2000: 135). The intention was to maintain connections with teaching, student life and 
residential living so that students ‘spend much of their time in their own or another 
college’ (Muthesius 2000: 134). The plan was to create a sense of community, applica­
ble ‘to life in a modern democracy’, sharing an ‘intellectual and emotional experience’ 
(Muthesius 2000: 136–7). Andrew Derbyshire, the architect of the York campus, admit­
ted to ‘a socialism as incarnated in his buildings’ (Ossa-Richardson 2014: 146). This was 
not simply utopian but a pragmatic way of achieving social economic and cultural 
regeneration (Muthesius 2000).
At York, the colleges were to be built in close proximity with connecting paths to 
stimulate interaction and effect encounters between staff and students from the Sci­
ence and Arts buildings (Ossa-Richardson 2014: 136). The lake was crossed by ‘delicate 
bridges’ (Ossa-Richardson 2014: 148), settled within the campus so the buildings 
became part of the natural beauty of the landscape. Built away from the city, the cam­
pus provided a secluded space for private contemplation, more like a monastery with 
cloisters. There was a strong sense that buildings should encapsulate the nature of 
higher education even ‘if the meaning was not articulated beyond philosophical 
abstractions as something between the emotional and the rational’ (Ossa-Richardson 
2014: 141) while at the same time infused with a new brutalism that was both futuristic 
and technological.
All of this was striving for an ‘aesthetic language’ for university architecture 
(Ossa-Richardson 2014: 142). Most notably as something that is characterised by a 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

90
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
sense of ‘incompleteness’ (Ossa-Richardson 2014: 143), and of being open-ended, 
making a link between the design principles of Derbyshire, Price and Littlewood. All 
of this was reflected in the ease in which it is possible to get lost on campus, of cre­
ating a sense of never having arrived, encouraging ‘mystery and disorientation’ 
(Ossa-Richardson 2014: 152), i.e. a space for private and shared discovery, the oppor­
tunity to cultivate self-hood, so that one has to find oneself in the complex labyrinth 
(Ossa-Richardson 2014: 152).
Faced with the idealistic principles on which the design of York campus was based, 
the contemporary concept of ‘student experience’ becomes a much reduced way of 
thinking about what these architects and administrators had in mind when they were 
designing this university of the future. Now the issue is not so much about Utopia, but 
rather how to create an ‘image’ to enhance league table rankings (Muthesius 2000).
Learning Landscapes in Higher Education (Lincoln, 2010)
These visionary campus designs were mainly at the level of master planning and had 
less to say about how their visionary pedagogies for teaching and learning spaces 
might be manifest as part of the architectural design. Learning Landscapes in Higher 
Education, a research project carried out in the UK between 2008 and 2010, made a link 
between ‘the idea of the university’ and the precise character of learning and teaching 
spaces. It made the connection by encouraging a critical academic sensibility to inform 
classroom design, and how this could be expressed at the level of the campus: not only 
through the usual measures of efficiency and effectiveness, but, more demonstrably 
and architecturally, through the way in which the idea of the university is expressed 
(Neary et al. 2010).
The methodology for Learning Landscapes was enriched by grounding the 
empirical research in radical sociology and critical pedagogy, worked up as design 
principles and framed by a historically materialist and Marxist theory of the produc­
tion of capitalist space (Lefebvre 1991). For Lefebvre, space is the outcome of the 
productive principle out of which societies are derived. In capitalist society, space is 
capitalised, by which he means space is given over to the logic of class struggle, 
imposed by the rationality of capitalist work – abstract labour: as factories measured 
in time and other clockwork forms of institutional life (Fordism), like prisons and 
schools and housework (Dalla Costa and James 1975). Lefebvre was interested in the 
way the rationality of factory time is resisted as counter-spaces, evident in the way 
capitalist space is colonised as public space, including, and in particular, the life of 
the street.
This Marxist interpretation of space was given a further radical twist in the Learn­
ing Landscapes Report (Neary et al. 2010), by an insistence that classroom design be 
imbued with the concept of gender. An example of gendered design was taken from the 
work of Virginia Woolf who, after having been excluded from a library at an Oxford 
College, argued that women should have a ‘Room of One’s Own’ (Woolf 2008), and be 
supported financially so that they might write and study. She pursues this theme of 
design principles for university architecture in ‘Three Guineas’ (Woolf 2008) where she 
argues that higher education should be free from the principles of competition, acqui­
sition and militarism that currently dominate research and teaching. In a speech to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
91
raise money for a new women’s college, she anticipates the impermanence principle 
established by Price and Littlewood:
Before you begin to rebuild your college, what is the aim of education, what kind 
of society, what kind of human being it should it seek to produce … the old educa­
tion of the old college breeds neither a particular respect for liberty nor a particu­
lar hatred of war – it is clear that you must rebuild your college differently. It is 
young and poor; let it therefore take advantages of those qualities and be founded 
on poverty and youth. Obviously then it must be an experimental college. Let it be 
built on lines of its own. It must be built not of carved stone and stained glass, but 
some cheap, easily combustible material, which does not hoard dust and perpetu­
ate traditions. Do not have chapels. Do not have museums and libraries with 
chained books and first editions under glass cages. Let the pictures and the books 
be new and always changing. Let it be decorated afresh by each generation, by 
their own hands. Cheaply.
(Woolf 2008: 198–9)
As well as an appeal to gendered sensibilities, the Learning Landscapes Report (Neary 
et al. 2010), insisted that classroom design should reflect the design principle of 
anti-discrimination; taking its cue from bell hooks who, writing as a black feminist 
educationalist and activist, argues against all forms of educational discrimination; and 
how this must be negated by turning the classroom into a paradise:
The academy is not a paradise. But learning is a place where paradise can be cre­
ated. The classroom with all its limitations remains a location of possibility. In that 
field of possibility we have the opportunity to labor for freedom, to demand of 
ourselves and our comrades an openness of mind and heart that allows us to face 
reality even as we collectively imagine ways to move beyond boundaries, to trans­
gress. This is education as the practice of freedom.
(hooks 1994: 207)
Neary and Saunders (2011) further developed the theme of academic engagement in 
the design and development of teaching and learning spaces by arguing that class­
room design could be informed by promoting a collective critical reflexivity among 
academics about the meaning and purpose of higher education: ‘the idea of the uni­
versity’, and how this could be represented in architectural design of the pedagogical 
environment. This collective critical reflexivity should be informed by the academic 
literature so that universities might come to know their own institutional story and 
create their own radical history of the university, including its engagements with stu­
dent protests and occupations (Neary 2012; Neary and Amsler 2012); and to use this 
as the basis on which they might confront the undermining logics of ‘academic capi­
talism’ (Slaughter and Rhoades 1994) and the pedagogy of debt (Williams 2006). They 
argued that academic input can be given greater academic credibility by making use 
of approaches to space and spatiality from across a range of academic disciplines, 
including Geography and Physics, as might be expected; but, also, and often with 
spectacular unexpected results, from less obvious disciplines, for example, English 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

92
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
Literature, following the example of Virginia Woolf, incorporating these poetic prob­
lematics into actual classroom design.
But what might all of this look like. Can we provide a concrete example?
Reinvention Classroom (University of Warwick, 2006)
The Reinvention Centre was a collaborative project between the University of Warwick 
and the University of Oxford Brookes from 2005–2010. Central to the project was 
the promotion of research activities for students as the organising principle of the 
undergraduate curriculum, and, in this way, for undergraduate students to become 
part of the academic project of universities. A key issue for the project was the design 
of teaching spaces to facilitate this radical proposal.
The Reinvention Classroom at the University of Warwick incorporates the princi­
ples and practices of radical sociology, critical pedagogy and Marxist theories of 
space, infusing the political aesthetics of fine art into classroom design. The space is 
an experiment as well as a work of art (Lambert 2011: 31, 42). The aim of the classroom 
was to create a space that would encourage collaboration between teachers and stu­
dents for the production of knowledge and meaning. The room was designed by aca­
demics and students working with architects and Estates professionals and university 
administrators; it was opened in September 2006 (Lambert 2011: 35).
The Reinvention Classroom is situated in a remote site at the northern outer lim­
its of the Warwick campus, housed in a detached building, co-habiting with a café 
and shop. It is rectangular in shape, 120 square metres of light and colour, stripped 
of all decoration – bare white walls with a blue floor covered in rubber stretched like 
a skin-membrane across the entire surface, primary coloured cube-shaped seats, 
round yellow oversized bean bags and long monochrome grey and black plastic 
benches. There are no tables and chairs. The space is lit by uplighters in the floor, 
halogen strips of electric light from the ceiling and sunlight streaming on sunny days 
through windows in the slanted roof. Polluted air from the nearby arterial road cir­
culates through ‘windcatcher’ ventilators warmed by an under-floor heating system. 
The acoustics are sound-around. Along the wall at intervals are dance rails, melding 
the energy of the room with performance theatre and the critical sensibility of the 
fine arts.
The main artistic influences for the space are Purism and Neoplasticism: utopian 
art movements that emerged in the 1920s as a protest against the chaotic carnage of 
World War I. Purism, or Cubism without the decoration, is noted for its ‘geometric 
forms and large areas of colour’ as well as its ‘cool and detached paint surfaces’ and 
careful composite chromatic order. The space contains an exemplar of Purist design, 
Le Corbusier’s chaise longue (1928) otherwise described as ‘a relaxing machine’ (Neary 
and Thody 2009). Neoplasticism is an extreme form of Purism, stripped bare to the 
barest elements of design with no recognisable figurative content. The artistic sensibil­
ity is reinforced by Liam Gillick’s, ‘Double Back Platform’ (2001), fixed high up on one 
of the walls, made of plexi-glass and aluminium, ‘the materials of McDonald’s signs, 
and display cases in Prada, of aeroplanes and bullet-proof screens in banks, of really 
sexy nightclub floors and riot shields’ (quoted in Neary and Thody 2009: 38). Not the 
kind of material or objects found in standard university classrooms.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
93
Technology is ubiquitous. With no fixed projector or televisual screens there are 
no dominating lines of sight. The pure white walls act as a surface for images thrown 
from a mobile projector that can be rolled around the space. This lack of dominating 
focal point reflects the Cubist anti-perspectival sensibility (Berger [1965] 1998), with 
no pre-allocated point at which a teacher might stand to give a lecture: there is no Power­
Point in the space, no space for teacher to dominate; each space needs to be negotiated 
and claimed (Rose 1993). All of this consolidating the utopian tendency of the room in 
which the space and, therefore, the future are something to be made and constructed: 
there is no ready-made. There is no fear of the future in this space: no ‘future proofing’ 
(Miller 2001). The future emerges out of the real world in which the present is grounded 
by the significance given to the floor which acts as a reality check for the whole room. 
The floor provides a sense of gravitas and gravity for the entire space. The floor is a 
surface for working on as well as walking on. The heated rubber provides an all-round 
feeling of warmth and comfort: as a site for social interaction, reminding us of the 
significance of the floor as a social space for other cultures, giving the room a racial 
and ethnic intelligence.
The space is not designed for any specific subject, all can be taught here to some 
extent. The room is uncomfortable and uncompromising. ‘The Learning Mould is 
Smashed’ (The Independent, January 2011), perhaps.
Parked outside the classroom is the Reinvention Bus, a jumbo transit van with 
spaces for 18 passengers, and disabled access. The bus is not just for driving students 
to Oxford Brookes and back, but to set up mobile teaching spaces on the M40. Although 
these mobile spaces were never established, without knowing about Price’s ideas, the 
Reinvention Centre was reinventing Thinkbelt’s commitment to mobile learning.
•	
In what ways have you been involved in working with students to negotiate 
teaching and learning spaces in order to help enhance learning? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in any campus initiatives aimed at creat­
ing flexible and open-ended social and learning spaces for staff and students?
Activity 4.2
Six principles
Based on all the above, I suggest six principles to consider when creating university 
teaching and learning spaces of the future:
1	
Ground – the space needs to be grounded theoretically in its own version of histor­
ical materialism; and, practically, to provide the room for social transformation or 
utopia, even. The floor should be fascinating, a surface for working on as well as 
walking on. Giving gravity and gravitas. While, at the same time, facilitate a light­
ness of being by the removal of anything that looks too much like architecture.
2	
Dynamic – the space should promote movement and mobility, demonstrating 
learning and teaching is more than a mental activity, but requires physicality and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

94
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
bodily functions – inter, intra and extra-mural, or Dance Dance Revolution. The 
spaces between classes can be transformed into learning events, as corridors, 
transporters, e.g. lifts and other vehicles, all in an environment that promotes 
walking as a philosophy and the root of pedagogy.
3	
Power – the space should be democratic, with all arrangements to be negotiated 
and agreed. There is no locus of power or PowerPoint in the room, no space for 
teacher or student, and with all of the spaces designed for cooperation and collab­
oration. There should be Fun House mirrors on the walls to promote distortions of 
space and time and with that future possibilities.
4	
Open – the space should be indeterminate and open-ended, as if it has yet to be 
complete. Sexy. Stretched like a membrane right up to its edges, except there are 
no edges, only the smooth curves of complexity. This is what we strive for: to be 
fully rounded. Sometimes we want it so bad it hurts, like an uncomfortable princi­
ple which should be reflected in the furniture.
5	
Play – all work in the spaces should be kept to a minimum and only ever when it 
enriches life and pleasure. The space should contain the most labour-saving 
devices and work should be apportioned according to ability. An important part 
of play is learning to carry out activities that will enhance the life of the group 
using the space and our own lives as a sort of role-play area.
6	
Anti war – the space should scream anti-war, recognising that violence can be 
‘divine’ (Benjamin 1921) justified not as an absolute ethic, but as a sign of the injus­
tice of the world, depending on each circumstance that cannot be pre-judged: as 
an excess of love, or ‘Educative Power’ (Benjamin 1921). The concept of educative 
power should be scrawled on the wall, as graffiti: Learn, Learn, Learn – Teach, 
Teach, Teach (after Zˇizˇek 2009).
Dear Lecturer
On inhabiting learning space
Sam Louis
Though there are some lecturers who can make a lecture interesting and interactive, 
many struggle and this just leads to everyone disengaging. With smartphones, lap­
tops, netbooks and tablets, you guys are fighting a losing battle with what’s left of 
our attention spans. If you are just going to stand at the front of a lecture theatre 
and read slides, cancel the lecture, put a recording online and use the time to 
increase the number of seminars.
With the re-cap service (whereby lectures are recorded, along with the projected 
presentation, and made available online), it is almost possible to completely do 
away with physically attending university at all, something that almost everyone I 
know has experimented with to some extent or another. But the end goal of techno­
logical advance is not to replace us (humans).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
95
Inhabiting digital space
Helen Beetham
Introduction
There are two stories told about digital space. In one, it is continuous or contiguous with 
the space our bodies inhabit: a next-door room, or in the room with us, easily entered 
through the graphical interfaces that we have come to experience as windows. In the 
other, it is a radically alternative space where we can become someone other than our­
selves, even realise new possibilities for human interaction. In education, the two sto­
ries are often told at the same time. So MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) are both 
spaces of a radically different educational experience – egalitarian, content-free, almost 
infinitely malleable to personal need – and shop windows for the traditional courses 
that participants can sign up to on the way out. Virtual worlds offer safe places to play, 
free from the real-world constraints of risk and resource, and where the trappings of 
embodied identity can in some ways be suspended, yet ‘effective’ only when their prox­
imity to embodied life allows the lessons learned online to be transferred.
In this second part of the chapter, I explore the relationship between the physical 
and virtual landscapes of higher education. I ask how learning happens (differently) in 
virtual spaces, how they might be transformative, and what it means to be a teacher – 
and a learner – in institutions that increasingly have a foot in both worlds.
Academic space as hybrid space
Academic campuses are among the most virtualised places on the planet. Student sta­
tus is largely achieved through access to and identity within institutional systems: reg­
istration, the library system and online subscriptions via Athens, the virtual learning 
environment (VLE), assessment and anti-plagiarism software and learner records. 
Increasingly universities are tracking learner behaviours in their online systems and 
using that data for rational planning, in some cases to offer learners personalised ser­
vices and in others to subject students to surveillance in order to identify those ‘at risk’. 
While students have always been subjected to various kinds of monitoring and control 
in the spaces of the university – not least in order to assess and accord them the grades 
which make sense of the whole experience – the capacity for surveillance is enhanced 
by the move towards a virtual campus.
Blogs and forums and VLEs can provide a great deal of support to a student’s 
educational experience, but they cannot replace the value of being in a physical learn­
ing environment, face-to-face not only with a teacher, but also with other students. 
Without this multi-dimensional interaction, the chances of developing the later stages 
of Baxter Magolda’s (1992) ‘Ways of Knowing’ are drastically reduced, because 
students are isolated in their learning. Technology should never replace interaction.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

96
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
Beyond its own systems, the university is a site of promiscuous access to digital 
networks and services which are used to perform academic work. This is regardless of 
whether specific services are commercially outsourced. Reliability and robustness of 
broadband are a ubiquitous issue of student concern: both students and staff now 
expect to have their personal media, social networks, information and collaborative 
opportunities at their fingertips. For a physical space of learning to exclude the vir­
tual, digital devices would have to be banned (e.g. on hygiene grounds in a laboratory 
setting) or switched off (e.g. at the local request of a tutor) or inoperable (e.g. in a 
fieldwork setting out of broadband range). Otherwise the assumption is not only that 
learning in real spaces is penetrated with information and conversations from else­
where, but that records of real learning events can be captured and removed to virtual 
space. So simultaneously with the virtualisation of institutional systems, the institu­
tional space is becoming more porous to alternative networks and through them alter­
native ways of learning and contesting narratives (e.g. students ‘testing’ their lectures 
against an online textbook or Wikipedia).
So much is true of many institutions. In academic institutions specifically, digital 
technology is also reconfiguring core functions, purposes and values. Knowledge prac­
tice – how we come to know (individually and collectively), how we value what is known, 
even what it means to know (as core cognitive functions such as memory are shared with 
virtual agents and networks) – all these are changed profoundly. In every subject area, 
digital tools are shaping new methods and practices, while digital contexts are generating 
new theories and new forms of intellectual and creative expression. Virtual space has 
become a key forum for sharing academic ideas and for enacting academic identities.
And universities themselves supply most of the new technologies that afford these 
developments. Hall and Stahl (2012: 196) consider ‘four emergent technologies [that] 
enable cognitive labourers to transcend physical barriers through virtual reality, and 
to consume their educational life-world in new ways’. The transformative technologies 
are of the moment and will change over time: what matters is the finding that all of the 
candidate technologies, and their capacity to transform education, have been ‘cata­
lysed by research inside the University’ (Hall and Stahl 2012: 196). The same is true of 
Facebook and Twitter, the networked computer and the internet itself. So it should be 
no surprise that universities are leading the way in the development of hybrid spaces 
where real and virtual worlds intersect.
•	
How would you articulate the rationale behind any blended or hybrid 
approaches you have developed on a course/programme you teach or 
support learning on? 
•	
How have you sought to enhance any wider technology-enhanced learning 
strategies which operate in your school/faculty, or institution, or beyond?
Activity 4.3
Meaning
Something that is obviously transacted between virtual and ‘real’ space is meaning. We 
encounter the virtual with the intention of making it meaningful, and we bring to it our 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
97
identities as meaning-making subjects. Like other media – stories, paintings – virtual 
environments invite us to project ourselves in, to experience what we find as a context 
for action. It is this meaning-making stance that allows us to experience digital content 
as new ideas and creative forms; that allows us to experience the flow of data in time 
as events, cultural exchanges, identity work. Trainee pilots and fire fighters make this 
investment in the simulations they use for learning, otherwise we would be much less 
safe when we stepped onto a plane or found ourselves caught up in an emergency. 
Students make a similar investment when they encounter digital material that is rele­
vant to their learning needs, or when they take part in online discussions and create 
digital materials for comment by others. We are used to making meaning through 
media, and virtual media are no different in kind.
Our stance towards virtual objects then is a generic stance towards human media, 
and an aspect of our complexly mediated social life. But we enter virtual space in par­
ticularly mediated ways. What we experience as an environment for action with tools 
for our use is in fact a series of data transactions: it is the interface that renders the data 
human-readable and humanly engaging, and the interface is designed by some people 
for use by others. Bayne (2008), in her visual analysis of virtual learning environments, 
argues that far from being neutral structures for content delivery, graphical interfaces 
serve to construct a particular pedagogic and organisational space. She asks:
If the spatial organisation and visuality of the screen both represent and create a 
value system and an ontology, what social and pedagogical practices does the 
VLE interface reflect, inform and inscribe? What meanings does it produce? What 
version of pedagogy does it ‘make visible’, and what alternatives does it blind us to?
(Bayne 2008: 397)
The same analysis of the power of designers over users and the same questions about 
how design makes some meanings/uses available over others can also be applied to 
the physical spaces of the institution, as Mike Neary has done in the first part of this 
chapter. We experience designed real-world environments as ready for occupation 
and use, when in fact they are carefully aligned with some uses and relationships and 
not with others. The lecture theatre is a case in point. In both kinds of space, the ideal 
user experiences her actions as natural and intentional rather than as systemically 
constrained (‘lecture’ or ‘listen’, ‘post’ or ‘read’). In both cases, it is possible to make 
those preordained behaviours and meanings more visible and even to act against 
them. But in the real world we do at least have ongoing identity and capacity to act 
without the mediation of interfaces. By contrast with our experiences in the natural 
(non-designed) world, we can consciously bring to awareness the ways that designed 
environments and tools work on us. Virtual design provides none of these resources. 
Its processes become more invisible as they become more advanced, with transpar­
ency, nativity (e.g. through the use of gesture) and frictionless adoption of the explicit 
goals.
Neil Selwyn (2013) argues that technology is most invisible to the people who have 
the least resources to resist it and the greatest reason to distrust it. He cites Matthew­
man (2011): ‘Ubiquity creates invisibility. McLuhan famously compared us to fish that 
fail to see our water. Under such circumstances, as Heidegger said, we are only likely 
to notice our technologies when they stop working as anticipated’ (cited in Selwyn 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

98
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
Feeling
In a recent keynote (Beetham 2014) I suggested that we should explore our feelings 
about living and working in virtual spaces. Acknowledging our vulnerability, bore­
dom, isolation, frustration and compulsion – as well as our curiosity, excitement and 
professional interest – is important to our occupational health as well as our capacity 
to support students and colleagues. Like the meanings we make there, the feelings we 
have in and about digital environments are continuous with our embodied emotional 
life, but they have new qualities and resonances. In my keynote I cited interviews with 
students that suggest the virtual world presents particular emotional challenges. 
Many, for example, feel they need to disconnect from the distractions of social media 
to focus on academic work. Others are worried that the digital footprint they have 
already laid down, perhaps without realising it, may affect their reputation into the 
future, or they have had negative experiences online which make it difficult for them 
to participate freely. Virtual space leaves many learners feeling exposed. It blurs the 
boundaries between public and private, work and play, the classroom and the outside 
world. Although it can be rewarding for learners to participate in open communities of 
practice, or to produce digital artefacts for public access, or to contribute to online 
research – and all of these are sound strategies for helping them to thrive in the virtual 
world – it can also be very challenging to rehearse a tentative and emerging identity in 
a public setting.
Students may be wise to feel exposed in virtual spaces – even those under the 
aegis of the academic community. Recent research from the Pew Research Center 
(2014) shows that 4 in 10 online participants have suffered harassment,18 per cent 
have suffered serious harassment or abuse, and women are over-represented in both 
groups. Feelings of hatred and rage, lust and self-aggrandisement are expressed more 
openly online, and while the mediating interface seems to offer a licence to those forms 
of expression, it does not remove the negative feelings that arise in response. And 
women (online subjects identified as female) are particularly likely to be the targets. 
Participating online feels different if you are a woman. Particularly in academic 
spaces, it feels different if you are not English-speaking, not from the Global North, not 
2013: 3). One of our responsibilities as educators, then, must be to notice and make 
noticeable to others the ways in which meaning is constructed online, in virtual spaces 
and in the new digital media, and the ways in which digital tools work on us as well as 
the ways in which we can use them to fulfil our intentions in the world.
Relevant HEA project
Gordon, N. (2014) Flexible pedagogies: technology enhanced learning. Available at: 
https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/TEL_report_0.pdf
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
99
from an elite educational culture or institution, not physically able, not digitally able, 
not a ‘proper’ (traditional) student or tenured academic.
As embodied subjects, we weave a continuous narrative about our experiences 
online and offline, and about the person we are when we act in those different spaces. 
How we deal with the affective fall-out of our virtual lives is important for how we 
cope as educators and is also something we can bring to the awareness of our students, 
ideally helping them to develop a wider repertoire of responses. We should celebrate 
the freedoms we experience online but not be afraid to speak out when we find digital 
spaces being colonised by values that are antithetical to educational (and human) 
development. As Bonnie Stewart has argued (Stewart 2014), we need to take care of 
each other in virtual spaces, recognising that they create new vulnerabilities as well as 
new life chances.
Bodies
The body and its physical location would seem definitively excluded from virtual 
space. This is, after all, the meaning of the real/virtual distinction. Bainbridge (2014) 
has recently argued that the separation of learning from the embodied self and from 
the physical (especially natural) world leaves learners without the ‘holding’ relation­
ships that they need to experience genuinely transformational learning. Echoing my 
concerns in the previous chapter about feelings of isolation and compulsivity, he con­
cludes that ‘the reliance of humans on technology in learning environments can be 
considered a fetish’ (Bainbridge 2014: 9). Undoubtedly the human body suffers when 
we live too much of our lives online – obesity, repetitive strain, sleep disorders and 
varieties of anxiety have been laid at its door.
But life online is hardly devoid of bodies, and not just pornographic bodies (the 
prevalence of porn is another important reason for dealing with issues of safety, vul­
nerability and ethical behaviour when inviting students to work in virtual spaces). 
Followers of the quantified life continually record their bodily functions and share the 
data with online groups, services and other virtual agents. While we are not yet map­
ping our students’ biological data, we do encourage them to capture evidence of their 
learning activities. In doing so, they are not only building up a virtual profile of their 
embodied learning, but contributing to the enrichment of the physical environment 
with virtual traces: images uploaded to Google maps, video learning logs (vlogs) and 
data captured from fieldwork would be examples of this. GPS applications – widely 
used in the teaching of subjects allied to Geography – redefine our relationship with 
the physical world, making every location simultaneously a real place and a node in a 
global network of information (see e.g. Taylor and Dunne 2011). Virtual patients for 
the teaching of medicine and healthcare have been important drivers of technical 
development in learning technology. Virtual bodies at a lower level of visceral realism 
exist in a vast array of simulations, designed to support learning in the professions and 
social sciences. Inscribed into multiple virtual systems, learners have multiple online 
personae but very few that they do not mark with their bodily identity, whether that is 
through use of an avatar, a cartoon, the photo of a loved pet, or a recent selfie.
Of course, virtual space does allow for expression of identity in ways not marked 
by bodily difference – by gender, race, physical (dis)ability or appearance – and this 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

100
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
can be used to serve an inclusivity agenda (Forman et al. 2011). The argument is a 
complex one. The issues that make it difficult for some people to identify as transgen­
der, or disabled, or physically scarred might not be addressed if those markers can be 
erased, but that erasure also opens up a new space of communication in which 
entrenched ideas might begin to be challenged. The same is true of intercultural work 
in online spaces (Panichi et al. 2010). Some people find it easier to participate in learn­
ing spaces when their bodily identity is obscured, to add to the many people with phys­
ical impairments and other difficulties of physical access (remoteness, poverty, 
daytime commitments) who can only participate in educational opportunity through 
virtual means.
Finally, virtual space is brought into being through real-world labour and the con­
sumption of real-world resources. Human bodies deliver our search results, whether 
they are mining rare earth elements, assembling iPads, or keeping Google’s data cen­
tres supplied with power. Intersections of the material and the virtual world take many 
forms, and will be seen differently through the lenses of different disciplines. They are 
often a productive site of exploration for students who, like Heidegger’s fish, can no 
longer see the virtual water they are swimming in except through the lens of a princi­
pled and deliberate critique.
•	
In what ways have you actively sought to incorporate the use of virtual space 
to provide for a more inclusive and/or engaged learning environment? 
•	
Have you been involved in developing any strategies or policies aimed at 
guarding/guiding students when occupying virtual space?
Activity 4.4
Money
At this point I think it is worth taking a detour around the question of why virtual 
spaces are becoming such a significant aspect of the student learning experience. In 
the FE sector, a recent report commissioned by the Coalition Government recommends 
that courses should aim for a 50 per cent online component by 2017/18 (FELTAG 2013). 
While HE institutions are unlikely to recognise such an edict, there is no doubting the 
trend towards blended learning in ‘traditional’ courses, and online-only learning as a 
significant alternative market. The answer to this question, in obvious and less obvious 
ways, is money. (It is possible that money, as pure exchange or transaction value, 
works better in the digital world than the real one: the stateless, lawless, un-backed-by-
any-central-bank bitcoin may prove this.)
In the obvious sense, aspects of online provision offer potential savings at a time 
of huge financial constraint. The savings are minimal if learning is understood as a 
human relationship, requiring dialogue, mutual understanding, support for personal 
developmental, collaborative opportunities, and modelling of new practices by more 
capable others. Then the main resource implications are human ones and can only be 
met by paying human beings for their time, expertise and attention. There may well be 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
101
environmental and cost savings if the offer is enacted virtually, but the really big sav­
ings are only made if learners can be convinced to minimise their expectation of human 
interaction – especially with teachers – and to maximise their investment in content, 
which can now be distributed virtually at very little cost.
Less obviously, students are online because money is online. They have been sold the 
idea that higher education is a ticket to higher pay, and the higher paid jobs in our society 
are predominantly virtual. (They may be ‘virtual’ in the sense of transitory and insecure, 
but in this case I use ‘virtual’ to indicate the space in which the work takes place.) Our 
current economic relations has been described as a mode of ‘cognitive capitalism’ under 
which growth and profit depend on advances in our use of information and data, rather 
than on trade and conquest or advances in production technologies, as under earlier 
phases of capitalism (e.g. Fuchs 2011). This gives higher education a particular relation­
ship with the digital, expressed by government as the need to supply ‘skills’ to the global 
knowledge economy (BIS 2009). A study experience that neglected the virtual, then, 
would neglect the very spaces in which graduates need to be productive (in their own and 
the national interest) – neglect the very foundation and location of valuable work.
Unfortunately for UK graduates, the value of knowledge work in the developed 
world is being undermined by advances in the higher education sectors of emerging 
economies (Craig and Gunn 2010). As long ago as 2008 a TLRP report concluded that 
‘once [high value work is standardised], high-skill people in low-cost countries sud­
denly become an attractive option for multinationals … young people now investing 
heavily in their education across the developed world may struggle to attain the com­
fortable jobs and careers to which they aspire’ (Brown et al. 2008: 2). Virtual work is 
more likely to involve live texting with irate customers from a distributed customer 
services centre than managing a digital start-up. ‘Skills’ in the global knowledge econ­
omy cannot be confined to the technical: they must include resilience in the face of a 
vast global redistribution of intellectual capital, as well as the capacity to thrive in 
situations where the boundaries of work and personal life are blurring, and to under­
take a constant project of self-upgrading to keep pace with technological change.
Just as not all virtual work is highly valuable or productive, not all productive 
work is virtual. In fact, the continued existence of virtual space depends on material 
infrastructure and real-world labour. This too is an issue that can be introduced to the 
curriculum, depending on how the digital world intersects with the subject of study. 
This is not to deny that most graduate employment demands virtual skills or that much 
valuable work is cognitively based, but it does help to situate that work in a material 
context of human needs and finite resources.
Utopia
A very different imagined future has also co-opted the virtual as a valuable space. Here 
the virtual is figured as a democratic zone of infinite connectivity and interplay, where 
inequalities are levelled and differences made less visible, oppressive laws have less 
purchase, and oppressive organisations are less able to secure a hold. In some versions 
of this utopia, the formal education sector is drastically reduced. Individuals engage in 
ad hoc learning and interest groups gather evidence of their capabilities, and (if they 
need to) seek confirmation via peer recommendation or open accreditation. Grades and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

102
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
qualifications give way to rich representations of personal ability, and the institutions 
which have acted as gateways to high value employment become largely obsolete.
Once again, however, there is strong evidence to believe the opposite. Virtual par­
ticipation in learning is higher among those who are already highly motivated and 
have high levels of educational capital. In fact, the more opportunities for real social 
advancement are available in virtual spaces, the more they are colonised by people 
who are already privileged (Hargittai 2008, 2010). Digital space is ‘a class-structured, 
segmented, stratified social space’ (Fuchs 2011: 346) and digital capital is just another 
benefit that can be deployed by the privileged to improve their advantages. Releasing 
open content from the global universities of the North, for example, even when this 
was done with the most egalitarian of intentions, has had mixed consequences for 
emerging sectors of higher education elsewhere and has led to concerns about digital 
colonialism (Amiel 2013). ‘Open’ learning may not even mean free access, and, where 
it does, it may not be accompanied by the kind of support that less advantaged learn­
ers need. In fact, while virtual space has given access to educational opportunity to 
many, and this is clearly a good thing, there is far less evidence that it can remedy 
inequalities of educational outcome or address inequities of a more systemic kind.
In the face of virtual alternatives, institutions of higher education have not disap­
peared. Instead they have diversified their offer to include virtual elements and become 
(particularly at the bottom of an increasingly stratified system) more reactive to the 
threat of competition from virtual providers, with the result that the more elite the 
institution, the more likely it is to sell the face-to-face, co-located campus experience 
as the gold standard.
As I outlined in the ‘Bodies’ chapter, utopian thinking also arises from the capacity 
to erase markers of difference and enter into relationships in ‘the absence of contradic­
tions and cross-purposes that haunt offline life’ (Bauman 2000, cited in Selwyn 2013: 
56). People have astonishing capacity to create new identities, new rules and new 
kinds of relationship, and there is no doubt that they are using online spaces to do so. 
Educators can create and contribute to these spaces, for example, by organising 
inter-cultural online exchanges. But this has to be done with a readiness to challenge 
preconceptions as well as celebrate differences, and to deal collectively with abuses 
of/in the virtual medium: trolling and bullying, the viral spread of images of violence 
and sexualised images, the tendency of self-selecting interest groups to reinforce their 
own prejudices rather than engaging in a meaningful way with different others.
We can, if we are wise, use to advantage those aspects of the virtual world that 
accord with our academic values: open exchange, peer review, collegiality and respect. 
But developments in digital technology are no substitute for political engagement with 
issues of equality and power, in the belief that entities such as ‘the internet’ or practices 
such as ‘open sharing’ necessarily entail more equal access to learning opportunities 
or more democratic institutions.
Conclusion
Virtual space is continuous but not identical with real-world space. As educators, we 
are particularly interested in how meanings, feelings and identities, social actions and 
economic values are transacted in digital space, and as I have tried to show, these 
transactions reproduce the inequalities, power dynamics and oppressive institutional 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
103
practices of real-world space. Some aspects of virtual space disguise these continuities 
and make it difficult to adopt a critical stance. These include the radical separation of 
designers from end-users, the fact that actions are narrowly constrained but alterna­
tives are literally unthinkable within the interface, and the ‘natural’ and ‘frictionless’ 
design ideal. All are good reasons why we should foster in our institutions, among our 
colleagues, and most importantly in our students, a critical approach to digital technol­
ogies and their uses. How we approach this will depend on our disciplinary resources, 
but we should be in no doubt that it will become more difficult for students to do this 
with their own resources, as they become more naturalised to living in a hybrid world.
Just like real-world spaces, virtual spaces can be co-opted against their original 
designs, or can be designed differently – collaboratively with students, for example, or 
in ways that are radically incomplete. And while real-world spaces can only be rede­
signed after much investment and long processes of consultation, in which radical 
ideas can easily be lost, virtual spaces are agile and reconfigurable. Personal learning 
environments, cloud services, community solutions and peer-to-peer networks are 
already deeply connected into the institutional infrastructure, introducing potential 
fault-lines and spaces of alternative play. Alongside virtual environments that repro­
duce an instrumental and managerial idea of the university, we can set alternative 
virtual spaces such as Coventry’s Disruptive Media Lab or the Ragged University proj­
ect and its various affiliates, online and physically located. Against the virtual pan­
technicon we can imagine the hybrid university as a network of loosely affiliated 
spaces, some allowing for safe exploration and identity work (‘walled gardens’), but 
with doors always opening onto other institutions and cultures, onto different ways of 
knowing, and onto an open landscape of knowledge in public use.
Opinion Piece, Debate, Dear Lecturer, and Fellowship Application 
extracts
In the following opinion piece, Wayne Barry reflects on his participation in two differ­
ently experienced online distance learning courses. This is followed by a debate on the 
merits of face-to-face learning compared with online learning, from two sisters who 
have had very different undergraduate learning experiences. To finish, Sam Louis, a 
recent graduate from Newcastle University, reflects on the chapter overall. This is 
followed by three extracts from successful HEA fellowship applicants who discuss 
some of the aspects of academic practice which feature in this chapter.
Opinion: On distance learning
Confessions of an online distance learning junkie
Wayne Barry
My first foray into the world of distance learning took place, for a brief spell, from 
2004 to 2005. I enrolled myself onto a correspondence course on creative writing 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

104
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
and had received, in the post, a thick, A4 ringed binder containing reams of papers 
and documents concerning the ‘rules and regs’ of the course, the course materials 
itself and the various assessment briefings. I had six assignments that would be 
posted to my tutor spreading over nine months. Around four to five weeks upon 
receipt of my assignment, my tutor would post back her feedback which would 
always be rich, critically friendly and very lengthy. I greeted my tutor’s feedback with 
a mix of surprise and exhilaration as I had never received, previous or since, feed­
back with so much depth, coupled with words of supportive encouragement. But, in 
some ways this was just over-compensating for the severe lack of any kind of tutor 
communication.
I recognise that I do tend to be a solitary learner with a strong accent towards 
co-operative, rather than collaborative, learning, which, in part, is attributable to my 
hearing impairment. But this particular learning experience left me feeling crushingly 
isolated. Other than the postal communications I had no-one to share and express 
my ideas, fears, joys and frustrations with. So I would like to take the opportunity to 
reflect upon two very different online distance learning experiences that were medi­
ated through synchronous and asynchronous technologies. One was formal (the 
Master’s programme) and the other informal (the EDC MOOC). I would like to con­
sider how these two very personal experiences have come to inform my own profes­
sional practice as an HE learning technologist.
Experience 1: an MSc in e-Learning
In 2006, I was appointed to the role of university learning technologist and in the 
following year, I enrolled myself onto the MSc in e-Learning (now rebadged as the 
MSc in Digital Education: http://online.education.ed.ac.uk/) at the University of 
Edinburgh. This is a very popular postgraduate course, which I took part-time, that 
attracts a great deal of national and international interest and is conducted over a 
distance and delivered totally online, which makes use of a number of virtual public 
and private spaces, such as the University of Edinburgh’s virtual learning environ­
ment (VLE), discussion boards, blogs, wikis, instant messaging, immersive virtual 
worlds and social media. There were around 40 individuals from around the globe in 
my cohort and they brought with them rich and diverse experiences and biographies. 
We all shared a common passion for education and that technology was seen as a 
means to facilitate learning in ways that should motivate and engage students.
Some of my most rewarding and richest learning experiences have happened 
online through the Master’s programme. However, it does raise some very real ques­
tions concerning the ‘perceived’ online presence, or embodiment (Blake 2002), of 
tutors, the engagement and motivation (extrinsic and intrinsic) of the students inside 
a space that is virtual, and working with peers who are temporally and culturally 
divergent. What works incredibly well for mature postgraduate students undertaking 
an online Master’s course, at a distance, on e-Learning may not, necessarily, trans­
late so well for campus-based undergraduates in their late teens who are used to 
predominately face-to-face interactions. Online learning has had a long track record 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
105
of student dissatisfaction that has resulted in high student attrition rates. This 
neatly brings me to the second of my online distance learning experiences.
Experience 2: an e-Learning and Digital Cultures MOOC
In January 2013, I enrolled myself on to the e-Learning and Digital Cultures (EDC) 
MOOC (Massive Open Online Course: https://www.coursera.org/course/edc) that 
was being run by the University of Edinburgh using the Coursera platform. A number 
of the tutors who had taught on the MSc in e-Learning programme taught on this 
course as well. The course ran for five weeks and consisted of readings and short 
videos that formed the basis of ‘thought experiments’. The students made use of the 
discussion board tool within Coursera as well as using third-party blogging tools and 
social media sites like Facebook and Twitter. The number of enrolments peaked to 
over 42,000 participants, but dropped down to just over 7,000 participants who 
were still active during the last seven days of the course (Knox 2014).
On this particular course, the tutors wanted an opportunity to research, experiment 
and participate ‘in an emerging pedagogical mode’ that was ‘significantly under-theorised’ 
where MOOCs were perceived as an ‘uncomfortable territory’ (Haywood 2012; Knox 
et al. 2012). One of the pedagogical theories that underpins MOOC technology is con­
nectivism (Siemens 2005; Downes, 2005, 2012), which has been described as:
[a] learning organization whereby there is not a body of knowledge to be trans­
ferred from educator to learner and where learning does not take place in a 
single environment; instead, knowledge is distributed across the Web, and peo­
ple’s engagement with it constitutes learning.
(Kop 2011: 20)
However, the tutors found that ‘MOOC pedagogy [was] not embedded in MOOC plat­
forms, but [tended to be] negotiated and emergent’ (Bayne and Ross 2014: 8). It 
soon became apparent within the discussion boards, blogs posts and tweets that a 
significant number of participants were struggling with a course that appeared to 
lack structure and ‘scaffolding’, where the tutors were decentralised, and there was 
an over-abundance (Weller 2011) of information and content that were leaving par­
ticipants feeling very lost and overwhelmed. My previous experience on the Master’s 
programme, my role as a learning technologist and being particularly confident with 
a range of virtual spaces meant that I had developed an acute ‘critical filter’ that 
allowed me to navigate and negotiate my way around this over-abundance of content 
and make strong connections with other participants on the course.
Informing practice
Being a student on these courses enabled me to experience the trials and tribula­
tions that all students undergo when studying on their own, and being wholly depen­
dent on technology working at critical points throughout the duration of the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

106
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
Debate: Online vs face-to-face learning
My entirely face-to-face learning experience
Anna McCormick
I spent three years as an undergraduate at Cambridge University (2007–2010), 
studying English Literature. In that time, I spent countless hours in libraries poring 
over books and critical essays, hours in lecture halls alternating between taking copi­
ous amounts of notes and sitting back and absorbing the theatre of it all, hours in 
small classes with a few other students parsing texts and debating various points of 
detail and theory, and hours in one-to-one supervisions being challenged on my think­
ing and essays.
The majority of my learning and teaching was therefore experienced face to 
face, with a strong emphasis on dialogic teaching and Socratic questioning. Conspic­
uous by their absence perhaps were online teaching or essays and question sheets 
that were marked remotely and returned with a score.
Without question, the most challenging, stimulating and valuable elements of 
my study were found in the small classes and one-to-one supervisions. Cambridge 
University describes supervisions in this way:
As well as helping you develop independent learning skills, supervisions enable 
you to explore course material in much greater depth than lectures allow, to gain 
programme. Students need significant ‘hand-holding’ and practically 24/7 technical 
support in courses dependent upon technology. Tutors need to factor in, during the 
first few weeks at the start of a programme, a level of socialisation and ‘low-stakes 
activities’ so that students become familiar with using the technology and are able 
to start to form a ‘community of learners’ (Wenger 2000). This was exactly what the 
tutors on the Master’s programme had anticipated and done, loosely basing their 
approach upon Salmon’s (2002) ‘5 stage model’. When the EDC MOOC was run for 
a second time, the tutors were at pains to ensure that there was sufficient structure 
and ‘scaffolding’ so that the students did not become overwhelmed with the nature 
of the tasks and activities.
From a tutor’s perspective, there needs to be careful consideration and planning 
of content, activities (individual and group-based) and resources with opportunities 
to communicate and collaborate with peers and tutors. In addition, these online 
encounters need to be situated within authentic learning experiences that further 
develop a student’s repertoire that is vital for working and learning in a digital age. 
These experiences have also strengthened my belief that academic staff should be 
working, in partnership, with their learning technologist to ensure that such opportu­
nities are realised and problems are avoided.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
107
further insights into your subject, to clarify anything you’re not clear about, to 
discuss your own work and ideas, and receive regular feedback.
They were focused on the primary paper each term and were delivered by a teacher 
who specialised in that area. Specific reading and focus areas were outlined by the 
supervisor and then frequently evolved over the course of the term to integrate the 
student’s area of interest. In my experience, a question would be set with an accom­
panying reading list and I would produce an essay for my supervisor. The supervi­
sion then would use the essay as a springboard for a broader discussion of the 
topic, and also of how the thesis was structured and communicated. It allowed for 
the exploration of arguments and counter-arguments, coaching on essay technique 
and construction, prompting on wider reading, and often rigorous debate with an 
expert in a particular field. It is hard to imagine how so broad a spectrum of learning 
could be combined in any other format.
A crucial fact to highlight is that the impact of the face-to-face teaching was criti­
cally dependent on the quality of independent study done prior to the session: the 
pre-reading, the thought applied to the questions for discussion, the development of a 
line of enquiry and work done to support it. A tutorial couldn’t be effective without the 
full engagement and preparation of both the teacher and the student – a lesson I rap­
idly learnt. There is no hiding in a one-to-one or small group environment, and it 
demands that you take ownership of your own learning and progress. However, it also 
allows for flexibility in study, whether that is to spend more time on an area that the 
student doesn’t understand, or to create space for them to explore their own areas of 
interest.
As passionate as I am about the benefits of this mode of teaching, it is not without 
its complexities. Initially, the emphasis on discussion and questioning can be disorient­
ing and more than a little daunting. Particularly if you are coming directly from school, 
where learning is highly directed and has clear parameters and marking criteria to 
structure your idea of what ‘good’ study is and what it isn’t. With dialogic teaching and 
tutorials, the parameters are often redefined with each new supervisor and topic, which 
can result in a shifting view of what good looks like, and occasionally conflicting advice.
Linked to this, the tone and experience of small classes or supervisions are 
almost entirely determined by the teaching style and personality of the tutor and of 
other members of the class. Due to the emphasis on face-to-face teaching, this will 
in many cases have a significant impact on the student’s learning experience – both 
for better and worse. Confidence also plays a key role in this learning environment. 
In order to participate in debate and to get the most from the teaching, you need to 
have the confidence to ask questions and to share your views and challenge those of 
others where appropriate. The environment actively encourages, and in fact demands, 
participation and it is a key way in which your progress and attainment are assessed. 
Therefore, individual discomfort with it could be stressful or intimidating, and ulti­
mately impact how a student feels they are performing. However, the upside to this 
is that the environment created ensures that you will develop those skills over the 
course of your study, resetting your natural inclinations through practice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

108
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
Debate: Online vs face-to face learning
My largely online learning experience
Emily McCormick
I enrolled on a degree programme in a research-intensive university in 2012 that has 
a high level of online learning, both in terms of the content of the curriculum, and 
also in its delivery. The number of students enrolled on the programme and the 
nature of the subject matter mean that much of the teaching is delivered either in 
large lecture theatres or online. With the development of technology and the increas­
ing inclusion of technology in degree programmes, online learning has become 
much more prevalent and widely accepted. The majority of degree programmes now 
have a large online presence including, but not limited to, online seminars, webinars, 
lectures and tests. Much of my experience of learning at university has been in this 
type of learning environment.
I have found some real advantages in this approach. Online resources can pro­
vide some much-needed structure to their independent learning as well as being 
much more convenient than attendance at large and often impersonal lectures, 
where it can sometimes be challenging for lecturers to teach one topic to many dif­
ferent people, and ensure that their content caters to, and engages, a large and 
diverse pool of learning needs and personality styles.
Online study is not limited to fixed schedules, it can be accessed at any time of 
the day or night and the student has much more control over the pace of their learn­
ing. Within a highly competitive and intellectual environment like university, with up 
to 200 students per lecture, there is often a fear of embarrassment or negative 
responses to what are viewed as ‘interruptions’ which may deter many students 
from asking questions or asking to revisit key points. Online learning may offer more 
opportunities to explore content and questions while studying independently as you 
are not required to keep pace with lecturers and other students, and can spend time 
understanding things which present barriers in getting to grips with certain aspects 
of a topic. This can be especially valuable for students who struggle with concentra­
tion, dyslexia or any other learning difficulty which may make it more difficult to 
keep up as slides can be revisited and audio or visual content can be replayed.
Having left university and moved into work, what has come to the fore is this 
skillset that I developed almost unawares – a confidence in formulating and asking 
questions, regardless of my existing knowledge of a topic, and the appetite to 
explore the different facets of a situation. While the knowledge I acquired of Anglo-
Saxon literature has not directly impacted my next steps and continued learning, the 
experience of and comfort with debate, challenge, and being set a broad area of 
inquiry from which to develop a thesis, definitely has.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
109
Progressing from the heavily supervised learning of school or college, university 
learning is supposed to be largely independent with lectures forming the skeleton of 
a student’s wider learning. The internet is a great source of information with which to 
bolster lecture content, as exploring a topic on the internet can provide some 
thought-provoking alternatives. Though lecturers’ teaching styles vary greatly, some 
still teach their opinion on a topic as gospel, rather than as simply one view of the 
content. Online learning may help a student to discover and explore many different 
viewpoints and theories, rather than just learning one specific perspective and being 
required to reiterate someone else’s subjective opinion, which in turn can provide a 
better understanding of, and outlook on, a topic.
However, for some, the convenience of online learning can prove detrimental as 
with it can come the assumption that it is easier than traditional learning, when in 
reality it often takes much more self-discipline, motivation and better time manage­
ment. The ‘mandatory’ nature of some lectures can provide some students with a 
much-needed push to remain engaged with their course materials, rather than put­
ting it off or just giving up.
It is not only mandatory lectures that help to keep a student engaged, but also 
lecturers. Lecturers are selected to teach courses because of their extensive knowl­
edge of and valuable insight into a certain topic or subject matter, for this reason 
alone, interaction with lecturers is extremely valuable in order to gain and develop a 
deeper understanding. I have often found that the passion of a lecturer who truly 
loves their subject can be infectious, providing a type of motivation that simply can­
not be replicated ‘screen-to-screen’. In a similar way, class discussions provide a 
very unique opportunity to learn in that they are organic and provide a fascinating 
insight into a topic by exploring many viewpoints and concepts that might otherwise 
never have been considered. The variety and diversity of students’ backgrounds, 
cultures and opinions can prove an engaging and valuable resource.
Despite online learning sometimes being viewed as more convenient, face-to-
face learning is often the most effective way of teaching one ‘piece’ of content to a 
large group of people, especially when it is particularly difficult or a key concept that 
needs to be understood as the springboard to move to a deeper understanding of or 
engagement with a topic. The potential for miscommunication or misunderstandings 
in general is much more prevalent online as many of the complexities of teaching are 
whittled down to simple written communication, or there can be so much information 
available that it is easy to feel overwhelmed and without direction, unless the learn­
ing activities are clearly thought through, carefully structured, and have specific 
aims.
Another challenge that I’ve found with online learning environments is that there 
can be limited opportunity for feedback, and for asking questions and discussion, 
especially when something has been particularly interesting, it can feel like a much 
more one-way relationship with information.
One of the aspects that is endangered if there is too much emphasis on online 
or self-directed learning is effective team building – one of the points of university is 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

110
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
Dear Lecturer
Inhabiting and owning learning spaces
Sam Louis
Newcastle University is a continuous coagulation of architecture through the ages. 
As with many universities, the buildings range across period and style, from pre-
1900 red brick grandeur to the ultramodern, dripping with shiny glass and vibrant 
colours. And while I loved the large, rolling desks in our library’s noisy, flexible work­
space, and the primary coloured furniture in the group work computer clusters, 
sometimes nothing made me sit down, shut up and work like vaulted ceilings, wood 
panelling and the hushed silence of the bookshelves.
Planning educational space to evolve with each generation is fantastic, but it 
should not be to the detriment of an academic tradition. To walk into a university and 
know that generations before you have sat here and learnt and worked, has an inspi­
rational effect on people, and motivates you to learn, in much the same way as a 
new, vibrant, unrestrictive room can motivate you to stretch boundaries and create 
something of your own. The two must work in harmony and there should be access 
to both in the university of the future.
Likewise, the way in which a space is used changes as people interpret it differ­
ently. I can’t speak for how much student involvement there is at Newcastle in plan­
ning new builds, but there is certainly a culture of student feedback on how they 
want to use the space there already is. During my three years, I saw the library 
become 24-hour use (as student sleeping patterns began to dictate usage times), 
and pop-up library space appeared around the campus to accommodate busy exam 
periods. Rooms in the student union could be hired out and put to whatever use was 
necessary, one minute hosting Socie-Tea tea parties and the next coming alive with 
the Circus Club.
A large part of student ownership and integration actually comes not from pro­
viding dynamic, open, anti-war, play spaces (as Mike Neary suggests) but simply by 
being open to changing the uses of whatever you already have to accommodate 
to prepare students for careers in their relevant field, in many cases this is not just 
the ability to absorb information but also to interact with other colleagues, work as 
a team, communicate effectively with others, disseminate your ideas in a way that 
influences or engages others, or lead a group. All of these skills must be learned, or 
at least developed, along with your subject knowledge base, within the context of 
your degree. If the balance between online/self-directed and face-to-face learning is 
not managed, these are the skills that can be at risk, as the university experience 
can provide invaluable opportunities and experiences to learn with and from others.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC SPACE
111
Extracts from successful HEA fellowship applications
Mr Blonde (AFHEA)
For some academic staff, the virtual learning environment (VLE) presents a transi­
tional stage of their teaching practice; for others, it can be quite transformational. 
The support, advice and guidance that I offer can be at a personal; programme; 
departmental; faculty and sometime institutional level [K1, K2, K4, K5, V3, V4]. 
Some of this support and guidance can be technical (i.e. how to insert a Turnitin 
assignment item into the VLE); pedagogical (i.e. how tutors support their students to 
make sense of the originality reports that are generated by Turnitin and how this 
relates to appropriate academic writing and understanding the issues around plagia­
rism); and strategic policy (i.e. advising the institution on best practices and proce­
dures based upon current evidence-informed approaches and that of the wider higher 
education sector) [K1, K2, K4, K5, K6, V2, V3, V4].
Mr Blonde (AFHEA)
I have been supporting and guiding academic staff to avoid experiencing ‘troublesome 
space’ by working with them to think about, plan and develop learning activities that 
make best use of the physical spaces, mobile technologies and learning resources 
that are currently available (see Fisher, 2009) within the university’s new learning 
and resources building [K1, K2, K3, K4, K5, V1, V2, V3]. Through this process they 
can begin to create dynamic and dialogic spaces that have the potential to support 
and sustain a scholarship of teaching and learning culture for them and their stu­
dents (see Jenkins and Healey, 2005) [K2, K3, K5, K6, V1, V2, V3, V4]. The work 
and research that I have done in the new building and around learning spaces gen­
erally has informed my Master’s dissertation [K1, K2, K3, K4, V3, V4]. Some of the 
findings taken from that have been used to develop support and guidance that has 
taken on many forms: one-to-one discussions, small group coaching and developing 
a practitioner’s handbook and a leaflet of hints and tips on making successful use 
student desire. I’ve done creative group work in dusty wooden-benched lecture the­
atres, with teams stretched across four rows, and had fascinating, teacher-centric 
lectures while sitting on bean bags and footstools. Space can be interpreted in 
whatever way you want, and it is the attitude and approach of the teacher that free 
or constrict, not the age or intention of the physical space.
The power of the brand and market investment in the university may long hold 
sway over architectural decisions, but the way in which you choose to inhabit and 
engage with the space can change in an instant.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

112
MIKE NEARY AND HELEN BEETHAM 
of learning spaces [K1, K2, K4, V1, V2, V3, V4]. Ultimately, I would like to see learning 
space design being offered as part of the University’s PG Cert (HE) programme 
[K1, K2, K5, K6, V1, V2].
Dr Blue (PFHEA)
I have always avoided championing technology-enhanced learning for the sake of it, 
emphasising that technology should only be used with purpose and a clear under­
standing of the benefits (and weaknesses) of the tools – the focus should be on 
offering flexibility of ‘place, pace & mode’ (see Gordon 2014). When discussing TEL 
with staff and at an institutional level, I have emphasised the importance of purpo­
sive design of TEL and particularly with blended learning, ensuring clear planning 
which is then effectively communicated to students ensuring they understand their 
learning journey (e.g. Garrison and Vaughan 2008). These are the points I empha­
sise at university level in committees and in discussions, to ensure that this under­
standing is disseminated as widely as possible and I strongly believe this emphasis 
is influencing our approach across the institution.
Note
1	 ‘Inhabiting learning spaces’ first appeared in the paper, ‘Making it with the university of the 
future: pleasure and pedagogy in higher and higher education’, first presented at Trinity Laban 
Conservatoire of Music and Dance, as part of the Teaching and Learning Research Seminar 
Series, 19 November 2014.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

You should see some of the stuff that’s being taught at my place now; I mean, 
it’s not proper knowledge, it’s just political correctness gone mad!
I took this job to teach and research my subject, not to make people good 
citizens. I wouldn’t say I was a good citizen, so what kind of role model 
could I be anyway?
It’s all very well helping students to get jobs, but that’s for the careers people, 
isn’t it?
Introduction
What is the nature of higher education knowledge? In posing the question so starkly, it 
challenges us to consider not only whether there is something that underpins all the 
knowledge found in every course, department and discipline, but also whether, and in 
what ways, this knowledge differs from other types of knowledge. Another way of 
looking at this is to ask whether you think you could draw a line for your discipline (or 
subject area) between what counts and what does not when it comes to knowledge. 
You might approach this chapter as a challenge to see how clear that line remains as 
you read on.
In a classroom context, one way to begin to draw a knowledge demarcation line is 
to consider how you deal with student contributions, specifically, how you deal with 
unwelcome contributions. Or, put another way, what epistemological ground rules are 
at work in these situations? Like the car-parking attendant who guards the university 
campus against automotive interlopers, do you feel that you are holding a line by 
guarding against epistemological interlopers? One of my first recollections of experi­
encing some of these ground rules (I was unaware they were ground rules at the time) 
was the commentary from my lecturers in the margins of my first year undergraduate 
essays: ‘… is this just your opinion …?; where are the references to academic literature 
to support your claims …?; where’s the evidence for this comment …?’ Taken collec­
tively, could this be read as a demand that I needed to earn my parking permit, which 
would then allow me to sit – legitimately – in the discipline-based seminar room?
5
The nature of academic knowledge
John Lea
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

114
JOHN LEA
This chapter might also be read as a footnote to Plato, specifically on the simile of 
the ‘divided line’, and how confident you feel about drawing your own disciple-based 
‘divided line’ between what is true (epistemic) knowledge, and what is mere opinion 
(doxa) (Plato, circa 360 BC). This chapter addresses this question from three angles: 
(1) an exploration of the relationship between knowledge and purpose; (2) an explora­
tion of the nature of the validity of higher education knowledge; and (3) an exploration 
of the relationship between some of the ontological and epistemological dimensions to 
higher education knowledge. In addition, Reason and Bracewell are back and will be 
adding their incisive commentary throughout.
Knowledge and the purpose of higher education
Ron Barnett and Kathy Coate distinguish three key purposes for higher education: 
(1) to produce a particular type of knower – with an emphasis on students’ own engage­
ment with knowledge; (2) to produce a particular type of actor – with an emphasis on 
being able to interpret one’s own actions; and (3) to produce a particular type of being – 
with an emphasis on being able to resiliently work things out in a changing world 
(Barnett and Coate 2005: 48). These terms mirror traditional curriculum ideologies and 
curriculum models. In terms of ideologies: a form of classical humanism, emphasising 
what it is essential to know; a progressive humanism, emphasising individual self-
development; and forms of social functionalism, emphasising the preparation for social 
and economic roles (Lawton 1983). In terms of curriculum models: a content model, 
emphasising what a learner needs to know; a process model, emphasising the process 
of learning itself; and an outcomes model, emphasising what the learning leads to.
These ideologies and models can also be linked to three broad theories of learning 
and Bloom’s three learning domains: the cognitive, the affective, and the psychomotor 
(see, for example, Bloom 1956; Krathwohl et al. 1964; Biggs and Tang 2007). Specifi­
cally, learning theories which draw on cognitive processes, emphasising the mental 
acquisition of knowledge, as opposed to more humanistic approaches emphasising the 
value and meaning of knowledge to the knower, as opposed to those approaches draw­
ing on variants of behaviourism, which emphasise what learners are able to demon­
strate and do as a result of a learning process.
Clearly, we must resist the temptation to depict these ideologies, models, and the­
ories in a three column table, because both the horizontal and vertical divided lines 
could simplify to the point of distortion, and mask the sometimes competing, some­
times complementary and sometimes unrelated relationships between the labelled 
boxes. But Barnett and Coate’s three broad terms could feature in a Venn diagram 
(Figure 5.1).
If you were to use this Venn diagram to depict one of the courses you teach on, how 
would you draw it? What size would each of the circles need to be in relation to the oth­
ers, in terms of where your course places its emphasis? How much overlap would there 
be between each circle, or would it be one, two or three separate circles? And how far 
do you think you could expand the middle overlap, or is it too much to expect one 
course to be able to achieve this (X as unique X factor, or no-go)? It is tempting to claim 
that an ideal course would indeed be one where the overlap between the three sets or 
circles is so great that they do all merge into one, but this is problematic for at least two 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
115
broad reasons. First, there is the ‘horses for courses’ question, that is, it may be highly 
desirable that a particular course only deals with one (or two) of the circles. And, sec­
ond, even if a complete overlap is sought, it may still be desirable to distinguish between 
separate learning activities in order to enact, say, a knower or an actor, so that they 
could be subsequently merged, or that one needs to be considered the foundation for the 
other, and so on.
Figure 5.1  Dimensions of a Higher Education.
X
Being
Acting
Knowing
Prof. Reason:  I can see where this is going so I’m going to throw down my yellow 
flag now. This is precisely where universities have gone wrong. If only we could just 
get back to the knowledge – generating it and disseminating it. One circle please, 
with the word ‘knowledge’ in the middle of it, in capital letters. It’s just no business 
of a university what people do with it. I don’t really care whether my students value 
the knowledge or whether it’s going to make them better citizens, or more employ­
able or whatever the latest jargon is. I’m not sure I even like the idea of a ‘knower’; 
still sounds a bit too touchy-feely to me. Look, there’s a clear distinction in philos­
ophy between facts and values and we should remember that. My subject deals in 
the facts, that’s my divided line. Do you think Einstein cared about whether people 
liked his equations, or that people would end up working in the armaments industry, 
using his equations to make atomic bombs? In the old days, you got your degree; 
you found a job; simple. I was employable because I had a degree not because 
I had employability skills, or that my university had taught me to be a good actor! 
And don’t go telling me that it’s more difficult these days because there are many 
more graduates now, because that just proves the point that we don’t need as many 
graduates.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

116
JOHN LEA
It is tempting to say that the emphasis on the ‘being’ and ‘acting’ sets in our Venn 
diagram reflect a recent turn in the articulation of purposes for universities, but it is 
too easy to find evidence to the contrary. For example, it would be difficult to claim 
that the colleges of the ancient Universities of Oxford and Cambridge have slowly – 
over centuries – expanded the being and acting sets at the expense of the knower set, 
for, if anything, the evidence points exactly in the opposite direction. Furthermore, 
though authors like Allan Bloom in the USA write convincingly about how Reason has 
been knocked off its perch in American universities by the unwarranted and misguided 
arrival of vocational and multicultural curricula (emphasising the acting and being 
sets at the expense of the knowing set), his appeal to put Reason back on its perch very 
quickly turns to ancient Greece, rather than any evidence drawn from the actual his­
tory of the development of many US and UK universities in the late nineteenth century 
(Bloom 1987). On that subject, it is not at all clear that the development of the so-called 
red brick universities in Victorian Britain were as a result of an appeal to Reason in the 
northern cities of the UK. Indeed, it is not clear either that ancient Greek intellectual 
thought would see it as desirable to demarcate knowing from being and acting, because 
it is surely in the combining of the three that a person is able to act wisely, and thereby 
prove that he is no idiot (in the Greek meaning of that word).
Other interesting Venn diagrams might be drawn from considering the following 
two quotations:
Men are men before they are lawyers and if you make them capable and sensible 
men, they will make themselves capable and sensible lawyers … what profes­
sional men should carry away with them from a University is not professional 
knowledge, but that which should direct the use of their professional knowledge, 
and bring the light of general culture to illuminate the technicalities of a special 
pursuit.
(Mill 1867: 219)
Dr Bracewell:  You’re winding yourself up here, and it’s clouding your judgement. You 
know full well that people learn best when they are enjoying it. Students need to feel 
comfortable about what they are learning, and, importantly, they need to know how 
to learn. That’s not touchy-feely, that’s just common sense, and it applies in a uni­
versity as much as a primary school. And who doesn’t ask themselves what the 
knowledge means to them? I would say that this question is crucial to higher learn­
ing. And it’s no good bemoaning students wanting to get jobs. We have a duty to 
prepare people for life, and on top of that I do want our graduates to be good citi­
zens. That’s how societies improve, and I want to think our graduates will make a 
difference, in their local communities, and in their jobs. And let’s get real here. Uni­
versities are judged on these things, and we can’t afford to get left behind. You want 
fewer graduates? Well, you are going the right way to bring that about; unfortunately 
the drop in numbers will only be at this university, enabling others to benefit from 
our loss.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
117
[I]t [a university] is a place of teaching universal knowledge. This implies that its 
object is, on the one hand, intellectual, not moral, and, on the other, that it is the 
diffusion and extension of knowledge rather than the advancement. If its object 
were scientific and philosophical discovery, I do not see why a University should 
have students …
(Newman [1852] 1996: 3)
Both are from around 150 years ago, but could easily have been written today. The first 
is addressing a perceived and unwarranted ‘vocational turn’. And the second, which 
appeared in Chapter 3 to highlight the importance of teaching in the university, is used 
here to signal what has been called in recent times an unwarranted ‘therapeutic turn’, 
first, in the USA (Sykes 1992), then in the UK (Ecclestone and Hayes 2008). In the latter, 
it is no longer an unhelpful concern for the moral being, nor even the general well-
being of a student, but a more dangerous casting of students as vulnerable, requiring 
their fragile egos to be positively massaged as a function of the educative process. 
Essentially, this is an infantilising agenda (Furedi 2004).
There seems to be two broad continua at work here. With regard to a ‘vocational 
turn’, there might be some distance between a university course which is specifically 
aimed at preparing students for a particular job (doctor, social worker, etc.), and a 
university course which has a graduate skills (or attributes) framework aimed at all 
students on all courses. And, on the therapeutic turn, there may be a huge distance 
between casting a student as a ‘diminished self’ (Ecclestone et al. 2005) in need of sup­
port to bolster a fragile ego, and providing opportunities for students to become ‘unen­
cumbered’ selves (Barnett 2011a). And even if we could find clear evidence of both at 
work in universities and colleges, would it not be possible to unite these perspectives 
in a desire to heighten the sense that students should see themselves clearly as agents 
in their lives rather than as victims of circumstances? Or, to answer the question posed 
in that popular song by The Killers: ‘Are we human or are we dancer?’; that is, are we 
free individuals or mere puppets?
Prof. Reason:  Well, that all sounds very grand and noble, but I’ve been reading some 
of Frank Furedi’s work and I’d certainly be happy to buy him a pint. We are infantilis­
ing our students. I mean, just look at the ‘shit sandwich’ we’re supposed to use when 
giving feedback. How does it go, thank them for their essay – which they have no 
choice on – then say something positive, then make the critical comments – which 
is the only thing which really needs to be said – then say something positive again, 
even it if it’s the worst thing you’ve ever read in your life. I mean. come on, what’s 
this all about? As if students can’t see through it anyway. Just give ‘em the grade, 
that’s all they want. I had to go to one of those staff development events a couple 
of years ago – last one I went to, I remember it well – where someone in the room 
suggested that we don’t put ‘fail’ on a student assignment, we put ‘needs develop­
ment’ and then tell them how to put it right. Seriously? I might as well just write the 
answer for them, it will save time all round. Come to think of it, why don’t we just put 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

118
JOHN LEA
•	
How would you articulate the principles that underpin the ways you ­support 
your students to achieve their academic goals? 
•	
At school/faculty or institution-wide level, how have you been involved in 
seeking to establish an effective balance between rights and responsibilities 
when it comes to academic learning (for staff and students)?
Activity 5.1
The validity of higher education knowledge
The idea that we might be infantilising higher education students, turning seminars 
into a mirror of primary school ‘circle time’ (Ecclestone and Hayes 2008), raises the 
‘needs development’ on everything and just say it means ‘pass’? I heard a rumour 
the other day that this place is thinking of having a learning and teaching ethics 
committee to whom we will have to submit lesson plans to check that we are dealing 
with sensitive subject matter correctly – yes, correctly is the right word – politically 
correctly. As if the research ethics committees aren’t bad enough. What was it I saw, 
‘Be mindful when surveying students, or conducting interviews with them, so they 
are not harmed in the process.’ Harmed by an interview? I’d like to harm the person 
who wrote that, then they’d know what harm really means.
Dr Bracewell:  How wonderfully alarmist! I know that section in the ethics guidance 
document well, having conducted a number of interviews in the last year. You’ve 
paraphrased it in order to ridicule it. What it actually says is that we have a duty of 
care when conducting interviews, to ensure that interviewees, including our stu­
dents, fully understand the nature and purpose of the exercise, and that they should 
be comfortable about that, and that there is mutual benefit to be gained by both 
parties. The word ‘harm’ applies to the process, that is, the potential for the inter­
view not to generate valid, reliable and ethically sound knowledge. And anyway, it’s 
guidance; you make everything sound like a diktat! Which is what people who rally 
against political correctness always do. And the same applies to the shit sandwich, 
as you eloquently put it. Are you seriously suggesting that we shouldn’t be encour­
aging our students, prompting them on how to improve, and develop their study 
skills? You say you haven’t been to a staff development event for the last two years; 
well, you’ve clearly missed out on some really useful conversations about feed for­
ward rather than just feedback. Instead of reading Frank Furedi, I suggest you start 
reading something by Graham Gibbs. How about buying him a pint to thank him for 
over twenty years of evidence on what works in improving student learning? And 
number one on that list is probably the harmful effect of grading on learning. Sorry, 
I said that word harmful there.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
119
question of what exactly is meant by the word ‘higher’ in higher education. Returning 
to our original Venn diagram in Figure 5.1, what exactly might be meant by a higher 
knower; a higher being; and a higher actor? Or put another way, is there a ‘divided line’ 
above which we are clearly working at a higher level?
One way to look at this is to place Bloom’s three learning domains above our 
original Venn sets, and ask to what extent we are moving students towards the high 
level skills in each of the domains. That is, to what extent is the learning enabling 
students to evaluate (and/or create) as knowers; to characterise (internalise and 
own) as beings; and to naturalise (as in second nature and/or originate) as actors. In 
turn, these higher level skills might be argued to be enactments of Maslow’s original 
notion of self-actualisation (Figure 5.2), with its emphasis on the person as an agent 
or self-willed. In the language of Carl Rogers, the learner is ‘free’; in the language of 
Barnett, the student is ‘unencumbered; and in the language more commonly seen in 
higher education documentation today, we have the autonomous or independent 
learner. And, returning to the original idea of a completely overlapping three-set 
Venn diagram, we also have the possibility here of a university education being com­
plete at the point where all three separate sets of activities come together in one 
person.
Figure 5.2  Higher education as an enactment of Maslow’s self-actualisation.
Self-Actualisation
Higher Education
Higher Education
Being
Knowing
Acting
In his book Bringing Knowledge Back In, Michael Young is particularly vexed 
by the question of vocational knowledge (Young 2008). Specifically, what is the 
status of experience gained from a work context that merits it being called knowl­
edge, or, more precisely, what is the process of transformation required for these 
experiences to become real knowledge? Drawing particularly on the work of the 
sociologists Basil Bernstein (in the late twentieth century), and the work of Emile 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

120
JOHN LEA
Durkheim (in the early twentieth century), Young looks at how experiential forms 
of learning, gained in particular (often work) contexts (indeed, that it is context-
tied) becomes elaborated – theorised, conceptualised – to become real, objective, 
knowledge. In the language of Durkheim, it passes from profane to sacred status, 
and, in the language of Bernstein, it desists from being horizontal in nature, and 
takes on elevated (vertical) status (Young 2008). This is another divided line which 
could be added to our previous diagram, requiring that our students deal strictly 
with this vertical knowledge, or, if they are to bring horizontal knowledge into the 
classroom, that they understand the process required to transform it into real 
knowledge.
Young’s work is relevant to this chapter for two key reasons. First, it shifts debates 
about the difference between vocational and academic knowledge away from the 
value given to academic knowledge simply because it is academic (and favoured by 
the powerful upper middle classes in some lines of argument), and moves it towards 
a consideration of its conceptual underpinning, thereby providing it with an objective 
status. Bringing this question closer to the classroom, it also speaks to the need to 
consider the question of re-contextualisation, that is, the pedagogical interventions 
needed to enable students to effectively translate the work-based, experiential con­
text into a conceptual one, and vice versa (see, for example, Eraut 2000; Young 2008; 
Hordern 2014; Simmons 2014). A vocational curriculum may need to be clearly and 
carefully articulated along these re-contextualising lines. This should also be 
extremely helpful in helping to determine what exactly is the higher element in that 
curriculum, or, in terms of Figure 5.1, what is it that takes the knowledge above the 
divided line?
The second reason why Young’s work is important is because, for him, it stands as 
an important corrective to much of his earlier work which took the social construction 
of knowledge to mean that the value of classroom knowledge was, in reality, rooted 
not in questions of epistemology but political clout, that is, it was the knowledge 
deemed to be of value to those who had the wherewithal to get it onto the curriculum 
(Young 1971; Keddie 1974). In this debate the power of knowledge becomes the knowl­
edge of the powerful, which the powerless are invited to invest in in order to gain the 
academic credentials to become socially mobile. In extreme versions of this debate, 
Shakespeare is on the curriculum not because his work has crossed an epistemological 
divided line in order to be deemed ‘good’, but simply because he is liked by those who 
have the power to put him onto the curriculum. To avoid this relativist (or Foucauld­
ian) quagmire, Young challenges himself to establish a realist approach to knowledge, 
where, particularly with the help of Durkheim, he seeks the foundations for objective 
social knowledge. But there are also clear implications here for the humanities, in gen­
eral, and the natural sciences.
This takes us to the heart of discipline-based epistemological debate, extending in 
the process some of the discussion about discipline allegiance covered in Chapter 3. 
One dimension to this debate is the demarcation line often drawn between natural sci­
ence subjects and social science subjects, where in the former one finds the image of 
the scientist carefully listening to the voice of Nature (using an array of experimental 
equipment) in order to discover her (sic) secrets. To be contrasted to the social scien­
tist who can only ever hope to approximate this exactitude, or give up altogether and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
121
satisfy themselves with perspectives rather than truths, or to seek understanding 
rather than explanation (verstehen vs. erklären, as Dilthey once described that con­
trast). But is this just a caricature of the differences, designed to defend different 
notions of valid knowledge, which in actual research practice are much closer on both 
sides? Durkheim certainly considered social facts to have as much weight as any other 
type of fact. And Einstein never claimed that he had discovered the truth, only that he 
had offered insight. Indeed, there are many people working in the world of quantum 
mechanics today who speak a language which would not be out of keeping on a Bud­
dhist retreat.
These epistemological demarcation disputes are complicated by two other 
dimensions which are relevant to the themes of this chapter. First, the demarcation 
line between what are often referred to as the pure and applied subjects within disci­
plines (as in pure and applied physics, for example), and these apply equally across 
discipline boundaries (as in economics and business studies – where the weighting of 
pure and applied might be shuffled differently between them). Gibbons and col­
leagues speak of the applied subjects containing mode 2 knowledge (applied), as 
opposed to the mode 1 knowledge of the pure subjects (Gibbons et al. 1994). This 
distinction echoes that other contemporary distinction between hard and soft, but 
also the more ancient distinctions between the Trivium knowledge of the human­
ities and the Quadrivium knowledge of the sciences. But importantly, it also speaks 
to an increased need not for multi-disciplinary knowledge, but interdisciplinary 
knowledge – with an emphasis on using knowledge from many sources to problem 
solve, rather than just applying the knowledge gained from one discipline context 
(Trowler et al. 2014).
These distinctions have also been used to rethink the metaphor of ‘tribes and 
territories’ and the nature of discipline allegiance (see Chapter 3), prompting new 
metaphors, like ‘oceans’, which emphasise fluidity (Manathunga and Brew 2014) par­
ticularly for professional courses, which almost by definition, will have much closer 
links with workplaces (Trowler et al. 2014). Earlier, this also prompted Bernstein to 
speak of a distinction between ‘singulars’, ‘regionals’ and ‘genericist’ knowledge, that 
is, knowledge produced in insular fashion by a discipline community increasingly 
being overtaken by knowledge which is brought to the university, which in the pro­
cess may then act as a de-professionalising force (Beck and Young 2005). These dis­
tinctions are important because not only might they provide different answers to the 
divided line questions, but also because the more applied the subjects are considered 
to be, the clearer it might be that the original Venn diagram would naturally have 
larger overlaps with the being and acting sets, particularly on those professional 
learning courses – where exercising professional judgements within vocational set­
tings is paramount. Looking forward to Chapter 7, they might also help to explain 
why some subject areas seem more comfortable with the REF notion of research 
impact than others.
The second complicating dimension is more overtly pedagogical, and concerns 
the extent to which some of these epistemological disputes have spilled over into the 
ways that the subjects are taught, and whether, thereby, each subject area has its 
own very distinct subject pedagogy. There is something intuitively obvious about 
claiming that a mathematician would teach their subject differently from, say, an 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

122
JOHN LEA
Relevant HEA project
Gunn, V. and Fisk, A. (2013) Considering Teaching Excellence in Higher Education: 
2007–2013: A Literature Review Since the CHERI Report 2007. Available at: www.
heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/TELR_final_acknowledgements.
pdf
Prof. Reason:  Well, I can certainly help out here. The further up the academic ladder 
you go, naturally, the more you will become involved in the dissemination of ideas. 
For example, presenting a paper at a conference as a PhD student is the best way I 
know of preparing that student for teaching that subject. But there’s another import­
ant reason why we need to hold on to some discipline allegiance here, and that is to 
stop those staff development busybodies from imposing their useless generic 
teaching principles on us all. That’s just a recipe to turn us all into school teachers, 
and even worse, robotic ones, using those ridiculous lesson plans with those even 
more ridiculous prescriptive boxes. Seriously, how would somebody who’s never 
studied physics even begin to know how to teach it? As far as I’m concerned, this is 
just another form of unwarranted managerialism creeping into the university and we 
should resist it.
Dr Bracewell:  Are you seriously trying to tell me that because a history teacher has 
been re-examining the causes of the Second World War, that they are, at the same 
time, involved in a re-examination of how to teach it? And could a physics teacher 
seriously claim that the methods they use to explore the movement of sub-atomic 
particles could be used to explore the nature of teacher–student interactions? 
There’s another angle here as well, one which has clearly bypassed you, because, 
unlike me, you’ve never undertaken a teaching qualification. When I was doing my 
PG Cert (HE), it wasn’t the teaching of generic learning principles that got everyone 
fired up, it was the chance to debate with colleagues from other disciplines. One of 
the best bits was where we had to defend our teaching and learning regimes. Under 
interrogation, it turned out most of us simply couldn’t do it, other than to say that is 
how we do things in my discipline!
In summarising Reason and Bracewell’s argument here, could we say that there 
are often some very sound political reasons for defending our teaching and learning 
regimes, but which can also act to hide some poor epistemological reasoning?
English Literature teacher, but the challenge is how well the articulated distinction 
would stand up to critical scrutiny.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
123
•	
How would you articulate your discipline/subject’s pedagogy, and how do 
you engage with forms of CPD to enhance aspects of your teaching and 
learning regime? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in establishing a regime of teaching and learn­
ing related professional development at school/faculty or institution level?
Activity 5.2
Dear Lecturer
On the nature of learning and knowledge as CPD
Kate Riseley
Who am I addressing in this short letter; surely not ‘Lecturer’, but ‘Facilitator of 
Learning’? And in that respect we are surely not that different. While your specialist 
academic knowledge is no doubt greater than mine, the journey we walk is quite 
similar. Don’t we both facilitate learning, our own and each other’s and those we 
don’t know? And don’t we both strive to know more tomorrow than we do today?
Entering university, we leave the spoon-feeding of the education nursery and we 
arrive at the ‘all you can eat’ buffet. Everything is there for the taking and for the 
sharing. It is up to us to facilitate our own learning, to access the buffet and heap our 
plates. But we also facilitate each other’s learning; as fellow students we communi­
cate with each other, through the conversations unpacking the unfathomable theories 
and concepts. But I sometimes wonder what you are learning from your students. In 
what ways are we facilitating your learning? I also think my learning would be facili­
tated more by knowing more about how you facilitate your own learning.
The question of whether epistemology is being used to mask the underlying polit­
ical reasoning is at the heart of the American culture wars and the associated accusa­
tions of political correctness gone mad. These debates have been extremely heated, 
and many of them have taken place in universities, where they often revolved around 
those who want to keep politics out of the curriculum arguing against those who want 
the exact opposite. This politicisation was a key component in the sociology of curric­
ulum knowledge in the 1960s and 1970s, but throughout the 1980s and 1990s (particu­
larly in the United States), the debates spread to include the humanities and the 
natural sciences. For example, in English departments, vociferous debates took place 
between those who wanted to attack the so-called literary canon, as being little more 
than the works of ‘dead, white, (mainly European) males’; in History departments, 
questions were asked about whether history as a discipline was quite literary his-
story (i.e. narratives about the activities of men); and how history was being used as 
propaganda – both by those who wanted it to be used to celebrate, and by those who 
denigrate, aspects of cultural identity; and in the natural sciences, questions were 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

124
JOHN LEA
being raised about the motivations of scientists in asking certain questions rather 
than others, and the influence of funding bodies on scientific research (see, for exam­
ple, D’Souza 1992; Nash et al. 1997; Zimmerman 2002; Bok 2005, for critical discus­
sions of these developments in American higher education).
For some authors, it was clear that this politicisation was at heart an attack on the 
Enlightenment, the idea of human reason shining its light to discover the truth, and 
embedded in the various disciplines which make up a typical university (Bloom 1987; 
Bronner 2004). However, those under attack were quick to defend themselves on the 
grounds that the Enlightenment was itself just a political project, full of ironies and 
contradictions, and a project which had simply elevated a particular approach to 
knowledge above all others (Choi and Murphy 1992). On this basis, those on this side 
of the culture wars invited university departments to adopt a more eclectic approach 
to knowledge, reflecting multiple axes of knowledge, and have them compete equally 
for curriculum space. It is here where we see talk of the post-modern university, one 
which invites the same critical approach to be taken to Enlightenment thought, as the 
latter took to religious thought. This also included an invitation to critically assess the 
extent to which aspects of discipline knowledge could be viewed (and possibly mas­
queraded) as revealed, discovered, or manufactured (Rorty 1989). For some, this also 
included an extended invitation to critically assess the role of theory in knowledge 
production: asking whether theoretical conceptualisation comes as a result of careful 
observation, or is brought to those observations (Patai and Corral 2005). And, once 
again, these invitations were sent across the board to all university disciplines, not just 
the social sciences.
Another way of approaching the role of theory was to consider the role of the 
researcher as ‘detached observer’ (of both animate subjects and inanimate objects). 
For, if it is impossible to view the world without some prior conceptualisation, it might 
equally be impossible to ask questions in the first place which are not value-laden in 
some way. For example, would disciplines have moved in different directions if differ­
ent questions had been asked; if different bodies had been funding and disseminating 
the results; and, indeed if different people had been doing the research? These ques­
tions were at the heart of some of the most heated culture war debates in universities 
in the United States. For example, had more scientists been women, would scientific 
endeavour have looked different;? if more historians had been black or gay, would 
history books have looked different; and so on? These ‘voice’ perspectives were com­
plicated by the extent to which black, female, queer (etc.) voices were viewed as being 
‘essentially’ different (as in essentialism) or constructed (as a result of environmental 
influence) (Gilligan 1982; hooks 1996). If the latter, they were then open to critical 
deconstruction, but if the former, then the question is raised about whether only repre­
sentatives of those groups can teach these subjects in university departments.
Prof. Reason:  Whoa! Hold those horses right there! As a friend of mine in the USA said 
to me a while back, if we carry on like this, you’ll have to be a rock in order to teach 
geology. This just goes to show how far we’ve gone in the wrong direction in higher 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
125
These questions are also extremely important when it comes to inclusivity. For, if 
the knowledge being taught is value-laden, particularly if it is viewed as a variation on 
the theme of ‘dead, white, males’, it is one thing to view access and mobility as an oppor­
tunity to engage with that knowledge, but quite another to view it as an opportunity to 
change the content of the curriculum to better reflect the values and culture of other 
groups; indeed, especially where lack of engagement by those groups might have been 
caused (in part at least) by being exposed to an alienating curriculum. This is also the 
starting part for the critical pedagogies associated with the work of Paulo Freire (see, 
for example, Freire 1970; Giroux 1981; hooks 1994; McLean 2008) the broad aim of 
which is to see the curriculum as a starting point to help people not just understand their 
circumstances, but also to challenge and change cycles of social disadvantage. Other 
variations of these radical pedagogies can be seen in the use of the classroom as a form 
of consciousness raising (which was originally popularised in feminist circles) and iden­
tity affirmation (which was originally popularised in anti-racist contexts). If we include 
in this list a desire to see research projects avowedly pursued because of their potential 
to enhance the lives of people living with disadvantage, discrimination and/or poverty, 
we can see how these ‘knowledge as standpoint’ perspectives might be equally embraced 
and denigrated by those on either side of the culture wars.
In stricter pedagogical terms, this division can also be summarised in the division 
between those who think it is more inclusive to support students to win a curriculum 
game which is heavily stacked against them, or to challenge the rules of that game, or, 
indeed, suggest that we should be playing another game altogether. For conservative 
authors like Allan Bloom and Dinesh D’Souza, this radical multi-cultural agenda in 
American universities was destined, in the end, to work against the very groups it was 
aimed at supporting (Bloom 1987; D’Souza 1992). For, not only would it produce 
education. The point about academic work is that it is, precisely, academic. What hap­
pened to being detached, not bringing emotional arguments to the table, speaking and 
writing in the third person? Has all this gone out of the window? Not that I have any 
desire personally to teach a feminist studies course, but are we really saying that this 
can only be taught by a feminist? Next thing will be that you have to prove you’re gay 
in order to undertake a course on gay studies, or whatever they call it these days.
Dr Bracewell:  Look, I’ll grant you that it can sound a bit odd when it looks like some 
people are being excluded from teaching and studying on particular courses. But the 
intention is exactly the opposite. It’s because certain voices have been lost to the 
academic world over the years that we need to take positive steps to bring them into 
the fold. Your argument would make more sense if we could prove that the main­
stream subjects really were detached and objective. Are you sure that all History 
courses simply document the facts, and don’t ever reflect the interests of those 
who’ve done the research? Are you really sure that those who teach Economics aren’t 
mainly pro-capitalist, and those who teach Politics aren’t mainly anti-capitalist? 
I’d be happy to wager some money on being right about this.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

126
JOHN LEA
minority enclaves in certain university departments, it would also mean that members 
of those groups would have to constantly defend themselves against the accusation 
that they got into university not based on merit but because they were members of 
those groups, and were there simply to advance that group’s interests. This can only 
result, ultimately, in the pursuit of the ‘particular’ not the ‘universal’; highlighting what 
separates us rather than what unites us.
•	
In what ways have you actively encouraged students from particular social 
groups, e.g. black, minority-ethnic (BME) to engage with, or change, the 
nature of the curriculum? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in institution-wide (and beyond) curri-
culum initiatives in order that it better serve a diverse range of students?
Activity 5.3
On the other side of that debate stand those who see ‘merit’ as a disguised euphe­
mism for ‘advantage’, enabling students from privileged groups to be sponsored to 
achieve high marks on (so-called) standardised tests, and to view the curriculum as an 
objective authority, rather than, in reality, a political battleground (Fish 1994). This 
line of argument helped Fish gain his title as ‘the grand wizard of political correctness’ – of 
course, the title granted him by his Enlightenment opponents. In terms of our divided 
line, we might summarise this debate as an attempt by authors like Bloom to try to 
make it bolder (holding fast to what is objectively true), and by authors like Fish as an 
attempt to remove the line altogether (or perhaps better, to view it as a political line 
and not an epistemological one).
The ontological dimension in higher education knowledge
The culture wars discussion above has already encroached on the subject of this final 
theme; namely, the extent to which higher education knowledge should bring about 
the transformation of the person. For many on the conservative side of the previous 
debate, the worry was the extent to which this dimension had become so concerned 
with identity affirmation that it was not only overshadowing the disinterested pursuit 
of truth, but also beginning to question the very idea of knowledge as truth. While 
those on the progressive side of the debate wanted to emphasise that, at the heart of 
radical multiculturalism, there was, precisely, a critique of knowledge as truth, and it 
was not simply a moral crusade on behalf of the disadvantaged. Indeed, if there was a 
moral crusade, it rode on the back of that epistemological critique. Looked at in this 
way, a culture war can never be won because both sides have no common language to 
come together with.
One of the reasons why culture war debates are commonly associated with forms 
of political correctness is the progressive wing’s conclusion that if notions of objectiv­
ity and truth are simply veils which are placed over what are, in reality, particular 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
127
perspectives, then all knowledge must be, at heart, political. But one of the ways in 
which conservative thinkers were very successful in countering that line of argument 
was to accuse the progressives of demanding a slavish, self-righteous, pursuit of the 
interests of previously disadvantaged groups, that is, making it unquestionably the 
correct thing to do, and creating a ‘dictatorship of virtue’ (Bernstein 1994). This counter-
argument has proved to be very successful in seeking to show how progressive groups 
have undermined, not pursued, the very forms of criticality one would expect to see in 
a university. This was the context in the culture war debates where progressives were 
accused of closing down free speech, by demanding that correct lines of thinking 
should not tolerate alternative lines of thought.
Prof. Reason:  Aha! Is this the bit where I’m allowed to speak out against the green 
police who operate on campus? And what was that email I saw the other day that 
all degrees must have a module on sustainability and all students must take it. 
What business is it of mine or this university to tell students how to live their lives? 
It’ll backfire anyway, because in two years time we’ll all probably be told that smok­
ing is good for us, and global warming is good, and so on. Or will that just become 
something else to ram down people’s throats? It’s bad enough being told that I don’t 
have enough ethnic minority students on my courses, so what’s next, how I’m sup­
posed to address them and teach them? I’ve seen some of those speech codes 
that American universities have; it’s laughable. Please don’t tell me we are going to 
have one of them here!
Dr Bracewell:  Actually, we do have a guidance document on the inclusive curriculum, 
which you’ve probably never looked at. It’s not a speech code but it does have some 
great advice on developing intercultural literacy, including ways to support first gen­
eration entrants to university, and international students. You can ridicule this if you 
want, but a sense of belongingness is now well known to be a key feature in retain­
ing students. And why wouldn’t you want that? And you know full well that sustain­
ability is not just a moralising agenda. I agree with you when it comes to some of 
the directives we have, but we are talking about the curriculum here, and any aca­
demic module on sustainability would cover a whole range of perspectives, including 
the importance of sustainable communication, and it would obviously include cri­
tiques and competing perspectives. You make it all sound like telling people off if 
they leave a light on, and you know full well it’s much more than that.
There are a number of thorny issues here, though, because it might be one thing 
to teach values, as in ensuring someone’s behaviour is in accord with a prescribed set 
of values (e.g. don’t kick cats, because it’s not nice), but quite another to develop an 
understanding of the conceptual frameworks that underpin ethical theory (e.g. hav­
ing knowledge of, say, deontological and utilitarian theories). And it might be quite 
another again to avowedly claim that a student should be leaving university with a 
distinct sense of agency (as a particular type of being). And while this ontological 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

128
JOHN LEA
dimension might be a very visible part of a mission statement for a college or univer­
sity with a clear religious or political conviction, it is not so clear how this might be 
made manifest in other institutions. Indeed, echoing Professor Reason, whether it is 
any business of a university how its students might act beyond its walls (even within 
it) and certainly beyond graduation. For some, to even talk in this way is enough to 
demonstrate how far universities have strayed from their mission as knowledge gen­
erators and disseminators. But for others the question has become one of how exactly 
we prepare students for a world of: ‘Fluidity, fuzziness, instability, fragility, unpre­
dictability, indeterminacy, turbulence, changeability, contestability: these are some 
of the terms that mark out the world of the twenty-first century’ (Barnett and Coate 
2005: 53).
One way to look at this question is to consider Carl Rogers’ notion of significant 
learning, and ask what it means to have learnt something which is not of any value. 
Here the very act of loving learning implies that it now occupies the heart not just the 
head (has entered the affective not just the cognitive domain). Furthermore, and 
returning to our ‘higher’ Venn diagram in Figure 5.2, we might also wish to say that our 
self-actualised student is not now just intelligent, but wise. It is in this context that we 
also speak of an ethical university, not just acting ethically as an ‘organization’ (or 
company, see Chapter 7), by for example, having a ‘green’ agenda, or having an explicit 
research ethics policy, but also in the ways that these impact on the curriculum. Here, 
the university continues in its mission of exploring the nature of truth claims (the epis­
temological dimension), but gives equal attention to the nature of human identity and 
the worthiness of the venture of the university itself (Nixon 2008). In terms of a Venn 
diagram, these last two elements will also impact (as overlap) on the epistemological 
dimension in demanding that we act truthfully (authentically, with integrity and con­
viction) in pursuing the truth, or advancing knowledge and understanding.
Relevant HEA project
Barnett, R. (2014) Conditions of flexibility. Available at: www.heacademy.ac.uk/
conditions-flexibility-securing-more-responsive-higher-education-system
•	
In what ways have you actively sought to incorporate elements of self-devel­
opment in your teaching and learning regime (e.g. students as virtuous 
citizens or ethically minded employees)? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in establishing an ethically based 
mission or strategy for your school/faculty, institution (and/or beyond)?
Activity 5.4
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
129
This elevation of the ontological dimension has several important strands. For 
example, psychoanalytically informed literature speaks of the need to help people 
deal with uncertainty (Frosh 1991) mixed with a reflexive social mood engendered by 
late or high modernity (Giddens 1991), where everything that was once solid now 
melts into air (Marx and Engels [1848] 2004), but which today increasingly includes 
the foundations for any knowledge claims. For Barnett, this makes it imperative that 
students learn to deal not just with the contestability of ideas but more profoundly 
with the ‘supercomplex’ nature of knowledge (Barnett 2000), and one which compels 
us to see human identity as always a ‘becoming’; identity as an unfinished project. 
This is what we need to prepare our students for – that fuzziness and fluidity (Barnett 
and Coate 2005). Charles Bailey also once spoke of the need to see education as some­
thing which offers the potential to take a student away from the present and the par­
ticular, to be contrasted with training courses which act in the opposite direction 
(Bailey 1984). Here, employability is also as much a state of mind or set of disposi­
tions, as a set of skills; not preparing students for a job, but helping them navigate an 
ever-changing job market; not being called to a vocation, but seeing work more like a 
series of self-development projects.
These ideas seem to follow logically from the notion of a student as unencum­
bered, for how are people to navigate all this uncertainty without a resilient sense of 
personal agency? Once again, we are back in the affective domain, using words pre­
fixed with ‘self’: self-reliance; self-motivation; self-development, and so on. And here 
the notion of criticality, usually applied to the epistemological dimension, becomes 
self-criticality, and part of the ontological project of a university. As Sherman points 
out, this self-criticality is double-edged because it can result in the opening-up of 
horizons but also act as a reality check, by helping us to focus on what is ‘structur­
ated’, to use Giddens’ term (i.e. what are the structures which situate us) (Giddens 
1984; Sherman 2003). Either way, it is this sociological imagination which enables us 
to see that things could be different but also what is needed to break free from the 
conventions which make us just one of the crowd (Riesman et al. [1950] 2001). This 
type of imagination also seems to be at the heart of management theories which 
encourage people to think ‘outside of the box’, as exemplified in the contemporary 
Theory U (Scharmer 2009).
Conclusion
Bill Readings speaks of ‘the university in ruins’ (Readings 1996). In part, this ruination 
has happened because of its pursuit of excellence – a vacuous quality term implying 
that if it meets its targets, then it congratulates itself on being excellent, but also 
because it has not been able to sufficiently defend itself against some of the implica­
tions of those culture war debates, leaving it without a clear purpose, and vulnerable 
to appropriation by a range of stakeholders. One way to rebuild it would be to take the 
Allan Bloom path and reinstate the role of Reason and all its implied Enlightenment 
baggage, but another way is to consider how the ‘dissensus’ engendered by the various 
epistemological disputes are themselves establishing a form of unity; the being as 
dissensus, or the university as a means to answer ‘the question of being together’ 
(Readings 1996: 20). Here the kinds of criticality commonly associated with university 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

130
JOHN LEA
degrees form the foundations for students to become agents of community; diplomats 
and critical citizens; applying the skill of criticality to forge new relationships, partner­
ships, tolerance, and so on: ‘It is to understand the obligation of community as one to 
which we are answerable but to which we cannot supply an answer’ (Readings 1996: 
187). In terms of our Venn diagram in Figure 5.1, this clearly helps to unite and overlap 
the sets, where the knower, being, and actor becomes a brokering agent in a world of 
dissensus; or a world where the epistemological and ontological dimensions are united, 
to form a wise citizen for the twenty-first century; one with the capabilities to trans­
form the world (Maxwell 2008; Kreber 2013). Put simply, it is also a willingness to 
consider a situation from the perspective of someone different (Nussbaum 1997), and 
where teaching is primarily viewed as ‘a matter of dialogue rather than the reproduc­
tion of a system of thought’ (Delanty 2001:140).
This vision is not without its problems. It seems to demand that universities con­
cern themselves squarely with notions of social justice; democracy, tolerance and 
even well-being. But these terms are themselves part of the dissensus for there is no 
universal understanding of their meaning, or general acceptance that they are, in 
themselves, good things. Why should I tolerate the intolerable, or will there always 
be a compromise? And what if I decide to live as a hermit after my university educa­
tion; have I now failed my university, and even myself, by reneging on a civic duty? 
But the vision is significant, because it places centre stage the notion of a university 
not just as a special knowledge space, but also as a special civic space – where we 
present the evidence of our deliberations, but also learn to relate to each other 
(Nixon 2008).
The ontological dimension needs to be put under critical scrutiny. In the end, we 
may have to make a stand on it. For some, its elevation may have been enough to dam­
age the role of the university as knowledge creator and disseminator, but for others, it 
may be viewed as a necessary rebalancing act between the epistemological and the 
ontological, or between knowledge and wisdom. And where the former helps us to 
understand and look critically at values, and the latter helps us to actually value. This 
question is not unrelated to the culture war debates, because not only might the disin­
terested pursuit of truth turn out to be a masquerade, but it might also produce a world 
of knowledge with no meaning – disenchanted knowledge, as Max Weber put it – or 
lifeless facts. The challenge now becomes to see wisdom as ‘the capacity to realize 
(apprehend and create) what is of value in life, for oneself and others …’. (Maxwell 
2012: 134), including a demand that we do not disassociate scientific and technological 
endeavour ‘from a more fundamental concern with problems of living’ (Maxwell 
2012: 124).
Here, the cultivation of character (Bildung) also needs re-exploring, not as ratio­
nal Enlightenment man (sic), but as a communicator in a world of uncertainty (Readings 
1996) – not the aggregation of knowledge, but making it meaningful. Here, ‘the univer­
sity is a zone of mediation between knowledge as science (or academic knowledge) 
and cultural cognition’ (Delanty 2001: 12–13). And where: ‘the knowledge project 
should be ultimately judged by how students make a stand for what they believe to be 
a better world’ (Harland and Pickering 2011: 27). Perhaps the simplest articulation is 
to take the notion of the craftsman as someone who does something well (Sennett 
2008), and transpose that as an aspiration for all our graduates. For those worried by 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
131
how much these ontological dimensions have undermined the epistemological one, 
the question might be asked as to the extent to which the epistemological drive to: 
render all knowledge as contingent; make everything an ‘interim report’ (Collini 
2012), and pursue knowledge by critiquing knowledge (Barnett 2011a), might then be 
brought to the ontological dimension to form a complementary rather than a contra­
dictory overlap.
Opinion Piece, Debate, Dear Lecturer, and Fellowship Application 
extracts
In the following opinion piece Ruth Lawton reflects on her role as an employability 
officer and the role generally of employability in the university curriculum. This is 
followed by a debate between Dennis Hayes and Celia Popovic, who take opposing 
positions on the nature of academic knowledge in the university and the extent to 
which it can be viewed as ‘objective’. To finish, Dave Thomas, a recent graduate from 
Canterbury Christ Church University, reflects on the chapter overall. This is followed 
by three extracts from successful HEA fellowship applicants who discuss some of the 
aspects of academic practice which feature in this chapter.
Opinion: On employability
Why employability is so important
Ruth Lawton
When we talk about academic knowledge, we are usually talking about discipline 
knowledge – history, accounting, midwifery, architectural technology. But as aca­
demics in HE, we also have to have knowledge about other aspects of the student 
experience and outcome from HE. Our students don’t just leave with a degree, we 
expect them to leave employable, and more than that – with graduate-level employment. 
Most graduate employers are not recruiting for a specific discipline (Prospects.
ac.uk) instead they are recruiting for skills, qualities, attributes, behaviours, ‘fit’, 
and so on. And our graduates need to recognise, record, articulate, evidence and 
demonstrate that they match these employer requirements as well as their degree 
subject knowledge.
As an academic, it is asking a lot of you to know about all this! So, what do you 
know about graduate recruitment? And, do you even think it’s your job to know this? 
And if it is someone else’s job, who is that person and how do your students find him 
or her? Or, how does that person find your students?
My role at Birmingham City University is to facilitate embedding employability in 
the culture and curriculum of the university, thereby enhancing the career prospects of 
our students and graduates. When I first started trying to do this, about 15 years ago, 
it was a thankless task with enormous resistance from almost everyone, academic 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

132
JOHN LEA
staff and senior management alike. Now I am welcomed everywhere and everyone is 
willing to explore and make changes to their practice where possible, but now new 
problems have arisen. The curriculum is under pressure from all sorts of stakeholders; 
the employability knowledge required to be effective in enhancing our students’ pros­
pects is also far more sophisticated and complex; and academic practitioners have so 
many things to balance alongside this agenda.
But let’s be realistic. Surveys of students show that one of the reasons they are 
at university is for better job prospects and they expect us (we who teach them) to 
support them with that. And the fairest, most effective, and efficient way to do that 
is in your classroom via your curriculum.
If we ask students to engage with ‘optional’ activities (like going to see a careers 
adviser to discuss job/lifestyle options, career decision-making, researching them­
selves and researching employers, presenting themselves on paper, online and in 
person) then a small percentage will do that. The majority will not; this is the reality. 
The percentage who will take up the option are usually the ones who already stand 
out from the crowd – and who, I would argue, need that help the least.
So, whether you like it or not, it does seem to come down to you and your class­
room, accompanied perhaps by a daunting feeling of ‘but what do I know about 
employability?’ But, actually, we all know a huge amount about employability. And I 
believe that embedding employability in your classroom and curriculum can start 
really effectively with your own reflection. How have you managed your own career 
so far? What has been your career history from Saturday/voluntary jobs as a teen­
ager through to now? How did you get those jobs? When is the last time you formally 
applied for something? How did you get on?
As you read this, you may be actively thinking about (and perhaps daunted by) 
applying for a Fellowship of the HEA which is potentially a career step as – at the 
very least – it is now in the ‘desirable’ column on a person specification for many HE 
academic posts. It is also a political and strategic step for many of us. For example, 
your institution may be paying for your application to HEA but is it what you want? 
(i.e. what is your motivation for doing it?) These are the sort of issues that confront 
our graduates and they can lead to wider questions: do you know what makes you 
happy at work, gives you a feeling of achievement, and is a real strength? Do you 
know where you want to be in 1, 2, 5 years time?
How easy was it for you to answer those questions, and how easy do you think 
your students would find it? Would their answers be realistic (I am thinking about 
students who declare that in 2 years time they will be a chartered accountant; buyer 
for Next; and in 5 years they will be on TV replacing Alan Sugar)? In this context, 
have you ever considered that being engaged with your own career and employabil­
ity is role modelling? That does not mean that your career has to be going swim­
mingly and you have answers for all of the above questions – successful people 
often claim that they learnt nothing from success, only failure. And how many of us 
have been happy to maintain the status quo because it is comfortable and easy? All 
of these things relate to managing our careers!
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
133
Debate: On the nature of academic knowledge
Can knowledge be viewed as universal and objective?
Celia Popovic
My starting point is a firm ‘no’ – knowledge cannot be viewed as universal and objec­
tive. My response alone is a good example. I ‘know’ this answer, in that for me this 
is a truth and I believe I have evidence to support it – as I will show later. However, 
I also ‘know’ that others do not agree – and I can only assume they believe their 
position to be as true as I believe mine to be. So, no: this particular knowledge is not 
universal, and I’m sure it is not objective.
A while back, I took John Lea to task over his otherwise stylish and useful text 
‘77 things to think about teaching and learning in higher education’ – because aside 
If you have not moved jobs recently, an HEA Fellowship application may be the 
first opportunity you’ve had for a while to think actively about your own CV. Indeed, 
sometimes we need these processes to recall very significant achievements that 
might otherwise get completely forgotten. And if you are finding it irksome, hard, 
revelatory, these are the very real professional knowledge spaces that your stu­
dents could benefit enormously from knowing about.
But you do not have to know all the answers, there are resources you can call 
on and use, including careers advisers who can work with you and your students, 
and academic developers who can help you design your curriculum and assessment 
to support career management/employability. For example, I have a DUMP CV (Law­
ton 2011). DUMP stands for Don’t Underestimate My Potential. This is my shoebox 
of everything I do/have done that I can dip into when needed. I haven’t applied for a 
job since 2002 but I have had to provide a CV for funding applications, a biography 
for publishers and event organisers, and detailed accounts of how fabulous I am for 
fellowships with the HEA and SEDA. My DUMP CV is 8 pages long now – it includes 
publications, conference and workshop presentations, consulting … all sorts of 
weird and wonderful things (like being interviewed by Kerrang radio, taking part in a 
tweet chat) that might be lost, but might come in useful to make me stand out from 
the crowd in the context of perhaps just one application in the future.
After reading this, I hope that next time you talk to your students about profes­
sional life you talk with passion, conviction, and from (perhaps sometimes bitter) 
experience. And if you set aside some time in your classroom to invite in alumni, 
employers, recruiters, and careers advisers, that you don’t see this as a ‘bolt-on’ to 
the curriculum to satisfy a management dictate, or to tick an employability box, but 
as a real opportunity to link academic knowledge meaningfully and authentically 
with professional knowledge.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

134
JOHN LEA
from one image of bell hooks, all images used in this publication were of men and 
the vast majority of the references were to male writers. Is there evidence here of a 
long-running bias which has made the mainstream of literature about pedagogy 
appear exclusively male, and probably white, with English as a first language (which 
John, himself is part of)? And has this also had the effect of relegating my thoughts, 
or more accurately, those of my gender to the status of perspective, as opposed to 
‘knowledge’?
What is it about knowledge that is universal and objective? What knowledge are we 
privileging and who decides what counts? Were all writers before Jane Austen male? 
What about the playwright Aphra Benn? Are all classical composers men? What about 
Clara Schumann or Fanny Mendelssohn? In the sciences – who discovered DNA? Yes, we 
all know – Francis Crick, James Watson and Maurice Wilkins, according to those who 
hand out the prizes; but what about Rosalind Franklin? There are dozens of other exam­
ples in science alone where women’s contributions are either ignored or attributed to 
men, often their supervisor or husband. So which version counts as ‘knowledge’?
Who decided that we needed a slot for sports news at the end of radio or TV 
bulletins and the back pages of newspapers? Why not announcements on child rear­
ing or health updates? Either of these would be of as much interest to some as 
knowing which group of players managed to kick a ball into a net more times than 
another group. Who decided we needed to hear a report on the stock exchange at 
least once a day? Why not current literacy rates or teenage pregnancy levels? Not 
all women would be interested in this either, and of course not all men are interested 
in sport: the point is that there are choices to be made and those with power and 
influence make the decisions.
In any account, the reporter, the writer, the commentator or the educator makes a 
choice. When the choice is repeated over and over again, and those making the choice 
are regarded by society as holding superior status (like a judge, a clergyman or an aca­
demic), those choices come to be seen as a fixed notion. But there is always a choice.
Who decides on the curriculum in a given subject? One teacher or a group of 
scholars select the elements that they think are key for this particular group of stu­
dents at this particular level of their learning. Any such selection is arbitrary. But 
what about progression? Surely there are things we have to learn in order to under­
stand the next step. Well, yes, I agree it is necessary to have an understanding of 
addition, for example, before you can understand multiplication. However, who 
decides that we need to learn multiplication or when we need to learn it? I am not 
suggesting we stop teaching basic maths to school children but I am using this as 
an analogy for most of the content of university courses. Who decided when I stud­
ied English and American Literature that I would be best served with nothing later 
than Dickens on the English syllabus and nothing earlier than Hawthorne on the 
American Studies? Medical students often complain about the overloading of the 
syllabus – why would a future psychiatrist need to memorize the name of every bone 
in the foot, when most non-foot medical specialists forget 90 per cent of the anat­
omy they learnt in medical school? Yet most medical schools emphasise and valo­
rise anatomy as a basic element of knowledge needed by every prototype doctor.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
135
Debate: On the nature of academic knowledge
No more Mr Nice Don
Dennis Hayes
Many proposals for doctorates in education drafted by lecturers in education or 
teachers are about the ‘perspectives’ of managers, lecturers, teachers, students 
or pupils. Finished theses and education journal articles are filled with accounts of 
various ‘perspectives’ on any issue. Most will end up unread and gathering dust 
because their ‘findings’ are uninteresting. The reason is that people’s ‘perspectives’, 
like their ‘experiences’, are just perspectives and experiences. They do not constitute 
knowledge nor does reporting them constitute a contribution to knowledge. What is 
needed, and what may well happen when these collections of ‘perspectives’ are in 
the dustbin of intellectual history, is a sociological study of why so much time was 
wasted on gathering perspectives over the last few decades. There is hint of a socio­
logical explanation in a related example from the 1990s when there was a sudden 
surge in attitude surveys being conducted, particularly by government bodies. The 
reason was that traditional bodies that provided access to the views of ordinary 
people had collapsed. No longer did the trade unions, political parties or groups 
provide any collective understanding of what people thought or desired. The collapse 
of politics after the collapse of communism is the root explanation of the origins of 
the concern with individuals’ viewpoints. Today, in what could be characterised as a 
Knowledge is not universal nor is it objective. What is fixed and known at one 
point, may prove to be contested or even faulty at another. We all know the tired 
example of Gallileo shocking his peers with the revelation that the earth revolves 
around the sun – an idea that is now considered fundamental. Knowledge is affected 
by politics (fundamental Christian Creationists, for example, or those who argue 
over the effect of climate change), by power (sports-keen men dominating the 
newsrooms), by fashion (research into breast cancer far surpasses research into 
any other type of cancer) and by opinion (Gove on the UK’s National Curriculum).
I believe that knowledge is created by the learner, and that since each of us 
comes to learning with a unique set of experiences and prior knowledge, then each 
of us creates a new form of knowledge as a result of the experience. As teachers, 
we may be able to set boundaries around the focus of the study, but we can no more 
control what people do or do not learn than control their preferences. We can create 
the context and the opportunities. But what we can most usefully do is teach our 
students to question and to learn to live with uncertainty. To be able to analyse what 
is presented as fact and to be aware of multiple ways of viewing the world. To appre­
ciate that we do not know everything and no one person can, nor that what is known 
now is static.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

136
JOHN LEA
‘post-political’ era, there is little to constrain the spontaneous and continuous rise of 
this pointless perspectivism.
The existence of perspectivism in the academy is not the outcome of the tri­
umph of influence of postmodernism, feminism or cultural studies. It can be 
explained in the same way. The collapse of politics allowed academics of a leftish 
persuasion to claim that their pet philosophy or subject had social force when in 
reality social forces allowed any ideas to gain a hearing in the academy. Perspectiv­
ism is one methodological expression of this intellectual anarchy. Although it can be 
labelled ‘perspectivism’, it is nothing more than a rattlebag of relativist views that 
have no philosophical foundation. Before discussing why relativism persists in a 
‘perpectivist’ form, it is worth reminding non-philosophers that over two thousand 
years ago relativism was shown to be self-contradictory by Plato in the Theaetetus 
(s170–171). Protagoras in this dialogue is said to have argued in his book The Truth 
for a relativistic philosophy that held that what a person thinks is true, is true. Soc­
rates points out a problem with this view. Some, if not all, people may think that 
Protagoras’ philosophy is false. Given his relativistic position, Protagoras has to 
agree that what they say about his philosophy is true and that his views are false. 
He must therefore hold his own philosophy to be both true and false at the same 
time. Socrates concludes, after exposing this contradiction, that Protagoras’ relativ­
istic view is not true for anyone, including himself.
We can update that argument here and provide what are often called ‘quick 
refutations’ of relativism. Suppose someone believes that ‘All opinions are equally 
valid’ we can ask ‘Is that statement true or is it an opinion?’ Or if they say ‘All truth 
is relative’ we can ask ‘Is that statement true or is it relative?’ Any attempt to make 
a statement that expresses a relativist position will have the ‘most exquisite feature’ 
Socrates enjoyed pointing out (s171a); it will be self-contradictory and therefore 
false! This may seem to some a simplistic argument and conclusion. There are more 
complex philosophical positions. This is true but nothing follows from noting this 
fact. The existence of a difficult and complex philosophical tradition in which a battle 
is raged against relativism and in favour of realism, reason and truth says nothing 
in favour of relativism outside of philosophy.
Perspectivism persists in higher education and elsewhere because of what 
Allan Bloom perceptively and famously described as a psychological state of nice­
ness. He characterised students as ‘nice’ and he said: ‘I choose the word care­
fully’ (1987: 82–3). Bloom felt that students, because times were good, had not 
been tested in class and other conflicts, and could not be expected to be particu­
larly moral or noble. Their primary preoccupation was ‘with themselves’. The same 
can be said of today’s academics. They are ‘nice’ and I choose the word carefully. 
They are not particularly moral or noble and are primarily preoccupied with them­
selves. In higher education, everyone is nice, too nice. Bloom was describing what 
we would now refer to as a ‘therapeutic ethos’ in universities. Being nice and lis­
tening to everyone’s opinions, perspectives or experiences seems nice in a thera­
peutic way.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
137
But being at university is not equivalent to being on a non-judgemental thera­
pist’s couch. The university embodies the Enlightenment belief in the pursuit of truth 
through reason. Abandoning that belief is to abandon the academy.
Abandoning the struggle for truth in favour of listening to many voices has hap­
pened for many reasons. Institutionally, it makes life easier for managers if they are 
(unwitting) relativists and, therefore, never have to make judgements about the value of 
much of what they oversee. Down the hierarchy, lecturers don’t have to judge one 
another or their students and a cosy relativistic consensus exists in the academy. 
Non-judgementalism makes life easy but it also seems ‘empowering’. It means that 
you do not have to ‘offend’ anyone by challenging their religious, cultural or philosoph­
ical views.
If you take a perspectivist position you can flatter yourself that it allows minority 
voices to be heard. Allowing views to be heard without criticism is said to be empow­
ering because ‘powerful’ academics will, by becoming perspectivists, no longer 
assert the power they have over students and other academics. That ‘power’ is the 
power of rigorous criticism.
To abandon this power in favour of flattering minorities by ‘listening’ to their 
voices is not empowering, it is deeply disempowering. It not only takes away the 
potential for anyone to use criticism to gain real knowledge and power but it strength­
ens the position of the truly powerful people outside of the academy. This is the 
consequence of the ‘cultural relativism’ that is today’s most ubiquitous form of rela­
tivism. Like philosophical relativism, cultural relativism stands to fall through a quick 
refutation if it is stated, but it has an even more dangerous feature. If all voices are 
to be heard without criticism, it is not just the powerful voices of ‘dominant’ cultures 
that have no claim to truth or have any social or political force but the ‘powerless’ 
voices of minority cultures also can make no claim to truth or have any social or 
political force. Neither of them is ‘true’. Cultural relativism leaves real power rela­
tions as they are. If you are interested in challenging real power, the condition for 
social and intellectual progress is to be part of the Enlightenment tradition and say 
what you believe is true, point out what you believe is false and get an argument 
going. That means academics have to abandon the intellectual laziness of being nice 
and return to their real role, which is, criticism.
Dear Lecturer
The real challenges of widening participation
Dave Thomas
Yes, widening participation initiatives have enabled students from disadvantaged 
backgrounds to access university education but the realignment of the university’s 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

138
JOHN LEA
curriculum to accommodate its increasingly multicultural cohorts is still very much a 
project in the making. And yes, while accepting that ‘knowledge is liberating’, in 
churning out ‘knowledgeable’ homogeneous graduates, are those graduates now 
devoid of personal cultural identity? Even worse, are we denigrating students’ own 
habitus and (unwittingly perhaps) promoting a form of subservience, more along the 
lines of academic colonialism?
As a mature student of black and minority ethnic (BME) origin, I undertook an 
inclusive curriculum undergraduate project that allowed me to explore the formula­
tion of academic knowledge. As I began, I couldn’t help asking myself the obvious 
questions: ‘Was this going to be another tokenistic, tick-box exercise?’; ‘Was this 
going to change the established curriculum?’; ‘Was the university ready to hear how 
BME students really think?’ And who can provide me with answers to these ques­
tions? As my lecturer, could you? Or does it seem slightly uncomfortable? Unfortu­
nately, widening participation comes with these thorny questions and responsibilities.
The Inclusive Curriculum survey raised many questions about the formulation of 
academic knowledge, particularly from BME students. Most students had no idea 
how their curriculum was formulated and didn’t think they could influence this curric­
ulum. Most students thought their curriculum was static, not encompassing or 
acknowledging their culture or context. One thing was very clear, that students didn’t 
feel their curricula were contemporary and representative of their heritage and cul­
ture. Another key finding was that BME students were not informed of the statistics 
surrounding the academic attainment gap and felt this knowledge would have helped 
them to improve their academic engagement.
Most worrying perhaps is that students genuinely wanted to engage with the 
content of the curriculum but often felt accused of being colloquial in their 
thoughts when attempting to contextualise key concepts. Furthermore, some stu­
dents thought the curriculum was somewhat Eurocentric and that lecturers inad­
vertently infantilised them by suppressing natural thoughts and ideas. BME 
students also felt that lecturers did not engage in enough dialogue with them and 
this itself could be enough to encourage their academic engagement. In conclu­
sion, the students said that the chief barriers to their academic engagement 
were: (1) belonging to the university; (2) learning and teaching strategies; and 
(3) classroom culture.
I have since completed my undergraduate degree and have gained employment 
in HE in a student support role. This has provided me with the opportunity to work 
closely with academics. I have now concluded that there is no clear rationale for 
non-alignment of the curriculum to accommodate different social groups. But what 
stands out for me is that the lecturers who attempt to re-align their curriculum to 
accommodate different cultural/social groups are often seen as mavericks in some 
academic quarters. This is troubling because the wealth of experiential knowledge 
brought to the table by mature, BME, and under-represented students must surely 
be an asset in helping to create new knowledge, and for all students.
Some of the issues I speak about are quite small and could be resolved quickly, 
for example, are we doing enough to encourage students from under-represented 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE NATURE OF ACADEMIC KNOWLEDGE
139
groups to participate in curriculum development? But some of the issues remain 
huge, for example, the need to recognise that while academic learning is a commod­
ity (and can be a means to a job market end) for marginalised and under-represented 
students, it can also be a destination, similar to the notion of self-actualisation. We 
must remember that students from under-represented social groups often turn to 
education for solace and liberation from their negative life events. And here the role 
of the curriculum in widening participation initiatives remains very much a project 
still in the making …
Extracts from successful HEA fellowship applications
Dr Orange (FHEA)
Famous television series such as CSI and Forensic Files have inspired an increasing 
interest in forensic science; unfortunately they have also created a false high 
expectation and understanding of ‘the science behind the crime’ for students who 
pursue a degree in Forensics. In order to avoid the ‘CSI effect’ I have developed a 
range of problem solving activities which are based on adaptions of real crime 
cases (Bergslien 1998). After having the fundamental framework in place for each 
activity, I have been able to adapt it to align with the learning outcomes of students 
across different degree programmes in Forensics, Pharmaceutical Science and 
Pharmacy. Through this context-based learning approach I am encouraging stu­
dents to build a deeper understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of their degree, 
an approach which will provide ‘meaningful’ learning for students (Gilbert 2006) 
[K1, V4].
For example, when teaching Forensic Science students the introduction to the 
case is through the use of photographs and police reports from a crime scene. The 
subsequent activity would then involve students developing their communication 
skills and organisation skills to explain how the crime scene would have been 
assessed, how the evidence would have been collected, and which evidence would 
require further laboratory analysis. From initial student feedback, in a consultation 
environment, it was apparent that students had enjoyed the crime scene aspect of 
the activities but felt they wanted more professional skills embedded within each 
activity, such as drawing sketches of the crime scene by using the electronic soft­
ware Visio, a change that was implemented soon after.
Dr Brown (SFHEA)
My grasp of psychology and its various applications in such fields as health; mental 
health; education; community, cross-cultural and social work guided the design of 
the course content (within the parameters of the BPS and QAA standards [K6]) but 
also the learning activities [K2]. Special attention was given to debate, comparison 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

140
JOHN LEA
and evaluation of theories, ethics and methods, in order to foster, from Level 4, 
skills of critical thinking so crucial in working with twenty-first-century psychology 
and its sometimes ill-considered applications [A1]. A wide range of audio visual 
resources [K4] were used as part of lectures and independent study, both to hold 
the interest of a new generation of university students glued to tablets and phones 
(use of both of which are allowed and even encouraged in lectures and workshops) 
and to access the contested and rapidly changing knowledge base of the different 
branches of psychology. Field visits, inter-university collaborative visits, visiting 
speakers, community partners and an online student collaboration with psychology 
peers at a large Indian university were all part of my aim of broadening the horizons 
and critical skills of a student group whose ethnic, age and diversity profile was 
more homogeneous than any I had encountered previously in my teaching career 
[K3; V1].
Mr Pink (SFHEA)
I have a strong belief that education should have a relevance to employability and 
am well aware that these issues are being actively discussed within the Higher Edu­
cation Academy’s Art Design Media (ADM) Subject Centre (Linda Ball’s 2010 report, 
for example, Future Directions For Employability Research In The Creative Industries). 
Bringing outside industrial and creative collaborations to the students has a notice­
able and tangible effect. In my experience, a targeted ‘real’ assignment acutely 
engages the learner transcending the typical classroom environment [A4]. It contex­
tualises the learning and adds real power. I persuaded Top Gear magazine to bring a 
car into the studio for the students to review and draw. The results were outstanding, 
with a wide range of student work published. I persuaded the Royal Opera House to 
open up their rehearsals for students to observe and draw. The students were mes­
merised by a totally different artistic context and produced artwork that reflected 
this. I persuaded Walker Books to host an evening for BA students at their Head 
Office so that a wide range of their staff from marketers, editors, writers, designers, 
even Managing Director could directly liaise with the students about their work. It 
was another example of a two-way process of mutual learning and inspiration. From 
this event alone, several students were mentored by the publisher and subsequently 
were published nationally and internationally. Articulate and motivated students 
graduate with real skills and industry acumen. These collaborations give them confi­
dence and I am proud that they continue to innovate on graduation. They actually do 
what they have aspired to do. The course is proud of the high levels of student 
attainment and employment within the sector. They animate for the very best com­
panies in the industry, Pixar and Aardman, illustrate for the Guardian, The Times, 
write and illustrate children’s books. The list is extensive [V4].
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

6
Students as partners in learning
Mick Healey, Catherine Bovill and 
Alan Jenkins
I can understand postgraduates as researchers, but undergraduates; they 
don’t know enough about the subject or about research methods, do they?
I don’t see how a student could effectively evaluate my teaching, what do they 
know about higher education pedagogy?
This student voice idea is getting a bit out of hand; students will be running 
the place soon.
Introduction
We have often heard views expressed like those in the above statements by both new 
and experienced lecturers. Whatever we think of these comments, they suggest that 
engaging students as partners in learning is a hot issue in higher education. Although 
not a new idea, it has come to the fore in the last few years and there have been many 
events dedicated to discussing the range of complex issues raised by implementing 
student partnership initiatives. Moreover, several books and reports have been pub­
lished recently dedicated to the topic (e.g. Healey and Jenkins 2009; Werder and Otis 
2010; Little 2011; Dunne and Zandstra 2011; Dunne and Owen 2013; Nygaard et al. 2013; 
Bryson 2014; Cook-Sather et al. 2014; Healey et al. 2014a, 2014b). Politically the idea of 
students as partners has also taken off recently within higher education. The UK gov­
ernment, for example, published a White Paper in 2011 entitled Students at the Heart 
of the System (BIS 2011) and the following year the National Union of Students (NUS) 
published: A Manifesto for Partnership (NUS 2012). In 2013, a Student Engagement 
Partnership Unit was established by the Higher Education Funding Council for England 
which is run by the NUS ‘to help students and their associated representative bodies 
become partners in the student experience’ (HEFCE 2013).
In this chapter we want to explore a range of contexts where students can make a 
valuable contribution as partners and to challenge you to think about circumstances 
where working with students could benefit your teaching as well as their learning. This 
was hinted at by Ramsden (2008) when he noted that:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

142
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
There is abundant evidence that the most effective higher education environments 
are ones in which students are diligently involved as part of a community of learn­
ers. As part of this engagement, they work together with academics to enhance 
teaching, assure quality and maintain standards. In these contexts, they under­
stand themselves as active partners with academic staff in a process of continual 
improvement of the learning experience.
(Ramsden 2008: 16)
Many staff are already quite good at listening to students’ views through, for exam­
ple, end-of-course evaluations and staff-student committees. However, we want to 
go beyond these conceptions of the student voice and examine situations where stu­
dents act as co-creators, co-producers, and co-designers of knowledge and learning.
In this chapter we focus on three distinct but complementary areas where students 
may engage in partnership – as teachers, scholars and as change agents. Students may 
take on the role of teachers through peer-learning and assessment or through taking 
on responsibility for co-teaching with staff and other students; they may act as schol­
ars through being involved in subject-based research and inquiry; and they may engage 
as change agents through undertaking scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) 
projects, co-designing the curriculum and acting as pedagogic mentors and consultants 
to staff. These three sets of activities are shown as overlapping circles in Figure 6.1 to 
reflect the interrelationships between them. For example, students undertaking SoTL 
are engaged both as scholars and as change agents. There is not an exhaustive set of 
ways in which students may be engaged as partners and other broader frameworks 
have been proposed (Healey et al. 2014a). Here we concentrate chiefly on students’ 
Students as
teachers
Students as
scholars
Students as
change agents
Figure 6.1  Areas of engagement in working with students as partners.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
143
engagement as partners in learning and teaching within the formal curriculum, draw­
ing on interesting practices internationally, but giving particular attention to the situ­
ation in the UK. The chapter is illustrated with mini-case studies of students as partners 
from a range of disciplines, institutions and countries, focusing for the most part at the 
course unit and programme levels.
The three roles we have chosen to concentrate upon are traditionally ones that are 
considered to belong to academic staff. We argue that students also have an important 
role to play in these areas. Inevitably as staff-student partnerships develop, some of 
the traditional identities of staff and students begin to break down and this raises 
issues of power and responsibility in higher education which we would like you to 
think about.
Relevant HEA project
Healey, M., Flint, A. and Harrington, K. (2014b) Engagement through partnership: 
students as partners in learning and teaching in higher education. Available at: 
https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/Engagement_
through_partnership.pdf
The chapter contains many extracts from academics discussing how they have: 
involved students as teachers; reoriented students to adopt a scholarly approach to 
learning; and included students as change agents.
Students as teachers
Traditionally, academic staff design and implement most teaching activities in higher 
education, but as noted above, a range of approaches are becoming increasingly used 
that shift the traditional role boundaries between staff and students. These newer 
forms of relationship between students and teachers can lead to students taking on 
some tasks that might normally be considered to be the domain of the teacher. This is 
not about completely replacing your teaching role and expertise, which most people 
would see as an undesirable step, but rather it is about altering the roles of teacher and 
student and adapting the existing student–teacher relationship (Breen and Littlejohn 
2000). Within these shifting boundaries, we are seeing increasing numbers of examples 
of students taking on teaching responsibilities, for example, students becoming 
involved in peer-learning and peer-assessment or students presenting disciplinary 
knowledge and concepts to their peers and teachers. These pedagogical approaches 
require a significant shift in the way that student and staff roles are conceptualised 
towards a more constructive, dialogue-based relationship between staff and students. 
Freire argues that ‘through dialogue, the teacher-of-the-students and the students-of-
the-teacher cease to exist and a new term emerges: teacher-student with students-teachers’ 
(Freire 2003: 63).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

144
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
One of the most common ways in which students take on the role of teacher is 
through peer-learning or peer-assisted learning. Frequently existing schemes involve 
senior students teaching junior students, such as at Kings College London, where their 
medical peer-teaching initiative involves fourth year students teaching clinical skills to 
third year students (KCL 2014), and at the University of Stirling in psychology, where 
fourth year undergraduates teach second year students statistics (Case study 1).
Case study 1: Final year students teach second-year students 
statistics in psychology at the University of Stirling, UK
Five to ten student tutors are recruited by asking for volunteers followed by a selec­
tion process that involves them doing practice lectures in front of a small group of 
staff and other fourth year students. The students are paid an hourly rate for the 
time they spend doing this, including preparation. In addition, they are encouraged 
to produce a report which they can use as credit in one of their final year modules. 
Two members of staff oversee the process and these meet weekly or twice weekly 
with the students for a few weeks before term begins and throughout the term. A key 
feature of this process is that each cohort of student tutors are invited to invent the 
module for themselves – to design all aspects of the teaching, given just the require­
ment that all learner students will have successfully completed a number of exam­
ples of the basic statistical tests. Student feedback for this process is highly positive 
and the external examiner is happy with the outcomes. The experience to date is that 
the students become adept at doing statistics quicker and more proficiently than 
under the more traditional lecturer model.
(Healey 2014; Roger Watt: r.j.watt@stir.ac.uk)
Other schemes involve senior students producing educational materials for junior 
students, such as at Loughborough University where senior students in mathematics 
produced worksheets on difficult topics for more junior students (Case study 2).
Case study 2: Four students who had completed their second 
year of a maths degree at Loughborough University, UK, were 
employed as interns to redesign materials for use in two 
second year courses
Fuelled by concerns about student engagement and performance in second year 
maths, students and staff collaborated to rethink and redesign materials specifically 
to help new second year students understand concepts that many students found 
difficult. The materials included handouts on difficult topics and video screen-casts of 
theory and examples. Two of the interns also acted as peer-assisted learning leaders, 
contributing to sessions where the more senior students taught the second years 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
145
Here’s another example of senior students designing online materials to teach more 
junior students in a geography degree in Ireland (Case study 3).
Case study 3: Programme co-ordinators redesign a first year 
geography curriculum in collaboration with students at 
University College Dublin, Ireland
The first year of the geography degree usually enrols about 400 students each year. 
The co-ordinators advertised for four third-year students who were paid to design a new 
virtual learning environment based on case studies covering important themes for first-
year geography, such as migration and the coffee trade. They then produced written, 
audio and video resources within the virtual learning environment that first-year stu­
dents could interact with and use to support their learning. These case studies prompted 
discussion among small groups of students online and in class. The third-year students 
then collaborated with the programme co-ordinators to identify examples of good stu­
dent work that could be used as the basis for teaching sessions, thereby supporting 
use of the current students’ work as an integral part of the curriculum.
(Bovill et al. 2011; Bovill 2014; Healey 2014)
A common concern that you might be thinking about is whether senior students teach­
ing knowledge and skills to other students, are expert enough to teach others and 
whether the quality of the teaching will suffer. Interestingly, there is evidence that 
many students prefer the relative approachability of their peer colleagues when com­
pared with staff and in fact often learn as much, if not more, than from staff teaching 
(Tolsgaard et al. 2007). There is also evidence of the enhanced understanding and con­
fidence demonstrated by peer-teachers from having to teach knowledge and skills to 
peers (Krych et al. 2005). Indeed, the deeper exploration and investigation of a subject 
that are needed in order to teach something to someone else ensures that there are 
strong links between the role of student as teacher and student as scholar. It is com­
monly accepted that teaching a subject requires a deeper level of understanding of the 
subject being taught. Inviting students to teach other students offers them an opportu­
nity to develop more nuanced and complex understandings of disciplinary knowledge 
and methodologies as well as enhancing their ability to communicate knowledge, con­
cepts and skills to others – and all of this has significant potential benefits for students 
in their future career (Ross and Cameron 2007).
about troublesome concepts using the materials they had devised. The second year 
students developed a deeper understanding of the topics covered and the student 
interns and teachers described an increased confidence in their own maths ability.
(Duah and Croft 2011); Cook-Sather et al. 2014)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

146
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
Another common format in which students take responsibility for teaching their 
peers, as well as the tutor, is in tutorials and journal clubs. In these settings it is not 
uncommon for students to take responsibility for teaching others about the findings 
from a relevant research article. Similarly where a problem-based learning approach 
is adopted, students often take responsibility for investigating concepts that they 
then share and teach other group members about. At this point you might be thinking 
what many academics think, which is how to ensure students complete required 
readings or tasks related to tutorials. There are some useful examples of ways in 
which staff tackle this challenge. One formal technique which holds promise is the 
use of the ‘jigsaw classroom’ approach. A technique first presented by Aronson 
(1978), it involves small group work where each group member is assigned part of a 
topic to learn about in order to teach the rest of the group. So the members of the 
group move to interim expert groups who focus on each topic before all returning to 
their original groups to be able to have all the pieces of the ‘topic jigsaw’ to fit 
together. More recently, Honeychurch (2012) has adopted this approach with philos­
ophy students, using wikis as a way of gathering together knowledge in the interim 
expert groups.
An alternative approach taken by some staff to ensure students take more respon­
sibility for reading and co-constructing discussions in tutorials is through the use of 
‘doughnut rounds’ (Fleiszer et al. 1997). This technique does not require passing cakes 
around in class, though this might contribute to student engagement in tutorials. The 
‘doughnut round’ refers to an approach where students have responsibility for formu­
lating questions about the selected reading. They then have to be prepared to ask 
each other the questions they have about the reading in the tutorial. The round 
involves one student asking another student one of their questions, and after the cho­
sen student has attempted to either answer the question or engage with some of the 
relevant areas of discussion raised by the question, the responder then has the chance 
to ask a different student one of their questions, and so on around the group. As we 
began to see above, the jigsaw classroom and the doughnut round re-envisage stu­
dents as active collaborators, co-teachers and scholars. Reconceptualising the rela­
tionship between students and teachers tends to lead students to exceed staff 
expectations and to adopt collaborative responsibility for learning and teaching with 
staff (Bovill 2014; Cook-Sather et al. 2014).
Peer-assessment could be considered to be another form of peer teaching, in the 
sense that assessment is often accepted to be part of the teacher’s role. However, using 
Freire’s conceptualisation above, if we consider students to have the potential to be 
teachers and for teachers to be learners, then this opens the assessment process to 
collaboration with students. You might think that assessment is a controversial area 
over which students can collaborate, where assessment involves judging whether a 
student has achieved particular learning outcomes or competencies – a key quality 
measure in higher education. Students are one set of actors who have the potential to 
judge assessment outcomes, but crucially, they are often unaware of the desired learn­
ing outcomes and marking criteria (Orsmond 2004). So there is enormous potential for 
students to learn through peer-assessment processes (Healey et al. 2014a). We often 
talk of the importance of students being able to judge their own and others’ perfor­
mance against criteria, and peer-assessment can be a very useful way for students to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
147
learn to do this. Peer-assessment can be a key element of an ongoing learning process 
rather than an end point focused on measuring performance.
Where students are involved in grading and providing feedback to other students 
on their work, initially students often feel uncomfortable with the notion of sitting in 
judgement on their peers. However, there are many benefits from dialogue between 
students and staff about marking criteria and the importance of being able to judge the 
quality of work against criteria. With practice and time, students can become skilled 
and insightful in their judgements and comments. Some students will remain uncom­
fortable with this idea of taking on the teacher’s role of judging someone else’s work, 
and this may explain why in many cases peer-assessment is used predominantly for 
formative assessments that do not count towards final grades. Whether peer-assessment 
takes place in formative or summative assessment, it is sometimes revealing to see 
how much the tutor’s marks are worth in comparison to the students’ marks. For exam­
ple, if you are thinking of involving students in peer assessment, consider the follow­
ing scenario: in a class of 10 students, the students will be assessed on a presentation 
and the nine peers in the room will provide a mark and so will the one tutor. In this 
scenario, will the peers’ marks count for 90 per cent of the mark and tutor’s mark count 
for 10 per cent, or will the tutor’s mark make up 50 per cent of the mark and the peers’ 
marks make up 50 per cent, or will the tutor’s mark count for 80 per cent and the peers’ 
marks count for 20 per cent? In each of these possible marking schemes, you will com­
municate to students a relative value that is being placed on their judgements in com­
parison to the tutor’s judgement.
Self-assessment provides an opportunity for students to gain enhanced insights 
into their own performance against criteria. Despite what many of us would think, in a 
study by Boud and Falchicov (1989), they found that there was no evidence that self-
assessment consistently led to over- or under-estimating of performance. Falchicov and 
Boud (1989) found that explicit criteria led to more accurate self-assessment, as did 
involving students in creating marking criteria. Orsmond (2004: 20) argues that:
Achieving empowerment for students in assessment processes demands their 
involvement with the assessment marking criteria. Although desirable, it is not 
always possible to have students involved in criteria construction. However, the 
onus is on the tutor to ensure that students have a good working understanding 
of the criteria.
Peer- and self-assessment may also be used for redistributing group marks between 
team members. For example, these approaches have been used to capture various 
group processes, such as the quality of group members’ contributions to developing 
ideas, collecting and analysing data, preparing the presentation and writing and edit­
ing the final report. These are all activities which realistically only the group members 
know enough about to be able to make an accurate judgement on their peers’ perfor­
mances (Healey and Addis 2004). It is important not only for students to be involved in 
dialogue about the criteria, but also to be involved in dialogue about assessment feed­
back (Rust et al. 2005). Combining self-assessment with the tutor’s assessment, Deeley 
describes the concept of co-assessment that involves discussion about performance 
and feedback (Case study 4).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

148
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
Students as scholars
At best teaching and research are very loosely coupled … the fundamental issue is 
what we wish the relationship to be, and we need to devise policies to enhance this 
wish … (and that to better ensure effective teaching research links) we need to 
increase the skills of staff to teach emphasising the construction of knowledge by 
students.
(Hattie and Marsh 1996: 529, 533–4, emphasis added)
What makes teaching in higher education distinctive from school-level learning? 
This question was asked by von Humboldt in 1810, and has been raised throughout 
this book. Our view – in keeping with von Humboldt – is that in higher education 
students need to be made aware of the contested nature of knowledge; the condi­
tions under which knowledge is discovered and manufactured; and that higher edu­
cation is as much concerned with what is not known, as what is known. Baxter 
Magolda, who has researched student intellectual development in higher education, 
argues that:
Case study 4: Co-assessment of a summative oral presentation on 
a service learning course at the University of Glasgow, UK
Drawing together the benefits of students’ self-assessment with tutor assessment of 
summative work in a service learning course, the tutor aims to maximise collaboration 
and co-ownership of the assessment process. The students self-assessed their own 
oral presentation and the tutor also assessed the presentation. Both students and tutor 
awarded a provisional mark and wrote reflective feedback comments about the perfor­
mance. There were eight students studying the course and the tutor then met with each 
student individually to discuss the marks and feedback and to agree a mark. However, 
in this work, Deeley (2014) does note the potential difficulties that might arise in trying 
to use this model with larger classes. She also acknowledges and discusses the impor­
tance of maintaining safeguards within a summative assessment process. Deeley 
(2014: 39) argues that ‘co-assessment requires the student and teacher to reach a 
mutually agreed appropriate grade for the assignment through discussion and negotia­
tion which must be supported by evidence and reasoned argument’.
(Deeley 2014)
•	
In what ways have you sought to incorporate the notion of students as 
teachers in your teaching and learning regime? 
•	
Have you been involved in articulating a notion of student as teacher in a 
strategy or philosophy to underpin the work of your school/faculty, or insti­
tution (or beyond)?
Activity 6.1
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
149
University curricula need to support student and citizen development from absolute 
knowing [where] students view knowledge as certain; their role is to obtain it from 
authorities [to] contextual knowing [where] students believe that knowledge is con­
structed in a context based on judgement of evidence; their role is to exchange and 
compare perspectives, think through problems, and integrate and apply knowledge.
(Baxter Magolda 1992: 75)
As teachers, then, our role is to bring students into the nature of scholarly knowledge 
in our discipline, the issues that discipline focuses on, and the research methods it uses 
to explore that knowledge. Here is how a researcher on ocean waves sees the role of a 
teacher in higher education:
Science is a conversation. The conversation has been in progress for a long time … 
science resembles the babble at a very large reception … The participants in the 
conversation have sorted themselves into groups, and sub groups, each dominated 
by a few brilliant conversationalists who set the subject and tone. Some scientists 
wander from group to group, while others remain fixed. Some groups talk about 
similar things, and occasionally snaps of conversation pass from one group to 
another. You have arrived in the middle of a party…. My job is to catch you up on 
the conversation and show you how to find your way to the bar.
(Kinsman 1965: 9, emphasis added)
As we bring our students into these disciplinary worlds of contested knowledge, key 
issues include helping students understand and contest the nature, connections and 
boundaries between ‘scholarship’ and ‘research’. Practically we have to consider how to 
introduce higher education students into knowledge complexity and then how to ensure 
there is a coherent progression through their courses to develop that understanding.
Consider the following case studies that in our view exemplify how this can be 
achieved in the opening weeks of year one curricula. What ideas do they give you to 
adapt to your disciplinary and departmental contexts? To what extent do they show 
students entering into the worlds of scholarship and research in their discipline? To 
what extent do they support students in becoming partners in their learning?
Case study 5: Psychology students research students’ quality of 
life at York St John University, UK
First-year psychology students at York St John University undertook an eight-week 
project in which they collected data from themselves and other students using short 
inventories and a biographical questionnaire in order to research topics related to 
students’ quality of life. This project provided students with the opportunity to collect 
‘live’ data, contribute to a developing database, select data for analysis and write up 
findings. The topics available for selection by students were linked to the research 
interests of the lecturer.
(http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/resources/detail/
subjects/psychology/Akhurst-case-study)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

150
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
We can see from these case studies that:
•	
staff are central in shaping the curriculum both in content and in the process of 
learning in ways that are supportive of students entering disciplinary communities 
of practice;
•	
students are central as inquirers, actively shaping their understanding but in a 
context where that provisional understanding is made public and subject to cri­
tique by their peers and staff;
•	
the ‘research’ methodologies are largely determined by the staff but are being 
made explicit to students;
•	
the ‘knowledge’ that the students ‘create’ is not new knowledge, and indeed it may 
be uncertain as to its validity, but the students are on a journey – and this is but an 
introduction.
As students progress through the curricula, teachers need to make more explicit the 
forms of scholarship and research in their discipline and the research methods of 
inquiry. One contested area for both students and staff in this journey is the extent to 
which such learning can be described as ‘research’. For some, research is clearly that 
knowledge which is new to the discipline and the academy. To others, while what the 
student produces and learns may not be new, it is new to them and more significantly 
shifts their understanding of the contested complexity of knowledge in their discipline. 
At what point do students see themselves as partners with ‘fellow’ students and per­
haps more critically see themselves as partners with us as staff? At what point do we as 
staff see students as partners in our learning? Returning to some of the themes dis­
cussed in Chapter 2, a key issue for staff and students is to consider carefully the rela­
tionships between ‘research’ and ‘scholarship’. Some may see clear distinctions between 
Case study 6: Undergraduate research begins at induction at 
University of Gloucestershire, UK
At the University of Gloucestershire, students undertake discipline-based inquiry 
projects during induction week. This involves them working in small groups to collect 
information from the library and in the field, analyse it, present it to tutors in novel 
ways and receive formative feedback. A wide range of projects have been under­
taken over the years. For example, the human geographers and the sociologists 
have researched the experience of Gloucester residents of the ‘Great Flood of 2007’. 
The biologists and the psychologists investigated how primates communicate at 
Bristol Zoo; while the English students investigated trees and poetry and visited 
Westonbirt Arboretum where, stimulated by the environment, they sent each other 
haiku poems.
(http://insight.glos.ac.uk/tli/resources/toolkit/wal/
sustainable/Pages/ActiveLearningInduction.aspx)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
151
‘research’ and ‘scholarship’, as can be seen in the UK Research Excellence Framework 
(REF 2012). We see these as both partly distinct; for example, in that with research the 
focus is more on creating new knowledge, but also as highly blurred in that in some 
disciplines, particularly the humanities, much research is re-search and research and 
scholarship overlap.
For staff who espouse this conception of the interconnections between research, 
scholarship and teaching in higher education, it is common to refer to the holistic view 
of academic practice proposed by Ernest Boyer, and summarised in the quotation we 
began this book with:
What we urgently need today is a more inclusive view of what it means to be a 
scholar – a recognition that knowledge is acquired through research, through syn­
thesis, through practice, and through teaching. We acknowledge that these four 
categories – the scholarships of discovery, of integration, of application, and of 
teaching – divide intellectual functions that are tied inseparably to each other.
(Boyer 1990: 25)
Table 6.1 takes Boyer’s categories and shows how they can guide us to bringing 
students into these higher education practices.
Table 6.1  Examples of ways in which learners may engage with Boyer’s four scholarships.
Types of scholarship
Illustrative example of ways of engaging learners
Scholarship of discovery
Engage in inquiry-based learning; undergraduate 
research and consultancy projects; co-research 
projects with staff.
Scholarship of integration
Engage in integrating material from different sources, 
including across disciplines; integrate life and work 
experience with academic studies; reflect on 
implications of studies for personal development.
Scholarship of application/
engagement
Engage with local, national, and international 
community service projects; volunteering; 
knowledge exchange projects; apply knowledge 
and skills in work-based placements.
Scholarship of teaching and 
learning
Engage in mentoring; peer support and assessment; 
collaborative group work; learners as explicit 
partners in educational development and inquiry.
Source:  Healey et al. (2014b: 56).
In developing your ability to bring students into the worlds of research and schol­
arship, the following framework in Table 6.2 and Figure 6.2, which builds on the inter­
national research on the student and staff experience of teaching-research relations, 
will help you in designing courses.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

152
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
Table 6.2  The nature of research and inquiry by students.
Research-led: learning about current research in the discipline
Here the curriculum focus is to ensure that what students learn clearly reflects current and 
ongoing research in their discipline. This may include research done by staff teaching 
them.
Research-oriented: developing research skills and techniques
Here the focus is on developing students’ knowledge of and ability to carry out the research 
methodologies and methods appropriate to their discipline(s).
Research-based: undertaking research and inquiry
Here the curriculum focus is on ensuring that as much as possible the student learns in 
research and or inquiry mode (i.e. the students become producers of knowledge not just 
consumers). The strongest curricula form of this is in special undergraduate programmes 
for selected students, but such research and inquiry may also be mainstreamed for all 
or many students.
Research-tutored: engaging in research discussions
Here the focus is on students and staff critically discussing research in the discipline as, for 
example, in many seminar-based courses.
Source:  Healey et al. (2014a: 17).
Figure 6.2  The nature of research and inquiry.
Source:  Healey and Jenkins (2009: 7).
STUDENTS ARE PARTICIPANTS
Research-tutored
Research-based
Research-led
Research-oriented
Engaging in research
discussions
Undertaking
research and inquiry
EMPHASIS ON
RESEARCH
CONTENT
EMPHASIS ON
RESEARCH
PROCESSES AND
PROBLEMS
STUDENTS FREQUENTLY
ARE AN AUDIENCE
Learning about
current research
in the discipline
Developing research
and inquiry skills and
techniques
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
153
Clearly these approaches are not independent and we consider all approaches 
with a research or scholarship focus to be valuable – though our emphasis is on sup­
porting students to be involved fully with staff and other students in undertaking 
research and inquiry. But you will need to decide which combination of these 
approaches to use in the contexts in which you work.
Dear Lecturer
On students as scholars
Martha Canfield
I have recently been working as a student intern on a research project called 
‘Re-imagining Attainment for All’ (RAFA), looking at the gap between attainment and 
progression rates of students from Black Minority Ethnic groups. The main focus of 
RAFA was on encouraging transparency with regards to the process of assessment.
As a BME student myself, the chance of working closely with members of staff 
offered a great opportunity to show the set of skills that we students have. ­Especially, 
where these skills represent the social and cultural context we come from, and 
where we aim to apply all the knowledge that we seek to gain in our university pro­
gramme of studying.
My main responsibility in this project was to facilitate the communication 
between students involved in the project and members of staff. I recruited and worked 
with students from different ethnic groups and departments of my university, as well 
as encouraging them to take part and engage in a debate about their experiences 
regarding assessment with members of academic staff in several workshops.
The experience of working in the RAFA project showed me that very often aca­
demics forget their practice can reach its full potential by simply boosting communi­
cation with students, promoting a dialogue that welcomes different perspectives 
and positions and thereby contributing to the success of BME students.
The four approaches discussed above will need to be adapted to the particular disci­
pline in which you teach and the department and institution where you work. Exam­
ples of curriculum design which exemplify these approaches are given in the following 
case studies.
Case study 7: Research-led – Introducing students to academic 
staff research: Department of Geography, University College 
London (UCL), UK
All year one students in Geography at UCL do an assignment as part of a compulsory 
‘Writing and Analysis in Geography’ course, in which students interview a member of 
academic staff about their research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

154
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
Case study 8: Research-orientated – Asking questions in plant 
biology at the Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
A practical exercise designed for a level two course involves students: making obser­
vations in a botanical garden; coming up with ten questions each (e.g. why do euca­
lyptus leaves dangle?); sharing one of these questions with another group of 
students; coming up as a group with hypotheses based on the question (e.g. euca­
lyptus trees in arid environments have leaves that dangle at steeper angles than 
those in wet environments); thinking of ways of testing the hypothesis; and writing up 
individually ten questions and one hypothesis as a 750-word mini-proposal for a 
research project.
Case study 9: Research-based – History students contribute 
research findings to a website at the University of Victoria, 
Canada
History 481: Micro History and the Internet; the main activity is primary archival 
research on various aspects of life in Victoria, British Columbia, from 1843 to 1900. 
Initial subject activities include orientation to the historical archives in Victoria and 
basic website creation skills. Students work in small groups on a research project 
and the final research ‘product’ of the subject is a website, not a standard research 
paper.
(http://www.victoriasvictoria.ca/; http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Digital_history;http://web.uvic.ca/~jlutz/courses/hist481/index.html)
•	
Each first year tutorial group is allocated a member of academic staff who is not 
their tutor.
•	
Tutorial groups are given three representative pieces of writing by the member 
of staff along with a copy of their CV, and a date is arranged for the interview.
•	
Before the interview, students read these materials and develop an interview 
schedule.
•	
On the basis of their reading and the interview, each student individually writes a 
1500 word report on: (1) the objectives of the interviewee’s research; (2) how that 
research relates to their earlier studies; and (3) how the interviewee’s research 
relates to his or her teaching, other interests and geography as a whole.
(Dwyer 2001; Cosgrove 1981; accounts of two interviews: 
http://gees.pbworks.com/w/page/10115571/
UCL%20students%20interview%20their%20lecturers)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
155
We have deliberately focused here on examples of engaging students as scholars early 
in their courses as it is already common in the UK and some other countries for final 
year students to undertake research projects. We do, however, believe that it is timely 
to rethink the forms that final year projects and dissertations take and introduce a 
wider range of choices (Healey et al. 2013).
Students as change agents
In addition to the two roles we have outlined so far – student as teacher and student as 
scholar – practitioners and researchers have started speaking about ‘students as 
change agents’. A change agent refers to an individual with the freedom and motiva­
tion to be able to make decisions with the potential to alter and transform something. 
This implies a radical shift in the way many students relate to learning and teaching 
and also to the ways they relate to teachers and other learners. Often, students are 
passive recipients of teaching rather than active contributors and collaborators within 
the learning process. Re-envisaging students as change agents in learning and teach­
ing begins to recognise that students have valuable views, ideas and experiences that 
they bring to learning and teaching. Where students gain agency over their learning 
experiences they also tend to become more engaged in the learning process (Mann 
2001). Where students have agency over learning and teaching, this can lead to trans­
formed learning and teaching. So what does this mean in practice?
Describing their work at the University of Exeter (Case study 11), Dunne argues:
There is a subtle, but extremely important, difference between an institution 
that ‘listens’ to students and responds accordingly, and an institution that gives 
Case study 10: Research-tutored – Involving first-year English 
students in the international research community at University of 
Gloucestershire, UK
At the University of Gloucestershire, Arran Stibbe enables students to take on the 
identity of a researcher from the start of their time at university. In Sociolinguistics 
and Ecolinguistics, a first year module, the students have an opportunity to share 
their insights with the wider research community. The research community in turn has 
something to gain from student contributions because students can critically analyse 
aspects of their language and culture that others have yet to examine. The approach 
works best when students are becoming critically aware of texts that they are familiar 
with, rather than struggling to understand new genres understood better by the lec­
turer than students. The students are encouraged to take part in the international 
research community through working with the Language & Ecology Research Forum – 
the main international forum for research in ecolinguistics. The website contains a 
mixed collection of articles, some of which are by students and some by researchers.
(http://www.ecoling.net/articles; http://www.english.heacademy.ac.uk/
explore/publications/casestudies/sustain/ecolinguistics.php)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

156
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
students the opportunity to explore areas that they believe to be significant, to 
recommend solutions and to bring about the required changes….‘students as 
change agents’ explicitly supports a view of the student as ‘active collaborator’ 
and ‘co-producer’, with the potential for transformation.
(Dunne and Zandstra 2011: 4)
Case study 11: Students as partners shape and lead their own 
educational experiences through the ‘students as change agents’ 
initiative at the University of Exeter, UK
The University of Exeter has been running a ‘Students as Change Agents’ initiative 
since 2008. Students are invited to undertake small-scale research projects to inves­
tigate areas of concern in learning and teaching that have been identified within formal 
staff-student liaison committees. Students work in partnership with staff to use the 
research results to take action to improve the learning experience. Ultimately the aim 
is to enhance students’ experiences of higher education. Projects have been diverse 
and have included research with a focus on assessment and feedback, technology, 
peer tutoring, seminar provision, academic writing and sustainability. Outcomes have 
included reports, student-led conferences, student-led writing skills seminars, a buddy 
system, peer tutoring and study guides. The initiative uses an action research meth­
odology to underpin the research studies, and consistent with this research approach 
is the emphasis on change as an integral part of the research process. So students 
have agency within the research process, but also within the action planning and 
change processes that are an integral part of this model. Students therefore have an 
active role and an investment in changes made to learning and teaching within the 
institution affecting their own and their peers’ learning experiences.
(Dunne and Zandstra 2011; Sandover et al. 2012)
At the University of Exeter, colleagues and students speak overtly of ‘students as 
change agents’, but in the university or college where you work, this may not be a 
familiar phrase. In some settings students are described as collaborating in the ‘schol­
arship of teaching and learning’ (SoTL). As has been discussed in previous chapters, 
SoTL is defined in many ways by different authors, but one useful definition for us here 
comes from Martin et al. (1998), who state that:
The scholarship of teaching involves three essential and integrated elements: 
engagement with the scholarly contributions of others on teaching and learning; 
reflection on one’s own teaching practice and the learning of students within the 
context of a particular discipline; and communication and dissemination of 
aspects of practice and theoretical ideas about teaching and learning in general 
and teaching and learning within the discipline.
(Martin et al. 1998, cited in Healey 2003)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
157
Hence when students are engaged in SoTL they are researching and inquiring into stu­
dent learning, whereas when they are researching and inquiring into their subject, we 
have referred to them in this chapter as scholars. Clearly many of the same skills are 
required to undertake both activities and this demonstrates the overlapping nature of 
the roles we outlined at the beginning of the chapter.
Where students are involved in SoTL, we create opportunities for students to act 
as change agents in improving the quality of teaching and student learning. Most defi­
nitions of SoTL position students as the subjects of our research or the recipients of the 
changes we make. In higher education, often the term ‘student voice’ has been used to 
refer to the importance of gathering feedback from students in higher education (see, 
for example, Campbell et al. 2009), where really students feeding back on evaluation 
forms could be considered to be only the very first step in student voices being heard. 
In contrast, the research literature about student voice in schools-based education has 
often been far more overtly political and critical of the lack of student agency in deci­
sions affecting students’ own learning experience (Bragg 2007; Fielding 2004). By 
engaging students as active participants and partners in SoTL, we provide opportuni­
ties for much greater student engagement and empowerment than is provided by tra­
ditional models of gathering student feedback. Involving students as partners in SoTL 
acknowledges the unique knowledge, skills and experiences our diverse learners bring 
to higher education, and the key role students can contribute as co-constructors and 
co-creators of learning and teaching. 
Case study 12: Students are co-inquirers in SoTL at Western 
Washington University, USA
Students and staff at Western Washington University collaborate to integrate the 
students’ voice into institutional initiatives for enhancing learning. Each year, 
staff and students come together in the ‘Teaching-Learning Academy’ (TLA) on a 
bi-weekly basis to develop significant questions about learning and teaching that 
they intend to investigate during the year. Over the year the group develops the 
significant question, undertakes a survey to discover existing collective knowl­
edge in the group about the question. Then others are invited into the study. The 
results are collectively analysed before developing a plan of action based on new 
understandings.
(Western Washington University (n. d.); Healey 2014)
Many universities in the UK are starting to involve students in SoTL projects even 
where they may not refer to SoTL explicitly. A couple of the more well-known exam­
ples of student involvement in SoTL are outlined briefly here (see also Healey et al. 
(2014a) for further details).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

158
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
Another institution that has encouraged students to become active partners in SoTL 
initiatives for a number of years is Birmingham City University (BCU). BCU has run 
their ‘academic partners’ initiative since 1998.
Case study 13: Students undertake SoTL within the ‘Student as 
Producer’ programme at the University of Lincoln, UK
The ‘Student as Producer’ programme at the University of Lincoln aims to use critical 
social theory to re-envisage the possibilities of higher education. The institution 
supports a range of student-led research and teaching initiatives and aims to make 
strong links between research and teaching rather than using pre-defined learning 
outcomes. One of the key aims is to shift students from being seen as the subjects 
of learning to being active producers of learning. Neary (2010: 8) argues that ‘Stu­
dent as Producer, and the revolutionary pedagogical practice which it promotes, is 
designed to interrupt the current consensual discourse about teaching and learning 
in higher education.’
(Neary 2010, 2014c)
Case study 14: ‘Students as academic partners’ at Birmingham 
City University, UK
This partnership between the Students’ Union and the University originally focused 
on partnership projects where students were employed to help staff and students 
research and implement changes to improve courses. However, as institutional sup­
port has grown, the scheme has evolved to include a student academic mentoring 
programme, cross-departmental initiatives and a ‘student jobs on campus’ service 
through which students can engage meaningfully with the work of the University.
(Nygaard et al. 2013)
Often these collaborative SoTL projects involve individual or small groups of students. 
Yet there are other SoTL projects that involve whole cohorts of students such as the 
collaborative evaluation project Bovill et al. (2010) undertook at Queen Margaret Uni­
versity, Edinburgh, involving all of the 21 students studying an educational research 
module. In this work, the whole cohort of students was involved in designing, imple­
menting, analysing and collating the evaluation of the module. A subset of the student 
cohort chose to set up a working group after the end of the module to disseminate the 
lessons from this work in a journal article and conference presentation. We do acknowl­
edge that it is likely to be more challenging to involve the whole cohort of students in 
SoTL if you are teaching and researching with larger classes, but it is not impossible.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
159
Some institutions have set up schemes where students act as consultants to staff 
to discuss and enhance teaching and learning approaches. In this work, students are 
not only scholars and potential change agents, but the focus on investigating and 
changing teaching, places students as advisors to teaching and as partners in teaching. 
One of the most well-established models of students working as pedagogical consul­
tants comes from Bryn Mawr College (Case study 15).
Case study 15: Students act as pedagogical consultants at Bryn 
Mawr College, Pennsylvania, USA
The Students as Learners and Teachers (SaLT) programme aims to support students 
and staff to create opportunities for critical and constructive dialogue where they 
can explore questions about learning and teaching with the aim of affirming, improv­
ing and developing classroom practices. The broader aims are to ensure that this 
critical and constructive dialogue between staff and students about learning and 
teaching becomes an embedded part of institutional culture and practice. The con­
sultant’s role includes making weekly visits to their staff partner’s classroom, where 
they take observation notes focused on learning and teaching issues previously 
identified by the staff member. Student consultants meet weekly with their partners 
to discuss their observations and explore one another’s perspectives on what takes 
place in the classroom as well as broader learning and teaching issues. The consul­
tants are supported by participating in weekly one-hour discussions with the Director 
of the programme and other consultants.
(Cook-Sather et al. 2014)
Students also act as change agents through co-creating or co-designing curricula. Stu­
dents and staff co-creating curricula is not a new idea, but it is one which, in common with 
conceptions of ‘student voice’, has perhaps gained more momentum within school educa­
tion than in higher education (Bovill 2013). For the sake of this discussion if we combine 
some of the definitions of curriculum outlined by Fraser and Bosanquet (2006) and take 
curriculum to be the structure, content and processes of a unit of study, as well as the 
learning experience of students, then co-creation of curricula can involve students in a 
broad range of initiatives to co-design elements of learning and teaching. Some initiatives 
involve students acting as change agents focused on curriculum content, such as Ignacio 
Canales’ work at the University of St Andrews, where he invited students to decide the 
content of the later parts of his Entrepreneurship and Business Planning course so they 
could ensure these sessions were focused on content that would help them to be able to 
complete their group entrepreneurship projects (Cook-Sather et al. 2014).
There are relatively fewer examples of students becoming involved in curriculum 
planning processes in a more integrated way with student and staff collaboration from 
the start of planning a whole curriculum. Indeed, Manchester Metropolitan University 
made a range of enhancements involving students as partners in curriculum design, 
but acknowledged the difficulties of sustaining student involvement in the design 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

160
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
process (MMU 2013). At Elon University, in the USA, students have been involved in 
curriculum design teams since 2005 (Case study 16).
Case study 16: Students act as co-creators of course design at 
Elon University, North Carolina, USA
All the teams work slightly differently, but typically a team includes one or two staff 
and between two to six undergraduate students and one academic developer from 
the University’s Center for the Advancement of Teaching and Learning. Teams usu­
ally meet every week for between one to three months, which is important for build­
ing trust and ensuring students realise their views are being taken seriously. In one 
team, the students were involved in choosing a new text book for the course, and 
when they realised that their negative reviews of some of the possible books were 
not objected to by staff, it was a key moment for students in sensing that their views 
were considered legitimate contributions to constructive educational discussions
(Mihans et al. 2008; Bovill 2014; Cook-Sather et al. 2014)
In our broad definition of curricula, based on Fraser and Bosanquet’s definitions we 
included the students’ learning experiences. This is a wide net that captures a large 
set of learning and teaching elements. For example, some students are involved in 
co-designing assessments, such as through designing their own essay title, or choosing 
between several possible assessment methods (Cook-Sather et al. 2014; O’Neill 2011). 
And here we see a natural overlap between students as change agents and students as 
teachers and indeed, this is another element where there is overlap generally between 
the partnership roles that students can adopt. What is clear is that student involvement 
in designing elements of both the formative and summative assessment process 
acknowledges that not only is assessment a key motivator for students (and staff) in 
higher education, but assessment also has value as an opportunity for learning, not 
just the measurement of what has been learned – or what we have come to know as 
assessment for learning (Sambell et al. 2012), and as discussed in Chapter 2. We men­
tioned earlier also that some students are designing their own learning outcomes, and 
this can have a significant impact on their learning experiences (Orsmond 2004) and 
therefore can be a meaningful way in which students can contribute to designing their 
own curricula, and in the process become more engaged, and independent learners.
•	
How have you been actively encouraging students to work with you on the 
design and planning of your taught sessions and their learning activities?
•	
How have you sought to invite students to become consultants and project 
steering group members for major change initiatives in your school/faculty, 
or institution (and beyond)?
Activity 6.2
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
161
Conclusion
We began this chapter with some statements we often hear from colleagues who express 
some scepticism about engaging students as partners in learning. We hope we have 
challenged these views in the ideas and examples we have discussed. There is growing 
evidence of the benefits of co-creating learning and teaching, whether through students 
being teachers, scholars or change agents. Many of the benefits appear to be shared by 
students and staff in terms of an increased level of engagement with learning and teach­
ing; enhanced learning and teaching practices; and an enhanced meta-cognitive under­
standing of learning and teaching processes (Bovill et al. 2011; Cook-Sather et al. 2014). 
These benefits are likely to be due in part to opening up the messy processes of learning 
and teaching and curriculum design to scrutiny by both students and staff, but also to 
acknowledging the benefits of students and teachers entering into more collaborative 
relationships where multiple perspectives are valued. In order to develop meaningful 
collaborative relationships between students and staff, it is crucial to enhance dialogue 
about learning and teaching. The development of partnership learning communities 
may be a fruitful way forward in this area (Healey et al. 2014a).
Clearly we are enthusiastic about the potential of this agenda to change the nature 
of teaching and learning in higher education and we hope that some of you will be 
inspired to try out some of the ideas we have presented in your own academic prac­
tices. Individual staff can make a great difference to the learning experience of stu­
dents. Consider some small-scale initiatives if you are new to the idea of working in 
partnership with students, and try to find colleagues in your own or other disciplines 
who have tried working in partnership with students and who might be able to offer 
advice and support (Cook-Sather et al. 2014). However, to move this agenda forward, 
conducive departmental and institutional strategies and structures need to be put in 
place and it is to some of these that we turn in conclusion.
While individual staff have the ‘power’ to bring students into their courses as 
teachers, scholars and change agents, for student partnership to become embedded 
through the curriculum, high-level leadership and support is needed. Thus, Case study 7: 
Introducing students to academic staff research at the Department of Geography, 
University College London, involves all academic staff and reflects strong departmen­
tal leadership. Case studies 6: Undergraduate research at induction at University of 
Gloucestershire and 11: The students as change agents’ initiative at the University of 
Exeter, also require strong leadership and funding at institutional and departmental 
levels.
Departmental and institutional leaders can develop and embed initiatives that sup­
port student partnership approaches through:
•	
conferences, academic seminars and papers setting out a scholarly vision that 
shows the importance of such initiatives;
•	
deciding which initiatives and principles need to be embedded across the institution 
for all students and which should focus on particular groups of students;
•	
targeted funding; for example, Miami University, Ohio, supported initiatives in 
large year one courses to develop an overall vision of the ‘student as scholar’ 
(Hodge et al. 2011);
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

162
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
•	
ensuring that departmental and institutional strategies explicitly support student 
partnership approaches to curricular design and provide mechanisms through 
quality assurance and enhancement for ensuring their embedding and effective­
ness;
•	
building into such initiatives strategies that embed and develop student leadership 
as well as staff leadership;
•	
researching the impact of student partnership initiatives in ways that also support 
the vision of students as teachers, scholars and change agents;
•	
ensuring that policies and practice for staff appraisal and promotion acknowledge 
and reward staff-student partnerships.
Further discussion and examples of departmental and institutional strategies to 
promote students as partners may be found in Jenkins and Healey (2005); Jenkins 
et al. (2007); Healey and Jenkins (2009); Cook-Sather et al. (2014) and Healey et al. 
(2014a).
Our vision for the future is that it should be the norm, not the exception, that stu­
dents are engaged as partners in learning as teachers, scholars and change agents and 
that co-creating, co-designing, co-researching and co-learning should be common 
practice between students and staff across higher education. Having read this chapter, 
we leave you to consider how far you share this vision.
We hope that the ideas discussed in this chapter will have stimulated you to talk 
with your students about ways in which they may become partners in learning and 
teaching. One of the lessons we have learned is that students often bring fresh ideas of 
what research into learning and teaching needs to be done. Student and staff perspec­
tives often differ and ideas for research will be richer for including ideas from both 
students and staff. Together you may find that you can quite quickly design and imple­
ment collaborative (often action) research ideas on a whole range of themes (for which 
your students might also be able to earn some HE credits). For example:
•	
implementing peer and self-assessment of group work projects;
•	
giving credit for students to develop teaching resources;
•	
arranging for first-year students to undertake a short inquiry project as part of 
induction;
•	
enabling dissertation students to undertake a wider range of types of project;
•	
thinking through how progression can be built into research and inquiry projects 
across your programme;
•	
employing students as pedagogical consultants;
•	
engaging students in SoTL projects to enhance the learning and teaching in their 
courses;
•	
inviting students to co-design courses, assessments and learning outcomes.
Students as partners is a rapidly growing area of interest in higher education. Some 
reviews which will give you a good coverage of the subject include: Cook-Sather et al. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
163
(2014), Dunne and Owen (2013), and Healey et al. (2014a). For students as scholars, 
you will find a comprehensive discussion of the topic and an international collection of 
case studies in Healey and Jenkins (2009), Healey et al. (2013), Healey et al. (2014b), 
and Jenkins et al. (2007). To keep up to date with new developments, see the regularly 
updated resources at: www.mickhealey.co.uk/resources and the Students as Partners 
pages of the HEA website: www.heacademy.ac.uk/students-as-partners.
•	
In what ways have you been active in seeking to enable students to be 
involved in co-developing their own modules/course and or learning 
­outcomes? 
•	
How have you been actively seeking to involve students at committee/
strategy/QA level within your school/faculty, or institution (or beyond)?
Activity 6.3
Opinion: On Researching, Advancing and Inspiring Student 
Engagement (RAISE)
Engaging students for transformation: ways forward
Colin Bryson
It came as a bit of a surprise to me this year to realise that it has been 40 years 
since I began my own journey in Higher Education as an undergraduate studying 
Mathematical Physics; a choice I soon regretted! That journey has had many twists 
and turns, and ups and downs but it’s been a privilege to work as an educator in one 
guise or other for 35 years. Initially my understanding of learning and teaching 
(L&T) was limited and naïve but working with more experienced colleagues who were 
Opinion Piece, Debate, Dear Lecturer, and Fellowship Application 
extracts
In the following opinion piece, Colin Bryson reflects on his involvement in student 
engagement projects and the creation of the RAISE network (Researching, Advancing 
and Inspiring Student Engagement). And in the debate, Frank Furedi and Mike Neary 
examine the authority of the HE teacher in the light of the increased involvement of 
students as partners in learning. To finish, Sam Louis, a recent graduate from Newcas­
tle University, reflects on the chapter overall. This is followed by three extracts from 
successful HEA fellowship applicants who discuss some of the aspects of academic 
practice which feature in this chapter.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

164
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
generous with their advice helped, but also made me realise how important commu­
nity was, a safe place where I could take some risks, trying out innovations and 
learning from times when things did not go so well. I participated in a large number 
of events, and many of these have been of the nature of exemplars of good practice 
and innovation. I started to realise that the educational process was more important 
than the content.
However, the real breakthrough in my thinking was when I was charged with 
increasing independent learning across a large school – I will gloss over the senior 
management thinking behind this initiative! I was wary about this idea and decided 
to ask the students. So working with Len Hand, we conducted focus groups across 
a broad range of students. Really for the first time, I listened properly to the stu­
dent’s voices – it was a revelation. What the students talked about was their engage­
ment – or rather lack of it – with their course and wider experience. Back in 2003, 
almost nobody in the UK was really aware about student engagement, with few if 
any studies and little scholarship about this. Our first dissemination to a wider audi­
ence was at the SEDA conference in 2005 where we received a lot of interest and an 
invitation to publish the paper (Bryson and Hand 2007). We got a lot of encourage­
ment from colleagues and the HEA and embarked on a much deeper, longitudinal 
study over a four-year period.
Around this time the notion of student engagement really started to catch on, 
and the three of us (we had been joined by Christine Hardy) were much in demand 
to give seminars and workshops about this topic. As our scholarship of the issues 
and ideas increased, we became aware of a large body of existing work in the rest 
of the world, where there had been considerable interest, and research, in student 
engagement for much longer. I was fortunate enough to present at conferences 
abroad and have direct discussions with leading experts which helped to shape my 
ideas and refine my understanding. Our longitudinal study was just unfolding and we 
focused on transitions into HE. I went to the 2009 European First Year Conference 
and met a group of enthusiastic colleagues. It was here that the Researching, 
Advancing and Inspiring Student Engagement network was born. It did not have a 
name at that time (it was my 16-year-old daughter who created that), but it was just 
an idea. A few months later, four of us met to plan a first meeting and, in May 2010, 
we held a one-day symposium in Nottingham with the ambitious agenda of develop­
ing a definition and conceptual framework for student engagement, as well as a 
basis for how our network could operate. We created the website (http://raise-
network.ning.com/) and held the first conference in 2011. The following year, the 
network became an organisation with a formal constitution and officers. We have 
continued with two-day annual conferences. These have now grown in scale as has 
RAISE. At the time of writing there were over 700 members from 15 countries. In 
2013, special interest groups (SIGS) were created and this is already leading to a 
rather larger number of events to add to the conference and seminars RAISE has 
held. A particular feature of RAISE is the direct involvement of current students. They 
contribute to, and participate in all the events, e.g. 40 per cent of the conference 
delegates in 2014 were students, mainly undergraduates.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
165
Debate: On the authority of the HE teacher
Academic authority in higher education
Frank Furedi
Learning in any educational environment requires trust in the authority of the teacher. 
Learning, within the sphere of higher education requires that students rely on the 
integrity and the authority of their teacher. Though university students are expected 
to be independent learners and ideally engaged in an interactive partnership with 
academics, education still sometimes requires a leap of faith which people only 
undertake if they trust and accept the authority of the educator.
Authority is a difficult concept and is often wrongly confused with authoritarian 
behaviour. Often authority is also one-sidedly interpreted as the role and influence 
exerted by an individual who is ‘in authority’, that is officially designated as in 
Based on the outcomes of my own and other studies, and discussion with 
RAISE members, I have produced a definition of engagement and, after considerable 
reflection, decided that there is no single conceptual framework that applies to this 
complex, multi-construct (Bryson 2014). I contend that student engagement (SE) 
underpins, not only a good student experience, but transformative learning and 
developing a sense of, and achieving ‘graduateness’. These are the true purposes 
of higher education. Therefore, we, as educators, should put SE at the heart of 
everything we do.
I moved to a different post in 2008, and took over a combined degree where the 
students studied multiple subjects. Their engagement with the course and critical 
social domain, was low, in large part because their sense of identity and belonging 
was weak – much to their frustration. I was able to introduce a holistic SE strategy 
and have worked very much in partnership in students to do that. That has seemed 
to create a rather better student experience and many students who demonstrate 
strong engagement. I believe that the partnership approach has been the catalyst 
for these students to feel that they can take risks and move outside their comfort 
zones. I am researching the ‘how’ of this at the moment and how to enhance this 
across diverse students and contexts.
The HE sector now seems to have embraced student engagement in large mea­
sure, in policy and in practice. This has ratcheted up the general quality of the stu­
dent experience. I am less sure that more than a handful of students are developing 
the type of deep and strong engagement that leads to transformation and really 
gaining all they can – ‘becoming’ (Fromm, 1977). Therefore, I believe that our goal 
should be to foster that through revitalising the curriculum and building partnership 
learning communities (Healey et al. 2014a). It is a very challenging goal but even 
trying to move towards that is so worthwhile for both students and staff.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

166
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
charge of a classroom or institution. However, being in authority does not mean 
possessing the capacity to behave authoritatively and to exercise authority. Author­
ity always rests on a moral foundation and its claim to influence, respect or esteem 
is far more fundamental than the formal power associated with an office or position. 
Historically, the term authority, which derives from the Roman word auctoritas, was 
associated with that of the author, as possessing both the capacity to initiate and 
provide a foundation for knowledge.
In higher education the authority of scholars is founded on their capacity to 
personify and lend meaning to a particular academic initiative. In a university envi­
ronment the exercise of this authority is contingent on the nature of the relationship 
between the academic teacher and the student. Authority is used to facilitate the act 
of initiating students into the subject. It is the academic who draws up reading lists 
and course plans. Although students may legitimately attempt to influence the 
course content, in the end, it requires the authoritative voice of the academic to ini­
tiate and give direction to the work of undergraduates.
Ideally, undergraduate students swiftly develop into active participants in their 
course work, develop a capacity for independent learning and in many cases culti­
vate a genuine academic partnership with their teacher. Integral to this partnership 
is the right to contest and question the views of teachers. In such circumstances the 
authority of an academic can never sit on its laurels but will face the scrutiny of 
students. In ideal circumstances the criticisms and questions directed at academics 
will be answered in a manner that strengthens their claim to authority. In instances 
where the authority of the academic is not upheld, responsibility for the future of a 
course is placed on the shoulders of students. This unreasonable burden may dis­
rupt the learning of the undergraduates concerned.
In recent years, the professional authority of academics has been undermined – 
not by questioning students but by the external pressure to formalise and rationalise 
university life. The growing focus on auditing academic performance and rationalis­
ing course content and assessment is motivated by the assumption that, left to their 
devices, academics will exercise their authority inefficiently if not irresponsibly. One 
important legacy of the introduction of the auditing culture has been the diminishing 
importance attached to professional judgement. The de-authorisation of academic 
judgement risks turning relationships between teachers and students into a techni­
cal affair.
In a world of online marking, pre-determined learning outcomes, externally con­
structed templates and auditing, teaching loses some of its moral force. Promoted as 
instruments of democratisation and inclusion, these technical changes are often cast 
in a non-hierarchical form of providing greater scope for the students’ voice and the 
students’ experience. However, in practice, these apparently democratic innovations 
represents a shift from the exercise of authority into unaccountable forms of control.
In the twenty-first-century university, discipline is increasingly perceived as a 
technical accomplishment. Its focus is on managerial techniques rather than on gain­
ing the identification of students with the aims of their course. Indeed, the techniques 
of managerial control that are used in the classroom have little to do with education 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
167
Debate: On the authority of the HE teacher
Student as producer: authority and authorship in authoritarian times
Mike Neary
Higher education is not against academic authority; but is contra to academic author­
itarianism: teaching based on a deficiency model of student capacities, or teaching 
which sees its prime role to transmit knowledge. Academic authoritarianism inflects 
teaching with over-explanation, leaving little space for critical intelligence to emerge.
and its aims. Most disturbingly, through its emphasis and reliance on technical 
manipulation, it avoids a morally informed dialogue between academic and pupil. And 
as Basil Bernstein reminds us in another context – despite its rejection of hierarchical 
principles of authority, in practice, the reliance on managerial control is arguably 
more authoritarian than the open exercise of authority.
For Bernstein, the apparently non-hierarchical educational practices do not do 
away with control and hierarchy but render it invisible. He argues that invisible ped­
agogy establishes control through psychological techniques. He describes these as 
an ‘implicit hierarchy’, which is one where ‘power is masked or hidden by devices of 
communication’ (Bernstein 2003: 67).
The adoption of an invisible pedagogy has encouraged the colonisation of the 
university by a variety of new administrators and experts. Once an academic’s 
authority became a subject of ambiguity and negotiation, the status and the auton­
omy of the profession became compromised. Ambivalence about the moral authority 
of the teacher has led to the introduction of what Foucault characterised as moral 
techniques – testing, measuring, surveillance and league tables follow. The prolifer­
ation of these moral techniques indicates that their introduction is likely to acquire 
a life of its own. In such circumstances the judgement of the academic teacher is 
trumped by the verdict of the league table or the opinion survey that purports to 
convey the sentiments of students. However, the authority vested in the outside 
authority lacks moral depth and serves to distract academic life from the pursuit of 
objectives integral to itself.
Trust in education has both an institutional and individual dimension. It presup­
poses confidence in the institution of education and specifically in the academic 
profession. For this confidence to be converted into active trust, students need to 
believe in their lecturers’ integrity and capacity to educate them. Trust is based on a 
subjective assessment of the character and personality of the individual academic. 
It is through a subjective relation of trust that authority ceases to be a formal or 
official designation and acquires its moral force. Authority which in general gives 
meaning to power in the context of classroom offers academics the moral force to 
inspire belief.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

168
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
Academic authoritarianism is antithetical to higher education, where students 
learn methods and methodologies, including theoretical understandings, to discover 
the world for themselves; and, in the process, create new knowledge and meaning. 
Higher education is saturated with content, presented to students for repurposing 
inside and outside of the curriculum. Higher education is full of explanation, but its 
explanations are non-dogmatic, open to the possibility of other explainings which 
may be counter-intuitive and contradictory.
Authority resides in higher education as the academic, who represents the sub­
ject discipline, and in the student, whose independent and collective intelligence has 
yet to be realised. Both student and teacher, each in their own way, have an import­
ant contribution to make to the production of knowledge and meaning, as well as 
understanding and representing the world to itself and to others.
This approach to teaching and learning in higher education is derived from the 
question: what are universities for? The first modern European university, the Univer­
sity of Berlin, founded in 1812, was conceived as a liberal humanist institution 
against the dogmatic scholastic medieval university, so that knowledge would now 
be created at the level of society, as a general encyclopaedia, to resolve the contra­
diction between knowledge for its own sake and instrumental (vocational) learning. 
The pedagogical principle on which this vision was based was the connection of 
research and teaching, with seminars replacing lectures as the main form of teach­
ing. Students were to be directly involved in the speculative thinking of their tutors, 
in a Socratic dialogue, without strictly planned courses and curricula. Students 
should work in research communities with time for thinking and without any practical 
obligations.
This philosophical and idealistic purpose of this kind of knowledge production 
was undermined by the student revolts in 1968 in Paris, France, and around the 
world. These student revolts challenged not only the elitism of knowledge produc­
tion, but the nature of knowledge itself. In this moment students became more than 
students, revealing the catastrophe of the liberal humanist project through a recov­
ery of revolutionary theory, e.g., Marxism, Feminism, and practical political cam­
paigns, e.g., Anti-war and Free love, in a movement of resistance where research 
became something that anyone can do. This movement of resistance is still being 
played out in student agitation and repressed by an increasingly authoritarian-
militarised-violent Police-State. An important aspect of the student revolt was the 
introduction of the independent student research project as a central feature of 
higher education.
The University of Berlin in 1812 and the student uprisings of 1968 were 
grounded in the same problematic: the relationship between research and teaching. 
This is the key to higher education and remains its central preoccupation. In the 
current context, the relationship between research and teaching is dysfunctional, 
with each activity working against the other.
This dysfunctionality is exemplified in British universities by two main strate­
gies for the regulation of academic life: the National Student Survey, which mea­
sures teaching quality, and the Research Excellence Framework, which assesses the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
169
quality of academic research. While each policy instrument has been subject to 
devastating academic review, taken together, they represent the bifurcation of the 
distinguishing foundational feature of higher education: the connection between 
teaching and research. This disconnection is framed around a narrow instrumental 
purpose for higher education, based on the promotion of students as consumers, 
students as proto-employees and the pedagogy of debt. This emphasis on a market-
based approach to higher education is occurring at a time when the market-based 
model for debt-driven social development is in crisis, following the Great Crash of 
2008.
Student as Producer is an attempt to reconsider the core purpose of higher 
education by reconnecting its central features, research and teaching, as a model of 
curriculum development. Student as Producer has been the organising principle for 
teaching and learning at the University of Lincoln since 2010 across all subjects and 
all course levels.
Academics at Lincoln are challenged and invited to consider the consequences 
of introducing research-based teaching to their own pedagogic practice: this means 
including research and research-like activities as a fundamental aspect of student 
learning, involving students in the design and delivery of teaching, setting out the 
learning environment to support research-based teaching through classroom design 
and learning technologies, and to develop curriculum activities whereby students 
can create the future: encouraging students to see themselves as subjects rather 
than as object of history.
In a recent project evaluation, students and staff at Lincoln were very positive 
about Student as Producer: students see the benefits of research-based teaching for 
their learning, earning and living. Staff acknowledged the institutional support to 
develop participatory and engaged approaches to higher education, with a recogni­
tion of the dynamic creative tension between Student as Producer and the market-
friendly imperative of higher education policy. Student as Producer has been taken 
up and adopted by other universities and is at the heart of current initiatives to pres­
ent Student as Partners across the sector.
While the success of Student as Producer is very encouraging, it is important to 
remember its radical credentials. Student as Producer has traces of the progressive 
idealists who founded the University of Berlin, to establish knowledge at the level of 
society, but is more grounded in the revolutionary politics of May ‘68, when the 
authority for knowledge production is based on a collaboration between academics, 
students and workers grounded in the challenges of everyday life.
The slogan ‘Student as Producer’, is based on a paper, ‘Author as Producer’, 
written by Walter Benjamin (1892–1940), the Marxist social theorist, and delivered 
to the Society of Anti-Fascists in Paris in 1934. The question for the paper was, how 
do radical intellectuals act in a moment of crisis? Benjamin’s solution was to trans­
form the social relations of production, based on human needs and capacities rather 
than profit, to ensure that intellectual workers see themselves as the subjects of 
history, able to recognise themselves in a world of their own design. While the cir­
cumstances of our current predicament are different from the 1930s, there are 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

170
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
Dear Lecturer
On letting me be responsible for my learning
 Sam Louis
Having had the opportunity to take part in a module where student and teacher were 
‘partners’ in co-designing the structure and syllabus for the year, I can honestly say 
was one of the most stressful, confusing and alienating experiences I have ever 
undertaken. And by far the most rewarding.
A rough module outline was presented at the beginning of the year, within which 
we had the freedom to propose how we wanted to be assessed, when the assess­
ments should be, how much they should be worth to our overall grade, almost every­
thing was malleable. With three staff members and 20-odd students, this led to an 
awful lot of discussion and deliberation. Throughout the beginning of the year I con­
sistently had little to no idea what was expected of me, what I was meant to do, how 
I was meant to do it or if I was even vaguely on the right track. Without being spoon-
fed objectives and criteria, I was drowning, incapacitated by fear of making a wrong 
move. It was long since the halfway point of the module had passed before I began 
to realise that I just had to take responsibility and decide for myself. I was forced to 
engage with the material and with the syllabus, and determine what it was that I wanted 
from the module, and, by association, from HE itself. It made me realise how little 
thought or research I had put into the modules I chose, aside from the content pro­
vided. I just expected to turn up and be provided with material for learning, without 
ever contemplating what I wanted to gain or improve by taking the module.
I worked harder, and for longer on this module than almost any other I have 
taken because of the learning curve you had to tackle before you even started your 
work, and consequently I produced some of the work that I am most proud of. 
I understood more and grew far more than at any other point in my university career 
and it completely opened up my other courses, as I started to look at them from a 
far broader standpoint and see the possibilities each held as an opportunity to learn, 
explore and experiment.
I don’t think that all modules should be jointly managed, and I also think that 
student participation in such schemes should be gradually introduced as the student 
progresses through HE. It is very difficult to be thrown in the deep end of qualifying 
enough similarities to be very concerned about the future. While the future cannot 
be future-proofed or guaranteed, an important corrective against the Police-State 
and other forms of authoritarianism is that our students have the capacity to claim 
authority and authorship for their own lives and the social world which has yet to be 
made.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

   STUDENTS AS PARTNERS IN LEARNING
171
Extracts from successful HEA fellowship applications
Dr Orange (FHEA)
I have designed formative simulated crime scene practicals which allow students to 
gain compulsory professional skills, such as communication, time management, doc­
umentation and organisation skills. Students are placed into small groups and are 
provided with details of a crime that has been committed within the forensic house. 
After having had the opportunity to assign their roles within the group, they would 
then set about to collect, preserve, document and package evidence from the simu­
lated crime scene. Within this co-operative learning environment (Brown and Ciuffe­
telli 2009), students are encouraged to feedback to the rest of the group by filling in 
a proforma at the end of the session detailing how each evidence type was pro­
cessed. They would then present to the rest of the group how they went about com­
pleting tasks within their specific role, and, more importantly, they would be able to 
reflect back on their actions individually and jointly as a group (Weinberger, et al. 
2007).
I have found that using a proforma alone does not necessarily make the stu­
dents feel that they have gained any immediate feedback from the lecturer, so 
I devote some time to questioning students about what they have recorded on their 
proforma and asking them for explanations. I have found that students do enjoy this 
form of assessment; however, they have commented that they would prefer to get 
direct feedback whilst they are carrying out the practical. Realistically they cannot 
be continuously disturbed with feedback, so I decided to film students while they are 
completing the practical within their group. This is a tool which has already been 
used in other disciplines to facilitate learning (Nilsen and Baerheim 2005). This way 
the students can view back the footage, carry out self-assessment using a proforma 
and then this can be discussed with the lecturer at the end of the session. Students 
will need to consent to being filmed as part of the ethical approval process, and if 
they are happy for the footage to be used for other purposes, then there is potential 
marking criteria and assessment objectives and make any sense of what to do, 
without just resorting to form and suggesting exactly what you did on another mod­
ule. But if gradually introduced, with increasing levels of control and participation 
given to students over the course of their studies, I think that it is a fantastically 
worthwhile undertaking. Why? Because you become aware of your own individual 
self-development and the need to take responsibility for it. More importantly, you 
become truly integrated in your learning. Not with the university through a team or 
society, but with your own personal process of learning, as you start to question and 
figure out the nature of your personal project, and to properly answer the question 
of why you have come to university.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

172
MICK HEALEY, CATHERINE BOVILL AND ALAN JENKINS
to use it at university open days and to encourage college students to consider a 
career within forensic science [K5, K4, V1, V2].
Ms White (PFHEA)
I consider the students co-producers in their learning (McCulloch 2009) and design 
the curriculum to be sufficiently fluid to enable them to develop their voice (Barnett 
and Coate 2005). I continue to refine my pedagogic practices, so that the students 
experience vibrant and challenging learning and I try to develop their critical literacy 
by providing reflective space for them to question their context and assumptions 
(Andreotti 2006). I vary the format of each session, including small group work, an 
element of whole-group input, the opportunity to visit schools and see the theory in 
the actual setting, practical activities to illustrate experiential learning, concepts 
such as leadership and work with elements including interactive dialogue sheets, 
podcasts and film. My module evaluations comment positively on the range of 
teaching strategies I use, my enthusiasm for the topic and for teaching, and stu­
dents feel that their contributions are valued, forming an integral and important 
component. I include group tutorials part-way through the module to support stu­
dents to begin their assignments, and individual tutorials to discuss work on a one-
to-one basis. I have introduced a personalised feedback strategy, whereby the 
students choose whether they would like face-to-face feedback, audio feedback, 
written feedback via coversheets or emailed feedback. Student evaluations suggest 
that this initiative has been positively received.
Dr Blue (PFHEA)
It is because of my strong views on the need to link staff and student engagement 
that I launched the faculty ‘teaching’ prize when I became Associate Dean. This prize 
is awarded to the top four staff in the faculty, based on student votes. The students 
are asked to say a few words to support their vote and this feedback is sent to staff 
who receive votes, to encourage them to continue good practice. This also helps us 
to assess which aspects of their teaching and learning students most appreciate 
across the faculty. Both staff and students are very engaged in this process, and 
this is further enhanced by my decision to award the official prizes at the graduation 
ceremonies, including a quote or two from the students. We display the winners on 
the screens in the Business School on a regular basis, to reinforce the importance 
of excellence in teaching. The major strategic aim of this initiative was to enhance 
the profile of teaching in the faculty, and as a vehicle to share good practice. NSS 
scores have increased on many programmes, particularly in the Business School, 
though I fully appreciate that this will be due to multiple factors I do believe that 
emphasising the importance of teaching has helped.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Some of the places delivering higher education these days, you couldn’t call 
them universities, could you?
Well, we’ve got to pass everyone these days; look at the money they’re paying, 
and they’ll only complain if they fail, won’t they?
Some of the courses we’ve got here now; I mean, really, we’re just a training 
institute now, aren’t we?
Introduction
What are universities for? Asking the question so starkly is revealing on many levels. 
First, surely, it is obvious what they are for, but if they do many things, maybe the 
question is really asking whether there is one core activity which unites all those 
things. Second, maybe the question implies the need to reconsider what universities do, 
that is, that they should be doing something else; that they have somehow lost their 
way. And third, perhaps the question is badly phrased because the word ‘university’ 
implies a place – a set of buildings – and is that inference a helpful one? This chapter 
deals with these questions, with the aim of prompting debate and reflection on our 
roles as academic practitioners in helping to shape the present and future landscape of 
higher education provision and its role in society.
The chapter has an obvious structure: a look at the past and what can be learnt 
from that; a look at the present reform agenda and some of its implications; and a look 
at the future in order to assess the direction of travel. As with all the previous chapters, 
the main focus will be on the role of teaching and learning in the changing landscape 
of higher education and the ways that we are both shaped by, and able to shape, 
that landscape. For the last time we will also meet up with Professor K.G. Reason and 
Dr M. Bracewell, who will be offering their views on what is presented.
A (very) short history of UK universities
To start, here is a short quiz, which requires you to resist the obvious temptation to 
look up the answers as you go:
7
The landscape of higher education
John Lea
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

174
JOHN LEA
1	
By 1335, how many universities were there in England?
2	
By 1835, how many universities were there in England?
3	
By 1860, how many universities were there in the UK?
4	
By 1963, how many universities were there in the UK?
5	
By 1992, how many universities were there in the UK?
6	
By 2010, how many universities were there in the UK?
7	
What percentage of UK 18-year-olds went to university in 1975 (roughly)?
8	
What percentage of UK 18–30-year-olds were expected to go to university in 2010?
Unless you are an expert on the history of universities, you might be quite surprised by 
how far out your answers are. When I did some checking (including on that well-known 
website) I discovered that the answer to the first one (not that surprisingly) was two – 
Oxford (circa 1167) and Cambridge (circa 1209). But much more surprisingly (to me 
anyway) was that 500 years later there only seemed to be three more universities – The 
University of Manchester (circa 1826), the University of Durham (circa 1832), and the 
colleges making up the University of London (established between 1826 and 1836). And 
it’s not at all clear that any of these would in any way resemble the institutions we know 
today. If we then jump forward a few decades, and include the other parts of the UK, we 
still only get less than a dozen institutions using a university title, including, in Scotland: 
St Andrews (circa 1411), Glasgow (circa 1450), Aberdeen (circa 1494), and Edinburgh 
(circa 1583); and then, in Ireland, Belfast (circa 1845). Colleges making up the Univer­
sity of Wales were established throughout the nineteenth century. Jump again 100 years 
to 1963 and that figure has only just doubled – if we exclude those being built at the time 
(see below), and jump again to 1992 and it’s still only doubled one more time – leaving 
the UK with still fewer than 50 universities (if each college of the Universities of London 
and Wales are disaggregated, the number grows by another dozen or so).
The years referred to in questions 4, 5 and 6 were chosen to correspond with 
three important reform documents. The 1963 Robbins Report spoke of the importance 
of public investment in building new (latterly called glass-plated) universities – including, 
for example, what became the Universities of Kent, Warwick, and York – to complement 
those ancient ones mentioned above and the newer civic (or red brick) universities 
which had been built in the Victorian period – including, for example, Leeds, Birmingham, 
and Sheffield (Robbins Report 1963). The 1992 Further and Higher Education Act 
which abolished the binary divide between universities and polytechnics, allowing all 
higher education institutions (HEIs) to apply for university status, and abolished the 
University Grants Committee (UGC) – which had funded universities – and established 
in its place new competitive funding bodies for each of the UK nations, to which all 
universities (old and new) would be able to apply for funds (DFE 1992). And 2010 saw 
the publication of the Browne Report (Browne Review of HE 2010), subsequently fol­
lowed by the Government White Paper (BIS White Paper 2011), which not only recom­
mended a fundamentally new way of funding teaching and learning in universities 
(primarily through full cost student fees) but also encouraged new providers to 
apply for degree-awarding powers – including private providers and further education 
colleges.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
175
Depending on which definition of a university is used (i.e. those strictly with uni­
versity in their title or all HEIs), the answer to question 7 can vary between around 115 
to 170 institutions. But the point I wish to make here is that it was only after 1992 that 
the growth of universities in the UK could be considered to have started to become 
exponential. Indeed, if we take the higher figure from 1992 (around 60) and compare it 
with the lowest figure from 2014 (115) the number of universities has still only just 
doubled again. Of course, the time period in which the doubling is occurring is shrink­
ing considerably (down to 20 odd years, from the 500 years of the first comparison), 
and this is how we have arrived at the total figure for HEIs we now have (which I am 
guessing is closer to the figure that many people might have considered to be the case 
for 100 years ago).
Another way to consider the nature of the growth pattern is to look at the per­
centage of full-time students attending universities. In the mid-1970s it was roughly 
10–13 per cent (of 18–24-year-olds), up from around 8 per cent at the time of the 
Robbins Report in 1963. Which, when compared with the (then) Prime Minister Tony 
Blair’s pronouncement in 1999 of a commitment to having a participation rate of 50 per 
cent by 2010, it points to the fact that a radical revolution was beginning to replace a 
quiet evolution, notwithstanding the astute observation at the time that: ‘Although 
British higher education is (quantitatively) mass, it is still (qualitatively) elite’ (Scott 
2003), and the subtle change in the definition of participation rate. As it turned out, the 
newly defined participation rate (18–30-year-olds with an experience of higher educa­
tion) never actually hit 50 per cent but it has been consistently over 40 per cent for 
the last ten years or so, which is more than enough to qualify for the label of a ‘mass’ 
system of higher education, which Martin Trow defined as a participation rate between 
15 per cent and 50 per cent – below and above those figures being ‘elite’ and ‘universal’ 
respectively (Trow 2010).
Prof. Reason:  This is all very well, but somebody has got to stand up at some point 
and ask the politically incorrect question of why we need 50 per cent of the popula­
tion to go to the university. Before you know it, you’ll need a degree to be a plumber. 
And if you work in a university, it’s plain to those who are honest enough to admit it, 
that standards are falling. How can 50 per cent of the population achieve the stan­
dard that 10 per cent were achieving only a generation ago? It just doesn’t make 
sense. And even worse, it’s no secret any more that lecturers are being put under 
pressure to mark student work leniently. And why? Because departments can’t 
afford to lose students; because universities want to advertise the number of 2:1s 
that students achieve; and individual lecturers just write kind things on student 
assignments because they think they should be either massaging their fragile egos, 
or they don’t want to have to deal with student complaints. Widening participation is 
a farce and I just don’t understand why more people don’t speak out against it.
Dr Bracewell:  Why do you seem to have no empathy with those students whom you 
must know have come to university as non-traditional learners or as first generation 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

176
JOHN LEA
However you define participation in higher education (for example, whether you 
just include achieving an honours degree in a traditional university, or extend it to 
include, say, dropping out of an HND course in a further education college), it is clear 
that participation rates have grown enormously. Indeed, there are now as many stu­
dents studying on higher education courses in further education colleges as there were 
studying throughout the whole of higher education provision at the time of the Rob­
bins Report. But increasing participation is not the same as widening participation and 
because of that we now have detailed data on, for example, the changing social class, 
gender, race and ethnic, age, and disability profile of students in all universities and on 
particular courses (available for view on an annual basis from the Higher Education 
Statistical Agency (HESA) website).
entrants? Are you really against giving people opportunities? It’s not their fault they 
don’t have the cultural capital that the privileged 10 per cent have always had. And 
I’ll tell you the real reason why the number of 2:1s has risen, it’s because university 
teachers are now more than ever much more mindful about how they support stu­
dent learning, and they don’t want to lose students they know could excel if they 
tailored that support to fit their circumstances. And what you call ‘kind’ feedback in 
reality is simply comments aimed at helping students do better in the next assign­
ment. And anyway, what’s to be gained by not being kind? The real problem is not 
widening participation, but why people like yourself want to defend, perhaps unwit­
tingly, social class privilege and elitism and then associate learner support with 
some kind of misplaced therapy for the masses, or just plain cheating – and there’s 
just no real evidence to support either claim.
Prof. Reason:  I must follow up here with another important politically incorrect point. 
It’s one thing to monitor these variables, it’s quite another to deliberately act on 
them. If we want to maintain standards, surely we must only let students into 
­university based on their ability – as measured by their A Level results. And while it’s 
lovely to see lots of students from different backgrounds on campus, it’s surely up 
to the students to decide where to study, not for us to try and engineer a particular 
type of student profile. That’s just a sure-fire route to political correctness gone mad, 
and as we’ve seen in the United States, it will inevitably result in some high flying 
students complaining that their places have been taken by other less able students 
just because their faces fit the type of profile that the university wants.
Dr Bracewell:  Now you’re bordering on being offensive, and demonstrating just how 
completely out of touch you are. For a start, why are you still stuck on the idea of 
an A Level grade being the gold standard? There are many different ways in which 
students can demonstrate their abilities and their readiness to benefit from higher 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
177
But are students today actually entering very different types of intuitions com­
pared with students even one generation ago? The answer is complicated in part by the 
increasing numbers and the changing profile of the students – which varies from insti­
tution to institution and course to course. But also by the fact that some of the institu­
tions didn’t exist as higher education providers one generation ago, and some of them 
may be providing a very particular type of higher education, for example, technical 
vocational HE on a foundation degree (which didn’t exist as a qualification a genera­
tion ago).
Furthermore, one of the implications of establishing the new funding councils in 
1992 was to shift funding in the direction of universities meeting specific targets in 
order to receive their funding. This enabled successive governments to dangle carrots 
and sticks at universities in order to engineer not just a wider student profile, but also to 
provide particular types of courses (ones which are vocationally more relevant, for 
example). These social engineering projects were given a new twist in the 2011 White 
Paper which, in the interests of putting students at the heart of the system, now require 
universities to supply annual data for a Key Information Set (KIS), which includes, for 
example, data on the percentage of their graduates in employment (HESA 2014). The 
combined effect of these changes has been to erode the ability of universities to decide – 
autonomously – the nature of their provision and their student profile. Or perhaps more 
accurately, if they wish to continue to act completely autonomously, it has put pressure 
on them to seek alternative sources of funding, and/or risk losing the confidence of 
regulatory agencies, and/or potentially risk losing students to rival universities.
The previous two paragraphs highlight that there have been both endogenous 
and exogenous factors at work over the past twenty years or so. In some cases, where 
for example, a particular institution wanted to widen its student profile anyway, the 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in actively monitoring the student 
profile on the courses/programmes you teach and/or support learning? 
•	
What strategies have you been involved in which has sought to change the 
student profile of your faculty/school, or institution (and/or beyond)?
Activity 7.1
education. And all students benefit from a wide student profile on campus. Indeed, 
the whole place will be enriched because of the mix of students. Students learn from 
each other as much as what they are taught by lecturers. Indeed, lecturers like you 
might learn a thing or two if you just listened once in a while! How do you think the 
curriculum is going to be enhanced if each generation of students is just the same 
as the previous generation, which then just goes on to produce the same-looking 
professoriate?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

178
JOHN LEA
relevant carrots and sticks could be seen as complementary. But some of the forces 
have been viewed as antagonistic or contradictory. For example, Stefan Collini has 
been vociferous in defending the liberal tradition in universities (specifically the 
humanities), which he sees as being undermined by the biggest social engineering proj­
ect of the State, namely, to see universities primarily as engines of economic growth, 
ignoring in the process the role of knowledge as a public good, aimed at widening and 
deepening understanding and valuing that knowledge for its own sake (Collini 2012). 
And, in a more overtly political context, we might also say that there is an important 
difference here between really useful knowledge (Johnson 1979) and merely useful 
knowledge, the former being aimed at enabling disadvantaged groups to understand 
their circumstances so that they could then change them, rather than just being accom­
modated to them. Clearly, what it means for higher education to be experienced as 
transformative has multiple meanings and dimensions.
Dear Lecturer
On HE as transformative
Diane Locke
I am a single mother, 43 years old, with two children, studying a full-time degree 
course in Youth and Community Work. When I came to university, I nursed anxiety 
from my schooldays. The labels and assumptions people had of me back then were 
still present within me. We had tasks to do, group work, presentations and speaking 
to the group about our values, which for me was difficult. I could not see at the 
beginning of the course where I could find any value from my past life.
Through transitions and perseverance I was able to dissect my past life, trans­
ferring it into positive attributes and a framework that I could use to enhance my 
understanding. With this new vision I became me again, but reawakened, with eyes 
that could see new things, that in the past I was too blind or scared to see. I can feel 
my strength without egoistical tendencies, and at the same time I recognise my 
limits and weakness. My ability to make mistakes and to learn from them, without 
anxiety, has been crucial in this development.
I struggled with the language of academia. I feel uncomfortable quoting theo­
ries and speaking rhetoric, yet when I write it flows fluidly. This is because I have 
learnt that I value who I am, where I have emerged from and what I represent for my 
community. That the way I speak and talk is entwined with every piece of flesh and 
bone in my existence of class and gender.
So here I am, now, in my third year and thinking ‘how the hell did this happen?’ 
and wondering whether the person who writes this way is even me any more. But 
then I speak and I realise all is not lost, she is still here and now she has learnt what 
her voice can achieve, she does not want to go back into the silent shadows of her 
previous existence.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
179
In the 1990s, Ron Barnett in the UK, and Bill Readings in the USA both questioned 
whether universities, largely of their own accord, had lost their way, requiring a recon­
sideration of what exactly was their way, and what might be the way forward. These 
questions were prompted not so much by the narrower political and economic agendas 
of successive governments, but by wider social and cultural movements, including, 
particularly, post-modern ideas which questioned some of the ontological and episte­
mological foundations on which universities had traditionally established themselves, 
chiefly, the notion of rational, autonomous individuals using human reason to shine a 
light on the discovery of truth, and the enhancement of humanity (Kant [1784] 2009). 
(Some of these issues were discussed in Chapter 5 and we will return to them again at 
the end of this chapter.)
The current reform agenda
Given the very positive way in which many colleges and universities have embraced 
the idea of students as partners in learning (see Chapter 6), one might have expected 
the idea of placing students at the heart of the system to be a natural complement. In 
reality, it has provoked enormous debate and discussion, the essence of which might 
be summarised in the contrast between the student as producer and the student as 
consumer of knowledge. For Neary and Winn (2009), the idea of a student as a con­
sumer of knowledge is completely at odds with the idea of a university as a place 
where students and staff work cooperatively and collaboratively on producing knowl­
edge. As we saw in Chapter 3, this is also in keeping with the idea of the university as 
espoused by von Humboldt:
The relationship between teacher and learner is … completely different in higher 
education from what it is in schools. At the higher level, the teacher is not there for 
the sake of the student, both have their justification in the service of scholarship.
(von Humboldt [1810] 1970, quoted by Elton 2008: 225)
This notion has also been axial throughout all the previous parts of this book. Here the 
idea of ‘schooling’ speaks to that strictly pedagogical relationship between teacher 
and pupil, where the former is the font of wisdom demanding that the latter sits at his 
or her feet. Indeed, the very architecture of the university lecture theatre cements this 
in the mind of the former school pupil as soon as they enter the university. And this is 
what prompted von Humboldt to further comment that we should see the seminar 
room rather than the lecture theatre as the axial knowledge context for a university 
(see Chapter 4 in particular).
But in what ways does the current reform agenda actually undermine these ideas? 
Although the 2011 White Paper contained a number of significant reforms, the headline-
grabbing ‘university students to pay £9,000 annual fees from September 2012’ was the 
one whose implications have been most discussed. In reality, colleges and universities 
can charge up to that figure – there being several triggers at work in deciding on a 
lower figure, and, of course, this is very much an English reform. But the key point was 
that students (in England at least) would (in essence and for most courses) now be 
paying the full tuition cost for their degrees. For some commentators, this has been 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

180
JOHN LEA
enough to prompt the claim that even if students didn’t see themselves as consumers 
before, that this would certainly focus their minds on what exactly they would be pur­
chasing with that money. Added to that, if we look at the Key Information Set (KIS), we 
can see that a number of its components concern the purchase price of goods and 
services associated with being at college or university (HESA 2014). Furthermore, the 
implied association that more contact teaching hours is a positive thing may well 
heighten the sense that it is what students receive from teachers which is at the heart 
of the university experience, not what they, themselves, invest in their studies. Further 
evidence of this mindset might also be gleaned from the National Student Survey (NSS) 
questions, the majority of which are about what teachers have done for students and 
not how students have engaged in their own learning (see Chapter 3).
The full list of NSS questions is available here: http://www.thestudentsurvey.com/
content/nss2012_questionnaire_english.pdf (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
But does this mean that the idea of consumerism is somehow anathema to the 
whole notion of being a student at university? Clearly, unless student accommodation is 
going to run as a kind of workers’ co-operative, and the university bookshop is going to 
give away all its books, and the coffee shop is to provide free coffee, we will continue 
to see forms of ‘commodification’ on campus – where a good or service will be bought 
in exchange for money. Furthermore, if competition for high achieving students contin­
ues, we will surely see a mirroring of the student service arms race often spoken about 
in the USA, where institutions ‘gild’ their campuses in the hope that prospective students 
will be seduced by all the bling on offer. But it could also be argued that these develop­
ments are as much to do with wider social forces than just the activities of university 
estates managers. In this context, George Ritzer has written about the need for univer­
sities to positively embrace the idea that they are ‘cathedrals of consumption’, or per­
haps better, take steps to become more ‘spectacularly irrational’ for fear that they will 
become hopelessly out of touch with these broader trends, and thereby possibly lose all 
credibility with young people as places to be seen (Ritzer 2001).
Prof. Reason: This is all very well, and I can buy some of this (excuse my pun). But 
I’m really not sure that I want my department to resemble the local shopping mall, 
and I really don’t see anything wrong with first years hanging on every word spoken 
in the lecture theatre – after all, we are the font of all wisdom, on our subjects, at 
least. But I do rather like this idea of students being prepared for the seminars and 
actually contributing something. How many times has a seminar just turned into 
another one of my lectures? Come to think of it, it’s every one of them.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
181
The reforms which followed the Browne Report in 2010 may have heightened the 
sense of students being consumers of educational products, but the broader notion of 
universities and colleges competing for those students in an educational marketplace 
has been felt for some considerable time. Indeed, in countries like the United States, it 
might be argued to have been a core feature of higher education provision since the 
inception of each institution. In the UK, the idea that public service provision would be 
more efficient if provided in the marketplace was given its most significant ideological 
and legislative backing with the election of Margaret Thatcher as prime minister in 
1979. And the two key political and economic pillars of Thatcherism have had clear 
effects on the university sector in the UK. The first of these emphasised how State con­
trol of the production and distribution of goods and services was the road to bureau­
cratic inefficiency and waste (and ultimately a road to serfdom) (Hayek 1944), and the 
second emphasised that individuals know best how to spend their own money (and 
that people should be free to choose) (Friedman and Friedman 1980). The added 
dimension was the general distrust at the time (particularly among Conservative gov­
ernment ministers) of public sector professionals, who seemed to be more concerned 
with their own welfare than that of their clients and therefore needed to be called to 
heel through more transparent forms of accountability (overseen, as it turned out, by 
State-backed quangos and watchdogs).
Aside from the direct cuts to university funding (recouped to some extent by the 
subsequent Labour administrations, headed by Tony Blair), the broad effects on uni­
versities of these reforms was a curtailment of the universities to act as autonomous 
bodies, and to seek State funding based on their own decisions about its need. At no 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in extending learning beyond the 
classroom and making use of social space? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in seeking to balance the need to 
provide an appealing campus environment for students while maintaining 
some of the more traditional academic conventions?
Activity 7.2
Dr Bracewell: Well, I want to look at this from a different angle. How do you know that 
your students are actually enjoying their lectures and learning something in them? 
And if they’re not, maybe that explains why they don’t do anything in your seminars? 
All contact time with students should be aimed at enhancing their learning and I’m 
not seeing any evidence from you that you are really that interested in that. And 
when you say ‘shopping mall’, I think you’re just being deliberately facetious. There 
really isn’t anything wrong with making the campus look more appealing. Creating 
café-style social spaces is actually good for learning. And, anyway, if that’s what 
students want, that’s what we should provide.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

182
JOHN LEA
point in this period was any decision taken to actually privatise universities (only the 
University of Buckingham was considered a completely private institution), in which 
case the term ‘marketisation’ became a blanket term to indicate the general direction 
in the movement of reform. For example, the funding councils established in 1992, 
along with ending the binary divide between universities and polytechnics, created a 
distinct sense that universities were now seriously competing for funds. The establish­
ment of the RAE in 1986 and the QAA in 1997 also created clear mechanisms of public 
accountability, along with the subsequent channelling of funds to those who were kite-
marked as market leaders on the basis of success in those processes.
One broader trend, which has been bolstered by the revisions to the original RAE 
in becoming the REF, has been to cement the heightened sense that the knowledge 
being generated through research activity is itself a commodity (Holmwood 2011). 
There are two distinct ways in which this particular trend is being felt. First, the idea 
of knowledge having an impact by being ‘near market’; that is, not blue skies thinking, 
but a marketable innovation. And, second, that these ‘knowledge products’ be viewed 
as having the potential to be a much-needed source of income for a university. Here, 
the university is no longer an incubator of ideas, but a supplier of products; no longer 
working with companies, it is a company itself, protecting its copyright, and attempt­
ing to profit from its patented products. It might also be argued that ‘generating impact’ 
is actually quite a long way from the idea of the ‘curious mind’, and, as we saw in Chap­
ter 3, the latter is beginning to sound rather quaint as a consequence. They also reso­
nate with Marx’s depiction of capitalism in Volume I of Das Kapital; that is, you know 
that capitalism has taken hold when money has become the purpose of exchange and 
not just the means of exchange (i.e. C-M-C –commodity-money-commodity – becomes 
M-C-M – money-commodity-more money) (Marx [1867] 1974).
Do these reforms have obvious impacts for learning and teaching? Clearly, they 
do. For if teaching and learning are to be led by subject-based research and informed 
by pedagogic research, what are we sharing with our students and asking them to 
become part of? Perhaps this is, quite literally, a production process; where students 
are learning about how to turn knowledge to economic use; no longer knowledge for 
its own sake, but ‘commodified knowledge’. And is this now the key lesson we are 
teaching, that is, academic capitalism, with an emphasis on knowledge not just as pri­
vate property, but also as profitable property? Here we see a stark contrast between 
the university as a marketplace of ideas, and as a marketplace of commodities. But 
whether we feel we may have overstepped the mark here must surely depend on how 
we answered that original question on what we believe universities are for.
Relevant HEA project
Tomlinson, M. (2014) Exploring the impacts of policy changes on student approaches 
and attitudes to learning in contemporary higher education: implications for student 
learning engagement. Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/
files/resources/Exploring_the_impact_of_policy_changes_student_experience.pdf
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
183
When I was studying Economics as an undergraduate I remember being told that 
no matter what ideological perspective you bring to the notion of a free market, there 
will always be two key issues at play: first, what you leave a marketplace with will be 
heavily dependent on what you bring to that marketplace (importantly, more money), 
and the fiercer the competition is between the suppliers in that marketplace, the more 
likely you will see: corners being cut; secrecy and espionage; and exaggerated claims 
about the benefits of the products. In reality, it does matter what ideological perspec­
tive you bring to the table, because those from the right are usually very quick to claim 
that it is the very competition (in the end) which will drive out the unscrupulous, while 
those on the left will be very quick to claim that it is those who know that they will 
definitely benefit from a free market who will be its keenest advocates.
In the case of a higher education marketplace we have seen these tendencies play 
themselves out in interesting ways. Brown and Carasso are succinct in their summary: 
Prof. Reason: Well, I can see how all this marketisation would work for the Business 
School, they all think like that over there anyway. As far as I can see, they are not 
asking their students to be critical of capitalism, but how to embrace it, and make it 
work for them. But what about poor old Higgins in biology, slaving over his micro­
scope looking at the sex lives of newts for the last twenty years? What’s he got to 
sell? And old Jenkins in English, busily being vexed by the use of metaphor, or was 
it simile – never did know the difference. And this is surely the end of all the Marxists 
round here. On second thoughts, maybe that’s no bad thing.
Dr Bracewell: I see your point, but whether we like it or not, this university has been 
put in this marketplace and we’ve got to make the most of it. And let’s be honest, 
some of that research our colleagues have been doing, it’s surely self-indulgent? 
What about that guy in History who seems to have been working on the biography of 
that local Victorian philanthropist for what seems like the last twenty years? Does 
anyone actually read those journal articles he writes every time he comes across 
another notebook? And surely it’s a good thing if a student produces something that 
can be sold while they’re at university? That’s money in the bank for them, and isn’t 
that going to increase their employability when they leave university?
•	
In what ways have you been active in incorporating or resisting the notion 
of knowledge as product in your teaching and learning regime? 
•	
In what ways have you been involved in seeking to balance the need to 
create an environment in which knowledge could be pursued for its own 
sake as well as become intellectual property, with commercial potential?
Activity 7.3
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

184
JOHN LEA
‘We have moved a long way from the notion of universities as expert providers of spe­
cialised services. The vision now is of a market in which consumers with the right 
information will (and should) determine what is provided’ (Brown and Carasso 2013: 
117). And Andrew McGettigan expresses his disquiet concerning the outcome; that we 
are facing the prospect of ‘a polarised sector featuring a handful of selective universi­
ties (privatised to all intents and purposes) and a selection of cheap degree shops 
offering cut-price value for money’ (McGettigan 2013: 10). Put crudely, the middle 
classes get what they always got, and the working classes get something else entirely. 
But is this unfair on some of the new private providers, including further education 
colleges, who may be providing something which entirely suits the needs of their pro­
spective students (Simmons and Lea 2013)? These students, for example, may not be in 
a position to access a traditional campus university experience; and may expressly 
wish to pursue a higher vocational curriculum tied to the local job market; and may 
even wish to disassociate themselves entirely from what might be perceived as the 
bourgeois lifestyle validation exercise which takes place annually in the so-called elite 
universities.
Relevant HEA project
Healey, M., Jenkins, A. and Lea, J. (2014c) Developing Research-Based Curricula In 
College-Based Higher Education. York: HEA. Available at:
http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/resources/detail/heinfe/Developing_research-
based_curricula_in_CBHE (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
In the United States Arum and Roksa (2011) have claimed that many universities 
have been able to position themselves in the marketplace in very understandable but 
equally very troubling ways. Using a Weberian form of ‘social closure’ theory, which 
might be summarised as requiring us not confuse the middle-class rush to educate their 
children as a newfound love of knowledge, but rather as a means to secure their social 
status, modern American society has (unwittingly perhaps) produced a pact which 
suits all the key stakeholders. In essence, parents are happy to send their children to 
elite universities, paying very high fees in the process, not because these students will 
receive a good education, but because it will secure them the credentials to access 
higher professional roles in society.
These ‘well-heeled’ students very rarely question the teaching and learning regime, 
because it suits them to go unchallenged in their academic activities, and it also suits 
many of the academics because it leaves them free to pursue the activities which are 
most likely to bring them status and kudos (i.e. research). Everyone is colluding in a 
game, from which each key stakeholder, ironically perhaps, gains; signing up to what 
George Kuh has called ‘a disengagement contract’, all the while knowing that ‘Students 
are allocated to occupational positions based on their credentials’ (Arum and Roksa 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
185
2011: 125), the gaining of which has little to do with investment in actual learning 
activities, a point which Gibbs also makes in his UK-based publication (Gibbs 2010). 
What students actually benefit from is the reputation of the university and the social 
capital networks they gain access to, not the teaching and learning regime. This seems 
to be a long way from the idea of students as consumers even of knowledge, let alone 
the idea of knowledge in the making, or student as producer.
The (near) future
If, as neo-liberals believe, the key watchword of quality is competition, and this ideol­
ogy prevails, we can expect to see many more UK education providers being encour­
aged to seek degree-awarding powers (TDAP) in the near future, and possibly 
‘university’ title. We might also expect to see greater variance in the fees that students 
will be paying to the institutions in this new higher education marketplace. That said, 
and at the time of writing this, the fact that all the traditional universities have ended 
up charging the full £9,000 fee, and the fact that current estimates indicate that the 
government is unlikely to save any money in switching the fee burden to students, it is 
very likely for some time that this market will not remain free from government manip­
ulation, including the possibility that the £9,000 fee cap will itself be either raised 
or reduced, or even removed altogether, depending on the political colour of future 
governments.
But what of the broader trends we are seeing in UK higher education? For exam­
ple, have these marketising forces begun to create particular and distinct types of 
organisational structures for UK universities and other HEIs? Ron Barnett speaks of 
the corporate university as the most obvious manifestation of the responses to these 
forces (Barnett 2011b). That is, the university which projects itself as a branded 
enterprise; its logo being the symbol of that quality. Here, its employees – including 
the academic practitioners – must pledge a distinct allegiance to this brand for it to 
work. Universities here are clearly not places that academics work at, but for; no 
longer allegiance to discipline here, or the ‘invisible college’, but a managed environ­
ment, in which each plays their part in meeting the strategic mission of the institu­
tion, requiring both a bureaucracy and a management structure through which this 
can be enacted.
But Barnett also speaks of a ‘liquid university’ (after Bauman 2000), which 
would seem to be at odds with the attempts of a corporate university to clearly 
demarcate itself and find its market niche (Barnett 2011b). For what if the univer­
sity or college needs to strike alliances with other providers or other types of 
knowledge-based organisations? In a world where time and space are compressed 
(Harvey 1990) and knowledge is ‘supercomplex’ (Barnett 2000), with lots of axes of 
knowledge and information centres all equally competing on a global scale (often 
with instant electronic access), can highly bureaucratised institutions be nimble 
enough to survive that dynamic landscape? Hargreaves once spoke of the need for 
educational organisations to view themselves more as ‘moving mosaics’ 
(Hargreaves 1994) and this metaphor seems to chime well with a slightly more 
restricted notion of liquidity. Either way, unless a university or college has carved 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

186
JOHN LEA
out such a distinct niche for itself and/or has established the educational equiva­
lent of a patent on that provision, the immediate future would appear to be one 
where partnership managers begin to play increasingly important roles in the land­
scape of higher education.
Returning to some of the issues raised in Chapter 5, could it also be argued that the 
most important niche is one for the concept of the University itself, and one that Plato 
conceived for his Academy; that a love of wisdom is a necessary function for a healthy 
society if not a wealthy one? Or in terms of an organic conception of social order, the 
pursuit of wealth, while needing to be unfettered for its practitioners, needs a wider 
check, from those who must themselves in turn be unfettered in their pursuit of wis­
dom. This makes universities not only very special places, but also carves out for them 
the role of ‘national social conscience’, and as guardians of the sustainability of the 
social order as a whole, and which seems to require of its academics that they act with 
integrity and authenticity (see, for example, Nixon 2008; Macfarlane 2012; Kreber 
2013). And which might be summarised as a demand they seek the truth, truthfully, 
that is, by being true to themselves.
In today’s universities this ‘social conscience’ function could be (in part at least) 
exercised by the public intellectual, the academic who takes a perspective precisely 
at variance with strictly economic or political perspectives. Or in the case of stu­
dents, it speaks to the need to see wider and deeper questions of sustainability being 
at the heart of citizenship. This may also spill over into a concern that questions of 
social justice are not side-lined in the pursuit of profitability. The university in these 
conceptions acts to prick the conscience of the nation, and it may need to be actively 
supported and defended in order to be able to exercise this function. Here, the notion 
of ‘walking in the groves of academia’ or ‘living in an ivory tower’ should be seen 
much more positively, rather than as derogatory swipes aimed at people who don’t 
live in the ‘real world’. And it may also require that academics act in this way, within 
their own organisations. For example, sometimes speaking out against, or just 
reminding, the bureaucratic, corporate and entrepreneurial elements in a university 
when there is a danger of overstepping the mark. It is in this context that Kavanagh 
speaks of the academic as the ‘fool’; the person who disturbs the status quo; who, 
through ridicule or irony, prompts a questioning of the taken for granted; the person 
who sees the joke and reminds others of it. But this playful side is not destructive – 
‘the fool as playmaker extraordinaire is central to [the] continual process of institu­
tional re-creation through which an institution breathes, lives and renews itself’ 
(Kavanagh 2012: 108).
Conclusion
This brings us back once more to our original question, concerning what universities 
are for. All these developments seem to be pushing some people into answering that 
question in new ways, but send others on a mission to rediscover and re-emphasise 
some of the more traditional answers. At the polar extremes the answers seem to 
revolve around those people willing to embrace the neo-liberal political agenda 
which underpins many of these new developments – a world where private individu­
als and markets form the nexus of activity, and become the guardians of quality 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
187
(if nobody wants to buy your product, the consequences are obvious) – and those 
who wish to counter that with the older (in reality, both ideologies are as old as each 
other) liberal educational creed, which emphasises the value of pursuing knowledge 
for its own sake, allied to a republican creed, which emphasises the value of other 
(non-market) social bonds, ties, and communities. Put simply, are universities to be 
viewed as private companies, marketing private goods, or as public institutions, 
serving a social good?
These debates are also complicated by epistemological allegiances. Are univer­
sities upholders of the Enlightenment project, comprising academics engaged in the 
disinterested pursuit of truth, discovering what is universal to humanity, or has 
post-modernity so infiltrated the landscape, that truth is just perspective, and where 
what is particular is just as valued as what is universal? At the extremes of this 
debate seems to be a deep desire to see the university as a special place, contrasted 
with a kind of (sometimes, hopeless) nihilism where there is nothing unique for the 
university to uphold so nothing of value is lost in it going in whatever direction it 
chooses.
These are all polar extreme arguments and the reality for most of us working in 
universities may well involve a much more pragmatic search for answers. Maybe a 
liberal creed could still subsist within a broader neo-liberal agenda? Surely a course 
can engender the love of a subject (an intrinsic factor), as well as provide opportuni­
ties to enhance employability (an extrinsic factor)? I choose this example to open up 
the notion of drawing not hard lines set in concrete, but softer ones, in sand. For exam­
ple, at what point does the demand that research be judged to have had impact by 
being near market, actually begin to compromise or start to undermine the blue skies 
thinking which often sparks insight, or that sense of being guided by wherever the 
research takes one? And at what point does a student’s request that she be allowed to 
start up her own company as her third year project begin to compromise the concep­
tual framework which underpins the course she has signed up to? If nothing else, we 
can see from this last example that the idea of student as producer or students as schol­
ars can quickly get complicated by these market reforms, because different academic 
practitioners may bring to the classroom very different notions of what it means to be 
scholarly (and what is meant by scholarly output).
Of course, these are not just individual decisions, for at what point does the 
Head of Knowledge Exchange at a university suggest to an academic colleague that 
they might consider some ‘gardening leave’ before they decide to publish the results 
of a research project which would surely undermine the credibility of a local com­
pany – particularly where this local company has an intern partnership arrange­
ment with the university? And at what point does a highly prestigious university 
decide to roll back a lucrative MOOC for fear that it is undermining its own credibil­
ity as an institution which attracts high achieving (and rich) students to its campus? 
These examples, at both individual and institutional level, point to a need to care­
fully negotiate our relationship with the market, and particularly the broader notion 
of academic capitalism. Some of this discussion can be summarised in a final Venn 
diagram (Figure 7.1) which highlights three of the key dimensions in the discussion, 
and asks what are we to make of the overlapping areas (particularly, once again, 
the X in the middle)?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

188
JOHN LEA
In Figure 7.1 we see the traditional notion of academics pursuing knowledge in 
whatever direction it takes them – without vested interest – but this now is being 
increasingly overlapped with a notion of academics practising and teaching forms of 
wise counsel, for example, asking ‘Is this a direction in which we truly wish to be 
going?’ And this notion also finds itself overlapping with questions of what will be the 
economic gain or return on the investment in particular forms of knowledge, for exam­
ple, the possibility of claiming intellectual copyright on a research output.
Perhaps the overlaps here might best be described as compromises rather than 
true overlaps. These compromises might also be viewed as examples of pragmatism, 
which may require very active management, and where one of the biggest challenges 
may be the need for universities to embrace many aspects of the market in order to 
survive, financially, while at the same time embracing a clear sense that the university 
is both a socially responsible organisation, and a place which provides for a purer form 
of knowledge pursuit and love of subject (if not completely pure). That responsibility 
might be made manifest in its desire to help produce socially responsible citizens of its 
students, along with an avowed sense of pride in its role as social conscience for the 
nation. And, on the knowledge side, it may need to become more active in protecting 
Figure 7.1  The role and purpose of HEIs as a Venn Diagram.
X
Wise
counsel
Academic
capitalism
Disinterested
knowledge
•	
In what ways do you engage with the question of what higher education is 
for with students and within your learning and teaching regime in general? 
•	
Have you been involved in seeking to articulate a mission statement or set 
of core principles for a higher education institution or HE in general?
Activity 7.4
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
189
its role as a repository for the more conceptual knowledge, for fear of some of the 
consequences of pursing a headlong embrace of applied knowledge. For, in the words 
of the old Joni Mitchell song: ‘You don’t know what you’ve got ‘til it’s gone.’
Another way of looking at this issue is to reconsider Robert Merton’s four key 
norms for scientific practice and extend them to become principles for all academic 
practice; namely – universalism, communism (as in communal), disinterestedness and 
scepticism, or, in summary, knowledge first, through collective effort (Merton 1942). 
And for each of us to ask ourselves whether we believe in them still, and if we do, 
whether we can draw a line for each, beyond which we would have a duty to call our 
universities to account, for fear that that crossing those lines could undermine the very 
nature and purpose of a university’s pursuit of knowledge. For example, at what point 
does commercially exploitable knowledge start to undermine the free dissemination of 
ideas? And can we draw a workable line between claiming intellectual copyright and 
commercial copyright?
But to exercise any of these roles, the university and its academics may well have 
to demand a degree of autonomy from the demands of the State’s various social engi­
neering projects, and also monitor carefully their own partnership relationships they 
might have with large private corporate bodies. For those opponents of the marketisa­
tion of higher education, this might be taken as all the evidence that is needed to argue 
that we should return the university to its public place, funded entirely by the public 
purse, and have it afforded that original high degree of professional trust in exercising 
its research and teaching responsibilities. Or is this line of thinking now simply too 
idealistic, given the dominance of the neo-liberal political agenda (particularly in 
England), but also because of the broader social and economic forces at work in a 
globalised marketplace of higher education provision, which has already firmly 
embedded commodified notions of what is meant by a ‘knowledge economy’?
Prof. Reason: Well Marlan, this seems to make us small fish in a rather large pond, 
and it also looks like it’s the end of our contributions. We don’t seem to have agreed 
on much, but I’ve enjoyed the exchanges. Now, I’m off to prepare for the Geography 
degree field trip. I love these trips, where everyone bonds for a short period away 
from the campus. This year I’m taking some third years to Croatia.
Dr Bracewell: It’s been great fun engaging with you Karen, and we mustn’t forget that 
we can make a difference to how our university positions itself in this global market. 
And you know what, I think we might have just found something we agree on – the 
value of field trips! Later on this year I will be taking some of my engineering 
students on a tour of Brunel’s projects around Britain. One of the things I’ve been 
working on recently is an assessment tool which measures their value for students.
Prof. Reason: Now, don’t go spoiling it again, just as we were getting on!
Dr Bracewell: I think it’s time to say good night and good luck and over and out!
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

190
JOHN LEA
Opinion Piece, Debate, Dear Lecturer, and Fellowship Application 
extracts
In the following opinion piece, Jonathan Eaton looks at the role and growth of ­college-based 
higher education (CBHE). And in the debate Patrick Ainley, followed by Ted Tapper 
and David Palfreyman, take contrary positions on aspects of the ­marketisation of 
higher education. To finish, Sam Louis, a recent graduate from ­Newcastle University, 
reflects on the chapter overall. This is followed by three extracts from successful HEA 
fellowship applicants who discuss some of the aspects of ­academic practice which 
feature in this chapter.
Opinion: On College-Based Higher Education (CBHE)
Teaching in college-based higher education
Jonathan Eaton
Colleges play a significant role within the national higher education landscape; with 
around 8 per cent of HE students in the United Kingdom currently taught within the 
college sector (Parry et al., 2012). Traditionally delivering higher qualifications with 
a focus on vocational skills, college-based higher education (CBHE) displays a stu­
dent profile distinct from that of many universities. CBHE students are more likely to 
be aged over 25, originate from areas with traditionally low rates of participation in 
HE or to be enrolled on part-time courses (HEFCE 2006).
The CBHE sector is remarkably heterogeneous with providers ranging in size 
from a handful of HE students to those with cohorts of over 3000. Colleges offer a 
diverse HE provision, including both undergraduate and postgraduate courses. Foun­
dation Degrees, with a pronounced vocational emphasis and opportunities for work-
based learning, are particularly common. Students graduating with Foundation 
Degrees may choose to enter employment or progress on to a Bachelor’s top-up 
programme offered by CBHE providers or universities. Most CBHE provision is vali­
dated or franchised by a university partner. The nature of the relationship between 
validating university and partner college is highly variable with some, but by no 
means all, including collaborative staff development opportunities and access to 
research networks.
In recent years, four CBHE providers have secured Foundation Degree Awarding 
Powers (FDAP) in their own right. A number of larger CBHE institutions aspire to 
Taught Degree Awarding Power (TDAP) status, which would allow them to validate full 
undergraduate and taught postgraduate programmes. The review process for such 
applications, overseen by the QAA, involves considerable scrutiny of the qualifica­
tions, experience and knowledge of CBHE teaching staff (QAA 2013c). It can be 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
191
argued that the award of FDAP and TDAP status to suitable providers will stimulate 
colleges to further contribute to regional economic growth without the need to con­
vince a validating university, sometimes located outside of the region, of the need 
for a specific area of provision in response to local skills needs.
Delivering FE and HE courses within the same institution can prove challenging, 
particularly in terms of nurturing a distinct sense of ‘HEness’ (Simmons and Lea 
2013). By their very nature, colleges support a diverse student body, from students 
on basic access courses to those potentially studying on postgraduate programmes. 
While some institutions have physically separated their HE delivery environment 
from FE spaces, this is often not possible, particularly when access to physical 
resources in the form of workshops, studios or real work environments is required. 
Lecturers may be called upon to deliver both FE and HE programmes, which can 
prove challenging in adapting to different academic levels and quality assurance 
systems. Teaching observations conducted to assess pedagogic competence can 
prove problematic, particularly when Ofsted criteria are applied to a HE environment. 
Some institutions have contextualised observation criteria which embrace HE deliv­
ery in an appropriate manner. Yet the link to FE can prove valuable in terms of raising 
the standard of teaching and learning, as most CBHE staff are required to hold a 
teaching qualification. It may be significant that, of the top 20 institutions identified 
in the 2014 National Student Survey, 12 were CBHE providers. Colleges are increas­
ingly embracing the UK PSF through accredited staff development programmes or 
individual applications, and the Higher Education Academy currently has a sizeable 
CBHE membership at an institutional level.
Ensuring a sense of ‘HEness’ inevitably requires evidenced engagement with 
research and scholarly activity. The lack of CBHE access to RCUK funding inevitably 
has an impact on the time allocated for teaching staff to undertake scholarly activ­
ity. The nature of scholarship within the CBHE sector is a matter of considerable 
debate, particularly within institutions aspiring to FDAP or TDAP status. Scholarly 
activity within a college environment may take a number of forms which are distinct 
from, but nevertheless to be equally valued as, the traditional nature of research 
recognised by universities. This includes the activities of teaching staff with dual 
identities as academics and professional practitioners. It can be argued that the 
latter is particularly important within a vocational HE environment. The nature of the 
CBHE student body should also be recognised as a fruitful source for scholarly activ­
ity, particularly through part-time learners sponsored by their employers and the 
deep engagement with industry which many students enjoy during their programmes 
of study. A recent Higher Education Academy report provided a number of case 
studies of student partnership in the context of research and scholarly activity within 
the CBHE sector (Healey et al. 2014c).
In an increasingly complex HE ecosystem inhabited by universities, colleges 
and alternative providers, CBHE providers have a distinct role to play in delivering 
vocational HE provision which drives local and regional economic growth. This is 
particularly the case in large urban areas which host a number of HE providers, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

192
JOHN LEA
Debate: On marketisation in HE
Meanwhile, beyond the city walls …
Patrick Ainley
In the long view from New College, the 2010 funding changes to English higher edu­
cation are only the latest accretions to the evolving model of the university that has 
grown down the ages to absorb more narrowly defined vocational training under its 
academic aegis. Supposedly, this enables more students to obtain jobs, increases 
the size of HEIs, thanks to enhanced funding, and possibly also benefits politicians 
and funding agencies with the feeling that ‘this still reasonably generously funded 
sector of society is finally about to make a more substantial contribution to the ben­
efit of the wider society’ (as Ted Tapper and David Palfreyman write in THE 9 Oct. 
2014). However, crucial for them is that the academy remains in control of its own 
goals.
Yet, ‘academic freedom’ – officially abolished with loss of tenure in 1988 – is 
constrained, on the one hand, by the corporate management of semi-privatised uni­
versities; on the other, by government demands for ‘research impact’ as another 
state subsidy to private corporations. In the two antique universities, however, it is 
where colleges can utilise their deep sense of place as opposed to the global out­
look of ambitious research-intensive universities. Newcastle College, for example, 
has around 3000 HE students within a city which also hosts large Russell Group and 
post-1992 universities. College HE provision focuses on vocational programmes 
which respond to industry trends and meets the needs of local and regional employ­
ers. FDAP status allows the college to shape Foundation Degrees which avoid overt 
competition with local HEIs through the development of niche provision, with an 
emphasis on technical skills and employability. For this reason, the HE staffing pro­
file of the college is also distinct with a greater focus on industry engagement and 
technical expertise than doctorates and publications. This expertise has been rec­
ognised through collaborative initiatives with local HEIs, including an award-winning 
subsea project involving Newcastle University and sector employers.
The nature of CBHE teaching defies easy categorisation, owing to the pro­
foundly heterogeneous nature of the sector. Larger providers increasingly play a role 
akin to polytechnics through higher technical education and applied research. 
Smaller providers may offer niche programmes which address specific local skills 
gaps or widen participation in HE within under-represented areas. With a rich heri­
tage of public education and industry engagement, the professionalism of CBHE 
staff cannot be doubted. While teaching in CBHE can prove challenging, it should be 
recognised as a valuable addition to the wider HE sector.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
193
preserved in the form of medieval guild democracy, adding to the self-importance of 
those there who feel that all is for the best in this best of all possible worlds.
It isn’t! Unlike Labour, which havered over reducing fees to £6,000, the Conser­
vatives made no General Election comment on fees but would like to raise the cur­
rent £9,000 cap they only agreed as a compromise with the Lib Dems. Oxbridge and 
a few other ‘top’ universities would then charge more, possibly forsaking state sup­
port and leaving state universities that cannot compete on price to collapse into 
virtual learning centres. Other ‘efficiencies’ would further unravel institutions, includ­
ing ‘mergers’ or take-overs, buy-outs and buy-ins, fragmenting what is left of a once 
more or less coherent HE system.
But then, while all save the two Real Russells compete for fee-bearing students, 
these two restrict their numbers to increase demand, thus maintaining their staff’s 
time for research and so further raising their reputations. Meanwhile, they invest in 
bursaries and other widening participation efforts not only to cover their backs but 
to ‘skim the cream’ of state school applicants. Thus, they preside over and benefit 
from the current situation in which (with few exceptions) the older the university, the 
posher, younger, whiter and proportionately more male its students.
This academically selective system’s close connection to the private schools, 
symbolised by Cameron and crew, is integral to UKanian flummery. It tests mainly 
literary abilities as proxies for more or less expensively acquired cultural capital. 
Even in the sciences, burgeoning into academico-medical complexes in hock to Big 
Pharma, where enrolment is less related to social origin though not to gender, as 
Bourdieu and Passeron noted, ‘the teaching of culture … implicitly presupposes a 
body of knowledge, skills, and, above all, modes of expression which constitute the 
heritage of the cultivated classes’.
So what students know is less important than how they say it, while they learn 
less but pay more to run up a down-escalator of rising debt for devalued qualifica­
tions. Yet they cram (sic) in, desperate to secure semi-professional employment 
even while it is proletarianised by corporate management and further reduced by 
automation, deskilling and outsourcing. Meanwhile, the other half of 18+ year olds 
(adults have long gone!) are fobbed off with promises of ‘apprenticeships’ equivalent 
to subsidised job placements or internships for non-graduates. This divisive system 
of social control threatens to revert to bi- or tri-partite divisions – this time at tertiary 
level – supported by genetic ideologies of so-called ‘intelligence’.
Instead, HE might recover itself in connection with FE by replacing market-driven 
expansion with regional partnerships to end competition between universities, col­
leges and private providers. An expectation of, and entitlement to, free local/regional 
adult further and higher continuing education would then follow from a general 
schooling, just as it still does (just) for US High School graduates; especially with 
more students living at home, as in other European countries. This should be the 
aim, even if not everyone wants to go to HE immediately – including many who are 
already there! Vocational considerations could then balance personal interest with 
progressive taxation defraying costs of cutting fees so that anyone (graduate or not) 
who earns more pays more.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

194
JOHN LEA
Rediscovering the purpose of higher study within and across disciplines includes 
the relation of such study to an academic vocation dedicated to learning critically 
from the past and with research and scholarship enabling change in the future. 
Undergraduate participation in that continuing cultural conversation can restore a 
sense many have lost of what higher education is supposed to be about.
Debate: On marketisation in HE
The marketisation of English higher education
Ted Tapper and David Palfreyman
It is important to remember that the critical driver of change from an English system 
of higher education that was overwhelmingly publicly funded to one which is ever-
more privately funded was the increasing parsimony of public funding. If higher 
education institutions were not to become bankrupt with the attendant loss of fac­
ulty, termination of courses and even institutional closure, it was critical for them to 
find alternative sources of funding. In effect, institutional well-being could only be 
guaranteed though increasing private funding, of which a critical early (and continu­
ing) source was the fees paid by overseas students. While one may make a strong 
critique of the failure of government policy to recognise through taxpayer funding the 
importance of higher education to sustain and enhance the national welfare, the 
actual saviour has turned out to be the availability of market resources (though it 
remains to be seen whether the UK/EU undergraduate tuition fees now at £9000 
p.a. will be allowed to increase in line with the inflation of university costs).
Moreover, it is difficult not to sympathise with the direction of government pol­
icy. In the context of financial stringency, governments have to make tough deci­
sions as to where their priorities lie. It is clear that politically the National Health 
Service has a more sheltered position than higher education, as also schools and 
pensions. It is simply that, in the context of an ageing population and a programme 
of prolonged austerity/deficit-reduction, this is a political and economic inevitability 
– indeed, given that for much of its history, English higher education has been elitist 
in terms of its social composition, conservative with respect to serving the needs of 
society, and academically narrow, this direction of government policy was to be 
expected. Perhaps the funding crisis is of our own making in that HE has not, as an 
‘industry’, been noted for the sort of innovation and productivity gains found in other 
areas of economic activity, both private-sector and public-sector, that has driven cost 
reduction and price competition.
Critically, the pressures of the market are, however, regulated by the state 
rather than risk the disruption within the context of a completely free HE market of 
potential market failure, and also given the state’s duty as the provider of consumer 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
195
protection. This regulation takes different forms: the instigation of inter-institutional 
competition to secure state funding (note the research assessment exercises), the 
control of student numbers (now in fact to be uncapped) and of tuition fees (perhaps 
in due course also to be relaxed if not uncapped), and the burgeoning of quality 
control mechanisms. Indeed, there is the possibility of the state-regulated market 
becoming such an intrusive means of state control (even compared to the days of 
state block-grant funding of HE) that many of the current opponents of marketisation 
may start to wish for less state guidance and a less encumbered market – though, 
as has been noted, the state through its enactment of consumer protection law, as 
well as competition law, will always have a duty to see that the HE market is operat­
ing efficiently and effectively in the student-consumers’ interest in that the market­
place should engender innovation in HE provision and also competition on tuition fee 
pricing.
The state needs to fulfil its duty as the provider of consumer protection by 
requiring higher education institutions to demonstrate precisely how they arrive at 
their fee levels. Second, it needs to explore ways in which students should be able 
to question the academic standards of the courses they have been taught, for this 
should not be a matter that is determined solely within the academy by academic 
procedures. Third, the arrangements for repaying loans must be revised to ensure 
that student loans do not become an undue burden upon the Exchequer, and thus 
the taxpayer at large. But there is no doubt that the marketisation of higher educa­
tion has arrived. But what has yet to be determined is its precise modus operandi.
Dear Lecturer
There are no substitutes for enthusiasm, energy and passion
Sam Louis
A return to the teacher-centric ways of 100 years ago would likely not serve the 
current generation of students particularly well. They are preparing for a world that 
expects them to be versed in buzz-speak and action words, where CEO’s are 24 years 
old and Silicon Valley is a business mecca of t-shirts and flip-flops. The marketplace, 
despite its faults and impurities, cannot be ignored. This does not, however, spell 
the end for the disinterested pursuit of interesting phenomena and pure truths, 
because it is exactly this that leads to one of the most marketable, valuable quali­
ties a student can take from higher education. Enthusiasm.
The notion that lecturers (and consequently students) are becoming divorced 
from exploring intellectual curiosities and are instead being led by fund-influenced, 
marketable avenues of research, or ‘employability-approved’ curricula, is both sad 
and counterintuitive. Having just finished my degree and spent 6 months in various 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

196
JOHN LEA
internships, assessment centres and job interviews, one of the biggest influences 
on how your application progresses is your level of enthusiasm. Your energy. Your 
passion for the company, or for what they do, or what you do, or even what you used 
to do. Passionate interest is learned and infectious, once you get it about one thing, 
it can spread to other areas of your life, and other people around you, and I believe 
one of the best places to catch it is higher education.
Spending time around people who have dedicated their lives to their passion is 
how I caught that passion for learning; that ‘will to learn’ which Ron Barnett speaks 
of, and which allows you to develop to the later stages of Baxter-Magolda’s ‘ways of 
knowing’. With this, I trust that I will manage okay wherever I might end up, because 
if you can learn, you can adapt. Consequently, I believe that the duty and aim of a 
university lecturer should be to inspire and ignite energy in their graduates, which 
they can only do if they pursue and convey their own passions and personality.
If universities were solely for the generation and dissemination of knowledge, 
blindly ingested by students, then it might as well all be online. If you gain nothing 
but a spoon-fed, rote learned understanding of texts, then as ‘Good’ Will Hunting 
remarks, you’ve spent an awful lot of money on an ‘education you could’a got for a 
dollar fifty in late charges at the public library’ (Good Will Hunting 1997). Lecturers 
do need to fight to retain their ‘ivory towers’, and in turn their passion for academic 
life, so that they might pass that passion on to the next generation, and prepare 
them for whatever life may bring.
Extracts from successful HEA fellowship applications
Dr Orange (FHEA)
Student engagement is placed at the heart of the student retention and success 
model developed by Thomas (2012), who also commented that ‘The process of 
engaging students should begin early and extend throughout the student life cycle. 
It is essential that engagement begins early with institutional outreach interventions 
and that it extends throughout the process of preparing for and entering HE.’ I am 
involved in the process of creating awareness of HE through outreach activities and 
student recruitment open days. I am a believer that student engagement begins 
before students have entered into Kingston University, and with this in mind I was 
determined to improve the open day experience through designing interactive 
hands-on activities that promote the school’s courses and relate them to the wider 
world. The activities included analysis of the chemical constituents of pain killers 
and the natural sources of major drug types. The visitors were provided with a ques­
tionnaire to leave feedback on their experience from the open day, and the results 
when analysed indicated that the visitors had an excellent experience and many 
visitors commented that the activities provided them with a greater understanding of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THE LANDSCAPE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
197
what each degree entailed and it provided them with additional information that they 
were not aware of before. This experience has made me understand the importance 
of engaging with students from very early on; from the first instance they enter 
the university premises, and when possible through tailor-made outreach activities 
[K3, K4, K5, V1, V2].
Dr Brown (SFHEA)
There is no part of my present-day practice in HE that does not carry the memory 
trace of my work in community settings with some of society’s most disadvantaged 
groups. My research in mental health settings is one of the enduring links between 
my HE practice and my community foothold, a link which also nourishes my approach 
to ethics in research; research-led teaching [V3] and indeed, the employability 
agenda which is often the spearhead for encouraging students into volunteering and 
placement roles. In this memory trace there is the continued belief that ‘outreach’ 
as performed by ‘higher’ education, is often a form of noblesse oblige rather than a 
relationship between peers striving for symmetric power relations (Webster and 
Buglass 2005; Sagan et al. 2010). This informs and guides the way I work with 
community ‘partners’ – attempting to ‘use’ them less as placement, ‘community 
engagement’ and WP opportunities, and engaging with them, rather, in collaborative 
exploration of possible joint research and ways in which they might benefit from my 
and the university expertise and resources [V2], while I and my students benefit 
from theirs [A4].
Ms White (PFHEA)
Learning and Teaching conferences can enable one of the primary purposes of aca­
demic development: ‘informed debate about learning, teaching, assessment, curric­
ulum design, and the goals of higher education’ (Gosling 2001). However, as well as 
showcasing best practice and providing a forum for informed debate, I want the 
conference to stand out as an exciting and vibrant event and also to respond to del­
egates’ feedback and suggestions. Two years ago I introduced a student panel, 
enabling colleagues to hear directly from students about learning at the university. 
This has led to some departments adopting panels in departmental boards. Last 
year I included a LectureMeet, where colleagues shared ideas on teaching and learn­
ing in an ‘unconference’ format. This was the first time that this had been done for 
higher education. The short presentations were broadcast to audiences beyond the 
university via WebEx, enabling virtual presentations from other HEIs and our good 
practice was shared across the sector. This event proved highly popular, attracting 
contributions from colleagues who do not usually engage in learning and teaching 
events, thus raising the profile of learning and teaching in harder-to-reach areas of 
the university.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Introduction: SoTL and its discontents
The previous six chapters have looked at how learning and teaching in HE relate to 
different aspects of academic practice. In some cases the links were straightforward 
(as in Chapters 2 and 6), in others (particularly Chapter 7) they may have been less 
obvious. In all cases, attempts were also made to look at how those links might be 
enhanced in order to better integrate the different dimensions of academic practice 
with learning and teaching, while at the same time acknowledging their contested 
nature. Sometimes this contestation related to the concepts and principles which 
underpin higher education pedagogy as a distinct discipline (indeed, whether there is 
such a thing), and sometimes the contestation related to much wider questions con­
cerning the very purposes and aims of higher education.
Another key thread running throughout the book has been a consideration of what 
it actually means to raise the profile of learning and teaching in higher education. For 
some, this is a straightforward issue, and would involve removing ‘original research’ or 
the ‘scholarship of discovery’ (as Boyer referred to it) from its elevated perch. But 
scratch below the surface of that issue and things turn out to be far from straightfor­
ward. For example, even though there may be many academics who would be keen to 
knock original research of its perch, all the while that the most cherished rewards and 
recognitions continue to relate to original research, it may just have to be a case of needs 
must. Allied to this, there will be those who believe that the most fundamental and hard­
est task in academic life is to produce original research, and therefore it simply wouldn’t 
be right to seek to raise the profile of one aspect of academic practice by mounting an 
unwarranted attack on another. Or, in its most derogatory formulation: those who can’t 
do research have to teach (and those who can’t do either have to manage).
Boyer’s (1990) re-visioning of these issues was carefully constructed so as not to 
denigrate but integrate as much as possible, and in holistic manner, the widest range of 
academic practice and grant all aspects a scholarship status (i.e. the scholarships of 
discovery; of application; of integration; and of teaching). Naturally, this leaves wide 
open the question of whether management, leadership and administration might also 
be accorded scholarly status, but his concern at that level was to ensure that as many 
8
Conclusion
Raising the profile of learning and teaching, being 
reflective and scholarly, and becoming a Fellow of 
the Higher Education Academy
Nigel Purcell1 and John Lea
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONCLUSION
199
academics as possible got to pursue the widest range of scholarly activities in their 
careers, and that this would need careful management.
His work was also key in raising the issue as what exactly constitutes a scholar­
ship of teaching. For some, it was enough just to label ‘discovery’ and ‘teaching’ in the 
same way, because in doing so it put into focus the similarities between anyone who 
undertakes a systematic understanding of something – problematising, collecting 
data, analysing results, and asking epistemological questions about the reliability and 
validity of the knowledge which has been generated. In this sense, pedagogy is a dis­
cipline like any other. But in the case of HE pedagogy, it also put the epistemological 
cat among the pigeons by raising questions about whether practitioners (as in action 
research) are actually involved in true research, or just reflecting on practice, and/or 
whether practitioners are best placed to be researchers (i.e. they are not detached 
observers). While it might be easy to counter those claims by asking questions about 
whether any researcher is ever truly detached from their work, this was enough for 
some to claim that if this type of action research is research, it is surely of inferior 
status (in research-intensive universities particularly).
Even among those who were keen to distance themselves from these ranking 
debates, questions remained about whether scholarship and research are the same 
thing, and particularly whether engaging in critical reflection on and in practice would 
be enough to raise the profile of learning and teaching. Put simply, if practice improves 
next Monday morning – based on reflection about what happened last Monday morning – 
and particularly if students learn more next Monday compared with last Monday, does 
the ‘research’ status of the enterprise really matter? Or, what works will do for me! But, 
for others, there is still an important stepping stone between these classroom experi­
ments and the scholarship of teaching and learning, for the latter must involve a clear 
sense that one has ‘gone public’ – and been subject to peer review and scrutiny, and 
become part of academic community (if not wider public) debate.
The focus for the rest of this conclusion is on practical advice in putting together 
an application to become a fellow of the HEA. We hope that the content of the previ­
ous chapters has helped to some extent in providing sufficient food for thought in 
beginning this process, but we also hope that the refocus in this first part of this 
conclusion – on how teaching and learning might be related to the other aspects of 
academic practice in many different ways, and that being scholarly about teaching 
and learning also has multiple dimensions and meanings – that both will act as stimuli 
in helping to put together a personally meaningful and individualised narrative 
account of your involvement in learning and teaching in higher education in the UK. 
One very simple and practical exercise to help begin that process might be to review 
the Venn diagrams which were presented in Chapters 3, 5, 6 and 7, and consider the 
extent to which they could be effectively combined to become one diagram encom­
passing all aspects of your academic practice (or what would need to be put in place 
before this could happen).
The HEA Fellowship Scheme: direct route or accredited provision?
The HEA provides two routes to fellowship: (https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/professional-
recognition).The first route is by making an application directly to the HEA. The second 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

200
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
route is via accredited provision (https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/consultancyservices/
accreditation).
On the second route, the HEA delegates to those subscribing institutions with accred­
ited provision the autonomy to award the fellowships. Depending on where you work, 
you may have the choice of either applying directly to the HEA or of applying through 
your own institution via their accredited provision. If you undertake HE work related to 
teaching and supporting learning, but do not work for an institution, both routes may still 
be available to you by approaching an accredited institution (a complete list is available 
on the HEA website) or simply consulting with the HEA about the direct route. (Which­
ever route you are pursuing, you should of course ensure that you have read the relevant 
guidance and accessed any support available under the relevant scheme.)
Some accredited institutions offer a taught route to Associate Fellowship or Fel­
lowship status, usually in the form of credit-bearing PG Certificate HE courses (collec­
tively known as PG Certs). The advantage of these courses is that you are given 
substantial formalised support to develop your knowledge and practice and this is 
especially beneficial if you are new to HE teaching and supporting learning. However, 
it does involve a substantial commitment to assignment and course work. But this 
route is well worth considering if you are aiming for Associate Fellowship or Fellow­
ship status, and if your institution provides this option. On successful completion, you 
will also be awarded a teaching qualification as well as a fellowship, and, in some 
cases, some Master’s level HE credits (level 7).
It is normal for more experienced staff to register for a non-taught route to fellow­
ship (be that directly with the HEA, or through an institution-accredited scheme), and 
this is usually the only option for those seeking senior or principal fellowship status. If 
you are still unsure as to which fellowship category you think you should be aiming 
for, you may wish to look again at the introductory chapter of this book before you 
read on, and or/check the relevant pages of the HEA website.
Beginning your application
Naturally, you can approach making an application (whether via the HEA direct route 
or via accredited provision) in a variety of ways. At one extreme, it might be treated as 
a mere hoop jumping or tick-box exercise, even though doing so will obviously reduce 
the intrinsic value of the process. At the other extreme, it might be treated as part of an 
ongoing action research project and in the process become a contribution to the schol­
arship of teaching and learning – particularly if you ‘go public’ with the findings of that 
research. For most, however, it will probably lie somewhere between the two, experi­
enced as a developmental exercise, and result in a critically reflective narrative 
account of the role that learning and teaching play in your academic practice.
It is worth pausing at this point to reflect further on the reasons for submitting an 
application and acknowledge any feelings which it may invoke – particularly those of 
trepidation. If you wish to make an application purely for the intrinsic reward to be 
gained from engaging in such a scholarly exercise, and/or you relish the opportunity to 
critically reflect on how your current academic practice is able to enhance student learn­
ing, any feelings of trepidation might simply be triggered by the desire to do well, accom­
panied by some healthy self-doubt as to whether you are worthy. On the other hand, if 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONCLUSION
201
you are making an application simply because it has been mandated by your institution, 
coupled with a fear that you might not get a job at another HEI without the recognition, 
some of your feelings of trepidation may border on resentment about the process.
We think it is important to both interrogate the reasons and acknowledge those 
feelings. Indeed, engaging with both aspects could end up featuring in your narrative 
account. And, as Ruth Lawton pointed out in the opinion piece which accompanied 
Chapter 5, making an application for fellowship status is not dissimilar (as a process) 
to what the vast majority of our students are facing on a regular basis as they apply for 
jobs, internships and higher degrees (often for the first time). In this respect, the appli­
cation process could also become a teaching and learning tool.
It is also important to acknowledge that an application may take some time, and 
in looking at the various descriptors (D1–D4), you may well decide that you should be 
working towards an application, rather than making one immediately. In this regard, 
no institution should be putting pressure on you to complete an application within a 
strict period. To do so would clearly undermine the developmental nature of the pro­
cess. On the other hand, we also need to be honest with ourselves and recognise how 
easy it is to let the ‘day job’ and other activities become the excuse as to why we hav­
en’t engaged with the process.
Lastly, we think it is important to acknowledge the genuine fear which can accom­
pany an application, particularly if you are a senior and/or experienced member of 
staff – that feeling that the process will expose you in some way. In this regard, we all 
(including mentors and assessors) have a duty to acknowledge and work through 
these natural anxieties. Indeed, one way to measure the developmental nature of the 
whole process could be to consider how you feel your own institution is able to 
acknowledge and work with you on these fears and anxieties.
Putting together an application
The following suggestions are drawn partially from material developed for HEA-
provided workshops and designed by consultants to support staff in making their fel­
lowship applications (in all categories). However, they could equally apply if you 
are simply reviewing your current practice in order to plan personal development, or 
are engaging in ‘remaining in good standing’ exercises. Naturally, the suggestions are 
generic in nature and apply to the process of constructing a coherent narrative account 
of your practice, not to the specific requirements of any particular scheme. In the case 
of the HEA direct route scheme, for example, it has a different template for each cate­
gory of fellowship and you will need to structure and order your narrative accordingly. 
The same will apply for any of the many accredited schemes.
1 Make it personal
Your application is a personal claim relating to how you have engaged with teaching 
and supporting learning in your professional context. It is a narrative describing and 
analysing your professional practice and thus it is generally best expressed in the first 
person. We appreciate that a lot of academic work demands third person writing, and 
particularly in certain disciplines, and therefore this narrative style may be easier for 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

202
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
some. Acknowledging this, your own narrative may well end up as a combination of 
first and third person writing, but it is worth reflecting on whether what you are saying 
might have sounded better (more engaging, more authentic, more meaningful) in the 
first person. Writing in this way should also make it easier to acknowledge your per­
sonal and subjective responses to your experiences.
2 Make it individual
Of course, much of your work will be in a collaborative, team context, but in an appli­
cation it is essential to identify your own contributions to team efforts. This is particu­
larly important when it comes to committee work, because it is very easy to talk about 
the work of a committee, without serious consideration of why you sit on that committee, 
and the impact you have had – personally – on that committee’s work. Individualising 
your application in this way should also help generally in heightening the sense of the 
impact that you have had on a range of professional practice – be that at course/module 
level, programme/degree level, department or school level, faculty or institution-wide, 
and/or sector/(inter)national level (according to fellowship category).
3 Make it reflective
It is essential that your claim is not only descriptive, but is also thoughtful and reflec­
tive. This should follow naturally from points (1) and (2). You need to explain not only 
what you have done, but also how and why you did it, as well as what were the out­
comes, impacts, and changes – if any – that followed. And if things didn’t go as well as 
you envisaged, what lessons you learned from that. It is tempting to miss those bits out 
of an application, for fear that they will read like failures, but actually they can be 
important springboards into new action, and thereby constitute forms of continuing 
professional development.
4 Make it scholarly
As we have seen throughout this book, the term ‘scholarly’ is a problematic one, in having 
a variety of meanings. Our practical advice here is to consider which of those meanings 
have the potential to strengthen your application in the most authentic ways. For exam­
ple, your professional practice might be underpinned by some key pedagogical concepts 
or ideas. When referring to these, we suggest either seeking to move from particular 
examples to the underpinning principle, or, moving from a statement of a key principle or 
value to examples of how you have applied it. In a nutshell, try to avoid simply stating 
principles without illustrating them, or simply describing aspects of practice without com­
menting on it. But you might also have engaged in your own research and scholarship 
relating to learning and teaching in your discipline context, and you should obviously 
refer to this as a contribution to the scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL).
In both examples above, your practice is ‘orientated’ to, or ‘informed’ by, research 
and scholarship – in the first case, by the work of others, and in the second, by your 
own work. But, do be careful with your own subject or discipline-based research, 
because the key here is to speak to how that research informs your teaching and learning 
regime (or a strategy related to teaching and learning). Finally, pedagogic research 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONCLUSION
203
literature, especially in your own discipline, is of course potentially very valuable, but, 
if used, you should be mindful to refer to it in a context of how it has influenced your 
specific practices.
To illustrate the many ways in which your application might be deemed to be schol­
arly, here is Mr Pink, from previous chapters, reflecting on how his practice is under­
pinned both by the research of others but also by his own reflection on his practice.
Mr Pink (SFHEA)
My pedagogic practice is contextualised by research into a range of contemporary 
practitioners and learning and teaching theorists [A5]. Design theorists, such as 
Naylor and Ball (Naylor 2005: 17) have given me incentive to expand the parame­
ters of my subject area, bringing three-dimensional possibilities into a discipline 
previously seen as paper- or screen-based. I have a strong belief that my students’ 
work, and for that matter my own practice, has not only been contextualised but 
also has to be forward facing and expansive. It should begin through self-reflection 
but also through experimentation referring to Donald Schön’s concept of discovery 
‘in action’. According to Schön, ‘discovery in action’, is intrinsic to reflection in 
action (Schön 1983: 140) or as Fulton-Suri puts it in her introduction to Design 
Research Through Practice to ‘think to build and build to think’ and bridge ‘the gap 
between understanding and making, and between theoretical and actual solutions’ 
(Fulton-Suri 2011) This linkage and the theory behind are one of my core values in 
extending the creative potential of my students.
5 Make it evidence-based
This follows naturally from making your application scholarly, but can also include 
other aspects. For example, in demonstrating impact, you might find yourself having 
to resort to making your own evaluative claim about that impact. This is where some 
evidence drawn from other sources can be extremely helpful. For example, you might 
have some statistical evidence you could draw on to indicate that your interventions 
have improved ‘results’. Or you may have some qualitative evidence in the form of 
personal testimony from individuals who have commented positively on your inven­
tions. In addition, you might consider using evidence from engagement in your institu­
tion’s peer review and/or peer observation of teaching processes. Indeed, if you are 
thinking about making an application in the future, you might consider how you could 
incorporate anticipated evidence from engagement in these processes. One of the key 
characteristics expected of an HEA fellow in any of the categories is that their practice 
is based on evidence of its effectiveness and is modified and adapted in the light of this 
evidence. Demonstrating that your practice is informed by a range of evidence can 
enormously strengthen your application, and don’t forget that it doesn’t always have to 
be positive. Remember, all evaluative evidence can be used as a springboard for new 
actions and interventions.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

204
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
6 Make it aligned (with the UKPSF)
In your application the UKPSF acts as a benchmark in judging whether you should be 
awarded a fellowship. As we saw in Chapter 1, it is very much up to the individual (sub­
ject to any institutional interpretations) how they use the UKPSF in that benchmarking 
process. The first thing to do is to consider carefully the type of engagement with the 
UKPSF that the category of fellowship you are aiming for demands (e.g. for Senior and 
Principal Fellowship your leadership of learning and teaching should be to the fore). 
Second, you need to consider how you will demonstrate that engagement against the 
three dimensions of practice. A simple way to do this is to mark up each paragraph or 
section in your application with coded references to the individual elements of the three 
dimensions (i.e. A1–A6; K1–K6; V1–V4). Leaving these references in your final applica­
tion is often very helpful to an assessor of your application. It can also act as a quick 
aide-mémoire to you, in checking that your engagement stretches equally (more or less) 
across all the elements and dimensions. On that score, there is evidence from HEA 
assessors that the Values tend to get the least attention in applications.
7 Make it current and sufficient
These last two aspects are very much based on personal judgement but can be useful 
in reviewing your own application before it is submitted. Currency refers quite simply 
to how up to date your application is. For example, to what extent do you think you 
have relied on evidence drawn from a long time ago? This might be evidence of the 
effectiveness of your own interventions but also evidence drawn from pedagogic liter­
ature and research. Clearly, this evidence may be highly significant, but is it balanced 
against more recent evidence? In checking for sufficiency, you might ask yourself 
whether you would be happy with the application if you were assessing it. For exam­
ple, if you are new to HE teaching, do you think you have demonstrated sufficient 
evidence from across the range of the areas of activity; or, if you are aiming for a 
Principal Fellowship, do you think you have provided a good range of examples of 
impact at institution level and/or influence at (inter)national level? Finally, ask your­
self, honestly, whether there are sections where you feel you might have just paid lip 
service to engagement with an element or dimension of practice. In which case you 
might want to consider strengthening this aspect of engagement or delaying the appli­
cation until you feel your engagement would be more genuine or authentic.
In all cases it is probably worth having a colleague read through your application 
(particularly if they are already a fellow) to give you some constructive feedback 
before you formally submit it.
Developmental activities
If you are just beginning to think about making an application, you might consider 
joining, or forming, a learning set. A learning set need be no more than an agreement 
among a group of colleagues to meet/engage regularly for a set period to have their 
ideas/work critically scrutinised. An initial exploratory meeting can establish the 
ground rules, which may need to be renegotiated as time progresses. For the purposes 
of compiling evidence for an HEA fellowship application, participants might agree to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONCLUSION
205
share and scrutinise each other’s pedagogic ideas and practice, and offer scholarly-
focused suggestions, using the UKPSF as guidance.
Experimentation with learning sets indicates that reflective learning is more likely 
to be productive if it is focused and consistent. If undertaken in groups, it is also likely 
to encourage a deeper understanding of the issues particularly if individuals are recep­
tive to wider peer review. And on a practical level, the necessity of meeting/engaging 
regularly with colleagues can help to defeat the procrastination which comes with 
busy working lives (Revans 2011).
We offer the following practical guidance on working with learning sets:
1	
The group can be any size, but practice indicates that 6–10 is probably an ideal 
size.
2	
The lifespan of the group can be any length, but practice indicates that too short 
and too long can be unproductive – suggest 2–3 months as an ideal.
3	
The group must commit morally to the validity of the exercise, i.e. recognise the 
duty to meet/engage, and offer up – in equal measure – honest reflections on one’s 
own practice and probing/constructive reflections on colleagues’ work.
4	
Learning sets can be ideal environments for honing listening skills, and practis­
ing Socratic questioning techniques – helping colleagues to answer their own 
questions.
5	
The group might benefit from a designated facilitator, but a member of the group 
could take on this role.
6	
A fundamental ground rule is that the group/set should be collegial in nature and 
understood as a safe and secure environment for critical reflection on professional 
practice (i.e. what is said in the set, stays in the set).
The following types of questions might also be useful in starting a learning set 
meeting:
•	
In what ways have I worked /could I work with academic colleagues/professional 
services/students to experiment/innovate with pedagogical ideas?
•	
In what ways have changes I have made to pedagogic practice had a positive 
impact, and how could I enhance that?
•	
How have I been involved in shaping/implementing university/national policies, 
strategies or initiatives? (e.g. inclusion and diversity, TEL, etc.)
•	
In what ways is my teaching, learning and assessment regime informed by peda­
gogical research/evidence?
•	
In what ways is my subject-based research able to lead/inform my teaching?
•	
In what ways could my professional practice forge new links within the wider 
teaching-research nexus?
The three following diagrams (Figures 8.1–8.3) might also be useful in prompting 
reflection in preparation for making a fellowship application. In the first one we see a 
variation on the many versions of David Kolb’s learning cycle (Kolb 1984) (Figure 8.1).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

206
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
Figure 8.1  A Learning cycle (after Kolb).
Experience
(what we do)
Reflection
(thinking about
what we do)
Conceptualisation
(theorising
what we do)
Experimentation
(trying out new ideas)
Figure 8.2  The UKPSF Dimensions of Practice triangle.
Areas of
Activity
(A1-A5)
Core
Knowledge
(K1-K6)
Professional
Values
(V1-V4)
In Figure 8.2, we see the three dimensions of practice in the UKPSF depicted as a 
triangle, aimed at encouraging us to make links between them as we reflect on prac­
tice (e.g. I operate with an assessment regime (an activity) which is informed by how 
students learn (knowledge-led), but is also underpinned by a desire to widen participa­
tion in HE (values-driven).
In the final one, Figure 8.3, we see a simple depiction aimed at encouraging reflec­
tion on our motivations for action: what I did, why I did it, and the impact it had.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONCLUSION
207
Figure 8.3  A continuing professional development triangle.
What I did
Why I did it
The impact
it had
In all these figures there is an inbuilt assumption – depicted by the arrows – that 
the process of reflection is ongoing, and multifaceted. For example, in Figure 8.3, the 
impact may have been small, or even adverse, which might then initiate a new engage­
ment with the process.
Examples of reflective writing in narrative accounts
Throughout the book we have used extracts from some successful fellowship applica­
tions. In this final chapter we use a few more, this time to illustrate some of the points 
we have been making in this conclusion, and also (hopefully) as an encouraging spur 
to help you begin your own narrative account.
Reflective writing for an associate or fellowship application
Here we see a university lecturer working in a practice-orientated science discipline. In 
the first example she is addressing ‘A2 Teach and/or support learning’ by reflecting on 
some revision and drop-in sessions she has been running.
When I first started teaching at postgraduate level, the students asked me if it was 
possible for me to arrange extra revision sessions on specific topics. This was 
because many of the learners were struggling with the new terminology that they 
were being introduced to [V1, V2]. As a result of this, I facilitated extra revision ses­
sions and this is now a practice that I incorporate into each module [K5]. The revision 
and drop-in sessions provide students with the opportunity to ask me questions, to 
revise topics that they may be struggling with, or to come to talk to me to receive 
informal feedback on their progress. I let students know that I am happy to meet 
with them in individually or in groups to help them learn. Recently, a student missed 
a class and so I arranged a time that suited us both to teach her how to apply stature 
estimation equations [V1, V2].
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

208
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
Here, the applicant provides a very brief description of her engagement followed 
by an explanation of why she adopted these particular strategies. And note the use of 
the personal pronoun. Throughout the account she also maps to the UKPSF with a 
particular emphasis on the often-neglected values that underpin her work.
In the second example she is addressing ‘A1 Design and plan learning activities’, 
discussing the importance of active learning strategies.
I incorporate a range of learning activities to help the students engage with the top­
ics that they are learning. It is widely acknowledged in the teaching literature that 
students often learn best through completing practical activities and through discov­
ering new information for themselves, to facilitate this, I incorporate activities into 
my classes at all levels.
For example, to encourage students to think critically. I have also often incorpo­
rated articles and videos from popular media into my classes and then compared 
these to the academic research that they are based on [K4]. I encourage students 
to ask questions, and to participate in discussions and debates in tutorials and 
seminar groups.
Note again the personal nature of the account and also the allusion to the findings of 
the literature – on the value of active learning. A specific reference might have been 
useful here but was not essential. The point is sufficiently widely accepted to justify 
simply stating it. She then goes on to elaborate on the methods employed, interspers­
ing the examples with the rationale for them and her own individual approach. 
Although not all explicitly mapped in this chapter, a number of core knowledge and 
professional value elements are covered (e.g. K3, V1–V2).
In the third extract, again addressing ‘A2 Teach and/or support learning’, she is 
discussing how she approaches tutorial and seminar work.
I have designed and delivered tutorials to undergraduate and postgraduate students. 
The students are encouraged to talk, engage and interact in the workshops and 
tutorials, and there are activities built into these sessions. At undergraduate level, 
I have asked the students to work in groups to read an article and them to present 
back to the class the main argument or theory outlined in the piece of writing. This 
aids students in developing their critical thinking and their oral communication skills. 
It is clear from the student feedback that this technique is an approach that is pop­
ular with students.
Notice here the mixture of description with reflective elements, such as how she 
relates to the students. She might have underpinned her application with more 
detailed references to pedagogic ideas and principles, and the evidence base for 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONCLUSION
209
judging effectiveness could have been more formal and drawn on wider sources, but, 
on both counts, the application is thoughtful and reflective.
Reflective writing for a Senior Fellow Application
At first glance, the differences between Associate/Fellowship and Senior Fellowship do 
not seem to be that great. It looks as though it is just the addition of the seventh descrip­
tor element (relating to supporting colleagues). But, in addition to that additional 
descriptor element, the Fellowship (D2) preamble starts with ‘Demonstrates a broad 
understanding of effective approaches to teaching and learning support …’ whereas 
the Senior Fellowship (D3) preamble starts with ‘Demonstrates a thorough understand­
ing …’ (emphases added). So, a Senior Fellow is typically expected to have a much 
deeper engagement with aspects of the scholarship of learning and teaching and to be 
able to provide a deeper and more comprehensive rationale for his/her practice.
Strong Senior Fellow applications will therefore provide evidence of support to 
enable others to teach and support learning more effectively, and will be underpinned 
by a much deeper understanding of the other six descriptor elements (than that 
required for an Associate/Fellow). In a nutshell, it is the difference between being able 
to perform a particular role yourself, and the additional insight and understanding 
required to explain how that role might be performed and enhanced in others, and 
being able to provide evidence of the design and implementation of effective strategies 
to support others in performing that role.
For example, in the following extract from a Senior Fellow applicant referring to 
teaching in a university on a gender studies module, the interaction between theory 
and practice is expertly explored in a narrative which combines a practical example 
(described in the preceding paragraph) with clearly stated values and a strong core 
knowledge base.
I wanted part-time students to make the leap from ‘learning facts’ to ‘understanding 
concepts’ (Ramsden 2003: 45). I needed to do this in a way that was inclusive and 
accessible. I was aware that it was important to balance accessible content with 
Dearing’s recommendation for a universal standard of theoretical depth (Dearing 
1997; Randall 2000). I noted these marginalised students offered personal insight 
on complex ideologies. When allowed to reflect, the class discussion would lead to 
a rich dialogue that clearly enhanced the group’s understanding. I was trying to facil­
itate the cognitive link between ‘knowing’ what is learned in the classroom and 
‘being’ that is their lived experience (Fontana 1988: 279). My goal was for students 
to reach some depth of academic knowledge (Gardner 1993) from personal experi­
ence [A1, A2, A3, A4, K1, V1, V2, V4].
Note again the personal nature of the account and the applicant’s own motivations and 
also the explicit statement of values ‘I needed to do this in a way that was inclusive and 
accessible.’ Interestingly, the mapping list at the end of the application doesn’t seem to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

210
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
do justice to the full breadth of Core Knowledge displayed in this extract. An assessor 
would nonetheless give credit for the other relevant Core Knowledge elements even 
though they had not been specifically listed. Not all Senior Fellow applications would 
show such a deep theoretical foundation for their practice but ideally they should all 
have this kind of reflective commentary.
In this second example from the same applicant, the stress is primarily on the sup­
port of other staff (D3.7).
My work with part-time tutors inspired active support for part-time disabled student 
support staff. I oversaw the review of the recruitment, selection, training, and ongoing 
evaluation of these staff. I brought practices into line with employment legislation and 
university policy while streamlining administrative process. My key change was to 
train these staff not just in what they were doing but why they were doing it. I gave 
the key address during training; I offered an ethical, political and informative account 
of the need for the support work. I wanted to get away from the reductive legal model 
(we make adjustments because of the DDA) and move toward a more motivating 
ethical argument (to enable every student to reach her/his potential; it is the right 
thing to do). The disability service employed up to 90 such staff, who supported 
approximately 1500 students over each academic year. The effectiveness of this 
review was measured in the increased efficiency of the service: there were fewer 
queries, complaints and confusion and improved feedback from supported-students 
at the annual independent review of the service [D3vii; D4iii].
Notice how the applicant has clearly stated and briefly explained her staff support role 
thus addressing the crucial D3l.7 element and then gone on to explore her goals and 
her ethical stance. She concludes by mentioning how the effectiveness of this initiative 
was measured in terms of increased efficiency of service. She could have easily added 
some mapping to V1 and V2 if she had wished.
Reflective writing for a Principal Fellow application
The key difference between a Senior and Principal lies in the focus on leadership 
and specifically strategic leadership. The preamble states that a Principal Fellow 
should be able to demonstrate, ‘… a sustained record of effective strategic leader­
ship in academic practice and academic development as a key contribution to high 
quality student learning’. So a Principal Fellow is typically expected to have a strong 
engagement with the strategic leadership typically at institutional or at national/
international levels. And again, underpinned by a thorough understanding of HE 
pedagogy.
In the example below taken from a strong Principal Fellow application, the appli­
cant is explaining the source of his deep commitment to widening participation and 
inclusive practice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONCLUSION
211
Note that the experience referred to dates back to the applicant’s childhood and yet is 
clearly and unarguably relevant to his current practice and so is appropriate to include. 
Note also that the focus is on the applicant’s values and that this is carefully related to 
examples taken from relevant pedagogic literature.
In the second extract, the applicant refers to the second of two internal papers he 
produced for the university’s senior management team outlining suggestions for stra­
tegic initiatives.
Throughout my academic career I have always championed the causes of widening 
participation and inclusive practice, and this is evidenced in my academic writing as 
well as my professional practice. My mother was from a Romany gypsy family and 
my father from a mining family, and both left school at the age of thirteen. I grew up 
in a home with no books, and I was expected to work from the age of fourteen. These 
experiences have profoundly shaped my outlook on the role of education and from 
two distinct directions. First, a strong belief in the power of education to transport 
oneself from ‘the present and the particular’ (Bailey 1984), but also, second, an 
equally strong belief in the importance of the curriculum reflecting the authentic 
aspirations of individuals, not just as a means to accommodate them into prescribed 
and pre-existing roles and practices. To this end, all my work is informed by the 
transformative possibilities engendered by forms of critical pedagogy (McLean 
2008) [V4].
The second paper took a more ambitious position, outlining how the university might 
rise to the challenge of placing students at the heart of the system, by championing 
the notion of students as co-producers of knowledge rather than just its consumers. 
The starting point was Neary and Winn’s chapter in Bell et al. (2009) which drew on 
the history of this notion from von Humboldt through Vygotsky to Freire. Specifically 
I outlined how the notion of ‘student as producer’ could become an umbrella for a 
range of learning and teaching initiatives at the university. To this end, throughout 
2012 and 2013 I have been presenting a series of such cases for change …
Note the broad strategic scope of the paper he has produced, and how he refers 
to relevant literature and national policy agendas. He clearly identifies his own 
role, using ‘I’ throughout. And then he concludes by showing how he is taking it 
forward.
Finally, the same applicant talks about his national standing established while sit­
ting on national committees, specifically on the impact he has had on policy initiatives 
aimed at vocational higher education in UK colleges.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

212
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
Again, we see the impact that the applicant has had in a personal capacity. He might 
have said more about what exactly he presented to the Skills Commission, but his evi­
dence claim here seems more related to the CPD opportunity this work presented to 
him. Note again, the reference to the values component in the UKPSF.
Conclusion
Twenty-five years on from Boyer’s (1990) publication – which started many people 
re-exploring ways to raise the profile of learning and teaching in HE – we hope we 
have clearly demonstrated (throughout this book) why and how this has proved to 
be tricky. Significantly, while concerted efforts have been made (including by the 
HEA) to raise the scholarly profile of teaching and learning, the tensions to pull 
teaching apart from research are perhaps even greater today than they were even 
twenty-five years ago. And even among those who oppose these trends, all the while 
that the big money, status, and kudos remains with research, the pressure to acqui­
esce is strong.
Furthermore, all the while that the QAA and the REF continue to be administered 
by separate bodies, and the desire to formally measure the impact of research on stu­
dent learning remains weak, we may continue to find much of the impetus behind 
Boyer’s work being dampened considerably by academic conventions which seem to 
exert themselves in equal measure from both outside and inside academe. That said, 
many universities in the UK are now moving steadily in the direction of creating dis­
tinct learning and teaching pathways to readerships and professorships, criteria for 
which are drawing on a much wider evidence base than traditional subject-based 
research output.
Many of us are also finding that there are interesting history lessons to be heeded 
in re-exploring the past – particularly in the work of prominent figures, most notably 
von Humboldt ([1810] 1970) and Newman ([1852] 1996). In their work we see a central 
role for students in developing forms of scholarship co-joined with academics (von 
Humboldt) and the central importance of the curriculum and the dissemination of new 
knowledge (Newman). If nothing else, this indicates that the battle for the very soul of 
the university is very much a contested one, and answering that question about what 
universities are for is not just a simple matter of reading from an original manuscript 
[This] included consultancy and lobbying work with ministers, civil servants, and the 
various bodies charged with overseeing the development of the professionalisation 
agenda laid out in the Equipping Our Teachers document (DfES 2004). This experi­
ence was invaluable in developing my communication and lobbying skills, and in 
helping to fully understand the mechanisms through which education reform is 
administered in the UK. I also provided oral and written evidence for the Skills Com­
mission inquiry into teacher training in vocational education, chaired by Sir Mike 
Tomlinson (Skills Commission 2011) [V4].
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONCLUSION
213
or blueprint. We can also see here that there is another question, which is not so much 
one of elevating the status of learning and teaching, but rather one of returning it to 
being a naturally integrated and holistic part of academic practice.
Throughout this book we have also seen many references to what it means to be 
engaged with higher education – that students will increasingly find themselves 
grappling not with textbook knowledge, but knowledge which is challenging the 
textbook; grappling with knowledge not at the core of the discipline but on the 
edge; knowledge in the making; and which reflexively looks at the conditions under 
which that knowledge was discovered or manufactured. Here, referring again to von 
Humboldt, we see that higher education is much more concerned with what is not 
known, than what is known. Recognising this, and armed with the appropriate cur­
riculum design principles (see Chapter 6), it should then be possible to meaningfully 
(re) co-join the learning activities of students with staff, or as Healey and Jenkins put 
it, to ‘enable students to learn in ways that parallel or reflect the ways academic staff 
themselves approach research and learn in their disciplines or professional area’ 
(2009: 28).
Finally, we hope that we have provided you with sufficient stimulus throughout 
this book to encourage you to put together a thoughtful and coherent account of your 
engagement with issues relating to learning and teaching in HE, and how this can form 
the foundation for your application to become a fellow of the HEA (in whatever cate­
gory). We also hope that the way we have presented the UKPSF will also be helpful in 
this regard; not as a competency model which grants you a licence to practice, but as 
an opportunity to interrogate the various dimensions of academic practice and how 
they might be better related to, and integrated with, learning and teaching, in the 
expectation of enhancing higher learning.
Relevant HEA project
The Staff and Education Development Association (2013) Measuring the Impact of 
the UK Professional Standards Framework for Teaching and Supporting Learning 
(UKPSF) www.heacademy.ac.uk/ukpsf-impact-study
As a final activity you may wish to consult and interrogate the Transport Map in 
Appendix 3 and ask yourself which of the key concepts (or stations) have the most 
influence on your practice. Only the concepts and stations which are discussed in the 
book appear on the map, and you may feel strongly that there are some that are miss­
ing or misplaced geographically. The map is accompanied by a glossary which briefly 
defines each concept. The map is available as a free download from the address at the 
foot of the map.
We finish this conclusion with one more opinion piece, which demonstrates how 
the notion of ‘sustainability’ both can and should be (for the author) the central axis 
around which all aspects of HE academic practice are holistically integrated.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

214
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
Opinion: On sustainability
If not education for sustainable development, then what for?
Katja Hallenberg
Why do we work in higher education? What is the point of the classes we teach, the 
courses we design, the assessments we set and mark? What, in fact, is the purpose 
of our home institution? An easy answer will have us scurrying to learning outcomes, 
subject benchmarks, university strategies and perhaps even government policy. But 
I have never known an academic who settles for an easy answer. For most of us, 
I believe, such questions evoke deeper consideration of the very purpose of our 
discipline, and of higher education in general. Such existential crises are important, 
prompting us to question and change our thinking, actions, ourselves. Indeed, trans­
formational learning (e.g. Mezirow 2009) would deem this as the raison d’être of 
higher education.
But it is important that we consider the direction of that transformation, for our stu­
dents, universities, ourselves and the higher education sector as a whole. In their 
2005 book Barnett and Coate refer to the responsibility of HE curriculum to address 
the ‘challenges of a changing world’. Six years later, Barnett (2011) puts the case 
for an explicitly values-based model of an ‘ecological university’ that does its utmost 
to enhance global well-being (as measured in more than just economic terms) and 
develop the world in positive ways.
Such discussion reflects a wider call for Education for Sustainable Development 
(ESD), the United Nations’ Decade (2005–2014), which has just drawn to a close 
(see Jones et al. 2010, for an overview). It placed particular responsibility on univer­
sities regarding research, learning, leadership and curricula development to facili­
tate ESD and its underlying values of human rights, social and economic justice, 
intergenerational responsibility, protection and restoration of ecosystems, respect 
for cultural diversity and commitment to peace (UNESCO 2004). Sustainability/
sustainable development form the meta-narrative of our time (Scoffham and Kemp 
2014) and should arguably also do so for education, shaping and driving its purpose 
and activities.
ESD requires pedagogic approaches that are interdisciplinary, holistic, embed­
ded, values-driven, critical, problem-solving, participatory and authentic (i.e. relevant 
to real-world issues and experiences), that incorporate multiple perspectives, 
acknowledge and use prior skills and knowledge, and promote learning opportunities 
beyond the traditional curriculum (UNESCO 2004; HEA/QAA 2014). Encouraging crit­
ical reflection is crucial, both in terms of providing space for exploration, discussion 
and reflection of sustainability issues (Cotton and Winter 2010) and clarifying, chal­
lenging and de- and reconstructing our own values (UNESCO 2002). Specific teach­
ing and learning methods that facilitate the above include, for example, use of 
stimuli and case studies, simulation/role-playing, problem-based learning, and expe­
riential projects including service-learning (Cotton and Winter 2010).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONCLUSION
215
No easy option, then, but possible, and very rewarding. I have been involved in 
ESD for several years, starting with the Manchester Leadership Programme (http://
www.mlp.manchester.ac.uk/) focused on addressing twenty-first-century problems 
in the context of sustainability and ethical leadership. After moving to Canterbury 
Christ Church University I sought to introduce something similar within my own dis­
cipline. The end result was a module ‘Criminology for a Just Society’ (CfJS), devel­
oped with a support from the university’s sustainability team and planned in 
collaboration with the students who helped shape the content, structure and assess­
ment. This was done to facilitate a collaborative, more democratic learning environ­
ment, creating a sense of ownership and personal responsibility, important not just 
for ESD but learning in general.
The module aims to develop a broad and nuanced understanding of sustainabil­
ity and criminology’s potential to further it within the framework of environmental, 
social, cultural and economic justice. The four themes are addressed with an inter­
disciplinary focus, using readings and guest speakers from other disciplines and 
outside academia in order to encourage ‘big picture’ thinking. A big part of the mod­
ule is service/action learning as students are expected to complete a minimum of 
40 hours of volunteering which is closely linked to the assessment. This includes a 
reflective blog which solicits reflection-on- and in-action (Schön 1983) of the volun­
teering experiences, and allows students to make links between theory and practice.
CfJS is currently in its pilot year, running with a very small group of students, so 
it is too early to make any definite statements regarding its impact but the experi­
ence has so far been positive. Students are highly motivated, actively participating 
in the sessions and volunteering placements, and based on reflective blogs and 
class discussions appear to find the module both challenging and enjoyable. For me, 
CfJS is one of the most rewarding aspects of my practice. It is not only intellectually 
and pedagogically stimulating, but also aligned with my personal values and ethics, 
providing a clear sense of ‘making a difference’. Modules that explicitly address 
sustainability have both strategic and symbolic value, signalling the importance and 
providing examples and catalysts, particularly in disciplines and departments where 
sustainability considerations have not previously been addressed (McGoshan and 
Martin 2014). They can create ripples that reach far, forming a part of a bottom-up, 
grassroots approach to facilitating a wider and deeper transformation (Scoffham and 
Kemp 2014).
Such a wholesale reorientation of core higher education systems, structures, 
practices and institutional cultures (Sterling 2004; UNESCO 2009) is crucial, 
because – to return to the questions raised at the start – if not Education for Sus­
tainable Development, then what for? While the governmental Zeitgeist considers 
economic prosperity and employment as the key drivers of higher education, it is 
important to remember how both depend on the continued sustainability of resources 
and societies that support them. The other side of the argument highlights educa­
tion as both the means and the end, emphasising the importance of creating new 
knowledge and pushing the boundaries of understanding. But is it not that very 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

216
NIGEL PURCELL AND JOHN LEA
Note
1	 Throughout this chapter Nigel Purcell writes in a personal capacity and not as a representa­
tive of the Higher Education Academy.
knowledge that has revealed the critical situation the world is facing? How to respond 
to that, or to choose not to respond, therefore becomes a dilemma higher education 
must engage with. Indeed, one can make a case for sustainability precisely to 
ensure the continuity of our ability to devote time and people to the pursuit of knowl­
edge. After all, to put the point in its crudest terms, without a sustainable future, 
there will not be steady land or stable society to build any ivory towers on.
While it is important to question what counts as success in education, or in the 
world (Barnett and Coate 2005), I believe it is more important for the higher educa­
tion to ask what counts as success for the world? Engaging with that would move 
beyond individualistic dispositions that view higher education and students as sepa­
rate from the world they live in, highlighting how the success of the former is depen­
dent on the success of the latter.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Academic Capitalism:  term often used to describe the process by which goods and 
services which were once outside the ‘commodification’ (see separate entry) process 
have now become potential sources of profit for universities and colleges, e.g. intellec­
tual copyright being exploited for the purposes of income generation, and research 
projects being judged according to their profitability.
Academic Citizenship:  term sometimes used to refer to the (perhaps undervalued) 
activities that academics routinely engage with in service to the academic community. 
For example, offering support and mentoring for new colleagues and students; under­
taking external examining duties and/or reviews for other universities; reviewing book 
proposals and joining a journal editorial board.
Academic Freedom:  broad term, often used when referring to the protection afforded 
academics as employees to speak freely and critically on controversial subjects, and 
the unwritten research code allowing research endeavour to be governed by the direc­
tion that the research takes the researcher. In practice, often used to mark its limits, 
and in drawing a line between freedom and responsibility.
Academic Guilds:  term used to highlight that many academic disciplines operate like 
professional bodies – generating their own academic standards and conventions – and 
which academics (effectively or actually) join, and which may result in strong alle­
giance, possibly in contrast to, or even sometimes in tension with, their employing 
institution. Balancing allegiances is perhaps a unique feature of academic careers.
Academic Partners:  broad term useful in asking questions about the extent to which 
students could be considered peers. For example, at what point might we speak of 
students being involved in the same types of discussions that academics routinely have 
with each other? The term also speaks to a contrast between students being involved 
in the decision-making process as opposed to just listening to their views.
Accountability:  term applied to the increasingly explicit requirement to account for 
the use of time and resource. Often used positively when the process is a form of ‘peer 
review’, or unmediated by third parties (e.g. direct staff/student liaison). Often used 
Glossary of Key Terms/Stations 
(see Transport Map)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

218
GLOSSARY
negatively when third parties become proxies, and the exercise is perceived as con­
trolling and de-professionalising, and unlikely to result in enhanced performance.
Accreditation for Prior Learning:  APL; usually divided between APCL and APEL, 
where the former refers to previous certificated learning (essentially existing qualifi­
cations) and the latter to experiential learning (from appropriate experience). Usually 
requires evidence of having already met the learning outcomes for a course, and 
thereby achieve exemption or advanced standing on that course.
Action Research:  approach to research which emphasises the role of the profes­
sional practitioner using research tools to solve professional problems, and which 
often treats the research participants as collaborators (often students) in the research 
process rather than as just respondents (see particularly the work of Jean McNiff). 
Sometimes accorded a low research status by non-users.
Active Learning:  blanket term often used to highlight a contrast between active 
engagement in learning and passive acquisition of knowledge. Can imply active as in 
workshop style learning, but also more broadly to imply the active processing of the 
more cognitive and reflective learning activities, where meaning is constructed by the 
student, in the process of learning (see Deep Learning and Constructivism).
Anti-Authoritarian Classroom:  a term which speaks to a contrast between teachers 
as authority figures and as authoritarian figures – in the latter, dictating the class­
room rather than facilitating learning. More controversial when this process is per­
ceived as undermining the subject expertise of the teacher. Has links with Student as 
Producer, Wilhelm von Humboldt and Carl Rogers (see separate entries).
Anticipatory Design:  an architectural term implying the need for buildings to be 
able to accommodate multiple (possibly future) uses. Can be adapted as a curriculum 
design principle to think about how a range of students might be able to engage with 
learning resources (including virtual ones). Has links with Universal Design for Learn­
ing (UDL) (see separate entry).
Assessment for Learning:  broad term used to distinguish between assessment prac­
tices which focus on what students are expected to do in their assignments and on 
feedback which concentrates on what they actually did, as opposed to a focus on what 
will enable learning, and develop learning between assignments. The term is often 
linked with notions of developmental feedback and feed-forward.
Audit Cultures:  term referring to the growth of (particularly) external and (mostly) 
State-backed auditing of professional and organisational activities. Largely negative 
in connotation, emphasising the incursive and high-stakes nature of the exercises, 
thereby distorting forms of authentic professional behaviour, and rooted in a lack of 
trust in public-sector service oriented professionals (see Thatcherism).
Business Ontology:  term which refers to the increasing amount of university estates 
which are being given over to eye-catching buildings, but which are celebrated more 
for their architectural design principles, than their effectiveness in enhancing learning 
and teaching. Could also be understood more literally to imply that the buildings look 
more like corporate buildings than traditional university ones.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

GLOSSARY
219
Calculated Uncertainty:  term which refers to ways in which space is able to com­
bine aspects of e.g. technology and art, which while delineating a set space also helps 
facilitate creative subversions and new imaginative ways of being, acting and thinking. 
Has connections with post-modern ideas and with Max Weber – embracing uncertainty 
rather than engineering it away, for fear of creating a disenchanted world.
Campus Gilding:  term which refers to the ways that college and universities are 
increasingly investing in eye-catching architecture and services which relate more to 
the social side of university life rather than the strictly academic, in the hope that it will 
be attractive to students, and guide their decision to study in one institution as opposed 
to another.
Capability:  a term which reflects a move away from an emphasis on the more cogni­
tive aspects of learning traditionally associated with higher education, and a move in 
the direction of education enhancing human development and quality of life. Questions 
of social justice and social inequality might also be to the fore. It has links with Critical 
Pedagogy and the Ecological University (see separate entries).
Capitalised Space:  term associated with the Marxist writer Henri Lefebvre, which 
speaks of the way that space in capitalist societies comes to reflect and reproduce the 
logic and needs of capitalist work relations, e.g. maintaining social class divisions. It 
invites a consideration of how these ideas can infiltrate university estates thereby cur­
tailing more utopian, subversive, and countervailing ways of being.
Cardinal Newman:  John Henry Newman, whose series of lectures delivered in 
Dublin in 1852, have become seminal in defending the primary intellectual (not moral) 
function of universities, emphasising the teaching and dissemination of Universal 
knowledge. Now collectively known as The Idea of a University.
Carl Rogers:  the psychotherapist who applied many clinical ideas to educational 
practice, particularly highlighting the importance of personal growth and the affective 
domain. He also inspired many teachers to concern themselves less with their own 
ability to teach and to concentrate more on what enhances learning – particularly pro­
moting the idea of autonomous student learning.
CBHE:  College-Based Higher Education, as a term it speaks to the growth of higher 
education outside of designated universities, and particularly its distinctive nature, 
and contribution to ‘widening participation’ (see separate entry). For example, CBHE 
often serves local ‘non-traditional’ students and local employers, often with a more 
obvious vocational portfolio of courses compared with some traditional universities.
Co-Assessment:  term used to describe the process where teachers and students 
together agree the appropriate mark or grade for a piece of work. The process might 
begin by each party separating marking (and as a piece of self-assessment for the stu­
dent) but then both parties negotiating together the final mark or grade. It mirrors the 
second marking approach more traditionally associated with teacher marking.
Collegiality:  broad term used to refer to the democratic principle at work amongst 
academic colleagues, affording each an equal status and stake in decision-making. 
Sometimes used to highlight ‘academic rule’ or ‘donnish dominion’ (Halsey 1992) as 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

220
GLOSSARY
opposed to rule by managers. In practice, often used to contrast a collegiate ethos with 
forms of Corporatism (see separate entry).
Collegiate Architecture:  term which implies that space can be designed to reflect 
forms of Collegiality (see separate entry) and in opposition to forms of Corporatism 
(see separate entry), with its implied management hierarchies. Examples might be 
found in spaces which are open to all, and/or where designated staff and student 
spaces are in close proximity, creating a sense of community and democracy.
Commodification:  term that refers to the way in which educational services are 
increasingly becoming saleable products. Relates to Karl Marx’s idea of a contradic­
tion between something having use-value (i.e. being useful), but at the same time hav­
ing exchange-value (i.e. being saleable) and which is the stronger force. Generally 
derogatory in tone, but can also reflect an economic realism.
Communities of Learning:  term associated with the work of Jean Lave and Etienne 
Wenger, along with ‘communities of practice’. Commonly used when discussing the 
ways that ‘novice’ learners are inducted into ways of being and acting within a profes­
sional and/or discipline-based community, including using the appropriate methods 
and approaches to knowledge which are conventional in that community.
Constructive Alignment:  term associated with John Biggs, specifying the need to 
produce explicit and transparent links between learning outcomes, and learning, 
teaching and assessment strategies (to create a virtuous triangle) (Biggs and Tang 
2007). Sometimes referred to as a learning outcomes approach, designed to enable 
students to meet or demonstrate the stated learning outcomes.
Constructivism:  a broad term with sociological implications about the social con­
struction of identity, but in educational circles more often associated with the work of 
Jean Piaget and Lev Vygotsky. Commonly used when considering the way that stu­
dents make sense of new knowledge and their need to assimilate it with their existing 
knowledge. It has connections with Scaffolding (see separate entry).
Contestability:  term which can be used to highlight the importance of high order 
analytic skills (see Learning Taxonomies), enabling students to recognise and deal 
with the contested nature of knowledge, particularly when working at the limits of a 
discipline’s knowledge base. Could also be linked to higher education being about what 
is not known rather than what is known (see Wilhelm von Humboldt).
Contrived Collegiality:  term associated with work of Hargreaves (1994), to highlight 
a form of management behaviour which promotes outwardly an image of collegiality 
and collective decision-making, but only when the outcomes of the decision-making 
process are in accord with prescribed management outcomes. Can be contrasted with 
other forms of teacher culture, e.g. ‘balkanised’ (see Subject Allegiance).
Corporatism:  broad term referring to organisational structures which usually have a 
strict management hierarchy, an emphasis on economic accountability and require 
explicit allegiance from employees to organisational goals. Often used in a derogatory 
manner by academics when they see these developments encroaching on Academic 
Freedom and allegiance to Academic Guilds (see separate entries).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

GLOSSARY
221
Critical Pedagogy:  term commonly associated with the work of Paulo Freire, in 
highlighting the need for the curriculum to help (particularly) disadvantaged groups 
not only understand their circumstances, but to be educated such that they could act 
to change those circumstance. Term continues to be key for authors such as Henry 
Giroux and bell hooks in the USA and Monica McLean and Mike Neary in the UK.
Cultural Cognition:  or cultural literacy or cultural citizenship (Delanty 2001), terms 
designed to raise awareness of the need for students to leave university not just with a 
set of traditional cognitive and practical skills, but also an ability to understand and 
apply forms of cultural awareness. The terms speak not just to the need to understand 
cultural difference but also to communicate effectively across cultures.
Culture of Compliance:  blanket term used to describe organisational behaviour 
where there is an emphasis on complying with prescribed rules and procedures. In 
some circles the term is used positively but in academic professional circles it is more 
often used in derogatory ways to indicate forms of de-professionalisation, particularly 
where once decision-makers have increasingly become rule followers.
Curriculum Ideologies:  broad term used to convey the idea that the curriculum can 
have multiple and/or broad aims. Generally:  to develop the person; to prepare people 
for social roles; and/or develop understanding and knowledge. In practice a particular 
curriculum is likely to combine elements of these, which speaks to the need to articu­
late how these aims will be enacted and the relationship between them.
Dead White Males:  colloquial term to highlight how much of the university curricu­
lum is taken up with the ideas of a narrow cross section of the population (and usually 
from Western societies). The term is often used in conjunction with the concept of 
Euro-Centrism to highlight a bias away from ideas embedded in other cultures and 
societies, to create an impression of Western Civilisation as civilisation.
Deep Learning:  term originally attributed to Marton and Saljo (1976), and as a con­
trast term with surface learning, where the latter emphasises recall of information and 
description of concepts and principles, as opposed to the deeper skills of attributing 
meaning, contextualisation, and application. Has links with Active Learning and 
Engaged Learning (see separate entries).
Digital Colonialism:  term used by Amiel (2013) with reference particularly to 
MOOCs (massive online open courses), which while being open and democratic, when 
run by Northern/Western universities might also have, perhaps hidden, colonial conno­
tations. Has links with Widening Participation (see separate entry) in asking whether 
new forms of digital learning are just serving those already well represented.
Dis-engagement Contract:  term associated with George Kuh, which speaks to the 
way that it is possible for students to go through university or college essentially dis­
engaged from their studies, but still leave with the appropriate qualifications. This may 
happen when students are not stretched and/or when students learn how to be strate­
gic in minimising the effort they need to exert (Arum and Roksa 2011).
Disinterested Knowledge:  term often used when describing the nature of academic 
knowledge production (as in original research and discovery); that it is pursued without 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

222
GLOSSARY
vested interest and directed by the results of the research findings, rather than the val­
ues of the researcher, or the interests of other stakeholders, e.g. employing institutions 
or funders (see Standpoint Knowledge as a contrast term).
Dissensus:  term associated with Readings (1996), to imply the need for universities to 
produce students who can successfully negotiate not consensus, but operate effec­
tively in a world of dissensus. The term speaks to the idea that reaching a consensus is 
not always the best outcome, and that the ability to negotiate disagreement would be 
a better axial principle for universities.
Diversity:  broad term which speaks to the pedagogical implications of widening 
the student profile (e.g. a broader mix of social class and minority representation). 
Often used in discussions about what kinds of support minority groups need to 
access and engage better with the curriculum, and/or whether the curriculum con­
tent needs to change to reflect a wider cross section of Voice Perspectives (see sep­
arate entry).
Divided Line:  term used by Plato in The Republic to distinguish knowledge as Univer­
sal truth (episteme) from orthodoxies (doxa) and opinion, and that it is the pursuit of 
the former which should occupy the minds of the philosophers in his academy. Contin­
ues to hold sway in curriculum ideologies which emphasise the disinterested pursuit of 
truth as a core principle for teaching and research.
Doughnut Round:  colloquial term for a teaching and learning strategy designed to 
encourage students to become more actively engaged with reading material. Students 
are asked to formulate questions for other students about some selected reading for a 
class or seminar. It becomes a ‘round’ because each responder then gets the chance to 
ask another student their question and so on.
Ecological University:  a term which refers to the idea of a university’s principles and 
practices being grounded in notions of Sustainability (see separate entry), Well-being, 
and interconnectedness. For example, this might be made manifest in an active moni­
toring of an institution’s research output and partnership working to ensure they are in 
accord with these principles.
Employability:  term often linked with Vocationalism (see separate entry), but one 
which implies a broader underpinning of the curriculum (and wider student experi­
ence) with a range of skills and attributes which would make a student more generally 
employable. Can be used in derogatory manner to imply unwarranted vocational drift, 
but also as valuable in articulating discipline-based graduateness.
Engaged Learning:  broad term which refers to learning activities which require the 
active engagement of students in order to complete them. Has obvious links with Stu­
dent Engagement (see separate entry), but can also be used to distinguish between 
engagements which are closely linked to gaining university level credit, and the wider 
engagement of students in all aspects of university or college life.
Enlightenment:  term often used to explain the nature of knowledge and understand­
ing in the ‘modern’ era. Literally it speaks of illuminating; discovering the truth for 
oneself through reason and empirical methods rather than waiting for it to be revealed 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

GLOSSARY
223
through religious faith, or believing in fate, or traditional authority. Often critiqued by 
post-modern thinkers who claim that it too requires a form of faith.
Ernest Boyer:  his seminal work on Scholarship Reconsidered (1990) is often viewed 
as the step change text in promoting the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning (SOTL) 
(see separate entry). The text was also instrumental in promoted a more rounded and 
holistic approach to scholarship – including discovery (original research), application, 
integration, and teaching – and equalising esteem between them.
Ethical University:  broad term implying a need for universities to ground their activi­
ties more in ethical principles. This might also manifest itself in organisational practices 
(e.g. choice of business partnerships and/or resource purchases) but also as embedded 
in research and in the curriculum (e.g. ethical principles for research practices and/or an 
emphasis on, e.g., notions of social justice in course content).
Flipped Classroom:  colloquial term used to summarise a pedagogical approach 
where students come to the classroom after having engaged with various learning 
resources and then proceed to teach (or share) with their peers and teachers what they 
have learnt. Associated with a questioning of the value of lectures and elevation of the 
seminar as being more important for learning (see Wilhelm von Humboldt).
Gaming:  term used to highlight a contrast between the desire to enhance practice and 
a desire to perform well in audit exercises, particularly where the latter has little effect 
on the former, and/or where an organisation is more motivated by the latter than the 
former. Tends to be most evident when the stakes are high for an organisation in terms 
of the potential to drop down an audit-related league table.
Going Public:  term used to distinguish between being critically reflective about 
teaching and learning – possibly through engagement in institution-based peer review 
exercises – and disseminating the results as publicly available published research – 
subjecting those results to wider peer review and public scrutiny and debate (see 
Kreber 2013).
Goldfish Bowl:  a term which describes an approach where students observe (without 
intervention) a group of their peers at work on a learning task, and then provide feed­
back. Tried and trusted as an approach in helping students focus on the nature of the 
learning (not just what was being learnt). It has obvious connections with the notion of 
a Flipped Classroom and Active Learning (see separate entries).
Hybrid Learning:  term which speaks to the ways that by combining aspects of tradi­
tional face-to face with aspects of on-line learning that combination creates its own 
unique form of learning, with implications for curriculum design and pedagogy. Can be 
linked with ‘blended learning’, but with a focus perhaps more on the uniqueness of the 
pedagogical result rather than the nature of what is blended.
Impact Measures:  term relating to the need to provide explicit evidence of the effect 
of professional interventions. Has particularly significance because of the explicit 
need to demonstrate the impact of research as a mark of its quality (REF 2012). For 
some, this could distort the motivation for engaging in research, along with Pa narrow 
definition of impact – emphasising Performativity (see separate entry).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

224
GLOSSARY
Inclusion:  broad term with multiple level meanings. Can refer to general social inclu­
sion, with links to belongingness, Widening Participation and Diversity (see separate 
entries). Closer to the curriculum it is often used to signal not the readiness of a student 
to learn, but the readiness of the institution to enable that student to learn. Has added 
implications when considering Online Self (see separate entry).
Indeterminacy:  term popular with post-modern thinkers to imply that rational calcu­
lation often has unintended and ironic consequences. In terms of learning space the 
term implies that that this should be embraced rather than denigrated; implying that a 
more playful and creative inhabiting of space is both liberating and in keeping with 
forms of Critical Pedagogy (see separate entry).
Infantilisation:  term associated with the work of Frank Furedi, implying that there has 
been a gradual movement in higher education, away from ideas of Self-Actualisation 
(see separate entry) towards students being treated as vulnerable and in need of con­
stant support. It might be seen in the unwarranted and over cautious desire to ensure 
that the educative process is not harming students.
Jigsaw Classroom:  colloquial term first used by Aronson (1978) to explain a teach­
ing and learning strategy where small groups of students work together on one aspect 
of a topic, and then teach it to the rest of the group, who have also been assigned dif­
ferent aspects of the same topic. Each piece in this jigsaw then becomes part of the 
process of piecing together the bigger picture.
Knowledge Economy:  term used to describe an economy which is increasingly 
dependent on Knowledge Products (see separate entry) and on the knowledge of its 
workforce. Sometimes viewed in a derogatory way because of its potential to corrupt 
a more traditional view of knowledge – that it should be loved for its own sake, or for 
general public good, rather than just for its potential to drive the economy.
Knowledge Products:  term used to describe the process by which knowledge 
becomes an essential ingredient in product creation, in particular where a product has 
a knowledge component at its core. The term might apply to the perceived need for 
students to see this as essential to their Employability (see separate entry), but also, 
where academics are invited to see the output of their research in these terms.
Learning Taxonomies:  term which refers to the classification and ranking of skills in 
various learning domains. Popularised by Bloom (1956) and colleagues for the cogni­
tive, followed by the affective and psychomotor domains. Refined several times since 
then, for example, in the SOLO taxonomy (Biggs and Tang 2007). Often used when 
writing learning outcomes to help specify appropriate skill-related verbs.
Lecturing:  a term which summarises the traditional didactic approach to delivering 
content to a (often very large) group of students from behind a pedestal in a desig­
nated lecture theatre, set up with fixed rows of seating. A resilient method of teaching 
that has survived countless attacks on its merits as a means to enable or enhance stu­
dent learning. In practice, can be highly interactive.
Liberal Tradition:  term used to describe educational pedagogies and knowledge 
production processes which are rooted in the idea of loving and pursing knowledge for 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

GLOSSARY
225
its own sake. Often used when countering the claim that knowledge should be pursued 
for the extrinsic purposes of, for example, wealth creation, or that subjects should be 
studied in order to prepare students for jobs and future social roles.
Liquid University:  term associated with Ron Barnett, after ‘liquid modernity’ (Bauman 
2000). It speaks to the idea of universities and colleges having less fixed boundaries, 
working and forming collaborative partnerships, which might be short term and/or 
global in scale, reflecting a contraction of time and space in modern life. Might also 
require more entrepreneurial rather than bureaucratic modes of operation.
Managerialism:  term used to describe management practices which emphasise the 
need for employee behaviour and activities to be in accord with what has been pre­
scribed. Can be used to distinguish between active people management and bureau­
cratic compliance. Generally unpopular among academics when they perceive that 
their professionalism is being undermined by intrusive management.
Marketisation:  a broad term often used to describe not markets per se, but the pro­
cess of exerting market forces on goods and services which have been traditionally 
protected from these forces. Terms like ‘regulated market’ or ‘social market’ also indi­
cate this process, for example, as applied to attempts to increase the competition 
between educational providers for State funds and resources.
Massification:  term which refers to the growth of student numbers in universities 
and colleges, particularly when it results in the need to restructure educational prac­
tice to accommodate the growth (e.g. larger teaching groups). It also has a technical 
definition, where ‘mass’ means that 15–50 per cent of an age-cohort are in higher 
education (below 15 per cent means ‘elite’, and above 50 per cent means ‘universal’) 
(Trow 2010).
Mindfulness:  a term which relates to a soft skill or attribute of teacher presence in 
the classroom. It speaks to an ability to be aware of an audience and work to enhance 
warmth and connectedness. Also often connected to the wider notions of contempla­
tive learning, affective learning domain, and balancing the more cognitive and rational 
aspects of learning (see Capability and Well-Being).
Mode 2 Knowledge:  term associated with Gibbons and colleagues (1994), which 
speaks to the way in which universities are increasingly validating courses, and devel­
oping knowledge bases which are inter and trans-disciplinary and have closer applied 
links with the world of work and professions, particularly when compared with the 
more traditional, more insular, university-based disciplines (Mode 1 Knowledge).
Near Market:  term often used to describe a motivation when conducting research 
where marketable products are likely to be an outcome. Often used in a derogatory 
way to distinguish this motivation from ‘blue skies’ thinking, or the pursuit of Disinter­
ested Knowledge (see separate entry). Can be used positively in an applied research 
context and or as a colloquial Impact Measure term (see separate entry).
Neo-liberalism:  a political philosophy which emphasises the role of private individu­
als and companies being motivated by their own actions in the consumption and pro­
duction of goods and services, provided in free markets, and unfettered by State 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

226
GLOSSARY
regulation or interference. Often used to contrast with those who value the role of the 
State and the wider community in providing access to societal resources.
Objective Knowledge:  term often used to contrast curriculum knowledge from sub­
jective opinion. Sometimes used to describe the nature of academic knowledge – as 
being beyond anecdote and personal testimony – as rooted in systematic study, using 
agreed research tools (often, discipline-based). Sometimes used in a derogatory man­
ner to ask whether knowledge could ever be completely objective.
Online Learning:  broad term which speaks to the way that more learning and teach­
ing is happening in Virtual Space (see separate entry), and the implications of that. 
Commonly used when speaking of distance learning software packages and MOOCs 
(massive online open courses), where the learning is open to anyone, anywhere, and 
happens entirely online.
Online Self:  term which speaks to the ways that individuals develop aspects of their 
learner (and wider) identity in Virtual Space (see separate entry). Has a troubling con­
notation when implying that this self may not be a true self, but also has an inclusive 
connotation by enabling students to engage with learning in ways they might feel more 
comfortable with (see Inclusion).
Open-Ended Architecture:  blanket term which can be used to summarise the oppo­
sition between university buildings and space which dictate how they should be used, 
and the possibilities for more liberatory forms of learning when there is the possibility 
for flexible negotiations of space by all users, at all times, and into the future.
Peer Assessment:  broad term used when a student’s peer group is involved in the 
assessment and feedback process. Commonly used in group work where each group 
gives feedback to the other groups. Often used in a ‘peer assisted learning’ (PAL) initia­
tive where senior students give advice on assignments to junior students. Can also be 
useful in helping students become more familiar with grading criteria.
Peer Learning:  broad term relating to all the ways in which students might learn 
from each other, rather than just from their teachers. This might be, for example, 
informally outside formal class time; as directed by teachers within formal class 
contact time; and/or as part of a ‘peer-assisted learning’ (PAL) scheme. Increasingly, 
it also refers to students acting as (formal or informal) assessors of their peer’s 
work.
Performance Indicators:  similar to Impact Measures (see separate entry), but with 
emphasis on the construction of the measures themselves. Used positively in corporate 
circles to help strengthen organisational allegiance, but also used negatively when 
academics perceive the indicators to be constraints on creative thinking, and as exam­
ples of Managerialism (see separate entry).
Performativity:  term sometimes used in sociological circles to highlight the social 
construction of aspects of human identity, but more commonly used in educational 
theory to refer to behaviours which are in accord with what has been prescribed by 
institutional custom and practice, but are engaged with or enacted in an inauthentic 
manner, and often perceived as a form of de-professionalisation.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

GLOSSARY
227
Private University:  term relating to a university or college which has no primary 
funding from the public purse. In effect, there is no clear boundary between a Public 
University (see separate entry) and a private one, because both in practice can attract 
funds from similar sources. Often linked to privatisation, and a perceived need to be 
less dependent on the public purse for accessing income and resources.
Problem-Based Learning:  broad term relating to learning and teaching strategies 
which focus on setting problems (either real or simulated) which students, either indi­
vidually or in groups, set about solving. Its rationale is often linked to the merits of 
Active learning and encouraging Deep Learning (see separate entries), but also because 
it mirrors the type of learning more likely to be encountered in a work place.
Public University:  a university (or college) which is funded (primarily or entirely) by 
the public purse, and/or serves the public good rather than acting for private gain. It is 
also often linked with a desire to see knowledge pursued for its own (intrinsic) sake 
(see Liberal Tradition), rather than for what it might (extrinsically) lead to. Used by 
supporters as a positive contrast term with Private University (see separate entry).
Realist Epistemology:  term used to promote the idea that certain methods of enquiry 
will enable us to understand the world (social and/or natural) as it is, rather than as a 
collection of ideas, perspectives, or interpretations. The latter may leave us with no 
basis to decide what enters a curriculum, other than the wherewithal of those who 
have the power/influence to get their perspectives heard (Young 2008).
Really Useful Knowledge:  a contrast term used to distinguish between the emanci­
patory learning which will enable people to change their social circumstances (e.g. 
poverty and social disadvantage) and ‘merely useful knowledge’ which has the effect 
of leaving those circumstances untouched. It has connections with Critical Pedagogy 
and Transformative Learning (see separate entries).
Recontextualisation:  term sometimes used to articulate the relationship between 
theory and practice in a discipline-based or Work-based Learning (see separate entry) 
course. The term speaks to the two-way process of generating theory from practice, 
and vice versa, and the need for all knowledge to be re-contextualised as it moves from 
context to context.
Reflective Practice:  broad term popularised by the work of Donald Schön, which 
focused on the ways that professionals learn by reflecting in and on their work. Can be 
linked with ‘grounded theory’ and the ability to generate concepts and theories from 
practice rather than vice versa, and when considering how reflection can be a 
construction site for knowledge, not just the process of thinking about knowledge.
Reinvention Room:  literally a room at the University of Warwick, but as a term it 
speaks to the perceived need for teaching and learning spaces to become more flexibly 
available to a wide range of users. Conceptually it speaks of a need to be able to break 
free from the dictating influence of fixed furniture and fittings, and of the learning 
potential in having to negotiate the space each time it is entered and used.
Research-Based Learning:  term popularised by Healey and Jenkins (2009), to distin­
guish it from Research-Tutored, Research-Orientated and Research-Led Learning 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

228
GLOSSARY
(see separate entries). The term is designed to emphasise the participatory and pro­
cess-driven nature of student involvement in research and inquiry, specifically where 
they undertake their own research projects as part of their degree programme.
Research-Led Learning:  term popularised by Healey and Jenkins (2009), to distin­
guish it from Research-Tutored, Research-Oriented and Research-Based Learning (see 
separate entries). The term is designed to emphasise the perhaps more passive and 
content-driven nature of student involvement in research and inquiry, specifically 
where they learn about current research within a discipline.
Research-Oriented Learning:  term popularised by Healey and Jenkins (2009), to 
distinguish it from Research-Tutored, Research-Based and Research-Led Learning (see 
separate entries). The term is designed to emphasise the perhaps more passive but 
process-driven nature of student involvement in research and inquiry, specifically 
where students develop research and inquiry skills and techniques.
Research-Tutored Learning:  term popularised by Healey and Jenkins (2009), to dis­
tinguish it from Research-Based, Research-Oriented and Research-Led Learning (see 
separate entries). The term is designed to emphasise the participatory and con­
tent-driven nature of student involvement in research and inquiry, specifically where 
they are actively involved in discussions about research and inquiry.
Resilience:  term which speaks to a general attribute associated with successful learn­
ing. Can be linked to attribution theory, which ask questions about to whom or what do 
people attribute their successes and failures. Resilient learners tend not to be fatalistic, 
have a strong Will to Learn (see separate entry) and a strong sense of personal agency.
Scaffolding:  term associated with the work of Lev Vygotsky, but coined by Jean 
Bruner. It speaks to the ways that students build from what they already know and 
through this can be enabled to reach higher and more independent forms of learning. 
Has connections with Constructive Alignment and Learning Taxonomies (see separate 
entries) and the writing of effective learning outcomes.
Scripted Communication:  term used to highlight how professionals are often 
required to ‘learn their lines’ to ensure a positive outcome in a review or inspection 
exercise. Often motivated by a desire to look good rather than be good, or to ‘toe the 
party line’ for fear of the consequences of not doing so. The term has an obvious ironic 
connotation in academic professional circles (Lea 2009).
Self-Actualisation: term associated with the work of Abraham Maslow, used as the 
pinnacle term in his hierarchy of needs. The hierarchy demands that the lower needs 
are met, which then enable the enactment of self-actualisation. The term has links with 
autonomous learning (see Carl Rogers) and Unencumbered Self (see separate entry), 
implying that self-direction and self-will are key to higher learning.
Self-Assessment: broad term used when there is an emphasis on students assessing 
their own work. This might include constructing their own assignments, but more usu­
ally refers to the monitoring of their own progress, and/or marking their own work, 
possibly in a joint manner with their teachers. Often used as a pedagogical tool to help 
students become familiar with grading criteria.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

GLOSSARY
229
Self-Criticality:  term used to highlight not just the ability to think critically about a 
subject, but also to think self-critically, that is, evaluate aspects of one’s own identity, 
and attachment to certain ideas, and their foundation in character formation. The term 
is likely to feature in courses which concentrate on self-development and personal 
growth (see Carl Rogers) and/or Reflective Practice (see separate entries).
Significant Learning:  term associated with Carl Rogers (see separate entry), high­
lighting the need for knowledge to have significant meaning for a student in terms of 
its affect on self-development. Can be used as a contrast term against the cognitive 
learning of abstract principles, and behavioural acquisition of psychomotor skills, par­
ticularly where both have little prospect of guiding personal growth.
SOTL:  the scholarship of teaching and learning; term highlighting the importance of 
teaching and learning methods being underpinned and informed by the research and 
scholarly evidence for their effectiveness. For some, an emphasis was placed on Action 
Research (see separate entry). For others, reflecting on practice and the further need 
for Going Public (see separate entry) on the findings was emphasised.
Standpoint Knowledge:  term which speaks to research and knowledge which is 
avowedly in the interests of certain social groups or political causes. Sometimes used 
as a contrast with Disinterested Knowledge (see separate entry), highlighting how the 
latter can disguise its own vested interests. And sometimes used to promote identity 
affirmation amongst exploited or underrepresented social groups.
Student as Active Collaborator:  blanket term which refers to the multiple ways in 
which students might take a more active role in the life and work of their university or 
college. The term speaks to moving away from listening to the student voice, and mov­
ing more towards seeing students as active partners, possibly working more as Stu­
dent as Teacher, as Scholar and/or as Change Agent (see separate entries).
Student as Change Agent:  broad term relating to the ways that students might get 
more actively involved in the organisational life and work of a university or college. 
Does not imply need for particular forms of change, with potential for tension between 
students who view HE knowledge as intrinsically valuable compared with those who 
hold more utilitarian notions (e.g. as a means to get a high status job).
Student as Co-Creator:  a term which refers to the ways in which students might 
begin to see learning as a contribution to knowledge production. Has obvious links 
with Student as Producer (see separate entry), but in the use of the prefix ‘co’ it might 
point to the types of activities where students are supported to make a step in this 
direction; possibly working alongside, or as junior members of research teams.
Student as Co-Designer:  a useful term to highlight the ways in which students might 
get more involved in understanding and enacting curriculum design principles. This might 
involve students sitting as advisers on course validation events, and/or working in part­
nership with staff on designing a course or module (e.g. its Constructive Alignment – see 
separate entry), which they will then subsequently undertake.
Student as Consultant:  a term which is useful in highlighting a mirroring of the 
types of consultancy work that academics routinely undertake – as advisors, experts, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

230
GLOSSARY
and reviewers. For example, students might advise university committees by pre­
senting evidence from the student experience, or they might advise staff team meet­
ings, particularly on their experience of, and research evidence on, learning and 
teaching.
Student as Producer:  term associated today with the work of Mike Neary at the 
University of Lincoln. It speaks to a contrast between students as passive consumers 
of knowledge or as active contributors to the production of knowledge, by being 
engaged in a range of scholarly and research activities. Has many historical links with, 
e.g. Critical Pedagogy and Wilhelm von Humboldt (see separate entries).
Student as Scholar:  broad term relating to all the ways that students (particularly 
undergraduates) might take a more scholarly approach in their learning. At one 
extreme it might involve students actually publishing a piece of work, but might also 
mean undertaking a small-scale research project; and/or using an evidence-based 
approach to solving a problem within a discipline context or beyond.
Student as Teacher:  broad term summarising all the ways in which students might 
act in a teaching capacity, for example, as part of a group presentation or poster pre­
sentation for their peer group, or taking responsibility for explaining concepts and 
ideas to their peer group and teachers. Recognised as a way to promote Active Learn­
ing, Deep Learning, and Engaged Learning (see separate entries).
Student-Centred Learning:  blanket term used to summarise approaches which 
place the student at the centre of the planning and enactment of learning. Commonly 
seen in notions of the Flipped Classroom, Active Learning, Engaged Learning, Deep 
Learning and in the application of the principles of ‘constructive alignment’ and has 
connections with the work of Carl Rogers (see separate entries).
Student Engagement:  blanket term used to describe myriad ways in which students 
might be more actively involved in student life. Has obvious connections with Engaged 
Learning (see separate entry) but can also be used to distinguish engagement which is 
relating to formal learning, from broader notions, e.g. acting as mentors to other stu­
dents; and/or engaging in outreach and community projects.
Student Surveys:  blanket term used to refer to the growing evidence base on the 
nature of the student experience of higher education, as documented in the results of 
large scale social surveys, e.g. the National Student Survey (NSS) in the UK and the 
National Survey of Student Engagement (NSSE) in the US. Questions have been raised 
about their reliability and validity, and their distortion of academic behaviours.
Subject Allegiances:  term used variously to highlight the central importance of sub­
ject knowledge in the teaching of a subject; the importance of being versed in its con­
ceptual language; and/or that this is best foundation for preparation to teach a subject. 
This can create ‘balkanised’ (Hargreaves 1994) divisions between subject-based 
departments (see also Tribes and Territories and Subject Pedagogies).
Subject Pedagogies:  term used to recognise the ways that different subjects are 
taught, and related to that, how new teachers are prepared for their teaching roles 
within their disciplines. The term raises the question of whether these pedagogies are 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

GLOSSARY
231
simply conventional or rooted in deeper epistemological considerations, and the link 
between this and the way a subject develops it knowledge base.
Super-complexity:  term associated with Barnett (2000), highlighting not just the 
complexity brought about by the sheer amount of knowledge and information cur­
rently available, but also the multiple epistemological axes for knowledge production, 
and the need to be critically aware of the conditions of its production – requiring a 
heightened sense of reflexivity among students.
Sustainability:  term which can apply equally to the practices of a university or col­
lege overall (see Ecological University) but also how its principles are embedded in the 
curriculum. For students it might be defined as a need to promote the idea of environ­
mentally responsible citizenship. For an organisation it could include active monitor­
ing of new builds to ensure they use renewable energy and building sources.
Teaching-Research Nexus:  broad term used to highlight the multiple relations or 
permutations between teaching and research in higher education. For example, teach­
ing led by the research interests of the teacher; teaching informed by the results of 
pedagogic research; teaching which seeks to develop the research capabilities of stu­
dents, etc. (see Neumann 1992).
Technological Fetishism:  term used by Bainbridge (2014) which speaks to the way 
the use of technology in learning can dominate discussions of its pedagogical appro­
priateness and ability to enhance learning. The term ‘fetish’ implies that the real object 
of desire has been substituted for another, and/or that substituted object has been 
granted a misplaced power and status.
Technology-Enhanced Learning:  (TEL); a broad term which refers to the ways in 
which technology is used to enhance the learning and teaching process. In practice is 
most commonly used in curriculum design discussions, when asking the question of 
how the technology is being used pedagogically – as a tool of teaching and learning 
rather than just focusing on the functions of the technology itself.
TESTA:  Transforming the Experience of Students Through Assessment; a national 
project based at the University of Winchester, enabling teams to evaluate their courses 
by taking a bird’s eye view from a student’s perspective. Results indicate that the 
emphasis on individual modules can have adverse effects for students, e.g. in the 
bunching of assignments and repeated meeting of learning outcomes.
Thatcherism:  term used to describe the monetarist (see Friedman and Friedman 1980) 
free market policies of the UK governments led by Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s. 
Thatcherism, as a term, was also a way of linking those economic policies with wider 
social and political ideas. In universities and colleges this was particularly felt in the 
perceived need for public-sector professionals to be called to account (see Audit Culture).
Therapeutic Turn:  term useful in implying that higher education is increasingly con­
cerning itself with the well-being of students and eroding its true purpose. First popu­
larised in the USA by Sykes (1992), who spoke of students being encouraged to see 
themselves as victims of circumstances, and in the UK by Ecclestone and Hayes (2008), 
who spoke of students being cast as ‘diminished selves’.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

232
GLOSSARY
Threshold Concepts:  term associated with work of Meyer and Land (2006) which 
speaks to those discipline-based concepts and ideas which are often ‘troublesome’ for 
students, but once grasped can lead to significant subsequent learning. Can also be 
adapted to refer to wider, more generic concepts and ideas, like the notion of ‘reflec­
tive practice’ (see separate entry).
Transformative Learning:  term often used to describe learning which has a pro­
found effect on the learner. For example, learning which makes a significant contribu­
tion to personal growth, or provides significant opportunities for students to bring 
about changes in their personal circumstances or life chances. It can be linked to ‘crit­
ical pedagogy’ (see separate entry).
Tribes and Territories:  term associated with Becher (1989) to indicate how univer­
sities are typified by distinct discipline-based research allegiances, which help to 
cement strong in-group and out-group behaviour. The term continues to be reworked 
by Paul Trowler – see Becher and Trowler (2001) and Trowler et al. (2014).
Tutor Embodiment:  term which speaks to ways that learning is supported by the 
on-line presence of tutors. This might require careful consideration in supporting those 
who are not so-called ‘digital natives’ – with the technologies as much as the learning – 
but also has wider implications when seeking to support the development of a student’s 
Online Self (see separate entry).
Unencumbered-Self:  term associated with Ron Barnett, used to highlight the impor­
tance of education in forging a distinct sense of agency for a student, in stark contrast 
to forms of dependency (which they may start their education with). It could be con­
nected with forms of Critical Pedagogy (see separate entry), with an emphasis on stu­
dents being confident about their ability to enact social change.
Universal Design for Learning:  term popularised by the Center for Applied Special 
Technology (CAST) in the USA, which utilises the architectural principle of universal 
design of buildings (consider potential users of a building not just the immediate client 
group) and asking teachers to consider the multiple ways in which students might be 
able to access and engage with teaching and learning activities and resources.
Universal Knowledge:  term used to imply that some knowledge is not just ‘objec­
tive’ (see separate entry) but applies in all circumstances and at all times. For 
some, such knowledge has a priori status (i.e. is beyond experience and not liable 
to contradiction by empirical evidence). Can be used in derogatory manner to 
imply that a claim is being made to Universality in order to close down debate (Fish 
1994).
University as Social Conscience:  term which speaks to a special defining charac­
teristic of universities as offering a space to reflect on the efficacy of social, political 
or economic trends and developments. Academics themselves may also need to be 
accorded a special status within their own institutions to exercise this function when 
calling their own institution to account.
Ventriloquism:  term used to highlight situations in which professionals will say 
one thing but mean another. Particularly prevalent in situations requiring acts of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

GLOSSARY
233
Performativity (see separate entry) and ‘scripted communication’ (see separate entry). 
Also used to highlight a bifurcated existence, i.e. the process of splitting into two parts.
Virtual Pantechnicon:  from the term Panopticon – the ability to be able to see every­
thing from 360 degrees, with obvious implications of surveillance, control, and impris­
onment for those who are being observed. The adapted term implies that Virtual Space 
(see separate entry) may be experienced in this way, for example, by tracking the 
movements of students in virtual learning environments.
Virtual Space:  blanket term often used to heighten awareness of the pedagogical 
implications of learning and interaction taking place in virtual learning environments 
(VLEs), and how they are inhabited and experienced. Sometimes involves debate about 
the competing nature of various platforms (e.g. Facebook vs. Blackboard VLE) and 
the issues around expanding virtual space and reducing physical space.
Vocationalism:  broad term used to convey the idea of courses being primarily a 
preparation for work. Sometimes used to make a contrast between training and educa­
tion, but also used when highlighting disconnects with employers’ needs. Often used in 
a derogatory manner to imply that academic courses are drifting from their original 
purpose to pursue knowledge for its own sake (see Liberal Tradition).
Voice Perspectives:  term used variously to highlight the distant nature of some 
voices and ideas in higher education. Also used in some circles to promote the idea of 
knowledge as perspective, philosophical relativism, and/or post-modern ideas, making 
the claim that truth is actually the ideas of the powerful masquerading as truth. Has 
some connections with Dead White Males (see separate entry).
Well-being:  term used to support a move away from an emphasis on the cognitive, 
rational, and atomistic aspects of knowledge in many courses, and towards a more 
holistic and balanced approach, particularly including more spiritual and contempla­
tive dimensions (Bloom 2005). Has positive connections with Capability and negative 
ones with an unwarranted Therapeutic Turn (see separate entries).
Widening Participation:  term that refers to the ways that universities and colleges 
have been seeking to widen access to, and participation in, HE. Often used as a con­
trast term from increasing participation, and as a check on whether reforms aren’t 
simply giving more opportunities to social groups who were already well represented. 
Often used alongside ‘non-traditional learner’ and ‘first-generation entrant’.
Wilhelm von Humboldt:  German philosopher, whose memorandum on the establish­
ment of the University of Berlin in 1810 is often quoted when highlighting some of 
essential qualities of higher education – the combining of research and teaching; the 
importance of seminars rather than lectures; an emphasis on what we don’t know 
rather than what we do; and enjoining students in scholarly endeavours.
Will to Learn:  term commonly associated with Barnett (2007). It speaks more to the 
ontological aspects of being a student (as opposed to the strictly epistemological), 
seeking to identify that disposition, that sense of agency, which propels a student for­
ward, in seeing learning as part of the project of ‘becoming’ as well as just being. It has 
connections with Self-Criticality (sees separate entry).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

234
GLOSSARY
Wise Counsel:  term which speaks to the ability of students to make measured deci­
sions which are not just knowledge based but more widely rooted in the benefits they 
are likely to bring. The term also speaks to academic decision-making being ethically 
based and resting on an ability to evaluate factual and/or scientific knowledge, partic­
ularly so-called Disinterested Knowledge (see separate entry).
Work-Based Learning:  broad term relating to the ways that learning either takes 
place in a work setting, or is integrated into that work setting. Has implications for 
discussing the multiple relationships between theory and practice, the role of place­
ment learning (common on professional learning courses) and/or conceptualising 
Recontextualisation (see separate entry) in curriculum terms.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Areas of
Activity
(A1–A5)
Core
Knowledge
(K1–K6)
Professional
Values
(V1–V4)
A1 Design and plan learning activities
and/or programmes of study
A2 Teach and/or support learning
A3 Assess and give feedback to learners
A4 Develop effective learning
environments and approaches to student
support and guidance
A5 Engage in continuing professional
development in subjects/disciplines and
their pedagogy, incorporating research,
scholarship and the evaluation of
professional practices
K1 The subject material
K2 Appropriate methods for teaching and
learning in the subject area and at
the level of the academic programme
K3 How students learn, both generally and
within their subject/disciplinary area(s)
K4 The use and value of appropriate learning
technologies
K5 Methods for evaluating the effectiveness of
teaching
K6 The implications of quality assurance and
quality enhancement for academic and
professional practice with a particular focus on
teaching
V1 Respect individual learners and diverse
learning communities
V2 Promote participation in higher
education and equality of opportunity for
learners
V3 Use evidence–informed approaches and
the outcomes from research, scholarship
and continuing professional development
V4 Acknowledge the wider context in
which higher education operates
recognising the implications for
professional practice
Appendix 1: UKPSF dimensions of practice and elements
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Descriptor 1 – Associate Fellow
Typical individual role/career stage
Demonstrates an understanding of specific aspects of effective 
teaching, learning support methods and student learning. 
Individuals should be able to provide evidence of:
I.  Successful engagement with at least two of the five Areas of 
Activity
II.  Successful engagement in appropriate teaching and practices 
related to these Areas of Activity
III.  Appropriate Core Knowledge and understanding of at least K1 
and K2
IV.  A commitment to appropriate Professional Values in facilitat­
ing others’ learning
V.  Relevant professional practices, subject and pedagogic 
research and/or scholarship within the above activities
VI.  Successful engagement, where appropriate, in professional 
development activity related to teaching, learning and 
assessment responsibilities
Individuals able to provide evidence of effectiveness in relation to 
their professional role(s) which, typically, will include at least 
some teaching and/or learning support responsibilities. This 
teaching and learning role may sometimes be undertaken with 
the assistance of more experienced teachers or mentors. 
Typically, those likely to be at Descriptor 1 (D1) include:
a.  Early career researchers with some teaching responsibilities 
(e.g. PhD students, graduate teaching assistants (GTAs), 
contract researchers/post-doctoral students etc.)
b.  Staff new to teaching (including those with part-time academic 
responsibilities)
c.  Staff who support academic provision (e.g. learning technolo­
gists, learning developers and learning resource/library staff)
d.  Staff who undertake demonstrator/technician roles that 
incorporate some teaching-related responsibilities
e.  Experienced staff in relevant professional areas who may be 
new to teaching and/or supporting learning, or who have a 
limited teaching portfolio
Descriptor 2 – Fellow
Typical individual role/career stage
Demonstrates a broad under-standing of effective approaches to 
teaching and learning support as key contributions to high quality 
student learning. Individuals should be able to provide evidence of:
I.  Successful engagement across all five Areas of Activity
II.  Appropriate knowledge and under-standing across all aspects 
of Core Knowledge
Individuals able to provide evidence of broadly based effective­
ness in more substantive teaching and supporting learning 
role(s). Such individuals are likely to be established members of 
one or more academic and/or academic-related teams. 
Typically, those likely to be at Descriptor 2 (D2) 
include:
Appendix 2: The UKPSF Descriptors (D1–D4)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

III.  A commitment to all the Professional Values
IV.  Successful engagement in appropriate teaching practices 
related to the Areas of Activity
V.  Successful incorporation of subject and pedagogic research 
and/or scholarship within the above activities, as part of an 
integrated approach to academic practice
VI.  Successful engagement in continuing professional develop­
ment in relation to teaching, learning, assessment and, where 
appropriate, related professional practices
a.  Early career academics
b.  Academic-related and/or support staff holding substantive 
teaching and learning responsibilities
c.  Experienced academics relatively new to UK higher education
d. Staff with (sometimes significant) teaching-only responsibilities 
including, for example, within work-based settings
Descriptor 3 – Senior Fellow
Typical individual role/career stage
Demonstrates a thorough under-standing of effective approaches to 
teaching and learning support as a key contribution to high quality 
student learning. Individuals should be able to provide evidence of:
I.  Successful engagement across all five Areas of Activity
II.  Appropriate knowledge and under-standing across all 
aspects of Core Knowledge
III.  A commitment to all the Professional Values
IV.  Successful engagement in appropriate teaching practices 
related to the Areas of Activity
V.  Successful incorporation of subject and pedagogic research 
and/or scholarship within the above activities, as part of an 
integrated approach to academic practice
VI.  Successful engagement in continuing professional develop­
ment in relation to teaching, learning, assessment, scholar­
ship and, as appropriate, related academic or professional 
practices
VII.  Successful co-ordination, support, supervision, management 
and/or mentoring of others (whether individuals 
and/or teams) in relation to teaching and learning
Individuals able to provide evidence of a sustained record of 
effectiveness in relation to teaching and learning, incorporating 
for example, the organisation, leadership and/or management of 
specific aspects of teaching and learning provision. Such 
individuals are likely to lead or be members of established 
academic teams. Typically, those likely to be at Descriptor 3 (D3) 
include:
a.  Experienced staff able to demonstrate, impact and influence 
through, for example, responsibility for leading, managing or 
organising programmes, subjects and/or disciplinary areas
b.  Experienced subject mentors and staff who support those new 
to teaching
c.  Experienced staff with departmental and/or wider teaching 
and learning support advisory responsibilities within an 
institution
(Continued)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Descriptor 4 – Principal Fellow
Typical individual role/career stage
Demonstrates a sustained record of effective strategic leadership 
in academic practice and academic development as a key 
contribution to high quality student learning.
Individuals should be able to provide evidence of:
I.  Active commitment to and championing of all Dimensions of 
the Framework, through work with students and staff, and in 
institutional developments
II.  Successful, strategic leadership to enhance student learning, 
with a particular, but not necessarily exclusive, focus on 
enhancing teaching quality in institutional, and/or 
(inter)national settings
III. Establishing effective organisational policies and/or strategies 
for supporting and promoting others (e.g. through mentoring, 
coaching) in delivering high quality teaching and support for 
learning
IV.  Championing, within institutional and/or wider settings, an 
integrated approach to academic practice (incorporating, for 
example, teaching, learning, research, scholarship, adminis­
tration etc.)
V.  A sustained and successful commitment to, and engagement 
in, continuing professional development related to academic, 
institutional and/or other professional practices
Individuals, as highly experienced academics, able to provide 
evidence of a sustained and effective record of impact at a 
strategic level in relation to teaching and learning, as part of a 
wider commitment to academic practice. This may be within their 
institution or wider (inter)national settings. Typically, those likely 
to be at Descriptor 4 (D4) include:
a.  Highly experienced and/or senior staff with wide-ranging 
academic or academic-related strategic leadership responsibili­
ties in connection with key aspects of teaching and supporting 
learning
b.  Staff responsible for institutional strategic leadership and 
policy-making in the area of teaching and learning
c.  Staff who have strategic impact and influence in relation to 
teaching and learning that extends beyond their own institution
Appendix 2:  (continued)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Appendix 3: Scholarship of Teaching and Learning Transport Map
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Bibliography
Addison, A. (1979) John Henry Brookes: Craftsman, Educator, Administrator. Oxford: Oxford 
Polytechnic Press.
Amiel, T. (2013) Identifying barriers to the remix of translated open educational resources, The 
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 14(1). Available at: 
www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/1351/242 (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Amulya, J. (2004) What Is Reflective Practice? [Online] retrieved 16 June 2014, from Center for 
Reflective Community Practice: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Andreotti, V. (2006) Soft versus critical global citizenship education, Policy and Practice: Devel­
opment Education Review, 3 (Autumn), 83–98.
Argyris, C. (1976) Double Loop Learning. Available at: http://www.instructionaldesign.org/
theories/double-loop.html (accessed 14 July 2014).
Aronson, E. (1978) The Jigsaw Classroom. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Available at: http://www.
jigsaw.org/ (accessed 14 March 2014).
Arum, R. and Roksa, J. (2011) Academically Adrift. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Atherton, J.S. (2013a) Learning and Teaching: Piaget’s Developmental Theory. Available at: 
http://www.learningandteaching.info/learning/piaget.htm (accessed 28 June 2014).
Atherton, J.S. (2013b) Learning and Teaching: SOLO taxonomy. Available at: http://www.learning
andteaching.info/learning/solo.htm (accessed 28 June 2014).
Bailey, C. (1984) Beyond the Present and the Particular. London: Routledge.
Bainbridge, A. (2014) Digital technology, human world making and the avoidance of learning, 
Journal of Learning and Development in Higher Education: Special Edition on Digital 
Technologies in Learning Development. Available at: http://www.aldinhe.ac.uk/ojs/index.
php (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Ball, L. (2010) Future Directions for Employability Research in the Creative Industries. London: 
HEA.
Ballard, J.G. (2014) Crash. London: Fourth Estate.
Barnett, R. (1997) Higher Education: A Critical Business. Buckingham: SRHE and Open Univer­
sity Press.
Barnett, R. (2000) Realizing the University in an Age of Supercomplexity. Buckingham: Open 
University Press.
Barnett, R. (2003) Beyond All Reason: Living with Ideology in the University. Maidenhead: Open 
University Press.
Barnett, R. (2007) A Will to Learn: Being a Student in an Age of Uncertainty. Maidenhead: 
McGraw-Hill/ Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
241
Barnett, R. (2011a) Being a University. London: Routledge.
Barnett, R. (2011b) Developing the university in turbulent times, Educational Developments, 
12(4): 1–5.
Barnett, R. (ed.) (2012) The Future University: Ideas and Possibilities. London: Routledge.
Barnett, R. (2014) Conditions of Flexibility. Available at: www.heacademy.ac.uk/conditions-
flexibility-securing-more-responsive-higher-education-system
Barnett, R. and Coate, K. (2005) Engaging the Curriculum in Higher Education. Maidenhead: 
Open University Press.
Baron, P. and Corbin, L. (2012) Student engagement: rhetoric and reality, Higher Education 
Research and Development, 31(6): 759–72.
Bauman, Z. (2000) Liquid Modernity. Cambridge: Polity.
Baxter Magolda, M.B. (1992) Knowing and Reasoning in College: Gender-related Patterns in 
Students’ Intellectual Development. New York: International Publishing Group.
Bayne, S. (2008) Higher education as a visual practice: seeing through the virtual learning 
environment, Teaching in Higher Education, 13(4): 395–410.
Bayne, S. and Ross, J. (2014) The Pedagogy of the Massive Open Online Course: The UK View. 
York: The Higher Education Academy (HEA). Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/
resources/detail/elt/the_pedagogy_of_the_MOOC_UK_view (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Becher, T. (1989) Academic Tribes and Territories: Intellectual Enquiry and the Cultures of 
Disciplines. Buckingham: SRHE and Open University Press.
Becher, T. and Trowler, P. (2001) Academic Tribes and Territories: Intellectual Enquiry and the 
Culture of Disciplines, 2nd edn. Buckingham: SRHE and Open University Press.
Beck, J. and Young, M. (2005) The assault on the professions and the restructuring of academic 
and professional identities: a Bernsteinian analysis, British Journal of Sociology of Educa­
tion, 26(2): 183–97.
Beetham, H. (2014) Post-digital provocations #1–4. Available at: http://design-4-learning.
blogspot.co.uk/2014/11/post-digital-provocations-4-in-recovery.html (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Bell, H., Stevenson, H. and Neary, M. (eds) (2009) The Future of Higher Education. London:
 Continuum.
Benjamin, W. (1921) Critique of violence, in P. Demetz (ed.) Reflections, Essays, Aphorisms, 
Autobiographical Writings, trans. E. Jephcott. New York: Schocken Books, pp. 277–300.
Berger, J. ([1965] 1998) The Success and Failure of Picasso. New York: Vintage Books.
Bergslien, B. (1998) Teaching to avoid the ‘CSI effect’, keeping the science in forensic science, 
Journal of Chemical Education, 83(5): 690–1.
Bernstein, B. (2003) Social class and pedagogic practice, in B. Bernstein The Structuring of Ped­
agogic Discourse, vol. IV: Class, Codes and Control. London: Routledge.
Bernstein, R. (1994) Dictatorship of Virtue. New York: Knopf.
Berrett, D. (2012) How ‘Flipping’ the Classroom Can Improve the Traditional Lecture. Available 
at: http://moodle.technion.ac.il/file.php/1298/Announce/How_Flipping_the_Classroom_Can_
Improve_the_Traditional_Lecture.pdf (accessed 14 July 2014).
Biggs, J. and Tang, C. (2007) Teaching for Quality Learning at University, 3rd edn. Buckingham: 
SRHE and Open University Press.
Biggs, J. and Tang, C. (2011) Teaching for Quality Learning at University, 4th edn. Maidenhead: 
SRHE and Open University Press.
Birenbaum, M. (2003) New insights into learning and teaching and their implications for 
assessment, in M. Segers, F. Dochy, and E. Cascallar (eds) Optimising New Modes of 
Assessment: In Search of Quality and Standards. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publish­
ers, pp. 13–36.
Birnbaum, R. (2001) Management Fads in Higher Education: Where They Come from, What 
They Do, and Why They Fail. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

242
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIS (Department for Business, Innovation and Skills) (2009) Higher Ambitions: The Future of 
Universities in a Knowledge Economy. Available at: http://dera.ioe.ac.uk/9465/ (accessed 
6 Jan. 2015).
BIS White Paper (2011) Students at the Heart of the System. London: BIS. Available at: https://
www.gov.uk/government/news/putting-students-at-the-heart-of-higher-education (accessed 
19 Nov. 2014).
Bishop, J.L. and Verleger, M.A. (2013) The Flipped Classroom: A Survey of the Research. Avail­
able 
at: 
http://www.studiesuccesho.nl/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/flipped-classroom-
artikel.pdf (accessed 14 July 2014).
Black. P. and Rust, C. (2006) Improving student learning through assessment. Proceedings of 
the 2005 13th International Symposium. Oxford: Oxford Centre for Staff and Learning 
Development.
Black, P. and Wiliam, D. (1998) Assessment and classroom learning, Assessment in Education: 
Principles, Policy and Practice, 5(1): 7–74.
Blake, N. (2002) Hubert Dreyfus on distance education: relays of educational embodiment, 
Educational Philosophy and Theory, 34(4): 379–85. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1469-5812.2002.tb00511.x (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Blanden, J. and Machin, S. (2004) Educational inequality and the expansion of UK higher educa­
tion, Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 51: 230–49.
Bloom, A. (1987) The Closing of the American Mind. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Bloom, B.S. (ed.) (1956) Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: the Classification of Educational 
Goals .Handbook I: Cognitive Domain. New York: McKay.
Bloom, W. (2001) The Endorphin Effect: A Breakthrough Strategy for Holistic Health and Spir­
itual Wellbeing. New York: Piatkus Books.
Bloom, W. (2005) Soulution: The Holistic Manifesto. London: Hay House.
Bok, D. (2005) Universities in the Market Place. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Boud, D. and Falchicov, N. (1989) Quantitative studies of student self-assessment in higher edu­
cation: a critical analysis of findings, Higher Education, 18: 529–49.
Boud, D., Keogh, R. and Walker, D. (eds) (1985) Reflection: Turning Experience into Learning. 
London: Kogan Page.
Bourdieu, P. and Passeron, J-C. (1979) The Inheritors: French Students and their Relation to 
Culture, trans R. Nice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bourner, T., Katz, T. and Watson, D. (eds) (2000) New Directions in Professional Higher Educa­
tion. Buckingham: SRHE and Open University Press.
Bovill, C. (2013) Students and staff co-creating curricula: a new trend or an old idea we never got 
around to implementing?, in C. Rust (ed.) Improving Student Learning through Research 
and Scholarship: 20 Years of ISL. Oxford: The Oxford Centre for Staff and Educational 
Development, pp. 96–108.
Bovill, C. (2014) An investigation of co-created curricula within higher education in the UK, 
Ireland and the USA, Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 51(1): 15–25.
Bovill, C., Aitken, G., Hutchison, J., Morrison, F., Roseweir, K., Scott, A. and Sotannde, S. (2010) 
Experiences of learning through collaborative evaluation from a Postgraduate Certificate 
in Professional Education, International Journal for Academic Development, 15(2): 143–54.
Bovill, C., Cook-Sather, A. and Felten, P. (2011) Changing participants in pedagogical planning: 
students as co-creators of teaching approaches, course design and curricula, International 
Journal for Academic Development, 16(2): 133–45.
Bowen, H.R. (1977) Investment in Learning: The Individual and Social Value of Higher Education. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Boyer, E.L. (1990) Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities for the Professoriate. Princeton University, 
NJ: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
243
Bragg, S. (2007) ‘Student voice’ and governmentality: the production of enterprising subjects? 
Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 28(3): 343–58.
Breen, M.P. and Littlejohn, A. (2000) The practicalities of negotiation, in M.P. Breen and A. Little­
john (eds) Classroom Decision-Making: Negotiation and Process Syllabuses in Practice. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brew, A. (2006) Research and Teaching: Beyond the Divide. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Brigden, D. and Purcell, N. (2013) Focus: Becoming a Reflective Practitioner Via the HEA. Avail­
able at http://www.medev.ac.uk/newsletter/article/32/ (accessed 9 May 2014).
Brockbank, A. and McGill, I. (1998) Facilitating Reflective Learning in Higher Education. Buck­
ingham: SRHE and Open University Press.
Bronner, S.E. (2004) Reclaiming the Enlightenment: Toward a Politics of Radical Engagement. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Brookfield, S. (1995) Becoming a Critically Reflective Teacher. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Brookfield, S. and Preskill, S. (1999) Discussion as a Way of Teaching: Tools and Techniques for 
University Teachers. Buckingham: SRHE and Open University Press.
Brown, G. with Bull, J. and Pendlebury, M. (1997) Assessing Student Learning in Higher Educa­
tion. London: Routledge.
Brown, H. and Ciuffetelli, D.C. (2009) Foundational Methods: Understanding Teaching and 
Learning. Toronto: Pearson Education.
Brown, P., Lauder, H. and Ashton, D. (2008) Education, Globalisation and the Knowledge Econ­
omy. Teaching and Learning Research Programme (TLRP). Available at: www.tlrp.org 
(accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Brown, R. and Carasso, H. (2013) Everything for Sale: The Marketisation of Higher Education. 
London: Routledge.
Brown, S. and Smith, B. (eds) (2013) Research, Teaching and Learning in Higher Education. 
London: Routledge.
Browne Review of HE (2010) Securing A Sustainable Future for Higher Education. Available at: 
http://www.delni.gov.uk/browne-report-student-fees (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
Bryan, C. (2006) Developing group learning through assessment, in C. Bryan and K. Clegg (eds) 
Innovative Assessment in Higher Education. London: Routledge.
Bryan, C. and Assiter, A. (1995) The Accreditation and Development of Cognitive Skills Acquired 
in the Workplace: Report on the ALE Project. London: University of North London Press.
Bryan, C. and Clegg, K. (eds) (2006) Innovative Assessment in Higher Education. London: 
Routledge.
Bryan, C. and Green, D. (2003) How guided reflection can enhance group work, in C. Rust (ed.) 
Improving Student Learning: Theory and Practice – 10 Years on. Oxford: Oxford Centre for 
Staff and Learning Development, pp. 316–25.
Bryman, A. (2007) Effective leadership in higher education: a literature review, Studies in Higher 
Education, 32(6): 693–710.
Bryson, C. (ed.) (2014) Understanding and Developing Student Engagement. London: Routledge/
SEDA.
Bryson, C. and Hand, L. (2007) The role of engagement in inspiring teaching and learning, Inno­
vations in Teaching and Education International, 44(4): 349–62.
Buckley, A. (2013) Engagement for enhancement: report of a UK survey pilot. Available at: https://
www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/Engagement_for_enhancement_FINAL_0.pdf
Buckley, A. (2014) UK Engagement Survey 2014; The Second Pilot Year. Available at:https://www.
heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/UKES_report_2014_v2.pdf
Bures, E., Abrami, P., Barclay, A. and Bures, E. (2010) Assessing online dialogue in higher educa­
tion, in J. Sanchez and K. Zhang (eds) Proceedings of World Conference on E-Learning in 
Corporate, Government, Healthcare, and Higher Education 2010. Chesapeake, VA: AACE.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

244
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Burgess, A. ([1962] 2001) A Clockwork Orange. London: Penguin Books.
Burroughs, W. (2010) The Naked Lunch: Restored Text. London: The Fourth Estate.
Burroughs, W. (n.d.) Creative Writing, Creating Reading Course. Available at: http:/
/dangerousminds.net/comments/take_a_creative_writing_course_with_william_burroughs 
(accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Campbell, F., Eland, J., Rumpus, A. and Shacklock, R. (2009) Hearing the Student Voice, Involv­
ing Students in Curriculum Design and Delivery. ESCalate. Available at: http://www.
sparqs.ac.uk/ch/E3%20Hearing%20the%20student%20voice%20involving%20students%20
in%20curriculum%20design%20and%20development.pdf (accessed 15 March 2014).
Carter, S.L. (1991) Reflections of an Affirmative Action Baby. New York: Basic Books.
Cheney, L.V. (1992) Telling the Truth: A Report on the State of the Humanities in Higher Educa­
tion. Washington, DC: National Endowment for the Humanities.
Choi, J.M. and Murphy, J.W. (1992) The Politics and Philosophy of Political Correctness. West­
port, CT: Praeger.
Clegg, K. and Bryan, C. (2006) Reflections, rationales and realities, in C. Bryan and K. Clegg (eds) 
Innovative Assessment in Higher Education. London: Routledge, pp. 216–27.
Clegg, S., Tan, J. and Saeidi, S. (2002) Reflecting or acting? Reflective practice and continuing 
professional development in higher education, in Reflective Practice: International and 
Multidisciplinary Perspectives, 3(1), published online (2010) http://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/abs/10.1080/14623940220129924#.U20Pj1cRR4w (accessed 9 May 2014).
Collini, S. (2012) What Are Universities For? London: Penguin Books.
Colombino, L. (2012) The house as skin: JG Ballard, Existentialism and Archigrams mini environ­
ments, European Journal of English Studies, 16(1): 21–31.
Cook-Sather, A., Bovill, C. and Felten, P. (2014) Engaging Students as Partners in Learning and 
Teaching: A Guide for Faculty. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cosgrove, D. (1981) Teaching geographical thought through student interviews, Journal of Geog­
raphy in Higher Education, 5(1): 19–22.
Cotton, D.R.E. and Winter, J. (2010) It’s not just bits of paper and light bulbs: a review of Sustain­
ability Pedagogies and their Potential for use in Higher Education, in P. Jones, D. Selby and 
S. Sterling (eds) Sustainability Education: Perspectives and Practice across Higher Educa­
tion. London: Earthscan, pp. 39–54.
Cowen, J. (2013) Facilitating reflective journaling, Journal of Learning Development in Higher 
Education, 5: 1–17.
CRAC (2013) The Wider Benefits of International Higher Education in the UK, BIS Research 
Paper 128. London: HMSO.
Craig, C. and Gunn, A. (2010) Higher skills and the knowledge economy: the challenge of offshor­
ing, Higher Education Management and Policy, 22(3). Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/
hemp-22-5km39qs88zjb (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Cuthbert, R. (2010) Students as customers? Higher Education Review, 42(3): 3–25.
Dalla Costa, M. and James, S. (1975) The Power of Women and the Subversion of the Community. 
Bristol: Falling Wall Press.
Dall ‘Alba, G. and Robyn, B. (2007) An ontological turn for higher education, Studies in Higher 
Education, 32(6): 679–91.
Dean, J. (2012) The Communist Horizon. London: Verso.
Dearing, R. (National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education) (1997) Higher Education in 
the Learning Society: Report of the National Committee (The Dearing Report) London, 
HMSO. Available at: http://www.educationengland.org.uk/documents/dearing1997/index.
html (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
Deeley, S. (2014) Summative co-assessment: a deep learning approach to enhancing employabil­
ity skills and attributes, Active Learning in Higher Education, 15(1): 39–51.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
245
Deem, R. and Brehony, K. (2005) Management as ideology: the case of ‘new managerialism’ in 
higher education, Oxford Review of Education, 31(2): 217–35.
Deem, R., Hillyard, S. and Reed, M. (2008) Knowledge, Higher Education, and the New Manage­
rialism: The Changing Management of UK Universities. Oxford: Open University Press.
Delanty, G. (2001) Challenging Knowledge: The University in the Knowledge Society. Bucking­
ham: Open University Press.
Department for Education (DFE) (1992) Further and Higher Education Act. London: HMSO. 
Available at: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1992/13/contents (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
Department for Education and Skills (DfES) (2004) Equipping Our Teachers for the Future. 
London: HMSO.
DfES (2003) The Future of Higher Education, Cm5753. Norwich: The Stationery Office.
Dinerstein, A. and Neary, M. (2002) The Labour Debate: The Theory and Reality of Capitalist 
Work. Farnham: Ashgate.
Dochy, F. et al. (1999) The use of self-, peer and co-assessment in higher education: a review, 
Studies in Higher Education, 24(3): 331–50.
Double, D. and Wilson, M. (2006) Berthold Brecht on theatre, in P. Thomson et al. The Cambridge 
Companion to Brecht, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Downes, S. (2005) An introduction to connective knowledge, Stephen’s Web, 22 Dec. Available at: 
http://www.downes.ca/cgi-bin/page.cgi?post=33034 (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Downes, S. (2012) Connectivism and Connective Knowledge: Essays on Meaning and Learning 
Networks. Ottawa, Ontario: National Research Council Canada. Available at: http://www.
downes.ca/files/books/Connective_Knowledge-19May2012.pdf (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Drucker, P. (1969) The Age of Discontinuity: Guidelines to Our Changing Society. London: 
Heinemann.
Drucker, P. (1989) The Practice of Management. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Drucker, P. (1990) The New Realities. London: Mandarin.
Drucker, P. [1974] (2011) Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices. London: Routledge.
D’Souza, D. (1992) Illiberal Education. New York: Vintage Books.
Duah, F. and Croft, T. (2011) Students as partners in mathematics design. Paper presented 
at CETL-MSOR Conference. Available at: https://dspace.lboro.ac.uk/dspace-jspui/bitstream/
2134/9904/3/Duah_Croft_2011final.pdf (accessed 15 March 2014).
Duke, C. (1992) The Learning University: Towards a New Paradigm? Buckingham: SRHE and 
Open University Press.
Dumelow, I., MacLennan, H. and Stanley, N. (2000) Career and Employment Patterns among 
British Graduates in Art, Craft and Design: Planning the Future. Corsham: NSEAD.
Dunne, E. and Owen, D. (eds) (2013) The Student Engagement Handbook: Practice in Higher 
Education. Bingley: Emerald.
Dunne, E. and Zandstra, R. (2011) Students as Change Agents: New Ways of Engaging with 
Learning and Teaching in Higher Education. Bristol: A Joint University of Exeter/
ESCalate/Higher Education Academy Publication. Available at: escalate.ac.uk/8064 
(accessed 14 Feb. 2014).
Dwyer, C. (2001) Linking research and teaching: a staff-student interview project, Journal of 
Geography in Higher Education, 25(3): 357–66.
Dyer-Witheford, N. (2006) The circulation of the common, paper presented at Immaterial Labour, 
Multitudes and New Social Subjects: Class Composition in Cognitive Capitalism conference, 
King’s College, University of Cambridge 29 and 30 April. Available at: http://www.fims.uwo.
ca/people/faculty/dyerwitheford/Commons2006.pdf (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Eagleton, T. (1996) The Illusions of Postmodernism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Easton, F. (1997) Educating the whole child, ‘head, heart and hands’: learning from the Waldorf 
experience, Theory into Practice, 36(2): 87–95.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

246
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ecclestone, K. and Hayes, D. (2008) The Dangerous Rise of Therapeutic Education. London: 
Routledge.
Ecclestone, K., Hayes, D. and Furedi, F. (2005) Knowing me, knowing you: the rise of therapeutic 
professionalism in the education of adults, Studies in the Education of Adults, 37(2): 182–200.
Education and Training Foundation (2014) Professional Standards for Teachers and Trainers in 
Education and Training – England 2014. Available at: http://www.et-foundation.co.uk/
wp-content/uploads/2014/05/4991-Prof-standards-A4_4-2.pdf (accessed 5 Jan. 2014).
Eggins, H. and Macdonald, R. (2003) The Scholarship of Academic Development. Buckingham: 
SRHE and Open University Press.
Elton, L. (1992) Research, teaching and scholarship in an expanding higher education system, 
Higher Education Quarterly, 46(3): 252–68.
Elton, L. (2001) Research and teaching: conditions for positive link, Teaching in Higher Educa­
tion, 6(1): 43–5.
Elton, L. (2006) Academic professionalism: the need for change, in C. Bryan and K. Clegg (eds) 
Innovative Assessment in Higher Education. London: Routledge, pp. 209–15.
Elton, L. (2008) Collegiality and complexity: Humboldt’s relevance to British universities today, 
Higher Education Quarterly, 62(3): 224–36.
Eraut, M. (1994) Developing Professional Knowledge and Competence. New York: Falmer Press.
Eraut, M. (2000) Non-formal learning and tacit knowledge in professional work, British Journal 
of Educational Psychology, 70; 113–36.
European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (ECDVT) (2013) The shift to learn­
ing outcomes and its impacts: taking stock of European policies and practices, Thessaloniki, 
21–22 November 2013.
Falchicov, N. and Boud, D. (1989) Student self-assessment in higher education: a meta-analysis, 
Review of Educational Research, 59(4): 431–70.
Fanghanel, J. (2012) Being an Academic. London: Routledge.
FELTAG (Further Education Learning Technology Action Group) (2013) Paths Forward to a Dig­
ital Future for Further Education and Skills. Available at: http://feltag.org.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2012/01/FELTAG-REPORT-FINAL.pdf. (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Ferman, T. (2002) Academic professional development practice: what lecturers find valuable, 
International Journal for Academic Development, 7(2): 146–58.
Fielden, J. (2011) Leadership and Management of International Partnerships. Leadership Foun­
dation for Higher Education. Series 2 publication 7. London: LFHE.
Fielding, M. (2004) ‘New Wave’ student voice and the renewal of civic society, London Review of 
Education, 2(3): 197–217.
Fish, S. (1994) There’s No Such Thing as Free Speech and It’s a Good Thing. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Fisher, M. (2009) Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? Ropley: Zero Books.
Fleiszer, D., Fleiszer, T. and Russell, R. (1997) Doughnut rounds: a self-directed learning approach 
to teaching critical care in surgery, Medical Teacher, 19(3): 190–3.
Fontana, D. (1988) Psychology for Teachers. 3rd Edition. Leicester: BPS.
Forman, A.E., Baker, P.M.A., Pater, J. and Smith, K. (2011) Beautiful to me: identity, disability, 
and gender in virtual environments, E-politics, 2(2): 1–17.
Fourier, C. (1971) Design for Utopia: Selected Writings. Studies in the Libertarian and Utopian 
Tradition. New York: Schocken.
Fraser, S. and Bosanquet, A. (2006) The curriculum? That’s just a unit outline, isn’t it?, Studies in 
Higher Education, 31: 269–84.
Freire, P. (1970) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Freire, P. (2003) From pedagogy of the oppressed, in A. Darder, M. Baltodano and R.D. Torres 
(eds) The Critical Pedagogy Reader. New York: Routledge Falmer, pp. 57–68.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
247
Friedman, M. and Friedman, R.D. (1980) Free to Choose: A Personal Statement. New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
Fromm, E. (1977) To Have Or To Be? New York: Harper and Row.
Frosh, S. (1991) Identity Crisis: Modernity, Psychoanalysis and the Self. London: Macmillan.
Fry, H., Ketteridge, S. and Marshall, S. (eds) (2014) A Handbook for Teaching and Learning in 
Higher Education: Enhancing Academic Practice, 4th edn. London: Routledge.
Fuchs, C. (2008) Internet and Society: Social Theory in the Information Age. New York: 
Routledge.
Fuchs, C. (2011) Cognitive capitalism or informational capitalism? The role of class in the infor­
mation economy, in M. Peters and E. Bulut (eds) Cognitive Capitalism, Education and 
Digital Labor. London: Peter Lang, pp. 75–119.
Fullan, M. (2008) The New Meaning of Educational Change, 4th edn. London: Teachers College Press.
Fuller, S. (2013) Deviant interdisciplinarity as philosophical practice: prolegomena to deep intel­
lectual history, Synthese, 190: 1899–916.
Fulton-Suri, J. (2011) Design Research Through Practice. Burlington, VA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Furedi, F. (2004) Where Have All the Intellectuals Gone? London: Continuum.
Gardner, H. (1993) Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice. New York: Basic Books.
Gastil, J. (1997) A definition and illustration of democratic leadership, in K. Grint (ed) Leadership. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwartzman, S., Scott, P. and Trow, M. (1994) The New 
Production of Knowledge. London: Sage.
Gibbs, G. (2006) How assessment frames student learning, in C. Bryan and K. Clegg (eds) Inno­
vative Assessment in Higher Education, London: Routledge, pp. 28–30.
Gibbs, G. (2010) Dimensions of Quality. York: HEA. Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/
sites/default/files/Dimensions_of_Quality.pdf (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
Gibbs, G. (2012) Implications of ‘Dimensions of Quality’ in a Market Environment. York: 
HEA. Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/implications-dimensions-quality-market-
environment (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
Gibbs, G. and Dunbar-Goddet, H. (2007) The Effects of Programme Assessment Environments on 
Student Learning. York: Higher Education Academy.
Gibbs, G. and Simpson, C. (2003) Measuring the response of students to assessment: the Assess­
ment Experience Questionnaire. Available at: https://www.uzh.ch/phil/elearning/ssl-dir/
wiki/uploads/Main/Gibbs_and_Simpson_2003.pdf (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Gibbs, G., and Simpson, C. (2004) Conditions under which assessment supports students’ learn­
ing, Learning and Teaching in Higher Education, 1: 3–31.
Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. 
­Cambridge: Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (1991) The Consequences of Modernity. London: Polity Press.
Gilbert, J. K. (2006) On the nature of ‘context’ in chemical education, International Journal of 
Science Education, 28(9): 957–76.
Gilligan, G. (1982) In a Different Voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Giroux, H. A. (1981) Ideology, Culture, and the Process of Schooling. London: Falmer.
Gitlin, T. (1995) The Twilight of Common Dreams. New York: Metropolitan Books.
Glancey, J. (2010) University architecture shapes up for a revolution, The Guardian, 31 August. 
Available at: http://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/aug/31/university-architecture-
revolution-students (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Gordon, N. (2014) Flexible Pedagogies: Technology Enhanced Learning. https://www.heacademy.
ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/TEL_report_0.pdf
Gorz, A. (1994) Farewell to the Working Class: An Essay on Post-Industrial Socialism. London: 
Pluto Classics.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

248
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gosling, D. (2001) Educational development units in the UK: what are they doing five years on? 
International Journal for Academic Development, 6(1): 74–90.
Grenfell, M. and James, D. (1998) Bourdieu and Education: Acts of Practical Theory. London: 
Routledge Falmer.
Grossman, R. (2009) Structures for facilitating student reflection, College Teaching, 57(1): 
15–22.
Grove, J. (2014) Universities to get near 6 per cent cut to most teaching budgets, Times Higher 
Education, 14 March 2014.
Grugulis, I. (2000) The management NVQ: a critique of the myth of relevance, Journal of Voca­
tional Education and Training, 52(1): 79–99.
Gulikers, J. T.M., Kester, L., Kirschner, P.A. and Bastiaens, T.J. (2008) The effect of practical expe­
rience on perceptions of assessment authenticity, study approach, and learning outcome, 
Learning and Instruction, 18: 172–186.
Gunn, V. and Fisk, A. (2013) Considering Teaching Excellence in Higher Education: 2007–2013: 
A Literature Review Since the CHERI Report 2007. Available at: www.heacademy.ac.uk/
sites/default/files/resources/TELR_final_acknowledgements.pdf
Haggis, T. (2003) Constructing images of ourselves? A critical investigation into ‘approaches 
to learning’ research in higher education, British Educational Research Journal, 29: 
8–104.
Haggis, T. (2009) What have we been thinking of? A critical overview of 40 years of student learn­
ing research in higher education, Studies in Higher Education, 34(4): 377–90.
Hall, R. and Stahl, B. (2012) Against commodification: the university, cognitive capitalism and 
emergent technologies, tripleC 10(2): 184–202.
Halsey, A.H. and Trow, M. (1971) British Academics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Halsey, A.H. (1992) Decline of Donnish Dominion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hardingham, K. and Rattenbury, S. (2007) Cedric Price: Potteries Thinkbelt: Supercrit#1. 
London: Routledge.
Hardt, M. and Negri, A. (2001) Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hargittai, E. (2008) The digital reproduction of inequality, in D. Grusky (ed.) Social Stratifica­
tion. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, pp. 936–44.
Hargittai, E. (2010) Digital na(t)ives? Variation in internet skills and uses among members of the 
‘Net Generation’, Sociological Inquiry, 80(1): 92–113.
Hargreaves, A. (1994) Changing Teachers, Changing Times: Teachers’ Work and Culture in the 
Postmodern Age. London: Cassell.
Harland, T. and Pickering, N. (2011) Values in Higher Education Teaching. London: Routledge.
Harper, S. et al. (2008) Student Engagement in Higher Education: Theoretical Perspectives and 
Practical Approaches for Diverse Populations. London: Routledge.
Harvey, D. (1990) The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural 
Change. Oxford: Blackwell.
Harvey, D. (2000) Spaces of Hope. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Hatherley, O. (2011) A Guide to the New Ruins of Great Britain. London: Verso.
Hattie, J. and Marsh, H. W. (1996) The relationship between research and teaching: a meta-analysis, 
Review of Educational Research, 66(4:) 507–42.
Hayek, F.A. (1944) The Road to Serfdom. London: Routledge.
Haywood, J. (2012) No such thing as a free MOOC, JISC Blog, 20 July 2012. Available at: http://
www.jisc.ac.uk/blog/no-such-thing-as-a-free-mooc-20-jul-2012 (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
HEA (Higher Education Academy) (n.d.) Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk
HEA (Higher Education Academy) (2005) National Professional Standards Framework for 
Standards in Teaching and Supporting Learning in Higher Education: Consultation 
Document. York: Higher Education Academy.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
249
HEA (Higher Education Academy) (2011) UK Professional Standards Framework (UKPSF). 
Available 
at: 
https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/professional-recognition/uk-professional-
standards-framework-ukpsf (accessed 8 Dec. 2014).
HEA and HEPI (2014) The HEPI-HEA Student Academic Experience Survey, 2014. Available at: 
http://www.hepi.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/05
HEA/QAA (2014) Education for Sustainable Development: Guidance for UK Higher Education 
Providers. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.qaa.ac.uk/en/Publications/Documents/Education-
sustainable-development-Guidance-June-14.pdf (accessed 28 Nov. 2014).
Healey, M. (2000) Developing the scholarship of teaching in higher education: a discipline-based 
approach, Higher Education Research and Development, 19(2).
Healey, M. (2003) The scholarship of teaching: issues around an evolving concept, Journal on 
Excellence in College Teaching, 14(2/3): 5–26.
Healey, M. (2014) Students as Change Agents in Teaching and Learning in Higher Education. 
Available at: http://www.mickhealey.co.uk/resources (accessed 15 March 2014).
Healey, M. and Addis, M. (2004) Use of peer and self-assessment to distribute group marks among 
individual team members: ten years’ experience, in M. Healey and J. Roberts (eds) Engaging 
Students in Active Learning: Case Studies in Geography, Environment and Related Disci­
plines. Cheltenham: University of Gloucestershire, Geography Discipline Network and 
School of Environment, pp. 116121. Available at: http://www2.glos.ac.uk/gdn/active/student.
htm (accessed 15 March 2014).
Healey, M., Flint, A. and Harrington, K. (2014a) Engagement Through Partnership: Students as 
Partners in Learning and Teaching in Higher Education. Available at: https://www.
heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/Engagement_through_partnership.pdf 
(accessed 9 Jan. 2015)
Healey, M. and Jenkins, A. (2009) Developing Undergraduate Research and Inquiry. York: Higher 
Education 
Academy. 
Available 
at: 
www.heacademy.ac.uk/assets/York/documents/
resources/publications/DevelopingUndergraduate_Final.pdf (accessed 14 Feb. 2014).
Healey, M., Jenkins, A. and Lea, J. (2014b) Developing Research-Based Curricula In College-Based 
Higher Education. York: HEA. Available at: http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/resources/detail/
heinfe/Developing_research-based_curricula_in_CBHE (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
Healey, M., Lannin, L., Stibbe, A. and Derounian, J. (2013) Developing and Enhancing Under­
graduate Final-Year Projects and Dissertations. York: Higher Education Academy. 
HEFCE (Higher Education Funding Council for England) (2006) Higher Education in Further 
Education Colleges: Consultation on HEFCE Policy, available at: http://www.hefce.ac.uk/
pubs/hefce/2006/06_48/ (accessed 1 Sept. 2014).
HEFCE (Higher Education Funding Council for England) (2013) Student engagement. Available 
at: www.hefce.ac.uk/about/howweoperate/si/studentengagement/ (accessed 15 March 
2014).
HEFCE (n.d.) What we do. Available at: http://www.hefce.ac.uk/whatwedo/wp
HEPI (Higher Education Policy Institute) (2014) Available at: http://www.hepi.ac.uk
Hertz, N. (2001) The Silent Takeover: Global Capitalism and the Death of Democracy. London: 
Heinemann.
HESA (2014) KIS Collection 2014/15. Cheltenham: HESA. Available at: https://www.hesa.ac.uk/
index.php?option=com_studrec&Itemid=232&mnl=14061 (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
Hodge, D.C., Nadler, M.K., Shore, C. and Taylor, B.A.P. (2011) Institutionalizing large-scale 
curricular change: the Top 25 project at Miami University, Change Magazine, 43(5): 
28–35.
Hollway, W. and Jefferson, T. (2000) Doing Qualitative Research Differently: Free Association, 
Narrative and the Interview Method. London: Sage.
Holmwood, J. (ed.) (2011) A Manifesto for the Public University. London: Bloomsbury.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

250
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Honeychurch, S. (2012) Taking forward the jigsaw classroom: the development and implementa­
tion of a method of collaborative learning for first year philosophy tutorials, Discourse, 
11(2): 40–52. Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/resources (accessed 15 March 
2014).
hooks, b. (1994) Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom. New York: 
Routledge.
hooks, b. (1996) Postmodern blackness, in W. T. Anderson (ed.) The Fontana Post-Modernism 
Reader. London: Fontana Press.
Hordern, J. (2014) How is vocational knowledge recontextualised?, Journal of Vocational 
­Education and Training, 66(1): 22–38.
Hoult, E. (2012) Adult Learning and La Recherche Féminine: Reading Resilience and Hélène 
Cixous. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Humboldt, W. von [1810] (1970) On the spirit and organisational framework of intellectual insti­
tutions in Berlin, Minerva, 8, 242–67.
Hussey, T. and Smith, P. (2002) The trouble with learning outcomes: active, Learning in Higher 
Education, 3(3): 220–33.
Hyland, T. (1994) Competence, Education and NVQs: Dissenting Perspectives. London: Continuum.
Jarvis, P. (1992) Reflective practice and nursing, Nurse Education Today, 12: 174–81.
Jenkins, A. (2004) A Guide to the Research Evidence on Teaching-Research Relationships. York: 
Higher Education Academy. Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/node/3617 
(accessed 6 Jan. 2014).
Jenkins, A. et al. (1998) Teaching and research: student perspectives and policy implications, 
Studies in Higher Education, 23(2). 
Jenkins, A. and Healey, M. (2005) Institutional Strategies to Link Teaching and Research. 
York: The Higher Education Academy. Available at: www.heacademy.ac.uk/assets/York/
documents/ourwork/research/Institutional_strategies.pdf (accessed 15 March 2014).
Jenkins, A., Healey, M. and Zetter, R. (2007) Linking Teaching and Research in Departments and 
Disciplines. York: The Higher Education Academy. Available at: https://www.heacademy.
ac.uk/node/3890 (accessed 9 Jan. 15).
Jessop, T. (2012) TESTA: Transforming the Experience of Students through Assessment – Final 
Project Report. York: Higher Education Academy.
Jessop, T., El Hakim, Y. and Gibbs, G. (2014a) TESTA in 2014: A way of thinking about assessment 
and feedback, Educational Developments, 15(2): 21–3.
Jessop, T., El Hakim, Y. and Gibbs, G. (2014b) TESTA: the whole is greater than the sum of the 
parts, Assessment and Evaluation, 39(1): 77–88.
Jessup, G. (1991) Outcomes: NVQs and the Emerging Model of Education and Training. London: 
Falmer Press.
Johnson, R. (1979) ‘Really Useful Knowledge’: radical education and working class culture, 1790–
1848, in J. Clarke, C. Critcher and R. Johnson (eds) Working Class Culture: Studies in 
History and Theory. London: Hutchinson.
Jones, P., Selby, D., and Sterling, S. (2010) More than the Sum of their Parts? Interdisciplinarity 
and Sustainability, in Jones, P., Selby, D., and Sterling, S. (eds.) Sustainability Education: 
Perspectives and Practice across Higher Education. London: Earthscan, pp. 17–38.
Kant, I. ([1784] 2009) An Answer to the Question: ‘What is Enlightenment?’ [trans. H.B. Nisbet] 
London: Penguin.
Kavanagh, D. (2012) The university as fool, in R. Barnett (ed.) The Future University: Ideas and 
Possibilities. London: Routledge.
Kay, G. and Mott, J. (1982) Political Order and the Law of Labour. London: Macmillan.
KCL (2014) Peer Teaching. Available at: http://www.kcl.ac.uk/medicine/research/divisions/
meded/innovation/peer.aspx (accessed 15 March 2014).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
251
Keddie, N. (ed.) (1974) Tinker, Tailor…The Myth of Cultural Deprivation. London: Penguin.
Kelly, G.A. (2003) A brief introduction to personal construct theory, in F. Fransella (ed.) Interna­
tional Handbook of Personal Construct Psychology. New York: John Wiley and Sons, pp. 3–20.
Kennedy, D. (1997) Academic Duty. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kezar, A. (2014) How Colleges Change: Understanding, Leading and Enacting Change. London: 
Routledge.
Kinsman, B. (1965) Wind Waves: Their Generation and Propagation Across the Ocean Surface. 
New York: Prentice Hall.
Klein, N. (2001) No Logo. London: Flamingo.
Knight, P. (2001) A Briefing on Key Concepts Formative and Summative, Criterion and 
Norm-Referenced Assessment, Assessment Series No.7 LTSN Generic Centre. Available at: 
https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/resources (accessed 6 Jan. 2014).
Knight, P., Tait, J. and Yorke, M. (2006) The professional learning of teachers in higher education, 
Studies in Higher Education, 31(4): 319–39.
Knight, P. and Yorke, M. (2003) Assessment of Learning and Employability. Buckingham: SRHE 
and Open University Press.
Knox, J. (2014) Digital culture clash: ‘massive’ education in the e-Learning and Digital Cultures 
MOOC, Distance Education, 35(2): 164–77. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01587919.
2014.917704 (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Knox, J., Bayne, S., MacLeod, H., Ross, J. and Sinclair, C. (2012) MOOC pedagogy: the challenges 
of developing for Coursera, ALT Online Newsletter, 28, 8 Aug. 2012. Available at: http://
newsletter.alt.ac.uk/2012/08/mooc-pedagogy-the-challenges-of-developing-for-coursera/ 
(accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Kolb, D. (1984) Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and Development. 
London: Prentice Hall.
Kop, R. (2011) The challenges to connectivist learning on open online networks: learning experi­
ences during a massive open online course, International Review of Research in Open 
and Distance Learning, 12(3): 19–38. Available at: http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/
article/view/882/1689 (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Krathwohl, D.R., Bloom, B.S. and Masia, B.B. (1964) Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: The Clas­
sification Of Educational Goals– Handbook II: Affective Domain. New York: McKay Publishers.
Kreber, C. (ed.) (2008) The University and its Disciplines: Teaching and Learning Within and 
Beyond Disciplinary Boundaries. London: Routledge.
Kreber, C. (2013) Authenticity in and Through Teaching in Higher Education: The Transforma­
tive Potential of the Scholarship of Teaching. London: Routledge.
Krych, A.J., March, C.N., Bryan, R.E., Peake, B., Pawlina, W. and Carmichael, S.W. (2005) Recip­
rocal peer teaching: students teaching students in the gross anatomy laboratory, Clinical 
Anatomy, 18(4): 296–301.
Kuhn, T.S. ([1962] 2012) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions; 50th Anniversary Edition. 
­Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lambert, C. (2011) Psycho classroom, Social and Cultural Geography, 12(1): 27–45.
Laurillard, D. (2002) Rethinking University Teaching: A Conversational Framework for the 
Effective Use of Learning Technologies, 2nd edn. London: Routledge Falmer.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. 
­Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lawton, D. (1983) Curriculum Studies and Educational Planning. London: Hodder and 
Stoughton.
Lawton, R. (2011) Don’t underestimate my potential, Educational Developments, 12(2): 16–17.
Lea, J. (2009) Political Correctness and Higher Education: British and American Perspectives. 
London: Routledge.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

252
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Lea, J. (2011) Guidance for Awarding Organisations and Practitioners with Regard to the 
Alignment of Qualifications Available for Teaching in the HE and the FE Sector in 
England: Report for Lifelong Learning UK. London: Lifelong Learning UK. Available at: 
www.heacademy.ac.uk/resources (accessed 8 Dec. 2014).
Lea, J. (2012a) 77 Things to Think About…Teaching and Learning in higher education. Canter­
bury: Canterbury Christ Church University. Available at: www.canterbury.ac.uk/Support/
learning-teaching-enhancement-unit/77things.aspx (accessed 13 Aug. 2013).
Lea, J. (2012b) The student as customer, British style, The Chronicle of Higher Education, 11 July 
2012.
Leadbeater, C. (2008) The Difference Divided: Why Immigration Is Vital to Innovation. Nesta 
provocation 06.
Lefebvre, H. (1991) The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lefebvre, H. (1996) Writings on Cities. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lefebvre, H. (2003) The Urban Revolution. Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press. 
Lewis, D. and Allan, B. (2005) Virtual Learning Communities: A Guide for Practitioners. 
Maidenhead: SRHE Open University Press.
Light, G. (2003) Realizing academic development: a model for embedding research practice in the 
practice of teaching, in H. Eggins and R. Macdonald (eds) The Scholarship of Academic 
Development, Buckingham: SRHE and Open University Press, pp. 152–62.
Linebaugh, P. (2014) Stop Thief: The Commons, Enclosures and Resistance. Oakland, CA: PM 
Press.
Lingfield, R. [Chair] (2012a) Professionalism in Further Education: Interim Report of the Inde­
pendent Review Panel. London: BIS. Available at: http://www.educationengland.org.uk/doc­
uments/pdfs/2012-lingfield1-professionalism-fe-interim.pdf (accessed 14 July 2014).
Lingfield, R. [Chair] (2012b) Professionalism in Further Education: Final Report of the Indepen­
dent Review Panel. London: BIS. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/34641/12-1198-professionalism-in-further-
education-final.pdf (accessed 14 July 2014).
Little, S. (ed.) (2011) Staff-student Partnerships in Higher Education. London: Continuum.
Locke, W. (2008) The Changing Academic Profession in the UK and Beyond. London: 
Universities UK.
Locke, W. (2014) Shifting academic careers: implications for enhancing professionalism in teach­
ing and supported learning. Available at: www.heacademy.ac.uk/node/10079.
Lombardi, J.V. (2013) How Universities Work. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lyotard, J. (1984) The Postmodern Condition. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Macfarlane, B. (2007) The Academic Citizen: The Virtue of Service in University Life. London: 
Routledge.
Macfarlane, B. (2012) Intellectual Leadership in Higher Education: Renewing the Role of the 
University Professor. London: Routledge/SRHE.
Mainka, C. (2007) Putting staff first in staff development for the effective use of technology in 
teaching, British Journal of Educational Technology, 38(1): 158–60.
Manathunga, C. and Brew, A. (2014) Beyond tribes and territories: new metaphors for new times, 
in P. Trowler, M. Saunders and V. Bamber (eds) Tribes and Territories in the 21st Century: 
Rethinking the Significance of Disciplines in Higher Education. London: Routledge.
Mann, S. (2001) Alternative perspectives on the student experience: alienation and engagement, 
Studies in Higher Education, 26(1): 7–19.
Mansfield, N. (2003) The subjectivity of money: critical psychology and the economies of 
post-structuralism, Critical Psychology, 8: 129–46.
Marsh, A. (2009) People Who Love Objects Parts 1–3. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Object_sexuality (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
253
Marsh, A. (2010) Love among the Objectum Sexuals, Electronic Journal of Human Sexuality, 13. 
Available at: http://www.ejhs.org/volume13/ObjSexuals.htm (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Marshall, L. and Morris, C. (eds) (2011) Taking Wellbeing Forward in Higher Education: Reflec­
tions on Theory and Practice. Brighton: University of Brighton Press.
Martin, E., Prosser, M., Conrad, L., Trigwell, K. and Benjamin, J. (1998) Developing Scholarship 
in Teaching. [Online, no longer available].
Marton, F. and Saljo, R. (1976) On qualitative differences in learning: II: Outcome as a function of 
the learner’s conception of the task, British Journal of Educational Psychology, 46: 115–27.
Marx, K. ([1867] 1974) Capital. Vol. 1. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Marx, K. (1993) Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy. London: Penguin 
Classics.
Marx, K. ([1875] 2009) Critique of the Gotha Programme. London: Dodo Press.
Marx, K. and Engels, F. ([1848] 2004) The Communist Manifesto. London: Penguin.
Maslow A.H. (1943) A theory of human motivation, Psychological Review, 50: 370–96.
Mason, M. (ed.) (2008) Critical Thinking and Learning. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Mathews, S. (2005) ‘The Fun Palace: Cedric Price’s Experiment In Architecture and Technology’,  
Technoetic Arts: A Journal of Speculative Research, 3(2): 73–91.
Mathews, S. (2007) From Agit Prop to Free Space: The Architecture of Cedric Price. London: 
Black Dog Publishing.
Maxwell, N. (2008) From knowledge to wisdom: the need for an academic revolution, in R. Barnett 
and N. Maxwell (eds) Wisdom in the University. London: Routledge.
Maxwell, N. (2012) Creating a better world: towards the university of wisdom, in R. Barnett (ed.) 
The Future University: Ideas and Possibilities. London: Routledge.
McCulloch, A. (2009) The student as co-producer: learning from public administration about the 
student-university relationship, Studies in Higher Education, 34(2): 171–183.
McGettigan, A. (2013) The Great University Gamble: Money, Markets and the Future of Higher 
Education. London: Pluto Press.
McGoshan, A. and Martin, S. (2014) From Strategy to Implementation: The Second Evaluation of 
the Green Academy Programme. HEA. Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/
default/files/resources/2nd_Green_Academy_Evaluation_2014_FINAL.pdf 
(accessed 
28 
Nov. 2014).
McInnerney, J.M. and Roberts, T.S. (2004) Online learning: social interaction and the creation of 
a sense of community, Educational Technology and Society, 7(3): 73–81. Available at: http://
www.ifets.info/journals/7_3/8.pdf (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
McKernan, J. (1996) Curriculum Action Research. London: Routledge.
McKernan, J. (2007) Curriculum and Imagination: Process Theory, Pedagogy and Action 
Research. London: Routledge.
McLean, M. (2008) Pedagogy and the University: Critical Theory and Practice. London: 
Continuum.
McNay, I. (1995) From the collegial academy to corporate enterprise: the changing cultures of 
universities, in T. Schuller. (ed.) The Changing University? Buckingham: SRHE and Open 
University Press.
McNiff, J. (2001) Action Research: Principles and Practice, 2nd edition. London: Routledge.
McNiff, J. (2009) You and Your Action Research Project. London: Routledge.
McPherson, M.A. and Nunest, J.B. (2008) Critical issues for e-learning delivery: what may seem 
obvious is not always put into practice, Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 24(5): 
433–45. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2729.2008.00281.x (accessed 10 Oct. 
2014).
Merton, R.K. (1942) The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

254
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Merton, R.K. (1947) Patterns of influence: local and cosmopolitan influentials, in R.K. Merton 
(ed.) Social Theory and Social Structure. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, pp. 387–420.
Meyer, J. and Land, R. (eds) (2006) Overcoming Barriers to Student Understanding: Threshold 
Concepts and Troublesome Knowledge. London: Routledge.
Mezirow, J. (ed.) (2000) Learning as Transformation: Critical Perspectives on a Theory of 
­Progress. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Mezirow, J. (2009) An overview on transformative learning, in K. Illeris (ed.) Contemporary 
Learning Theories: Learning Theorists… In Their Own Words. London: Routledge, 
pp. 90–105.
Mihans, R., Long, D. and Felten, P. (2008) Student-faculty collaboration in course design and the 
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, International Journal for the Scholarship of Teach­
ing and Learning, 2(2). Available at: http://www.georgiasouthern.edu/ijsot (accessed 
15 March 2014).
Mill, J.S. (1867) Inaugural Lecture at the University of St. Andrews, in J.M. Robson (ed.) (1984) 
The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XXI – Essays on Equality, Law, and 
­Education. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Miller, A. (2001) Einstein and Picasso; Space, Time and the Beauty that Causes Havoc. New 
York: Basic Books.
Mirowski, P. (2013) Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste: How Neo-Liberalism Survived the 
Financial Meltdown. London: Routledge.
Mittelstrass, J. (2010) The future of the university, European Review 18, Supplement No. 1 (Diver­
sification of Higher Education and the Academic Profession. Papers from the Hercules 
Symposium Turin, Italy 2009, pp. 183–9.
MMU (2013) Design Your Own Course? A New Role for Students in Programme Development 
and Curriculum Design. Higher Education Academy Students as Partners Change 
­Programme. Manchester Metropolitan University Case Study.
Monbiot, G. (2000) Captive State: The Corporate Takeover of Britain. Oxford: Macmillan.
Mueller-Vollmer, K. (2011) Wilhelm von Humboldt, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Fall 2011 Edition), ed. E.N. Zalta. Available at: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2011/
entries/wilhelm-humboldt/. (accessed 9 April 2014).
Murphy, D. (2012) The Architecture of Failure. Alresford: Zero Books.
Muthesius, S. (2000) The Postwar University: Utopianist Campus and College. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press.
Nash, G.B., Crabtree, C. and Ross, E.D. (1997) History on Trial: Culture Wars and the Teaching 
of the Past. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Naylor, M. (2005) Form Follows Idea: An Introduction to Design Poetics. London: Black Dog 
Publishing.
Neary, M. (2003) All power to the power workers, emerging from the darkness, electricity and 
progressive politics in South Korea: a social science fiction, in Korean Transformations: 
Power Workers Probation and the Politics of Human Rights, Resource Centre for Asian 
NGOs, Sungkonghoe University.
Neary, M. (2010) Student as Producer: a pedagogy for the avant-garde?, Learning Exchange, 
1(1).
Neary, M. (2012) Teaching politically: policy, pedagogy and the New European University, 
Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies, 10(22): 233–57.
Neary, M. (2014a) Academic not-identity, or the politics of the invisible: a social science fiction, 
Keynote address to Academic Identity Conference, University of Durham, 9 July.
Neary, M. (2014b) The university and the city: Social Science Centre, Lincoln – forming the urban 
revolution, in P. Temple (ed.) The Physical University: Contours of Space and Place in 
Higher Education. London: Routledge.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
255
Neary, M. (2014c) Student as Producer: curriculum development, institutional change and rein­
venting ‘the idea of university’ as a radical political project, Educational Development, 
15(1): 10–13.
Neary, M. and Amsler, S. (2012) Occupy: a new pedagogy of space and time, Journal for Critical 
Education Policy Studies, 10(2).
Neary, M., Harrison, A., Crelin, G., Parekh, N., Saunders, G., Duggan, F., Wiliams, S. and Austin, 
S. (2010) Learning Landscapes in Higher Education. Lincoln: University of Lincoln.
Neary, M. and Rikowski, G. (2002) Time and speed in the social universe of capital, in G. Crow 
and S. Heath (eds) Social Conceptions of Time: Structure and Process in Work and Every­
day Life. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Neary, M. and Saunders, G. (2011) Leadership and learning landscapes in higher education: the 
struggle for the idea of the university, Higher Education Quarterly, 65(4): 333–52.
Neary, M. and Thody, A. (2009) Learning landscapes: designing as classroom of the future, in 
higher education, in L. Bell, H. Stevenson and M. Neary (eds) The Future of Higher Educa­
tion: Policy, Pedagogy and the Student Experience. London: Continuum, pp. 30–41.
Neary, M. and Winn, J. (2009) Student as Producer: reinventing the student experience in higher 
education, in L. Bell, H. Stevenson and M. Neary (eds) The Future of Higher Education: 
Policy, Pedagogy and the Student Experience. London: Continuum.
Neocleous, M. (2000) The Fabrication of Social Order: A Critical Theory of Police Power. London 
and New York: Verso.
Neto, E. (2008) Stone-Lips-Pepper-Tits-Clove-Love-Fog-Frog. Available at: http://www.artnet.
com/artists/ernesto-neto/stone-lips-pepper-tits-clove-love-fog-frog-a-pxd4D_
YM9MBV_G-ecFAS0g2 (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Neumann, R. (1992) Perceptions of the teaching-research nexus: a framework for analysis, 
Higher Education, 23(2): 159–71.
Newman, J.H. ([1852] 1996) The Idea of a University, ed. F.M. Turner. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Nicholls, G. (2005) New lecturers’ constructions of learning, teaching and research in higher 
education, Studies in Higher Education, 30(5).
Nicol, D.J. and McFarlane-Dick, D. (2006) Formative assessment and self-regulated learning: 
a model and seven principles of good feedback practice, Studies in Higher Education, 
31(2): 199–218.
Nilsen, S. and Baerheim, A. (2005) Feedback on video recorded consultations in medical teach­
ing: why students loathe and love it – a focus group based qualitative study, BMC Medical 
Education, 5(28).
Nin, A. ([1977] 2008) Delta of Venus. London: Penguin.
Nixon, J. (2008) Towards the Virtuous University: The Moral Bases of Academic Practice. 
London: Routledge.
Nixon, J. et al. (1998) What does it mean to be an academic?: a colloquium, Teaching in Higher 
Education, 3(3): 277–98.
NUS (National Union of Students) (2012) A Manifesto for Partnership. London: NUS. Avail­
able at: www.nusconnect.org.uk/resourcehandler/0a02e2e5-197e-4bd3-b7ed-e8ceff3dc0e4/ 
(accessed 14 Feb. 2014).
Nussbaum, M. (1997) Cultivating Humanity: A Classical Defense of Reform in Liberal Educa­
tion. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nuttall, G. (1970) Bomb Culture. London: HarperCollins.
Nygaard, C., Brand, S., Bartholomew, P. and Millard, L. (eds) (2013) Student Engagement: 
­Identity, Motivation and Community. Faringdon: Libri.
O’Mahony, J. (2014) Enhancing Student Learning and Teacher Development In Transnational 
Arrangements (Research report). York: Higher Education Academy.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

256
BIBLIOGRAPHY
O’Neill, G. (ed.) (2011) A Practitioner’s Guide to Choice of Assessment Methods Within a Module. 
Dublin: UCD Teaching and Learning. Available at: http://www.ucd.ie/teaching/resources/
assessment/howdoyouassessstudentlearning/ (accessed 15 Mar. 2014).
Orsmond, P. (2004) Self- and Peer-assessment: Guidance on Practice in the Biosciences. Higher 
Education Academy Biosciences Subject Centre. Available at: ftp://www.bioscience.
heacademy.ac.uk/TeachingGuides/fulltext.pdf (accessed 9 Jan. 2015).
Ossa-Richardson, A. (2014) The idea of a university and its concrete form, in P. Temple (ed.) The 
Physical University: Contours of Space and Place in Higher Education. London: Routledge, 
pp. 131–58.
Panichi, L., Deutschmann, M. and Molka-Danielsen, J. (2010) Virtual worlds for language learning 
and intercultural exchange: is it for real?, in S. Guth and F. Helm (eds) Telecollaboration 2.0, 
Language, Literacies and Intercultural Learning in the 21st Century. London: Peter Lang, 
pp. 165–98.
Parry, G., Callender, C., Scott, P. and Temple, P. (2012) Understanding higher education in further 
education colleges (BIS Research Paper 69). Available at: www.gov.uk/government/
publications/understanding-higher-education-in-further-education-colleges (accessed 15 
Sept. 2014).
Parsons, D., Hill, I., Holland, J. and Willis, D. (2012) The impact of teaching development pro­
grammes in higher education. Available at: www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/
resources/HEA_Impact_Teaching_Development_Prog.pdf.
Patai, D. and Corral, W.H. (eds) (2005) Theory’s Empire. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Pearman, H. (2014) Cleverer by design, The Sunday Times, 17 August. Available at: http://www.
thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/culture/arts/article1445902.ece (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Penfold-Mounce, R., Beer, D. and Burrows, R. (2011) The wire as Social Science Fiction, Sociology, 
45(1): 152–67.
Perkins, D., Jay, E. and Tishman, S. (1993) New conceptions of thinking – from ontology to edu­
cation, Educational Psychologist, 28(1): 67–85.
Pew Research Center (2014) Online Harassment. Available online: http://www.pewinternet.
org/2014/10/22/online-harassment (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Plato (circa. 360 BC) The Republic. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Polanyi, M. (1967) The Tacit Dimension. New York: Anchor Books.
Powers, A. (1992) In the Line of Development: FRS Yorke, E Rosenberg, and CS Mardall to YRM, 
1930–1992. London: RIBA.
Price, P. (2011) Professional Standards Applying to Teaching and Learning in the HE in FE 
Sector (England): A Discussion Paper for the Higher Education Academy HE in FE 
Enhancement Programme. York: Higher Education Academy. Available at: https://www.
heacademy.ac.uk/resources (accessed 8 Dec. 2014).
Prosser, P. and Trigwell, K. (1999) Understanding Learning and Teaching. London: SRHE 
and OU.
QAA (Quality Assurance Agency) (2006) Code of Practice for the Assurance of Academic Quality 
and Standards in Higher Education, Section 6: Assessment of Students, September 2006. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.qaa.ac.uk/Publications/InformationAndGuidance/Documents/
COP_AOS.pdf (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
QAA (2007) Outcomes from Institutional Audit: The Adoption and Use of Learning Outcomes. 
Gloucester: The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education.
QAA (2011) The UK Quality Code For Higher Education Chapter B6: Assessment of Students 
and Accreditation of Prior Learning. Gloucester: QAA. Available at: http://www.qaa.ac.uk/
Publications/InformationAndGuidance/Documents/Quality%20Code%20-%20Chapter%20B6.
pdf (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
257
QAA (2012) The UK Quality Code for Higher Education Chapter B3: Learning and Teaching. 
Gloucester: 
QAA. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-
guidance/uk-quality-code-for-higher-education-chapter-b3-learning-and-teaching (accessed 
6 Jan. 2015).
QAA (2013a) Quality Code for Higher Education. Gloucester: QAA.
QAA (2013b) Review of Transnational Education in China: 2012, Overview. Gloucester: 
QAA.
QAA (2013c) Guidance on Scholarship and the Pedagogical Effectiveness of Staff: Expectations 
for Foundation Degree-Awarding Powers and Taught Degree-Awarding Power. Gloucester: 
QAA.
QAA (2014) Review of Transnational Education in UAE: 2013. Overview. Gloucester: QAA.
Ramsden, P. (2003) Learning to Teach in Higher Education. London: Routledge.
Ramsden, P (2008) The future of higher education teaching and the student experience. Available 
at: http://www.bis.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/HE-Teaching-Student-Experience.pdf 
(accessed 27 April 2015).
Ramsden, P. and Moses, I. (1992) Association between research and teaching in higher education 
in Australia, Higher Education, 23(3): 273–95.
Ranciere, J. (2004) The Politics of Aesthetics: Distribution of the Sensible. London: 
Bloomsbury.
Readings, B. (1996) The University in Ruins. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
REF (Research Excellence Framework) (2012) REF 2014: Assessment Framework and Guid­
ance on Submissions. REF 02.2011. Bristol: REF. Available at: www.ref.ac.uk/pubs/2011-02/ 
(accessed 3 Aug. 2013).
Revans, R. (2011) ABC of Action Learning. Farnham: Gower.
Richardson, V. (1997) Constructivist Teacher Education: Building a World of New Understand­
ings. London: Falmer Press.
Riesman, D., Glazer, N. and Denny, R. ([1950] 2001) The Lonely Crowd. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Ritzer, G. (2001) Let’s make it magical, Times Higher Education Supplement, 7 Jan., p. 6.
Robbins Report (1963) Higher Education Report. London: HMSO. Available at: http://www.
educationengland.org.uk/documents/robbins/robbins1963.html (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
Rogers, C. (1957) Personal thoughts on teaching and learning, in H. Kischenbaum and V.L. Henderson 
(eds) (1989) The Carl Rogers Reader. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. (1989) The Carl Rogers Reader. Ed. H. Kischenbaum and V.L. Henderson. New York: 
Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. and Freiberg, H. J. (1994) Freedom to Learn, 3rd edn. New York: Merrill.
Rogers, C.R. and Lyon, H. (2013) On Becoming an Effective Teacher: Person-centered Teaching, 
Psychology, Philosophy, and Dialogues with Carl R. Rogers and Harold Lyon. Available at: 
http://shelf3d.com/i/Carl%20Rogers (accessed 7 July 2014).
Roggero, G. (2011) The Production of Living Knowledge: The Crisis of the University and the 
Transformation of Labour in Europe and North America. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University 
Press.
Rorty, R. (1989) Contingency, Irony and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rose, G. (1993) Feminism and Geography The Limits of Geographical Knowledge. Cambridge: 
Polity.
Ross, M.T. and Cameron, H.S. (2007) Peer assisted learning: a planning and implementation 
framework: AMEE Guide no. 30, Medical Teacher, 29(6): 527–45.
Rovai, A.P. (2004) A constructivist approach to online college learning, Internet and Higher 
Education, 7(2): 79–93. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2003.10.002 (accessed 
10 Oct. 2014).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

258
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Rowland, S. (2006) The Enquiring University: Compliance and Contestation in Higher Educa­
tion. Maidenhead: SRHE and Open University Press.
Rust, C., O’Donovan, B. and Price, M. (2005) A social constructivist assessment assessment pro­
cess model: how the research literature shows us this could be best practice, Assessment 
and Evaluation in Higher Education, 30(3): 233–41.
Ryan, R.M. and Deci, E.L. (2000) Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic moti­
vation, social development, and well-being, American Psychologist, 55(1): 68.
Sadler, S. (2005) Archigram Architecture Without Architecture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sagan, O., Candela, E. and Frimodig, B. (2010) Insight on outreach: towards a critical practice, 
International Journal of Education through Art, 6(2): 145–61.
Said, E. (1994) Representations of the Intellectual, The 1993 Reith Lectures. London: Vintage 
Books.
Salmon, G. (2002) e-Tivities: The Key to Active Online Learning. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Sambell, K., McDowell, L. and Montgomery, C. (2012) Assessment for Learning in Higher 
Education. London: Routledge.
Sandover, S., Partridge, L., Dunne, E. and Burkill, S. (2012) Undergraduate researchers change 
learning and teaching: a case study of two universities in Australia and the UK, CUR Quar­
terly, 33(1): 33–9. Available at: www.cur.org/documents/?CategoryId=7 (accessed 15 March 
2014).
Savin-Baden, M. (2003) Facilitating Problem-Based Learning Illuminating Perspectives. Maid­
enhead: SRHE and Open University Press.
Scharmer, C.O. (2009) Theory U: Leading from the Future as it Emerges. San Francisco, CA: 
Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Schön, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Schön, D.A. (1991) Educating the Reflective Practitioner: Towards a New Design for Teaching 
and Learning in the Professions. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Schwartz, P. and Webb, G. (2002) Assessment Case Studies: Experience and Practice from 
Higher Education. London: Kogan Page.
Scoffham, S. and Kemp, N. (2014) It’s contagious! Developing sustainability perspectives in aca­
demic life at a UK university. Paper prepared for The Second World Symposium on Sustain­
able Development at Universities, Manchester Metropolitan University, September 2014.
Scott, P. (2003) 1992–2002: Where next?, Perspectives, 7(3): 71–5.
SEDA (Staff and Educational Development Association) online discussions entitled Univer­
sity teacher conceptions of reflective learning, July 2014, notes available from www.
seda.ac.uk
Selwyn, N. (2013) Distrusting Educational Technology. New York: Routledge.
Sennett, R. (2008) The Craftsman. London: Penguin.
Sharpe, R. (2004) How do professionals learn and develop? Implications for staff and educational 
developers, in D. Baume and P. Kahn (eds) Enhancing Staff and Educational Development. 
London: RoutledgeFalmer, pp. 132–53.
Sherman, D.L. (2003) Critical theory, in R.C. Salomon and D.L. Sherman (eds) The Blackwell 
Guide to Continental Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Siemens, G. (2005) Connectivism: a learning theory for the digital age, International Journal of 
Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 2(1), January 2005. Available at: http://
www.itdl.org/journal/jan_05/article01.htm (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Simmons, J. (2014) The nature of knowledge in the higher vocational curriculum, in J. Lea (ed.) 
Supporting Higher Education in College Settings. London: SEDA.
Simmons, J. and Lea, J. (2013) Capturing an HE ethos in College Higher Education. Gloucester: 
QAA. Available at: http://www.qaa.ac.uk/publications/information-and-guidance/publication/?
PubID=2773#.VBq   j4kshtNI (accessed 19 Nov. 2014).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
259
Skills Commission (2011) Teacher Training in Vocational Education. London: Policy Connect.
Slaughter, S. and Rhoades, G. (1994) Academic Capitalism and the New Economy: Markets, 
States and Higher Education. Philadelphia, PA: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Smith, A. and Webster, F. (eds) (1997) The Post Modern University? Buckingham: Open University 
Press.
Smith, D. and James, E. (2008) The utopianist campus: biography, policy and the building of a 
new university during the 1960s, History of Education, 37(1): 23–42.
Smith, H. (2011) Values in Higher Education: Annotated Bibliography. CPD4HE: Open Resources 
on HE Teaching and Learning. Available at: http://vle.bruford.ac.uk/login/index.php 
(accessed 6 Jan 2015).
Smith, H, Cooper, A. and Lancaster, L. (2002) Improving the quality of undergraduate peer assess­
ment: a case for student and staff development, Innovations in Education and Teaching 
International, 39(1); 71–81.
Smith, M. et al. (2013) Graduate employability: student perceptions of PBL and its effectiveness 
in facilitating their employability skills, Practice and Evidence of the Scholarship of Teach­
ing and Learning in Higher Education, 8(3): 217–40.
Stanek, L. (2011) Henri Lefebvre on Space: Architecture, Urban Research and the Production of 
Theory. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University Press.
Steiner, R. (2005) Theosophy. Forest Row: Rudolf Steiner Press.
Stephanie, J. et al. (2001) Assessing self- and peer-assessment: the students’ views, Higher 
Education Research and Development, 20(1): 53–70.
Sterling, S. (2004) Higher education, sustainability, and the role of systemic learning, in 
P.B. Corcoran and A.E.J. Wals (eds) Higher Education and the Challenge of Sustainability: 
Problematics, Promise, and Practice. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Press, pp. 47–70.
Stevenson, J. et al. (2014) Pedagogic Stratification and the Shifting Landscape of Higher Edu­
cation. Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/PedStrat_
Finalreport.pdf (accessed 6 Jan. 2015).
Stewart, B. (2014) Networks of care and vulnerability. Online presentation to Scholar14. Available 
at: http://theory.cribchronicles.com/2014/11/04/networks-of-care-and-vulnerability/ (accessed 
6 Jan. 2015).
Stibbe, A. (2013) Work-based learning in the humanities: a welcome stranger? Practice and 
­Evidence of Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, 8(3): 241–55.
Sykes, C.J. (1992) A Nation of Victims. New York: St Martin’s Press.
Tait, J. and Knight, P. (eds) (1996) The Management of Independent Learning. London: Kogan Page.
Taylor, C.A. and Dunne, M. (2011) Virtualization and new geographies of knowledge in higher 
education: possibilities for the transformation of knowledge, pedagogic relations and 
learner identities, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 32(4): 623–41.
Thomas, L. (2001) Widening Participation in Post-compulsory Education. London: Continuum 
Studies in Lifelong Learning.
Thomas, L. (forthcoming) Effective practice in the design of directed independent learning 
opportunities. Available at: https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/project/350
Thomas, L. and Quinn, J. (2006) First Generation Entry into Higher Education. Maidenhead: 
Open University Press.
Thomas, L. (2012) Building Student Engagement and Belonging at a Time of Change in Higher 
Education. London: Paul Hamlyn Foundation.
Thompson, D. (ed.) (2000) Stretching the Academy: The Politics and Practice of Widening 
Participation. London: NIACE Publications.
Tolsgaard, M.G., Gustafsson, A., Rasmussen, M.B., Hoiby, P., Muller, C.G. and Ringsted, C. (2007) 
Student teachers can be as good as associate professors in teaching clinical skills, Medical 
Teacher, 29(6): 553–57.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

260
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Tomlinson, M. (2014) Exploring the impacts of policy changes on student approaches and atti­
tudes to learning in contemporary higher education: implications for student learning 
engagement. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/
Exploring_the_impact_of_policy_changes_student_experience.pdf
Trigwell, K. and Shale, S. (2004) Student learning and the scholarship of university teaching, 
Studies in Higher Education, 29(4): 523–36.
Tripp, D. (1993) Critical Incidents in Teaching: Developing Professional Judgement. London: 
Routledge.
Trow, M. (2010) Twentieth-Century Higher Education: Elite to Mass to Universal ed. 
M. Burrage. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Trowler, P., Saunders, M. and Bamber, V. (2014) Tribes and Territories in the 21st Century: 
Rethinking the Significance of Disciplines in Higher Education. London: Routledge.
UNESCO (2002) Education for Sustainability, from Rio to Johannesburg: Lessons learnt from 
a Decade of Commitment, Paris: UNESCO. Available at http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/
0012/001271/127100e.pdf (accessed 28 Nov. 2014).
UNESCO (2004) United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development (2005-14): 
Draft International Implementation Scheme. Paris: UNESCO. Available at http://unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0013/001399/139937e.pdf (accessed 28 Nov. 2014).
UNESCO (2009) Bonn Declaration. Available online at http://www.esd-world-conference-2009.
org/fileadmin/download/ESD2009_BonnDeclaration.pdf (accessed 28 Nov. 2014).
University of Glasgow (undated) beSoTLed. Available at: http://www.gla.ac.uk/departments/sotl/
whatissotl/aworkingdefinition/ (accessed 15 March 2014).
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978) Mind and Society: The Development of Higher Mental Processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Walker, M. (2006) Higher Education Pedagogies. Maidenhead: SRHE and Open University 
Press.
Warner-Weil, S. and McGill, I. (eds) (1989) Making Sense Of Experiential Learning: Diversity in 
Theory and Practice. Buckingham: SRHE and Open University Press.
Watson, D. (2000) Lifelong Learning and Professional Higher Education, in T. Bourner, T. Katz 
and D. Watson (eds) New Directions in Professional Higher Education. Buckingham: SRHE 
and Open University Press.
Watson, D. (2007) Does higher education need a Hypocratic oath?, Higher Education Quarterly, 
61(3): 362–74.
Webster, M. and Buglass, G. (eds) (2005) The Community Arts Workers: Finding Voices, Making 
Choices. Nottingham: Educational Heretics Press.
Wegerif, R. (1998) The social dimensions of asynchronous learning environments, Journal of Asyn­
chronous Learning Networks, 2(1): 34–49. Available at: http://onlinelearningconsortium.
org/read/journal-issues/ (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K. and Fischer, F. (2007) Knowledge convergence in collaborative 
learning: concepts and assessment, Learning and Instruction, 17(4): 416–26.
Weller, M. (2011) A pedagogy of abundance, Spanish Journal of Pedagogy, 249: 223–36. Available 
at: http://oro.open.ac.uk/28774/ (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice, Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Wenger, E. (2000) Communities of practice and social learning systems, Organization, 7(2): 225–46. 
Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/135050840072002 (accessed 10 Oct. 2014).
Werder, C. and Otis, M.M. (eds) (2010) Engaging Student Voices in the Study of Teaching and 
Learning. Virginia: Stylus.
Western Washington University (no date) Teaching-Learning Academy. Available at: http://
library.wwu.edu/tla (accessed 15 March 2014).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
261
Wilkinson, T. (2014) Bricks and Mortar: Ten Great Buildings and the People They Made. London: 
Fourth Estate.
Williams, J. (2006) The pedagogy of debt, College Literature, 33(4): 155–69.
Woods, P., Ashley, M. and Woods, G. (eds) (2005) Steiner Schools in England. Research Report 
RR645. London: Department for Education and Skills, pp. 15–18.
Woolf, V. (2008) Three Guineas. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Young, M.F.D. (1971) Knowledge and Control. London: Collier-Macmillan.
Young, M.F.D. (2008) Bringing Knowledge Back In. London: Routledge.
Zimmerman, J. (2002) Whose America: Culture Wars in the Public Schools. Cambridge, MA: Har­
vard University Press.
Zˇizˇek, S. (2009) On Violence: Six Sideways Reflections. London: Profile Books.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
abuse, online 98
academic allegiance 2, 3, 54–82
department allegiance 55
discipline (subject) allegiance 55–6, 120–2, 
230, 239
importance of working at a university 77–9
importance of working for a university 
75–7
student perspective 80
see also academic identity
academic authoritarianism 167–8
academic authority 165–70
academic capitalism 91, 182, 187–9, 217, 239
academic citizenship 73, 217, 239
academic core 71
academic freedom 71–2, 192–3, 217, 239
academic guilds 71, 217, 239
academic identity 2, 3, 54–82
bifurcation and ventriloquism 73–5
dimensions of 56–7
extracts from successful HEA fellowship 
applications 81–2
managing academic practice 56–7, 65–71, 
71–2, 81–2
nature of 55–8
student perspective 63
teaching and learning 56–7, 58–64
see also academic allegiance
academic infrastructure for HE 65
academic knowledge 2, 3, 113–40
employability 129, 131–3, 140, 222, 239
extracts from successful HEA fellowship 
applications 139–40
nature of 133–7
ontological dimension 126–9, 130–1
purpose of HE 114–18
real challenges of widening participation 
137–9
student perspective 123, 137–9
validity 118–26
academic partners 217, 239
academic space see learning spaces
access 101–2
accountability 65, 66–8, 181–2, 217–18, 239
accreditation for prior learning (APL) 218, 239
accredited provision 14, 200
acting 114–16, 119
action research 22, 64, 199, 218, 239
active collaborator, student as 229, 239
active learning 208, 218, 239
administrative shell 71
Ainley, P. 192–4
Allcroft, J. 23–4
American culture wars 123–7
anti–authoritarian classroom 218, 239
anticipatory design 86, 218, 239
anti–discrimination 91
anti–war principle 94
APEL (Accreditation of Prior Experiential 
Learning) 26
application, scholarship of 1, 2, 7, 22, 59–60, 
151
applied subjects 121
apprentice model 41
apprenticeships 193
architectural designs 83–94
areas of activity 10, 206, 235
interpretation in practice 10–11
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

INDEX
263
Argyris, C. 35
Aronson, E. 146
art 140
Arum, R. 184
assessment 29, 49, 171–2
co–assessment 147–8, 219, 239
conditions under which it supports student 
learning 39–40
as a form of dialogue 38–43
formative 40, 45–6
peer assessment 40–2, 146–8, 226, 239
self–assessment 40–1, 42, 147–8, 228, 239
student involvement in designing 160
summative 33, 40, 45–6, 148
TESTA project 44–6
assessment for learning (AfL) 39–42, 160, 218, 
239
Associate Fellowship 12, 13, 200, 236
reflective writing for the application 
207–9
audit cultures 65, 68, 166, 218, 239
Australian National University 154
authentic assessment 42
authoritarianism 167–8
authority, academic 165–70
authorship 169–70
Bailey, C. 129
Bainbridge, A. 99
Barnett, R. 27, 55, 114, 128, 129, 179, 185, 214
Baron, P. 28
Barry, W. 103–6
Baxter Magolda, M.B. 148–9
Bayne, S. 97
becoming 51, 165
being 51, 114–16, 119
Benjamin, W. 169
Berlin, University of 21, 168
Bernstein, B. 119–20, 167
bifurcation 73–5
Biggs, J. 29, 30, 31
binary divide 77
abolition of 76, 174
Birmingham City University 131–3, 158
BIS White Paper 141, 174, 177, 179
Bishop, J.L. 38
blended learning 100
Bloom, A. 116, 125, 126, 136
Bloom, W. 32–3
bodies 99–100
Boud, B. 147
Boyer, E.L. 1, 2, 4, 7, 22, 58–60, 151, 198–9, 212, 
223, 239
brands/branding 78, 83, 185
UK HE brand 17–19
Brookes, J.H. 84
Brookfield, S. 31–2
Brown, R. 183–4
Browne Report 174, 181
Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania 159
Bryson, C. 163–5
business agenda 78–9
business ethics 79
business ontology 83, 218, 239
calculated uncertainty 86, 219, 239
Cambridge University 106–7, 192–3
campus gilding 180, 219, 239
campus–style universities 87, 88–90
Canales, I. 159
Canfield, M. 153
Cannon, J. 63
Canterbury Christ Church University 215
capability approach 31, 219, 239
capitalised space 90, 219, 239
capitalism 182
academic 91, 182, 187–9, 217, 239
cognitive 101
Carasso, H. 183–4
change agents, students as 142–3, 155–60, 229, 
239
class contact hours 70, 180
co–assessment 147–8, 219, 239
Coate, K. 114, 129, 214
co–creator, student as 159–60, 229, 239
co–designer, student as 159–60, 229, 239
cognitive capitalism 101
collaboration
brand UK HE 17–19
in evaluation 158
problem solving 36–7
industrial and creative 140
collective critical reflexivity 91
college–based higher education (CBHE) 
190–2, 219, 239
collegiality 55, 219–20, 239
contrived 72, 220, 239
collegiate architecture 220, 239
Collini, S. 178
commodification 180, 182, 220, 239
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

264
INDEX
communalism 189
communities of learning 41, 106, 142, 161, 165, 
220, 239
community partners 197
competency approach 8, 9
competition 183, 185
for students 180, 181
conferences 197
confidence 107–8
connectivism 105
constructive alignment 29, 220, 239
constructivism 26, 220, 239
consultants, students as 159, 229–30, 239
consumer protection 194–5
consumerism 179–81
contact teaching time 70, 180
contestability 1, 220, 239
context–based learning 139
continuing professional development (CPD) 
13–14, 123, 206–7
contrived collegiality 72, 220, 239
Cook–Sather, A. 159
cooperative scholarship 22
Corbin, L. 28
core knowledge 10, 206, 209–10, 235
interpretation in practice 11
corporate university 185
corporatism 55, 78, 220, 239
‘cosmopolitan’ academics 74
cost savings 100–1
Coursera 105
Coventry Disruptive Media Lab 103
creative collaborations 140
credit–bearing PG Certificate HE courses 
(PG Certs) 200
Criminology for a Just Society (CfJS) 
module 215
critical being 27
critical pedagogies 125, 221, 239
critical thinking 27, 34–6
criticality 129–30
cultural capital 193
cultural cognition 130, 221, 239
cultural relativism 137
culture of compliance 221, 239
culture war debates 123–7
currency 204
curriculum co–creation/co–design 159–60
curriculum ideologies 114, 221, 239
curriculum models 114
dead white males 123, 125, 221, 239
Dearing Report 4, 58, 65, 66, 74–5
Deeley, S. 148
deep learning 30, 221, 239
department–based allegiance 55
Department for Business, Innovation and 
Skills (BIS) 18
BIS White Paper 141, 174, 177, 179
de–professionalisation 66, 121
Derbyshire, A. 89
descriptors 8, 12–13, 236–8
detached observer 124–5
diagnostic assessment 40
dialogue 143, 147
assessment and feedback as forms of 
38–43
difference 99–100, 102
digital capital 102
digital colonialism 221, 239
Digital Experience Building in University 
Teaching (DEBUT) project 16–17
digital space see virtual learning spaces
dimensions of practice 8–12, 206, 235
diminished self 117
directed independent learning 70
disability student support staff 210
disciplinarity, erosion of 79
discipline (subject) allegiance 55–6, 120–2, 
230, 239
discovery, scholarship of 1, 2, 7, 22, 59–60, 151
discovery in action 203
disenchanted knowledge 130
disengagement contract 184–5, 221, 239
disinterested knowledge 187–9, 221–2, 239
disinterestedness 189
dispositions of democratic discussion 31–2
dissensus 129–30, 222, 239
distance learning 103–6
diversity 25, 125–6, 222, 239
divided line 114, 222, 239
double loop learning theory 35–6
‘doughnut rounds’ 146, 222, 239
drop–in sessions 207
Drucker, P. 78–9
D’Souza, D. 125
DUMP CV 133
Dunne, E. 155–6
Durkheim, E. 119–20
duty of care 118
dynamic 93–4
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

INDEX
265
e–Learning and Digital Cultures (EDC) 
MOOC 105
Eaton, J. 190–2
ecolinguistics 155
ecological university 214, 222, 239
Edinburgh, University of 104–5
Education for Sustainable Development 
(ESD) 214–16
educative power 94
El–Hakim, Y. 44–6
Elon University, North Carolina 160
Elton, L. 26, 62
employability 129, 131–3, 140, 222, 239
energy 195–6
engaged learning 28–32, 222, 239
Enhancing Learning and Teaching Transport 
Map 3–4, 213, 239
enhancing student learning 2, 3, 16, 20–53
assessment and feedback as forms of 
dialogue 38–43
extracts from successful HEA fellowship 
applications 52–3
flipped classroom 24, 36–8, 223, 239
health, well–being and spirituality module 
32–3
key thinkers 21–3
learning outcomes 46–50, 65
learning as student engagement 28–32
reducing teacher input in tutorials 24–6
reflection 33–6
SoTL 26–7
student–centred learning 22–4, 230, 239
student perspective 23–4, 51
TESTA 44–6
Enlightenment 124, 222–3, 239
enthusiasm 195–6
epistemological demarcation diputes 120–2
ethical university 128, 223, 239
ethics 79 
guidance 118
evidence 203
Exeter, University of 156
exponential growth of universities 175
face–to–face learning 106–10
factories 85, 88, 90
Falchicov, N. 147
feedback 52–3, 172
as a form of dialogue 38–43
to lecturers 52
feelings 98–9
Fellowship status 12, 13, 200, 236–7
reflective writing for the application 207–9
see also HEA Fellowship Scheme
FELTAG 100
first person writing 201–2
Fish, S. 126
flipped classroom 24, 36–8, 223, 239
fluidity 128, 129
Fordist factories 85, 88, 90
forensic science 139, 171–2
formative assessment 40, 45–6
Foundation Degree Awarding Power (FDAP) 
status 190–1
foundation degrees 76, 190
four descriptors 8, 12–13, 236–8
four scholarships 1, 2, 7, 22, 59–60, 151
freedom, academic 71–2, 192–3, 217, 239
Freire, P. 125, 143
Fuller, S. 59
Fulton–Suri, J. 203
Fun Palace 86–7
funding councils 174, 177, 182
funding of HE 181–2, 192–3, 194
Furedi, F. 117, 165–7
further education 191
further education colleges 184
Further and Higher Education Act 1992  174
fuzziness 128, 129
gaming 68, 223, 239
gendered design 90–1
genericist knowledge 121
geography 145, 153–4
Gibbons, M. 121
Gibbs, G. 39, 69–70, 118, 185
Gillick, L., ‘Double Back Platform’ 92
Glasgow, University of 148
globalised HE marketplace 17–19
Gloucestershire, University of 150, 155
going public 61, 223, 239
goldfish bowl model 36–7, 223, 239
Gosling, D. 48–50
governance, university 77
GPS applications 99
graphical interfaces 97
ground 93
ground rules 113
group learning 41–2
guilds, academic 71, 217, 239
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

266
INDEX
Hall, R. 96
Hallenberg, K. 214–16
Hand, L. 164
harassment, online 98
Hardingham, K. 87–8
Hargreaves, A. 185
Hatherley, O. 85
Hattie, J. 148
Hayes, D. 135–7
HEA Fellowship Scheme 6–7, 16, 132–3, 
199–212
accredited provision 14, 200
beginning an application 200–1
categories 12–13
developmental activities 204–7
direct application route 199–200
extracts from successful applications 
16–17, 52–3, 81–2, 111–12, 139–40, 171–2, 
196–7
putting together an application 201–4
reflective writing in narrative accounts 
207–12
heads of department 66
Healey, M. 151, 152, 213
health, well–being and spirituality module 32–3
Hertz, N. 78
hierarchy of needs 27
higher education (HE) 5
funding 181–2, 192–3, 194
governance 77
historical background 76, 173–9
landscape see higher education landscape
massification 25, 175–6, 225, 239
purpose of 114–18, 169, 186–9
role of 76–7
UK HE in the globalised marketplace 17–19
Higher Education Academy (HEA) 6, 14–15, 
64, 191
Fellowship see HEA Fellowship Scheme
role in the changing context of HE 4
UKPSF see UK Professional Standards 
Framework
Higher Education Funding Council for 
England (HEFCE) 28, 141
higher education landscape 2–3, 173–97
college–based HE 190–2, 219, 239
current reform agenda 179–85
extracts from successful HEA fellowship 
applications 196–7
future for 185–6
historical background 76, 173–9
marketisation 21–2, 169, 179–85, 189, 
192–5, 225, 239
student perspective 178, 195–6
Higher Education Review (HER) 65
history of HE 76, 173–9
research–based learning 154
hooks, b. 91, 134
Humboldt, W. von 21, 22, 61, 148, 179, 212, 213, 
233, 239
Humboldtian tradition 60–1
Hussey, T. 46–8
hybrid learning 223, 239
hybrid space 95–6
hybrid university 103
impact measures 68, 79, 223, 239
impermanence principle 91
implicit hierarchy 167
inclusion 28, 125–6, 127, 210–11, 224, 239
challenges of widening participation 137–9
indeterminacy 86, 224, 239
individualising the fellowship application 
202
induction week 150
industrial collaborations 140
inequalities 101–2, 184–5
infantilisation 117–18, 224, 239
Institute for Learning and Teaching in Higher 
Education (ILTHE) 4
Institutional Audit (IA) 65
institutional induction events 55
integration, scholarship of 1, 2, 7, 22, 59–60, 
151
interactive architecture 86–7
Interchange Project, North London 87
intercultural online exchanges 102
international research community 155
internationalisation 17–19, 78
invisible pedagogy 167
Ipsos MORI 68
James, E. 89
Jarvis, P. 82
Jenkins, A. 152, 213
jigsaw classroom 146, 224, 239
Jobson, R. 85
John Henry Brookes Building, Oxford 
Brookes University 84–6
journal clubs 146
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

INDEX
267
Kavanagh, D. 186
Keele University 87
Key Information Set (KIS) 65, 70, 177, 180
Kinsman, B. 149
Klein, N. 78
Knight, P. 38
knowing 114–16, 119
knowledge
academic see academic knowledge
as commodity 182
contested nature of 148–9
disinterested 187–9, 221–2, 239
mode 2 knowledge 121, 225, 239
objective 133–5, 226, 239
really useful and merely useful 178
standpoint knowledge 124–5, 229, 239
universal 21, 58, 117, 133–5, 232, 239
vocational 119–20
knowledge economy 77–9, 101, 224, 239
knowledge exchange 60, 79
knowledge products 182, 224, 239
knowledge transmission model 23–4
Kolb, D. 205–6
Kop, R. 105
Kuh, G. 184
Lambert, C. 92
Language and Ecology Research Forum 155
Lave, J. 41
Lawton, R. 131–3
Le Corbusier chaise longue 92
Lea, J. 7–8, 133–4
leadership
managing academic practice 56–7, 65–71, 
71–2, 81–2
Principal Fellow application 210–12
learning activities 29, 208
learning communities 41, 106, 142, 161, 165, 
220, 239
learning cycle 205–6
learning domains 114, 119
Learning Landscapes in Higher Education 
project 90–2
learning outcomes 29, 46–50, 65, 79, 146, 160
case for 48–50
limits of 46–8
learning sets 204–5
learning spaces 2, 3, 83–112
extracts from successful HEA fellowship 
applications 111–12
online distance learning 103–6
online vs face–to–face learning 106–10
physical spaces 83–95
principles to consider 93–4
student perspective 94–5, 110–11
virtual spaces 95–103, 233, 239
learning taxonomies 30–1, 224, 239
learning and teaching conferences 197
Learning and Teaching Support Network 
(LTSN) 4
lecturing 23–4, 224, 239
Lefebvre, H. 90
liberal humanism 168
liberal tradition 178, 187, 224–5, 239
lifelong learning 88
Lifelong Learning UK (LLUK) standards 7–8
Lincoln, University of 158, 169–70
Lingfield Reports 14
liquid university 185–6, 225, 239
Littlewood, J. 86–7
Lloyd, B. 84
‘local’ academics 74
Locke, D. 178
Lombardi, J.V. 71
Loughborough University 144–5
Louis, S. 94–5, 110–11, 170–1, 195–6
Macfarlane, B. 73–5
management 56–7, 65–71, 71–2, 81–2
see also leadership
managerialism 21–2, 48, 66, 71, 72, 78–9, 225, 
239
academic authority 166–7
Manchester Metropolitan University 159–60
marketisation 21–2, 169, 179–85, 189, 192–5, 
225, 239
Marsh, H.W. 148
Martin, E. 156
Marx, K. 182
Maslow, A.H. 27
massification 25, 175–6, 225, 239
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 95, 
105
materials design 144–5
mathematics 144–5
McCormick, A. 106–8
McCormick, E. 108–10
McGettigan, A. 184
meaning 96–8
mentoring 81
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

268
INDEX
merely useful knowledge 178
Merton, R. 74, 189
Mill, J.S. 116
mindfulness 32, 225, 239
Mittelstrass, J. 21–2
mode 2 knowledge 121, 225, 239
Modernism 85
modules 46
Monbiot, G. 78
money 100–1
moral techniques 167
Morgan, N. 51
motivations 206–7
MSc in e–Learning 104–5
Murphy, D. 85
Muthesius, S. 88–9
National Committee of Inquiry into Higher 
Education see Dearing Report
National Coordination Team for the Teaching 
Quality Enhancement Fund 4
national social conscience 186, 232, 239
National Student Survey (NSS) 44, 68–9, 
168–9, 180
National Survey of Student Engagement 
(NSSE) 68, 69
National Union of Students (NUS) 141
National Vocational Qualification (NVQ) 
system 7
natural sciences 120–1
near market 182, 225, 239
Neary, M. 90, 91, 158, 167–70
needs, hierarchy of 27
neo–liberalism 186–7, 189, 225–6, 239
Neoplasticism 92
Newcastle College 192
Newcastle University 110–11
Newman, J.H. 21, 22, 58, 77, 79, 117, 212, 219, 
239
niceness 136
non–judgementalism 137
Norman, R. 77–9
Nygaard, C. 158
objective knowledge 133–5, 226, 239
online learning 226, 239
distance learning 103–6
vs face–to–face learning 106–10
virtual spaces 95–103, 233, 239
online marking 52–3
online self 99–100, 226, 239
ontological dimension 126–9, 130–1
open days 196–7
Open Educational Resources (OERs) 30, 38
open–ended architecture 94, 226, 239
oral presentation 148
organic solidarity 56
Orsmond, P. 147
Ossa–Richardson, A. 89–90
outcomes–based learning see learning 
outcomes
ownership of learning spaces 110–11
Oxford University 192–3
Palfreyman, D. 194–5
participation rate 175–6
partners in learning see students as partners 
in learning
partnership learning communities 161, 165
passion 195–6
Pater, W. 77
peer assessment 40–2, 146–8, 226, 239
peer–assisted learning 144–5
peer learning 144–5, 226, 239
performance indicators 67, 226, 239
performativity 68, 73–5, 226, 239
perspectives 124–7, 135–7, 233, 239
perspectivism 135–7
Pew Research Center 98
PG Certs 200
physical learning spaces 83–95
face–to–face learning 106–10
Piaget, J. 26
plant biology 154
Plato 114, 136, 186
play 94
polarisation 184–5
policy–making 211–12
political correctness 123–7
polytechnics 26, 76, 77
Popovic, C. 133–5
post–modern university 124
postmodernism 78
post–structuralism 78
power 94
pragmatism 188–9
prefabricated housing 87
Preskill, S. 31–2
Price, C. 86–8
Price, P. 8
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

INDEX
269
Principal Fellowship 12, 13, 238
reflective writing for the application 210–12
private university 182, 187, 227, 239
privilege 102
problem–based learning 36–8, 146, 227, 239
producer, student as 158, 167–70, 179, 230, 239
professional values 10, 11–12, 206, 209–10, 235
programmes 46
progression 134
Prussia 21
pseudo–modernist architecture 85
psychoanalytically informed literature 129
psychology 139–40, 144, 149
public funding of HE 181–2, 194
public intellectual 186
public sector professionals 181
public university 187, 227, 239
pure subjects 121
Purism 92
purpose of HE 114–18, 169, 186–9
qualified HE teacher status 70
Quality Assurance Agency (QAA) 17, 18, 46, 
65, 182
quality assurance regimes 49–50
Quality Code for Higher Education 18, 19, 65
quality of life, students’ 148
Queen Margaret University, Edinburgh 158
radical multiculturalism 123–6
Ragged University 103
Ramsden, P. 141–2
Rattenbury, S. 87–8
Readings, B. 179
realist epistemology 120–1, 227, 239
really useful knowledge 178, 227, 239
recontextualisation 120, 227, 239
reflection 81–2
enhancing student learning 33–6
HEA Fellowship application 202, 205–7
reflection–in–action 35, 203
reflection–on–action 35
reflective practice 8, 81–2, 227, 239
reflective writing 207–12
reform agenda 179–85
regional partnerships 193
regulation 194–5
Re–imagining Attainment for All research 
project (RAFA) 153
Reinvention Bus 93
Reinvention Centre 92
Reinvention Classroom 92–3, 227, 239
relativism 136
cultural 137
reputation, university’s 184–5
research 58–9, 198, 199
and publication 56–7
role of researcher 124–5
by students in induction week 150
students as scholars 148–55
teaching–research nexus 22, 60–4, 73–5, 
168–9, 231, 239
Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) 65, 182
research–based learning 152, 154, 227–8, 239
Research Excellence Framework (REF) 56, 
61, 64, 65, 151, 168–9, 182
research impact 79
research–informed teaching 61
research–led learning 152, 153–4, 228, 239
research–led teaching 61, 63
research–oriented learning 152, 154, 228, 239
research–tutored learning 152, 155, 228, 239
Researching, Advancing and Inspiring 
Student Engagement (RAISE) network 
163–5
resilience 228, 239
revision sessions 207
Riseley, K. 51, 80, 123
Ritzer, G. 180
Robbins Report 174
Rogers, C. 22–3, 70, 128, 219, 239
Roksa, J. 184
Rowland, S. 72
Said, E. 34
Saunders, G. 91
scaffolding 34, 106, 228, 239
scepticism 189
scholarship
four scholarships 1, 2, 7, 22, 59–60, 151
HEA Fellowship application 202–3
scholarly activities in CBHE 191
students as scholars 142–3, 148–55, 230, 239
scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) 
1–2, 7, 22, 151, 198–9, 229, 239
academic identity 59–60, 61
enhancing student learning 26–7
movement 74–5
students as change agents 156–8
Schön, D. 8, 33, 203
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

270
INDEX
scripted communication 68, 228, 239
self–actualisation 27, 119, 139, 228, 239
self–assessment 40–1, 42, 147–8, 228, 239
self–criticality 129, 229, 239
Selwyn, N. 97–8
Senior Fellowship 12, 13, 237
reflective writing for the application 209–10
service functions 73
Sherman, D.L. 129
significant learning 128, 229, 239
Smith, D. 89
Smith, P. 46–8
social capital networks 184–5
social closure theory 184
social conscience function 186, 232, 239
social engineering projects 177–8
social learning theory 40–1
social sciences 120–1
sociological imagination 129
SOLO Taxonomy 30–1
speech acts 48
spirituality 32–3
St Andrews, University of 159
Staff and Educational Development 
Association (SEDA) 4, 34
staff support role 210
Stahl, B. 96
standpoint knowledge 124–5, 229, 239
state regulation 194–5
statistics 144
Steiner, R. 27
Stephanie, J. 41
Stevens, D. 75–7
Stevenson, J. 28
Stewart, B. 99
Stirling, University of 144
Stockton, B. 17–19
strategic leadership 210–12
student as active collaborator 229, 239
student–centred learning 22–4, 230, 239
student as change agent 142–3, 155–60, 229, 239
student as co–creator 159–60, 229, 239
student as co–designer 159–60, 229, 239
student as consultant 159, 229–30, 239
student as consumer 179
student engagement 69–70, 196, 230, 239
enhancing in tutorials 24–6
learning as 28–32
RAISE network 163–5
Student Engagement Partnership Unit 141
student experience 90
student as producer 158, 167–70, 179, 230, 239
student revolts 168
student as scholar 142–3, 148–55, 230, 239
student surveys 44, 68–9, 168–9, 180, 230, 239
student as teacher 142–8, 230, 239
student voice 157
‘Students as Change Agents’ initiative 156
Students at the Heart of the System 141
Students as Learners and Teachers (SaLT) 
programme 159
students as partners in learning 2, 3, 141–72
authority of the HE teacher 165–70
change agents 142–3, 155–60, 229, 239
departmental and institutional strategies 
161–2
extracts from successful HEA fellowship 
applications 171–2
RAISE 163–5
scholars 142–3, 148–55, 230, 239
student perspective 153, 170–1
teachers 142–8, 230, 239
students’ quality of life 149
subject (discipline) allegiance 55–6, 120–2, 
230, 239
subject–by–subject review 65
subject pedagogies 121–2, 230–1, 239
sufficiency 204
summative assessment 33, 40, 45–6, 148
super–complexity 27, 129, 185, 231, 239
supervisions 106–7
surface learning 30
surveillance 95
sustainability 127, 213, 214–16, 231, 239
Tang, C. 29, 30
Tapper, T. 194–5
Taught Degree Awarding Power (TDAP) 
status 185, 190–1
teacher–centred perspective 23–4
teachers, students as 142–8, 230, 239
teaching, scholarship of see scholarship of 
teaching and learning
teaching excellence 28, 74
teaching and learning (as academic practice) 
56–7, 58–64
Teaching–Learning Academy (TLA) 157
teaching prizes 172
teaching–research nexus 22, 60–4, 73–5, 
168–9, 231, 239
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

INDEX
271
team building 109–10
technological fetishism 99, 231, 239
technology–enhanced learning (TEL) 112, 
231, 239
TESTA (Transforming the Experience of 
Students Through Assessment) project 
44–6, 231, 239
Thatcherism 181, 231, 239
therapeutic ethos 136
therapeutic turn 117, 231, 239
Thinkbelt (The Potteries) 87–8
third person writing 201–2
Thomas, L. 196
three dimensions of practice 8–12, 206, 235
threshold concepts 36, 232, 239
time 88
Toffler, A. 23
transformative learning 178, 214, 232, 239
transnational collaboration 17–19
transport links 88
Transport Map 3–4, 213, 239
tribes and territories 55, 121, 232, 239
Trow, M. 175
trust 167
tuition fees 179–80, 185, 193, 194
tutor embodiment 100, 104, 232, 239
tutorials 208
reducing teacher input 24–6
students as teachers 146
UK Professional Standards Framework 
(UKPSF) 5–14, 64, 204
aims 6
engaging with 13–14
four descriptors 8, 12–13, 236–8
language and structure 6–8
three dimensions of practice 8–12, 206, 235
unencumbered self 117, 129, 232, 239
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) 28, 232, 239
universal knowledge 21, 58, 117, 133–5, 232, 239
universalism 189
University College Dublin 145
University College London (UCL) 153–4
university governance 77
university as social conscience 186, 232, 239
University of the Streets, East London 86–7
utopian imaginary future 101–2
validity of academic knowledge 118–26
value–laden knowledge 124–5
values, professional 10, 11–12, 206, 209–10, 
235
ventriloquism 68, 73–5, 232–3, 239
Verlager, M.A. 38
Victoria, University of (Canada) 154
virtual learning environment (VLE) 111
virtual learning spaces 95–103, 233, 239
online distance learning 103–6
online learning vs face–to–face learning 
106–10
virtual pantechnicon 233, 239
vocational education 191–2, 211–12
vocational knowledge 119–20
vocational turn 116–17
vocationalism 233, 239
voice 
perspectives 124–7, 135–7, 233, 239
student voice 157
Vygotsky, L.S. 26
Walker, M. 31
Warwick, University of 92–3
well–being 31, 32–3, 233, 239
Wenger, E. 41
Western Washington University 157
White Paper of 2011  141, 174, 177, 179
whole–of–university approach 28
widening participation 25, 175–8, 210–11, 233, 
239
real challenges of 137–9
Wilkinson, T. 85
will to learn 27, 233, 239
wise counsel 187–9, 234, 239
women, online harassment/abuse of 98
Woolf, V. 90–1
work 87, 88
and the knowledge economy 101
work–based learning (WBL) 25–6, 234,
239
York, University of 89–90
York St John University 149
Young, M. 119–20
Zandstra, R. 155–6
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

 
 
TEACHING FOR QUALITY LEARNING AT 
UNIVERSITY  
Fourth Edition 
 
John Biggs and Catherine Tang 
 
ISBN: 9780335242757 
eBook: 9780335242764 
2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teaching for Quality Learning at University, now in its fourth edition, is a 
bestselling book for higher education teachers and administrators interested 
in assuring effective teaching. The authors outline the constructive alignment 
of outcomes based teaching, including how to implement it and why it is a 
good idea to do so. Clearly organized and written, with practical examples, 
the new edition is thoroughly updated. 
 
Key features: 
 
a Each chapter includes tasks that offer a 'how-to' manual to implement 
constructive alignment in your own teaching practices 
a Aids staff developers in providing support for teachers  
a Provides a framework for administrators interested in quality assurance 
and enhancement of teaching across the whole university  
     
                        
 
   
                     
 
 www.openup.co.uk            
 
 
 
 
 
 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

www.openup.co.uk 
 
RESEARCH PROPOSALS 
A PRACTICAL GUIDE 
Martyn Denscombe 
2012 
9780335244065 – Paperback 
eBook also available 
 
 
Whether you are an undergraduate student doing  
your final year project, a Masters student writing your dissertation, or a 
PhD student applying for acceptance onto a doctoral programme, this 
practical book will  
help you to produce a successful and persuasive research proposal.  
Written by an experienced and best-selling author, this handbook uniquely 
draws a parallel between a research proposal and a sales pitch. The book 
provides guidance on what to include and what to omit from your proposal 
and demonstrates how to ‘sell’ your research idea. Denscombe ably guides 
you through each stage of the process: 
a Choosing a research topic 
a Reviewing the literature 
a Formulating the research question 
a Explaining the research methods 
a Estimating the costs and planning the time involved 
a Obtaining research ethics approval 
With top tips throughout, this book provides an insight to the logic behind 
research proposals and the way that good proposals address 7 basic 
questions that readers will ask when they evaluate any proposal. 
 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WRITING FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS 
Third Edition 
 
Rowena Murray 
 
ISBN: 9780335263028 (Paperback) 
eBook: 9780335263035 
2013 
 
 
 
 
 
Writing for publication is a daunting and time-consuming task for many 
academics. And yet the pressure for academics to publish has never been 
greater. This book demystifies the process of writing academic papers, 
showing readers what good papers look like and how they can be written.  
Offering a research-informed understanding of the contemporary 
challenges of writing for publication, this book gives practical advice for 
overcoming common obstacles such as finding a topic, targeting journals, 
and finding the time to write. The author offers a range of helpful writing 
strategies, making this an invaluable handbook for academics at all stages 
of their career, from doctoral students to early career researchers and even 
experienced academics.  
The third edition has been comprehensively updated to reflect the 
changing landscape of academic writing, including the most recent 
research and theory on writing across the disciplines. Drawing on her 
extensive experience of running writing workshops and working closely 
with academics on developing writing, Rowena Murray offers practical and 
tested strategies for good academic writing.  
New to the third edition: 
a Advice on how to use social media to promote your publications  
a More examples from different disciplines and journals  
a More advice on how to tackle writer’s block  
a Extended end-of-chapter checklists  
a New evidence that these strategies really work!  
 
www.openup.co.uk 
 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Making Policy in British Higher Education 1945 - 
2011 
 
Michael Shattock 
 
ISBN: 9780335241866  (Paperback) 
eBook: 9780335241873 
2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This book aims to provide an authoritative account of the evolution of 
policy in British higher education drawing extensively on previously 
untapped archival sources. It offers a comprehensive analysis of the policy 
drivers since 1945 and up to 2011 and of the extent to which, even in the 
so called golden age of university autonomy in the immediate post-War 
period, the development of British higher education policy was closely 
integrated with government policies. In particular, it highlights how the 
role of the Treasury in determining the resource base for the expansion of 
student numbers is key to understanding many of the shifts in policy that 
occurred. 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.openup.co.uk               
 
 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Researching Higher Education 
Second Edition 
 
Malcolm Tight 
 
ISBN: 9780335241835  (Paperback) 
eBook: 9780335241842 
2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This authoritative book couples an overview of the principal 
current areas of research into higher education with a guide to the 
processes involved in undertaking such research. 
 
Comprehensively updated throughout, this new edition examines 
the current state of higher education research with brand new case 
studies and has been expanded to include North American work. 
 
The book includes: 
 
a Analysis of published research by topic, method, theory and level 
a Detailed discussion of selected examples of published research 
a Suggestions on under-researched topics 
a Guidance on publication outlets 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.openup.co.uk               
 
 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Cover design Tiger Finch Creatives
Enhancing Learning and 
Teaching in Higher Education
Engaging with the Dimensions of Practice
“This volume not only brings together a huge volume and range of 
research and scholarship on teaching and learning but does so in an 
extremely accessible and engaging way. This is a book that seeks 
to encourage thinking, and thinking oriented to helping to enhance 
higher education and everyone’s experience of it at that. It is a 
splendid book from which everyone can gain.”
Ronald Barnett, Emeritus Professor of Higher Education, 
UCL Institute of Education
This book is an essential guide if you are working in higher education and 
seeking professional recognition for your role in teaching and supporting 
learning, and particularly if you are seeking a fellowship with the UK 
Higher Education Academy (HEA). The book maps a range of key themes 
against the United Kingdom Professional Standards Framework (UKPSF) 
and invites you to engage with its ‘dimensions of practice’.  
Its distinctive features include:
·	 Explicit links to the UKPSF and practical advice on how to put 
together a scholarly narrative account of your academic practice in 
order to seek fellowship status with Higher Education Academy (HEA)
·	 An exploration of the contested nature of academic practice, 
inviting you to interrogate how this can be negotiated within your 
own learning and teaching context
·	 Contributions from leading scholars in the field, practitioners writing 
about their roles and experiences, and the views of students.  
Each chapter interweaves insightful commentary with case studies, 
practical examples and opinion pieces, as well as debate pieces 
and ‘Dear Lecturer’ comments from students. Each chapter also 
includes helpful extracts from successful HEA fellowship applications, 
demonstrating how the content of the book can be used in a practical 
way to help you put together your own application.
If you are following an individual or institution accredited route to 
fellowship and/or studying a taught course (such as a PG Cert HE) then 
this book is an indispensable tool to help you think critically about the 
UKPSF dimensions of practice and academic practice in general.
John Lea is Head of Academic Professional 
Development at Canterbury Christ Church 
University, UK.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

