
IET HEALTHCARE TECHNOLOGIES SERIES 10
Enhanced Living
Environments

IET book series on e-health technologies – call for authors
Book Series Editor: Professor Joel P. C. Rodrigues, the National Institute of
Telecommunications (Inatel), Brazil and Instituto de Telecomunicac¸o˜es,
Portugal
While the demographic shifts in populations display significant socio-
economic challenges, they trigger opportunities for innovations in e-Health,
m-Health, precision and personalized medicine, robotics, sensing, the
Internet of Things, cloud computing, Big Data, software-defined networks
and network function virtualization. Their integration is however associated
with many technological, ethical, legal, social and security issues. This new
Book Series aims to disseminate recent advances for e-Health Technologies
to improve healthcare and people’s well-being.
Topics considered include Intelligent e-Health systems, electronic health
records, ICT-enabled personal health systems, mobile and cloud computing
for eHealth, health monitoring, precision and personalized health, robotics
for e-Health, security and privacy in e-Health, ambient assisted living,
telemedicine, Big Data and IoT for e-Health, and more.
Proposals for coherently integrated international multi-authored edited or
co-authored handbooks and research monographs will be considered for
this Book Series. Each proposal will be reviewed by the Book Series Editor
with additional external reviews from independent reviewers. Please email
your book proposal for the IET Book Series on e-Health Technologies to:
Professor Joel Rodrigues at joeljr@ieee.org or joeljr@inatel.br

Enhanced Living
Environments
From models to technologies
Edited by
Rossitza Ivanova Goleva, Ivan Ganchev, Ciprian Dobre,
Nuno Garcia and Carlos Valderrama
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Published by The Institution of Engineering and Technology, London, United Kingdom
The Institution of Engineering and Technology is registered as a Charity in England &
Wales (no. 211014) and Scotland (no. SC038698).
† The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2018
First published 2017
This publication is copyright under the Berne Convention and the Universal Copyright
Convention. All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research
or private study, or criticism or review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988, this publication may be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, only with the prior permission in writing of the publishers, or in
the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms of licences issued
by the Copyright Licensing Agency. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside those
terms should be sent to the publisher at the undermentioned address:
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
Michael Faraday House
Six Hills Way, Stevenage
Herts, SG1 2AY, United Kingdom
www.theiet.org
While the authors and publisher believe that the information and guidance given in this
work are correct, all parties must rely upon their own skill and judgement when making
use of them. Neither the authors nor publisher assumes any liability to anyone for any
loss or damage caused by any error or omission in the work, whether such an error or
omission is the result of negligence or any other cause. Any and all such liability is
disclaimed.
The moral rights of the authors to be identified as authors of this work have been
asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this product is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-78561-211-4 (hardback)
ISBN 978-1-78561-212-1 (PDF)
Typeset in India by MPS Limited
Printed in the UK by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon

Dedication
To my family and friends.
In Memoriam to Rumen Stainov.
– Rossitza Goleva
To all my family and extended family.
– Ivan Ganchev
To Anamaria and Iulia, the two beautiful girls in my life,
with all my love.
– Ciprian Dobre
To the true team spirit of the AAPELE Team
and to my family and friends!
– Nuno M. Garcia
To the great AAPELE team that provides the essential energy
we all need as well as to our families who support our dedication
and sacrifices.
– Carlos Valderrama

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
About the editors
xv
Preface
xix
Acknowledgements
xxiii
1
Introduction to enhanced living environments
1
Ciprian Dobre, Ivan Ganchev, Nuno M. Garcia, Rossitza Goleva
and Carlos Alberto Valderrama
Abstract
1
1.1
Introduction
1
1.2
An overview of healthcare systems
3
1.3
Ambient assisted living and enhanced living environments
7
1.4
Conclusions
14
Acknowledgements
16
References
16
Biographies
18
2
Enhanced living environments from the viewpoint
of socioecological psychology
21
Tama´s Martos and Viola Sallay
Abstract
21
2.1
Introduction
21
2.2
Socioecological psychology as a framework
22
2.3
Concept of ‘human niche construction’ as a universal human
phenomenon
22
2.4
Home as a niche
24
2.4.1
Emotional processes in the home: lessons learnt with
the Emotional Map of the Home Interview
25
2.5
Legacy of Self-determination theory
28
2.5.1
Core concepts of SDT
28
2.6
Putting it all together: socioecological psychological aspects
of ELE
30
2.6.1
ELE as niche construction
31
2.6.2
ELE and home niches: the potential places of technology
in a complex system
34
2.6.3
Constructing ELE solutions in home niches: the importance
of psychological need support
36

2.7
Conclusions
40
Acknowledgements
41
References
41
Further reading
46
Biographies
47
3
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
49
Kadian Davis, Evans B. Owusu, Lucio Marcenaro, Jun Hu,
Carlo S. Regazzoni, and Loe Feijs
Abstract
49
3.1
Introduction
49
3.1.1
Social isolation and loneliness as risk factors
50
3.1.2
Ambient assisted living
50
3.2
A user-centred approach for designing systems to support
social connectedness
52
3.2.1
A user-centred design process
53
3.3
Context-aware systems for social connectedness
55
3.4
Pervasive sensing and models for HAR
57
3.5
A case study evaluating the HMM-SVM model
60
3.6
Context-aware connectedness systems
62
3.7
Experimental results
65
3.7.1
Perceptions on context-aware solutions for social
connectedness
65
3.7.2
HAR-based activity displays for social connectedness
66
3.8
Challenges
69
3.9
Conclusion
69
Acknowledgements
70
References
70
Further reading
77
Data set
77
Biographies
77
4
Ethics in information and communication technologies:
training the elderly in making gerontechnology accessible
81
He´le`ne Geurts, Marie-Claire Haelewyck, and Carlos Valderrama
Abstract
81
4.1
Introduction
81
4.2
Generation effect
82
4.3
Gerontechnology is a neologism vector of the future
83
4.4
Pitfalls to be avoided
85
4.5
Ethical issues at stake
88
4.6
Identification of needs, the keystone of reflection
90
4.7
Need for acceptability, the secret of success
93
4.8
Conclusion
95
Acknowledgements
95
viii
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

References
95
Further reading
98
Biographies
99
5
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios in smart personal
environments
101
Serge Autexier, Rossitza Goleva, Nuno M. Garcia, Rumen Stainov,
Ivan Ganchev,, Constandinos X. Mavromoustakis, Ciprian Dobre,
Ivan Chorbev, Vladimir Trajkovik, and Eftim Zdravevski
Abstract
101
5.1
Introduction
102
5.2
State of the art
103
5.3
Living lab architecture
106
5.4
End-user groups
108
5.5
From single user and single sensor to the cloud and back
110
5.6
Scenarios
114
5.7
Customized ELE ICT services
120
5.8
Conclusions and further research directions
122
Acknowledgements
122
References
122
Further reading
128
Biographies
128
6
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
133
Valentina Markova and Todor Ganchev
Abstract
133
6.1
Introduction
133
6.2
State-of-the-art personal health monitoring systems
135
6.2.1
Physiological parameters and stress
135
6.2.2
Overview of system architectures
139
6.2.3
Short-range wireless network technology
141
6.3
Stress and emotion assessment
145
6.3.1
Stress assessment procedure
146
6.3.2
Emotion recognition
147
6.4
Use cases
148
6.4.1
Stationary setup
148
6.4.2
Mobile setup
149
6.4.3
Recent projects
151
6.4.4
SLADE application scenario
152
6.5
Future technology in support of stress monitoring
and management
153
References
155
Further reading
158
List of abbreviations
159
Biographies
160
Contents
ix

7
Big data healthcare system to improve healthcare information
searching in the Internet
161
Mariya Savova Evtimova
Abstract
161
7.1
Introduction
161
7.2
Intelligent agents’ advantages and characteristics
162
7.3
Fuzzy logic and probability
163
7.4
Meaning of big data in a personalized search of uncertain
and vague information
165
7.4.1
Value and demand in-depth analysis
165
7.4.2
Variety and heterogeneity of data
165
7.4.3
Quality of data
166
7.4.4
Volume and size of data
166
7.4.5
Speed and timeliness of the data
166
7.5
Rule-based and case-based reasoning
166
7.6
Related work
167
7.7
Agent-based system for personalized searching
167
7.7.1
Aims and tasks of the developed system
168
7.7.2
Conceptual model for personalized semantic search
system when the information in the query is fuzzy
and uncertain
168
7.8
Concept of building a customized profile
172
7.8.1
Approaches and methods for collecting user
information
172
7.8.2
Conceptual scheme of the user profile
173
7.9
Development of applied subjective ontology: problems and
approaches
174
7.9.1
Storing the knowledge in the fuzzy ontology of the
proposed semantic system
174
7.9.2
Fuzzification process in case-based ontology
174
7.9.3
Design of the fuzzy and vague case-based ontology
174
7.10 Description of the process of reasoning
175
7.11 Metrics for evaluating the quality of the returned results
from the search system
178
7.12 Conclusions
178
References
180
Further reading
182
List of abbreviations
182
Biography
182
8
Sensors for wireless body area networks
183
Ivelina Nikolaeva Ruskova and Elitsa Emilova Gieva
Abstract
183
x
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

8.1
Introduction: wireless body area networks and wireless
sensor network
183
8.2
Sensor node
184
8.3
Overview of sensor characteristics
192
8.4
WBAN technologies
199
8.4.1
Applications depending on the technology
200
8.5
Conclusion
202
References
202
Further reading
204
Biographies
204
9
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
207
Rossitza Goleva, Mara Pudane, Sintija Petrovica, Egons Lavendelis,
Karl Kreiner, Mario Drobics, Ivan Ganchev, Nuno M. Garcia,
Rumen Stainov, Ciprian Dobre, Constandinos X. Mavromoustakis,
Ivan Chorbev, Vladimir Trajkovik, Eftim Zdravevski,
and George Mastorakis
Abstract
207
9.1
Introduction
208
9.2
State of the art
209
9.3
Generic AALaaS/ELEaaS architecture
210
9.4
Affective computing mapping implementation
216
9.5
KIOLA platform implementation
220
9.6
AAL/ELE laboratory and home implementation
223
9.7
Conclusion and further research plan
224
Acknowledgements
224
References
224
Further reading
229
Biographies
229
10 Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
in the next-generation networks
235
Radosveta I. Sokullu and Eren Demir
Abstract
235
10.1
Introduction
236
10.2
Linear wireless sensor networks
237
10.2.1
Network model
237
10.2.2
Variations of LWSNs
238
10.2.3
Objectives and challenges of LWSNs
240
10.3
MAC protocols for LWSNs
241
10.4
Open research issues
262
10.5
Conclusion
262
References
263
Contents
xi

Further reading
266
List of abbreviations
266
Glossary
267
Biographies
268
11 Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
269
Belgacem Ben Hedia, Chokri Mraidha, Etienne Hamelin,
and Sara Tucci-Piergiovanni
Abstract
269
11.1
Introduction
269
11.2
CPS challenges
272
11.3
Model-compilation methodology and approach
275
11.3.1
Front-end: from multiple heterogeneous
high-level models
275
11.3.2
Middle-end: model-compilation into SwArch
280
11.3.3
Back-end: transformation into concrete target
platforms
283
11.3.4
Design iterations
283
11.4
Model-compilation methodology assessment
284
11.4.1
Applicability of model-compilation approach
284
11.4.2
Productivity enhancements
285
11.5
Related works
285
11.5.1
Model-based methodologies for safety
and timing
285
11.5.2
Model-compilation
286
11.5.3
Physical modelling
287
11.6
Conclusion
288
References
288
Biographies
291
12 Health monitoring using WBAN: topology design, routing
and thermal issues
293
Ghufran Ahmed, Saif Ul Islam, Maham Shahid, Azfar Shakeel,
Najmun Nisa, Najmul Hassan, Numera M.I. Shahid,
Zaheer Ul Hussain Sani, and Hilal Jan
Abstract
293
12.1
Introduction
293
12.1.1
Applications
295
12.1.2
WBAN wireless technologies
298
12.1.3
WBAN infrastructure
300
12.1.4
Energy efficiency
300
12.1.5
Approaches to achieve energy efficiency
300
12.2
Energy-aware topology design
301
12.2.1
Optimization of relay nodes placement
304
xii
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

12.3
SAR analysis
304
12.3.1
Using low transmission power level to
reduce SAR
305
12.3.2
Impact of frequency band on SAR values
305
12.3.3
Impact of high SAR on human body
305
12.4
Energy efficient and SAR-aware routing
306
12.4.1
Energy-efficient routing
306
12.4.2
SAR-aware routing
308
12.5
Conclusion
309
References
309
Biographies
313
13 Wearable health care: technology evolution, algorithms
and needs
315
Raluca Maria Aileni, Sever Pasca, Carlos Alberto Valderrama,
and Rodica Strungaru
Abstract
315
13.1
Introduction
315
13.2
Wearable technology evolution
316
13.3
Healthcare perspectives for wearable devices
324
13.4
Algorithms dedicated to wearable technologies
325
13.4.1
Case 1: wearable sensors for body temperature
monitoring
326
13.4.2
Case 2: wearable sensors for human skin
conductance response
331
13.4.3
Case 3: wearable sensors for human activity
monitoring
332
13.5
Wearable: user needs and expectations
334
13.6
Future wearable challenges
335
13.7
Conclusions
337
Acknowledgements
338
References
338
Biographies
342
14 Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
345
Nirvana Popescu, Marian-Silviu Poboroniuc, Decebal Popescu,
D˘anut¸ Irimia, and Alexandru Valer Grigoras¸
Abstract
345
14.1
Introduction
345
14.2
Design and development of the IHRG structure
348
14.3
Voice control approach
349
14.3.1
Hardware and software design
349
14.3.2
Experiments with vocal commands
352
14.4
Predefined recovery exercises system for home use
353
Contents
xiii

14.5
Hybrid FES-robotic glove approach
354
14.5.1
Hybrid system description
354
14.5.2
Experimental results
358
14.5.3
Statistical analysis
360
14.6
Conclusion
364
References
365
Biographies
366
Index
369
xiv
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

About the editors
Ciprian Dobre is Professor within the Computer Science Department, University
Politehnica of Bucharest (Habil. since 2014, Dr. Since 2008 with Cum laudae).
He currently leads the activities within Laboratory on Pervasive products and ser-
vices, and MobyLab. Ciprian Dobre’s research interests involve research subjects
related to mobile wireless networks and computing applications, pervasive ser-
vices, context awareness and people-centric or participatory sensing. He has sci-
entific and scholarly contributions in the field of large-scale distributed systems
concerning mobile applications and smart technologies to reduce urban congestion
and air pollution (MobiWay, TRANSYS), context-aware applications (CAPIM),
opportunistic networks and mobile data offloading (SPRINT, SENSE), monitoring
(MonALISA), high-speed networking (VINCI, FDT), Grid application develop-
ment (EGEE, SEE-GRID) and evaluation using modelling and simulation
(MONARC 2, VNSim). These contributions led to important results, demonstrating
his qualifications and potential to go significantly beyond the state of the art.
Ciprian Dobre was awarded a PhD scholarship from California Institute of Tech-
nology (Caltech, USA), and another one from Oracle. His results received one IBM
Faculty Award, two CENIC Awards and three Best Paper Awards (in 2013, 2012
and 2010). The results were published in over 100 chapters in edited books, articles
in major international peer-reviewed journals and papers in well-established inter-
national conferences and workshops.
Dr. Ivan Ganchev is a Senior Member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers (IEEE), the IEEE Communications Society, the IEEE Consumer Elec-
tronics Society, the IEEE Internet of Things Community, the IEEE Smart Cities
Community and the IEEE Consultants Network. He received his doctoral and
engineering (summa cum laude) degrees from the Saint-Petersburg State University
of Telecommunications. He is a Deputy Director of the Telecommunications
Research Centre (TRC), University of Limerick (Ireland), an Associate Professor
from the University of Plovdiv ‘‘Paisii Hilendarski’’, an ITU-T Invited Expert and
an IET Invited Lecturer. Dr. Ganchev was involved in 35þ international and
national research and education projects. His research interests include novel
telecommunications paradigms, future networks and services, smart ubiquitous
networking, context-aware networking, mobile cloud computing, Internet of Things
(IoT), Internet of Services (IoS), ambient assisted living (AAL), enhanced living
environments (ELE), trust management, Internet tomography, mHealth and
mLearning ICT. Dr Ganchev has served on the Technical Program Committee of

200þ prestigious international conferences, symposia and workshops. He has
authored/co-authored 6 books (including 2 edited books) and 240þ research papers
in refereed international journals and conference proceedings. Dr. Ganchev is on
the editorial board of and has served as a Guest Editor for multiple international
journals.
Nuno M. Garcia holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science Engineering from the Uni-
versity of Beira Interior (UBI, Covilha˜, Portugal) (2008) and he is a 5-year B.Sc.
(Hons.) in Mathematics/Informatics also from UBI (1999–2004). He is Assistant
Professor at UBI and Invited Associate Professor at the School of Communication,
Architecture, Arts and Information Technologies of the Universidade Luso´fona de
Humanidades e Tecnologias (Lisbon, Portugal). He was founder and is coordinator
of the Assisted Living Computing and Telecommunications Laboratory (ALLab), a
research group within the Instituto de Telecomunicac¸o˜es at UBI. He was also
cofounder and is Coordinator of the Executive Council of the BSAFE LAB – Law
enforcement, Justice and Public Safety Research and Technology Transfer
Laboratory, a multidisciplinary research laboratory in UBI. He is the coordinator of
the Cisco Academy at UBI, Head of EyeSeeLab in Eye- See Lda. (Lisbon, Portu-
gal), and member of the Consultative Council of Favvus IT HR SA (Lisbon). He is
also Chair of the COST Action IC1303 AAPELE – Architectures, Algorithms and
Platforms for Enhanced Living Environments. He is the main author of several
international, European and Portuguese patents. He is member of the Non-Com-
mercial Users Constituency, a group within GNSO in ICANN. His main interests
include next-generation networks, algorithms for bio-signal processing, distributed
and cooperative protocols.
Rossitza Goleva received her Ph.D. in Communication Networks in 2016 and
M.Sc. in Computer Science in 1982 at Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria. She
was part of the research staff of the research Institute of Bulgarian PTT between
1982 and 1987. Since 1987, she is with Department of Communication Networks at
Technical University of Sofia. At present, Rossitza works on communication net-
works, communication protocols and software engineering. Her research interests
are in Quality of Service in communication networks, communication protocols,
traffic engineering, cloud and fog computing, performance analyses. She is an
IEEE Member, involved in IEEE Bulgaria section activities, has more than 85
research publications, was part of more than 30 research projects including and EU
COST IC1303 AAPELE action.
Carlos Alberto Valderrama is, since 2004, Director of the Electronics and
Microelectronics Department at the Polytechnic Faculty of the University of Mons
in Belgium. The Electronics and Microelectronics Department is member of the
Numediart (New Media Art Technology) and the InforTec (Information Technol-
ogy) Institutes. He obtained the Ph.D. degree in Microelectronics at the INPG in
Grenoble, France, in 1998, the M.Sc. diploma at the Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro (UFRJ-COPPE), Brazil, in 1993, and the electrical-electronics engineering
xvi
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

diploma at the National University of Cordoba (UNC), Argentina, in 1989. He was
visiting professor at two Brazilian universities, at the Federal University of Per-
nambuco (UFPE) in 2004 and at the Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte
(UFRN) in 1998. Between 1999 and 2004, he was leading the Hardware-Flow team
in CoWare NV. (today acquired by Synopsys), Belgium. In 2009, he was respon-
sible for the creation of the spinoff Nsilition (http://www.nsilition.com/) resulting
from the IPfundry project funded by the Walloon Region. His primary research
interests include wireless communication, EDA and system level design of recon-
figurable embedded architectures. He has participated in more than 15 national and
international research projects from the development of 4G chips to next-genera-
tion tracking devices and software architectures for the IoT, satellite and multicore
industry, collaborating with partners such as Alcatel, STMicroelectronics, NXP and
Thales. He serves as technical reviewer and committee member of multiple jour-
nals and international conferences. His research activity is supported by more than
150 publications on international conferences, more than 10 books chapters, and
more than 30 scientific journals. He is IEEE senior member since 2006.
About the editors
xvii

This page intentionally left blank 

Preface
The implementation of the information and communication technologies (ICTs) in
healthcare and caregiving areas, the increase in medical expenses, problems with
demographic ageing, the dynamics of the everyday life and the necessity to take
care of the family put a strong pressure on the sustainability of health and social
care systems, on the labour participation and on the quality of life for elderly,
people with disabilities, children and active people. Enhanced living environments
(ELEs) encompass all ICT technological achievements supporting true ambient-
assisted living (AAL) including capabilities for better living and healthcare orga-
nization. ELE promotes the provision of infrastructures and services for better
living via the seamless integration of ICT within homes and residences, thus
increasing the quality of life of human beings, maintaining one’s home as a pre-
ferable living environment for as long as possible and not causing disruption in the
web of social and family interactions. AAL aims to construct safe environments
around assisted peoples (and local/remote caregivers/family members) in order to
help them maintain independent and/or more autonomous lifestyle. Finally, AAL/
ELE technologies allow the creation of personal living environments (PLEs) con-
cerned with not only medical or fitness related functionalities but also social
isolation, stress level, emotional state, etc.
Most efforts today towards the realization of AAL/ELE systems are based on
developing specialized devices and the use of ambient intelligence to integrate
these devices together to construct a safe PLE. There is a missing interaction of
multiple stakeholders needing to collaborate for ELE supporting a multitude of
AAL services, as well as barriers to innovation in the markets concerned, the
governments, and health care sector. These innovations do not yet take place at a
relevant scale.
Many fundamental issues in the ELE area remain open. Most of the current
efforts still do not fully express the power of human being, and the importance of
social connections and societal activities is less noticed. Effective ELE solutions
require appropriate ICT algorithms, architectures and platforms, having in view the
advance of science in this area and the development of new and innovative con-
nected solutions (particularly in the area of smart dust/dew/fog/cloud computing).
In this sense, the book aims to provide a platform for the dissemination of research
efforts and presentation of advances in the ELE area that explicitly aim at addres-
sing these challenges.
The book is intended for use by different professionals from medical doctors,
ICT specialists, mathematicians, engineers and programmers to caregivers and

third parties like insurance companies’ personnel and end users. It could be used as
a notebook in the related curriculum. The chapters could be read in any order.
The overall objectives of this book are to:
●
Offer an up-to-date analysis of architectures, techniques, protocols, compo-
nents and development related to the AAL and ELE areas.
●
Explain state-of-the-art technological solutions for the main AAL/ELE issues,
stressing on computing and sensors.
●
Demonstrate the importance of the emotional status of people in their living
environment.
●
Present the AAL/ELE benefits along with the development process of scien-
tific and commercial applications and platforms.
The book’s mission is to make readers familiar with these concepts and tech-
nologies that are successfully used in the implementation of today’s AAL/ELE
systems or are promising in future developments. The approach is more practical
than theoretical, defining different concepts under a hierarchical reference model
for ELE. The interdisciplinary nature of the topic brings together also an inter-
disciplinary team of authors that presented different views on the topic. The book
contains many examples showing specific applications and highlighting possibi-
lities for the integration on a generic platform.
The book presents also up-to-date technological solutions to the main aspects
regarding AAL/ELE systems and applications including computing and artificial
intelligence. The aim is to demonstrate the process started with AAL labs by further
transforming these into islands with rich capabilities. This will allow crystallization
and refinement of specifications and definitions, and will provide possibilities to
offer appropriate services to broad public aiming at the same time to decrease the
cost of their provision. The book discusses contemporary AAL/ELE technologies
designed to solve some of the thorniest business problems affecting applications in
areas such as health and medical supply, smart cities and smart houses, big data,
Internet of Things (IoT) and many more.
The book consists of 14 chapters that are grouped logically depending on its
respective topics. Chapter 1 is an introduction to ELE. Chapter 2 deals with ELE
from the viewpoint of the socioecological psychology. It highlights an interesting
approach towards the emotional state of people under monitoring. Chapter 3
explains pervasive sensing for social connectedness and enriches the topic of
Chapter 2. Chapter 4 presents a specific view towards elderly, raising also some
ethical issues.
Chapter 5 defines in a more technical way how the end users, AAL and ELE
address service scenarios within a smart PLE. Chapter 6 demonstrates an interest-
ing measurement of stress. An application of artificial intelligence in searching for
health information is shown in Chapter 7.
Chapters 8 and 9 relate to communications and networking aspects of
AAL/ELE platforms and systems along with their architectures and possible
implementations.
xx
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

A broad analysis of the linear wireless sensor networks (LWSNs) and protocols
for use in the next-generation networks is included in Chapter 10. A theoretical
approach towards the actual software implementation on the target ELE platform is
shown in Chapter 11. Chapter 12 presents the use of wireless body area networks
for health monitoring along with corresponding challenges, topology design and
thermal issues. Chapter 13 presents an interesting survey on the wearable health-
care technology. Chapter 14 presents a sophisticated intelligent system for after-
stroke home rehabilitation.
Preface
xxi

This page intentionally left blank 

Acknowledgements
This book would not have been possible without the help of many people. We
would like to thank the reviewers, colleagues from IET, authors, co-authors and
friends for their direct and indirect support.
Many special thanks to all colleagues from the EU COST action IC1303
‘Algorithms, Architectures and Platforms for Enhanced Living Environments’
(AAPELE) for their encouragement, advices, proposals and reviews. Many of them
are authors and had been cited in the book.
Special thanks to Valerie Molie`re, Olivia Wilkins, Jennifer Grace and Paul
Deards of IET Publishers as well as Srinivasan Natarajan of MPS Ltd. for their
patience, corrections, advices and valuable support.
Book Editors

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 1
Introduction to enhanced living environments
Ciprian Dobre1, Ivan Ganchev2, Nuno M. Garcia3,
Rossitza Goleva4 and Carlos Alberto Valderrama5
Abstract
This chapter introduces the ambient assisted living (AAL) and enhanced living
environments (ELEs) platforms in their different aspects. With the integration of the
information and communications technologies (ICT), cloud, fog, dew, and smart dust
computing, microelectronics, sensor networks and many other pervasive devices, the
use of ambient intelligence aims to construct a safe environment. There is a missing
interaction of multiple stakeholders needing to collaborate for ELE supporting a
multitude of AAL services. There are also barriers to innovation in the markets
concerned, the governments and healthcare sector that do not still take place at a
relevant scale. Many fundamental issues in ELE remain open. Most of the current
efforts still do not fully express the power of human beings and the importance of
social connections; societal activities are less noticed as well. This book constitutes
an advanced research in the area of ELEs starting from end-users and platform
definition and ending with service personalisation and implementation.
1.1
Introduction
As technology evolves, it positively touches on various scientific fields. E-Health,
in particular, draws its roots from the need to compensate for medical services by
an array of technological areas: personal health device communications, electronic
data record storage and management, smart monitoring of patients and machine
learning for extracting information on medical conditions, among others [1]. As a
scientific domain, it combines multiple medical and informatics fields like health
1Computer Science Department, University of Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania
2Telecommunications Research Centre, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland; University of Plovdiv
‘‘Paisii Hilendarski’’, Bulgaria
3Computer Science Department, Universidade da Beira Interior, Portugal
4Department of Communication Networks, Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria
5Department of Electronics and Microelectronics, University of Mons, Belgium

telematics, telemedicine, biomedical engineering and bioinformatics [2]. However,
till now, this area has failed to show real industrial-scale real-life applications. For
a start, an e-Health system would give the undertaking that it allows many types of
accurate patient data to be securely shared and analysed across multiple devices.
Sharing patients’ data records is, in fact, one of the factors blocking the use of
e-Health tools due to concerns about privacy. Secondly, considering that e-Health
is a relatively new area, dating back to the 2000s, the lack of standardisation
represents another important factor that has an impact on the wide acceptance of
health informatics. Assuming that we can overcome these issues by using different
frameworks which can assure trust and security of the processed data and by
adopting the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) family of
standards for communications protocols and electronic devices, a new set of pro-
blems arises. For example, raw, unstructured data, acquired through medical pro-
cedures, needs to be included in insight and medical decision-making processes [3].
Velocity of data needs to be managed, which is particularly problematic for real-
time monitoring systems. Finally, data gathered (especially from bioinformatics’ e-
Health subarea) needs to be properly mapped on large-scale environments (i.e.
clusters or large cloud-based data centres) if we hope for efficient processing.
Cloud computing evolved today towards custom-made solutions, gives access
to several systems offered by different providers, to use more resources, to replicate
data on different systems and, of course, to save money by choosing a
suitable solution among a pool of alternatives. Some of the health informatics
subareas, such as mobile health (m-Health) [4] and bioinformatics, can be easily
mapped on this model. Today m-Health applications are mainly used to offer
real-time monitoring, detect changes in health status and provide remote healthcare
services [5]. But such requirements bring challenges like the real-time processing
and storing of huge volumes of patient data and privacy/security of medical
information (like access control and location). Another example of application of
cloud computing comes from bioinformatics. As a subfield, bioinformatics can be
defined as the interactions between multiple components and different teams. Most
bioinformatics applications are data processing intensive or input/output intensive
[4]. Considering these aspects and the fact that we cannot predict the necessary
required hardware, one needs to map a system on a large scale. Thus, a viable
solution is the use of a cloud-based system. Cloud solutions could be implemented
at smart dust, dew, fog and cloud computing level depending on the circumstances,
existing solutions and new trends on the market.
The progress in technology led to an era where clinical workstations are used
in hospitals and in-/out-patient offices, and are gradually supplemented by smart
mobile devices with wireless connectivity. Despite all the technological progress,
the healthcare system is still seen as one that has multiple issues in understanding
the information technology, exploiting its unique functionalities, understanding the
importance and necessity of investment and commitment. Here, healthcare infor-
mation is defined as the collection and utilisation of information from all aspects of
health care, with the goal of predicting what will happen for a patient in a
2
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

manner that is both efficient and accurate. The end goal of health informatics is
healthcare output or the quality of care that the healthcare field can give to the end-
users. Health organisations admit that there are still gaps in the systems which are
supposed to allow them to answer questions crucial for strategic planning, reporting
to regulatory agencies and better understanding of how they can compare results/
share knowledge with other provider groups. One of the principal barriers that
clinicians encounter when trying to increase their efficiency to meet productivity
goals is the lack of access or inadequate access to clinical information [6].
Most healthcare institutions are nowadays assisted by computational tools with
patient-care matters (test results, access to transcribed reports, support for tele-
medicine applications or decision support functions, analysing the outcomes
associated with treatments and procedures, supporting bibliographic search, etc.).
Most organisations found the migration to the electronic clinical records rather
challenging. This observation raises multiple questions: Are the available products
and systems well matched with the modern notions of e-Health? Do they meet the
needs of individual users as well as the health systems themselves?
Another important aspect is the clinical trial, which is defined as a set of
experiments in which data obtained from patient interactions are pooled and
analysed. The results are used to learn about the safety and efficacy of new treat-
ments and tests, and at the end to understand the evolution of a disease. Health care
is a very information-intensive field. To make decisions, clinicians are gathering,
analysing, reviewing and communicating information. The use of information
systems in the health area is meant to facilitate the use of the information. There-
fore, the body of the existing knowledge, in health care, is complex and expanding
at ever-increasing rates.
1.2
An overview of healthcare systems
Healthcare systems rely, first of all, on the possibility of acquiring and storing
(mostly patient-related) data. An early application of computing technology in
e-Health was patient monitoring, where physiological data was collected directly
from patients. For example, in case of critically ill patients, continuous measure-
ment of parameters such as heart rate, blood pressure and oxygen saturation is very
common. Bedside monitors are used to collect, store and display such pieces of
information. This type of monitoring is critical in detecting life-threatening con-
ditions and guiding the decision-making process.
Nowadays intensive care units (ICUs) monitoring systems are evolved in
integrating not only the data from bedside monitors, but also the data obtained from
devices and sources outside the ICU [7]. For example, the HELP system, which
collects data from several sources (bedside computer, ventilator, infusion pumps
and other devices), based on its computerised decision support system, can make
suggestions for optimum care. The system helps medical teams in their decision-
making process by organising and reporting huge amounts of data. It can also alert
Introduction to enhanced living environments
3

the physicians about life-threatening laboratory results and other findings.
According to [8], care units provide different functions, such as:
●
acquiring physiological data frequently/continuously;
●
communicating data from data-producing systems to remote locations;
●
storing, organising and reporting of patient information;
●
integrating, organising and correlating data from multiple sources;
●
providing clinical alerts and advices, based on multiple sources of information;
●
operating as an automated decision-making support tool that health profes-
sionals may use in planning the care of critically ill patients;
●
measuring the severity of illness for patient classification purposes;
●
analysing the outcomes of ICUs in terms of clinical effectiveness and cost
effectiveness.
After predicting the need for, and later insisted on, routine arterial blood
pressure monitoring in the operating rooms, Harvey Cushing raised the following
questions [9] that are still being asked today: Are we collecting too much data? Are
the instruments used in clinical medicine too accurate? Are the approximated
values good enough in the decision-making process? His answers stated that the
vital sign measurements should be made frequently and as accurate as possible. The
American College of Critical Care Medicine and the American Society of Anaes-
thesiologists have made similar recommendations [10]. The acquisition of data
from ICU is critical, but in addition the computerised decision support system
depends on high-quality, timely data. In a typical ICU, most medical data continue
to be collected on paper flow sheets. Only partial data from the flow sheets ends up
into a computerised patient record, as structured and coded data; other parts are
recorded in a free text format [11–14]. The process of developing and imple-
menting a system that can accurately acquire data involves more than technology;
the technology must be adapted to the human users. Even though the natural
language processing [15], evolved over the past decade, and the text processing to
obtain coded and structured information were improved, the process is far from
being perfect [16–18].
The electronic health record (EHR) was later defined to be the repository of
electronically maintained information about an individual’s health status and health
care, stored so that it can offer legitimate access to different users of the record. The
term ‘EHR system’ (EHRS) is also referred to as a computer-based patient-record
system besides including the necessary tools used to manage the information.
EHRS today includes information management tools to provide clinical reminders
and alerts, linkages with knowledge sources for healthcare decision support and
analysis of aggregated data for both care management and research. The EHR helps
the reader to organise, interpret and react to data [6].
For example, the WorldVistA Computer Based Patient Record System or the
ISI Imaging system provide solutions for integrating text data and images into a
patient’s EHR [19]. The medical doctor has access to demographics, DICOM
format of X-ray images, JPG photos, links to problems, medications, orders, notes,
consults, discharge summary and laboratory analysis.
4
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Today, most clinical data sources and EHRs can send and receive clinical
content messages. Larger organisations use interface engines to send, receive and,
when necessary, translate the format of, and the codes within, such messages. In
general, a patient encounter is usually defined by a face-to-face visit (e.g. out-patient
visit, in-patient bedside visit, home health visit), but relevant information about the
patient’s condition is also gathered during patient telephone calls, prescription
renewal requests and the arrival of new test results. Therefore, the clinician and key
office personnel should be able to respond to these events with electronic renewal
authorisations, patients’ reports about normal test results, new requests for further
investigations and include them in the EHRS. In addition, when the provider
schedules a diagnostic test such as a PET/CT for example, an EHRS can keep track
of the time since the order was written and can notify the physician that a test result
has not appeared in a specified time so that the provider can investigate and correct
the obstacle to fulfilment.
One of the main issues of adopting the EHRS is the amount of data that needs
to be stored and maintained. Due to this, the topic of big data in healthcare systems
has received much attention in recent years. The Institute of Health Improvements
developed, for example, a framework for optimising the health system to improve
patient experience, improve population health and reduce the costs related to
various medical procedures. The objectives had been summarised in the Triple Aim
concept design [20], which relies on measures of population health, patient
experience and the cost that is acquired from multiple sources, that is, survey data,
clinical data, including patient generated data. All this, of course, leads to large
amounts of data that need to be properly (and efficiently) stored and analysed.
As Feldman, Martin and Skotnes [21] summarise, ‘The potential of Big Data
allows us to hope to slow the ever-increasing costs of care, help providers practice
more effective medicine, empower patients and caregivers, support fitness and
preventive self-care, and to dream about more personalised medicine.’ The large
volume of data generated by healthcare information demands integration of big
data analytics systems for organising information and ultimately improving health
processes. Pharmaceutical and biotech companies can utilise analytics for adaptive
trials which will support personalised medicine for comparing the research results
and for decision support. Academic research centres can adapt analytics for com-
parative effectiveness and collaborative research. Finally, public health centres can
utilise analytics for disease surveillance and clinical utility studies. The opportu-
nities offered through big data analytics are plentiful and will continue to grow as
the e-Health evolves [22].
For as much as the clinician’s view of integrated information access, the
patient’s view must be considered in the definition of patient-centred health care.
Different projects have been proposed with the aim to utilise information and
communication technologies (ICT) for addressing real needs of elderly such as:
●
organised schedules;
●
maintaining the mental and physical health of elderly, for example, through
social gaming;
Introduction to enhanced living environments
5

●
environmental control at home;
●
improving the way the elderly follows the medical treatments prevention
through nutrition, depending on the stage of the disease;
●
defining regular activity that reduces mortality and age-related morbidity of
elderly.
The OASIS project introduces a medication manager to follow up the user’s
medication schedule [23]. It triggers the user to take his/her medication, informs
him/her about possible changes (decided by the doctor) and checks that the user is
following the schedule. The SOPRANO project [24] has a medication alert which
collects events from a medication dispenser about missed medication taking,
selects the most appropriate communication channel and delivers the alert to the
assisted person. In case the app does not acknowledge the alert (e.g. in case wire-
less communication fails), the process is escalated and an SMS is sent to an
informal caregiver.
The PIPS project [25] encompasses the entire set of business processes, pro-
fessional practices and products applied to the analysis and preservation of the
citizen’s well-being using the latest innovations in ICT. Among other services,
PIPS offers a personalised nutritional support which offers personalised nutritional
adviser, shopping list, product information, product check according to personal
profile, etc. The aim is to provide users with information and advice about having a
healthy lifestyle and choosing healthy nutritional habits that are tailored to the
user’s needs.
The Persona project [26] aims at advancing the paradigm of Ambient Intelli-
gence through the harmonisation of ambient assisted living (AAL) technologies
and concepts for the development of sustainable and affordable solutions for the
social inclusion and independent living of senior citizens, integrated in a common
semantic framework. The Persona offers several services related to nutrition such
as a nutritional adviser, a cooking assistant, a shopping assistant and a food
inventory.
In healthcare systems, more recently, Internet of Things (IoT) technologies
allow flexible patient monitoring. The patient’s status can be monitored remotely
from home by doctors and nurses. This has an impact on the average daily cost for
patients and on the patient’s comfort.
The BodyGuardian Remote Monitoring System [27] can detect non-lethal
arrhythmias in ambulatory settings by using a body-worn sensor, a mobile phone,
and a preventive care platform. Its system architecture, described in [28], uses a
microprocessor, a memory and a Bluetooth chip. After gathering the signals, the
sensor pairs with a dedicated mobile device and the ECG, heart rate, respiratory
rate and activity levels are transmitted via mobile phone through a cellular network
and, ultimately, to the cloud.
Zebra Technologies and Healthcare Solutions [29] are concerned with
improving the hospital’s management and security. The company defined a set of
applications which facilitates resource planning, offers real-time visibility into
patients’ records, medications, equipment, and provides an IoT platform for patient
6
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

care by integrating all devices connected to the hospital’s network. They provided a
patient identification schema based on barcoding which reduced medication errors
by 65–86%, according to the US Department of Veterans Affairs.
A Microsoft Kinect sensor has been used in detection of stereotyped hand
flapping movements in autistic children [30]. The system used the dynamic time
warping in order to detect motor behaviours in children with autism spectrum
disorder (ASD). It was tested in a closed laboratory environment and in two schools
with children having ASD. Multiple actors were involved – children, engineers,
doctors and teachers. The system facilitated the identification of behavioural
patterns when studying interaction skills in children with ASD.
1.3
Ambient assisted living and enhanced living environments
The increase in medical expenses due to societal issues like demographic ageing
puts strong pressure on the sustainability of health and social care systems, on
labour participation and on the quality of life for elderly and/or people with
disabilities. The concept of enhanced living environments (ELEs) promotes the
seamless integration of ICT within context-aware homes and residences, with the
aim of constructing smart environments around people in order to ensure better
lifestyle and reduce the corresponding costs of health and social care. The AAL
paradigm presents innovative technological, medical and sociological solutions for
improved quality of life and advanced autonomy, mobility, social interaction, self-
confidence and safety of elderly individuals and people with disabilities. Effective
ELE/AAL solutions require sophisticated mobile information systems, encompassing
pervasive devices, sensors, robots, smart objects, possibly utilising a cloud-based
computational intelligence and providing highly contextualised and customised
mobile services and applications available anytime-anywhere-anyhow.
The main difference between ELE and AAL is that ELE is a broader term
while AAL is more related to the patients and elderly supportive services. Enriched
by services and applications for good living for everybody, the ELE technology is
applied to support better family life and better existence within the society. The
current aim is to incorporate the ELE idea into future smart cities, smart homes,
smart business and other similar IoT environments.
The AAL is a paradigm that focuses on the research and development (R&D)
of systems that enhance quality of life of people with special needs, that is, elderly,
people with disabilities or people who temporarily need assistance. As by definition
AAL systems are extremely complex, there are a number of goals and tasks that
should be fulfilled to achieve the creation of safe environments around assisted
people to help them maintain more independent type of living. Pure ICT systems
are often difficult for use by non-professionals. Such systems often have features
requiring sophisticated configuration, which is beyond the capability of the com-
mon end-users. On the other hand, part of the systems is used professionally and
needs to be designed and implemented in such a way as to support rich professional
services. The price dropping of ICT services and devices, along with the increased
Introduction to enhanced living environments
7

abilities of new ICT technologies, for example, cloud/fog/due/dust computing,
made it possible to unify part of the AAL/ELE services while also enriching the
other part.
The AAL/ELE platforms and systems are a matter of serious analysis and
design by different projects, stakeholders, national and international organisations.
This is a very hot topic due to the population ageing and vast possibilities of using
different electronic devices in medicine and everyday life. This phenomenon
changed the fashion of medical care, active and passive ageing, and operation of
social care service providers. A lot of AAL work has been done on elderly support
services, most of which is specific and relates to diseases like dementia, Alzhei-
mer’s, handicaps, etc. The market niche for services for active people, however, is
almost empty. It includes mostly fitness devices which are partially connected.
The ELE area could be explored from different angles, and this is the approach
utilised within this book. Starting with the psychological angle, the next chapter,
entitled ‘Enhanced living environments from the viewpoint of socioecological
psychology’, provides a theoretical overview and framework for studying and
understanding the psychological aspects of ELE. The authors present the basic
tenets of socioecological psychology as a macro theoretical approach to the human
environmental behaviour and relationships. As a specific concern of socio-
ecological psychology, they refer to the evolutionary biological theory – the niche
construction theory – whose main concepts are spreading rapidly to other dis-
ciplines such as socioecological psychology and thus may be used to broaden the
theoretical foundations of ELE. Since home (environment) is among the most
universal examples of human micro niches and at the same time homes are deeply
affected by new technological inventions, the authors first review the psycho-
logically relevant literature of the home with an emphasis on the transactional
processes between individuals and their built or natural environments. Then they
present the self-determination theory – an evolving macro theory of human rela-
tionships and motivation – which may provide insight about optimal conditions for
constructing socioecological niches and thus is important for the development of
home environments that are optimally embedded in interpersonal and intrapersonal
relationships. This chapter ends with defining major themes and research directions
where psychological approaches, in general, and socioecological psychology, in
particular, may enrich the R&D in the ELE area.
The next chapter, ‘Pervasive sensing for social connectedness’, advocates a
user-centred approach for designing context-aware systems supporting social con-
nectedness between the elderly and their caregivers. It shows that placing the user
at the centre of the design process promotes system usability and acceptance. By
considering the user comfort with respect to the amount and location of deployed
sensors, the authors propose the use of a single waist-mounted smartphone in order
to take advantage of its multiple in-built sensors for collecting activity data and to
deploy as little body-worn sensors as possible. In order to reduce the number of
false alarms in communicating the well-being of the elderly, the authors conclude
that context-aware connectedness systems should utilise accurate and reliable
human activity recognition (HAR) models to precisely represent the user context.
8
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

In relation to this, they propose and evaluate a hybrid support vector machine/
hidden Markov model, with a high-classification accuracy and suitability for
deployment within ELE.
Humans are social beings, thus one of the most important aspects of AAL/ELE
is to support social contacts, which could be achieved through the implementation
of affect detection and processing mechanisms. The inclusion of affect supports not
only social but also emotional needs. In the existing AAL/ELE systems, the affect
adaptation is carried out through tailored music, colouring, lighting, etc. The social
side of AAL/ELE is becoming even more important when speaking about elderly,
children, patients with disabilities and end-users who keep track on their physical
and emotional state. Social aspects of AAL/ELE systems are closely related to the
field of affective computing which explores how affects (on various complexity
levels) could be built within the systems for various purposes. Social connected-
ness, social inclusion and social usefulness are considered non-technical terms that
affect the work with equipment significantly.
Emotion-based AAL/ELE solutions are designed to monitor and assess the
current patient’s mood in order to cope with mood disorders, allow caregivers or
family members to react on-time in supporting the person in need, suggest per-
forming certain exercises to cheer up the patient or to distract his/her attention from
depressing thoughts.
Beyond the technical solutions, much of innovations remain within the realm
of social gerontology, which aims to analyse the coping behaviours and needs
expressed by the ageing population. In this context, the next chapter, entitled ‘Ethic
in information and communication technologies: training the elderly in making
gerontechnology accessible’, brings together technological challenges and social
gerontology, contributing to the promotion of an inclusive society, where these two
resources conceive ethical goals for supporting and strengthening the quality of life
of elderly and people with disabilities (and their relatives), with a positive impact
on their health, mobility and safety. The authors propose a reflection and revision
of the principles of adaptability and acceptability of technologies. They start with
exploring the characterising patterns of a generation, according to societal concerns
and technological affinities, followed by the presentation of the main issues related
to demographic evolution and the opportunities for technological innovation to
improve the quality of life of the ageing population. Major deviations, observed
when considering behaviours and responsibilities of all actors involved, are then
reported, along with the rights and responsibilities of elderly in the acceptability
and adequacy of technological objectives. The identification and preservation of
life activities are dealt with by the authors in a fashion not only compensating the
deficiencies but also maintaining and developing societal resources. Existing and
effective design concepts, helping solve ethical problems associated with the
adoption and acceptability of technologies, are presented in this chapter as well.
The vast enrichment of services provided to the end-users and high require-
ments for service customisation and contextualisation have changed the way of
doing business for telecommunication companies, Internet service providers and
AAL/ELE service providers, which must respond quickly to the user demands and
Introduction to enhanced living environments
9

market changes. The service portfolio and dynamic and intensive service testing are
essential for good perception of the market. The huge number of new electronic
devices interconnected and linked to the Internet (and the cloud) requires new
solutions that need continuous testing and updating. The need of test groups for
proper service development, verification and validation is an essential part of the
service creation process. This is especially true for the sensitive AAL/ELE services
for elderly, ill people and children, and medicine-related applications and fitness
applications where the importance of the service for personal life or well-being
is essential for the end-users causing very high service requirements. The next
chapter, ‘End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios in smart personal environ-
ments, aims to show how the main test groups, that is, end-users, caregivers and
service providers, can be prepared for the challenges of the market. The authors
present results of AAL/ELE service identification and testing performed within an
existing living lab, enriched by customised ICT services and including elements of
both technical and contextual testing, and social perception of services. Possible
end-user scenarios of ‘AAL as a Service’ (AALaaS) and ‘ELE as a Service’
(ELEaaS) platforms are also described and specified. Protocol and service classi-
fications are presented according to the end-user-specific requirements from
communication and information point of view. The test groups are used to verify
and validate the platforms and services described and specified in this chapter. The
testing is based on the platform technology and depends on the user requirements’
analysis and ongoing work throughout use-cases. The description of the ELEaaS is
done by authors in general terms, along with the testing needed to be performed on
general functions. Motivated by the necessity to analyse in detail the outcomes
from the experienced living laboratories, the authors point out the need for the
establishment of networks of living labs with a good scaling option to allow the
deployment of AAL/ELE services in different regions and possible interconnection
with other local and global services and providers. A separate module for service
creation and abstraction could help the process of scaling and customisation, and
this is proposed as a future research topic at the end of this chapter.
It is well understood today how the human autonomic nervous system (ANS)
controls the body functioning. The unconscious regulation of heart rate, digestion,
respiratory rate and urination is of primary importance for the survival of indivi-
duals. The ANS functioning is modulated by the external stimuli and changes in the
surrounding environment. When the environmental conditions are challenging or
when a person perceives a threat, the ANS amends the body functioning, which is
referred to as stress response. When an individual is subject to a stress, the ANS
reacts by mobilising all resources and improving the chances of survival. Besides
the long-term effects of stress and the recognised increased risk of diseases, there
are substantial short-term negative effects that have to be considered, as pointed out
in the next chapter, entitled ‘Technological support to stress-level monitoring’. It is
well recognised that stress affects mission readiness and more importantly the
cogent decision-making process in critical moments, which is especially true for
high-risk professionals. Thus, the periodic evaluation of stress levels and real-time
stress monitoring during a mission are not only important for the health of
10
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

personnel but also critical for crisis and disaster management. These short-term
and long-term negative effects motivate the need for the establishment of stress-
level monitoring methods, considered by the authors in this chapter, and for the
establishment of strategies for stress management and prevention. The authors’
attention is focused on the technological support of (real-time) stress-level assess-
ment methods along with their pros and cons. Awareness about the current stress
level of personnel could improve the mission efficiency and safety, whereas
awareness about the cumulative stress levels could help preserve the mission
readiness and the health of personnel. In addition, real-time assessment of stress
level opens up opportunities for reallocation/re-positioning of people, changing the
assignments and effective usage of resources, which all contribute to better
managing critical/dangerous situations, by lowering the risks for people operating
on the field and increasing the chances of a successful mission. In the rest of this
chapter, the authors detail the technology behind the three stages of the data pro-
cessing workflow and outline the most recent trends in personal mobility, with the
focus on the introduction of intelligent, wearable and implanted sensors. Firstly,
they provide an overview of the state of the art in the area of personal health
monitoring systems by discussing the overall architecture, functionalities of indi-
vidual components and technologies involved in the implementation of these
functionalities. Next, the authors discuss the technology involved in assessment of
brain activity, negative emotional states, mental disorders and neurological dis-
eases, which are linked to stress, behavioural, mental disorders, etc., with the focus
on data acquisition and modelling methods for the discovery of causality between
physiological measurements and mental stress. The two main setups for stress
assessment and monitoring – stationary and mobile – are then outlined, and their
technological feasibility is discussed. An overview of recent and ongoing R&D
projects is then presented, along with a discussion of interesting use cases. The
authors finish their chapter with an overview of the current and future R&D trends,
and some inherent limitations of the stress-level assessment and the challenges that
still remain unaddressed.
The next chapter, ‘Big data healthcare system to improve healthcare infor-
mation searching in Internet’, deals with the people’s problem of finding the correct
information (on the Internet) about their health. The problem discussed is about the
quality of information provided to/acquired by the end-user. This is a typical pro-
blem in the area of semantic science, related to the semantic information retrieval
systems. Relevant improvements to healthcare systems in this regard may lead to
more appropriate diagnostics and better interpretation of diseases. The author first
analyses the methods for knowledge extraction from Internet resources and then
presents the concept of using semantic agents for personalised big data searching in
the domain of health care. A conceptual model for personalised search of health-
care information on the Internet, resulting in a significant improvement of the
search accuracy, is proposed. A new hybrid method for big data reasoning, based
on ontologies for customisation of search queries, is described. Possibilities for the
extraction of useful information from a medical text within an incomplete and
contradictory information environment by means of a multi-agent software system,
Introduction to enhanced living environments
11

utilising a hybrid reasoning algorithm for subjective ontology, are presented. The
author concludes that the combination of semantic- and agent-oriented technolo-
gies ensures scalability and adaptability of the designed system, and facilitates its
operation within a dynamic environment.
From a technological point of view, the recent developments in the area of
wireless communications have had a great impact on the quality of life. With respect
to ELE, the wireless body area networks (WBANs) and the implantable sensors have
paved the way for remote health monitoring, AAL, prevention and monitoring of
diseases, biofeedback from monitoring of emotions, sport monitoring, medical help
in disaster situations, etc. A typical WBAN consists of biological sensors, which are
placed in/on specific body areas for measuring different body health parameters.
Promising WBAN-based examples include the so-called lab-on-a-pill, which takes a
sample from body fluids and gathers patient health parameters, such as temperature,
pH levels, dissolved oxygen levels, etc., and the ‘smart pill’ – a specialised micro-
pump implanted in the human body for drug dosage control and status track. The next
chapter, ‘Sensors for wireless body area networks’, provides a detailed overview
of typical WBAN applications in the medicine, such as the anaesthesia delivery
machine, oxygen concentrator, dialysis membrane, sleep apnoea machines, infusion,
kidney dialysis machine, insulin pump, flow cytometry, etc. The authors provide a
good summary of the main characteristics of various types of medical sensors, along
with a description of the main WBAN communication technologies and quality of
service requirements of the corresponding medical applications.
With respect to WBANs, however, there are some concerns that need to be
addressed. Among these are the heat dissipation, which may cause damage to the
surrounding tissue, and the use of relay nodes to increase the network lifetime,
which however may lead to health hazard issues. Thus, finding an efficient network
topology design to overcome these two problems is of great importance. These
issues are dealt with in the chapter ‘Health monitoring using WBAN: topology
design, routing and thermal issues’. The authors consider in detail the WBAN
applications, related technologies, energy-aware network topology design, efficient
relay node placement methods and relevant energy-efficient and thermal-aware
routing techniques.
The chapter ‘AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms’ continues with the technological
aspect of AAL/ELE by presenting a generic ‘ambient assisted living as a service’/
‘enhanced living environment as a service’ platform along with its multiple ele-
ments. The main goal of the authors is to identify important platform parts, classify
the existing models and create a framework for further protocols and services
classification. The chapter starts with a presentation of the end-user requirements,
continues with considering the analysis and design phases, and ends up with a pos-
sible implementation of the platform as a cloud-based one, aiming to aggregate data
from multiple (and different) access- and edge technological solutions, and allow-
ing data analysis and mining at the abstract level. The presented work is based on a
real-life experience gained within living labs and conducted surveys on the topic.
The next chapter, ‘Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols in the next-
generation networks’, is focused on the wireless sensor networks (WSNs), which
12
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

have turned into one of the main pillars of ubiquitous communications today.
A quickly unfolding trend of specialised WSNs utilised by different applications
has created a totally new perspective for this type of networks, which have become
a staple of the modern ICT infrastructures especially when taking into account
machine-to-machine (M2M) communications, smart cities and AAL/ELE. A WSN
constitutes a typical part of a WBAN. One of the newly defined WSN subtypes are
the WSNs with linear topology (LWSNs), which are presented in this chapter with
a specific focus on the medium access control (MAC) protocols playing the most
important role in the optimisation of their performance. The authors first introduce
the LWSN concept and terminology, then continue with presenting the LWSN
communication model and providing a detailed overview of the most recent MAC
protocols designed especially for LWSNs, and finish with some open R&D issues.
The detailed discussion allows the reader to achieve a better understanding of one
of the major building blocks of the modern complex cyber-physical systems (CPS).
Staying on the CPS note, the next chapter, ‘Model-compilation challenges for
cyber-physical systems’, introduces a new methodology, concept and process,
aiming at reducing the gap between high-level modelling tools for describing the
CPS functionalities, behaviours and structures, and the actual software imple-
mentation on the target platform. Integrated into a model-driven systems develop-
ment methodology, the proposed model-compilation methodology may help
system, control, software and safety engineers working together on a software
implementation and respecting all their concerns at once, in a holistic, iterative and
de-verticalised way. This could enable much faster development cycles from the
concept to the realisation and validation stages, up to rapid-prototyping of complex,
safety-critical applications and thus could reduce the development costs and
enhance the qualities of CPSs in multiple industrial domains, including AAL/ELE.
The model-compilation methodology could be envisaged as a specification
integrated (instantiated) by tool editors and CPS application developers in their
tool-chain process and development process. Even though the authors consider the
autonomous vehicles as a use case to illustrate their proposed methodology, the
approach could be generalised to all CPS applications including AAL/ELE.
The next chapter, ‘Wearable health care: technology evolution, algorithms and
needs’, deals with another important segment of AAL/ELE, namely the wearable
technology encompassing electronic gadgets that can be worn in/on the human
body by using either invasive methods (i.e. implants) or non-invasive methods
(i.e. external accessories). Wearable technology itself is related to the ubiquitous/
pervasive computing and wearable computers. Primarily used for data collection,
this technology opens up new opportunities for businesses development and data
analytics. Within the AAL/ELE realm, the interest in wearable technology arose
from the necessity for control and monitoring in the medical/fitness area. For
instance, the integration of a micro fluidic lab-on-a-chip has a high potential for
healthcare applications (i.e. for vital signs monitoring, biomedical sensing and
chemical analysis). In the near future, the wearable micro fluidics will be used
in active drug-delivery patches, soft robotics sensing and control, and even
implantable artificial organs. Many of these new trends and approaches, for
Introduction to enhanced living environments
13

example, sympathetic skin response, HAR, etc., are presented by the authors in this
chapter, along with applicable algorithms for process classification and analysis of
data sets collected from wearable sensors. User needs and expectations with respect
to wearable devices are also presented, along with future challenges in this area.
The last chapter, ‘Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation’, falls
within the area of rehabilitation robotics which has become an increasingly inter-
ested R&D topic. It involves the use of robotic systems to restore the normal human
functions for people who suffered a stroke or a cerebrovascular accident, affecting
their motor control and more generally their independent living. Multiple studies
suggest that, in these cases, intensive and repetitive training could help recover
functional motor functionalities by modifying the neural organisation. In this con-
text, the authors present the design of an intelligent haptic robotic glove system
prototype for patients’ rehabilitation by making different rehabilitation exercises
at home, for example, flexion and extension of fingers or grasping an object.
The corresponding control system is presented and its performance is evaluated.
Different approaches for after-stroke rehabilitation, based on this robotic glove, are
presented as well.
1.4
Conclusions
The e-Health domain, and more specifically the AAL/ELE area, is being extended
through novel and very interesting projects and applications. However, despite the
proliferation of such solutions, we fail to see today significant gains for the medical
practices – except for the critical life-threating situations. Although we see a sig-
nificant market for e-Health technologies, they still have to face important chal-
lenges, among which we identify the fear of improper correct automatic support.
Many fundamental issues in the AAL/ELE area still remain open. Among
these, security and privacy of healthcare systems are of paramount importance.
Even if both patients and providers benefit from the presence of IoT in healthcare
domain, security policies still should be considered and applied. Even if security
policies are well defined in a closed environment such as a hospital or medical care
system, researchers are trying to find solutions for ‘Bring Your Own Device’
(BYOD) setups [31]. In a BYOD system, nurses, doctors and other caregivers can
use their own tablets, laptops and smartphones to have access to the hospital’s
resources. By using smartphones, doctors can check their appointments, make new
ones, access patients files, write prescriptions, etc. Whether the use of external
devices is supported or not by the hospital, the BYOD approach represents a major
security threat to the privacy and security of patients. In order to minimise the risks,
many businesses today are implementing BYOD policies which can further be
adopted by healthcare systems.
Protecting and defined what is critical data (in security terms) was one of the
main concerns for many years for the e-Health domain. The European Union (EU)
and the United States (US) both defined regulations concerning data protection in
electronic health area, namely the ePrivacy Directive 2002/58/EC [32] in the EU,
14
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) [32] in the
US. The EU law defines personal data as ‘identified or identifiable natural person’
information. It also states the rights and responsibilities of the ‘data controller’
(the person/organisation who has access and processes data) as well as the ‘data
subject’, the person whose data is being processed. HIPPA defines who can have
access to personal health data; it is a subset of a series of federal protection
laws. In the US, data protection is regulated in different states and by different
federal laws.
A danger for imposing security measures for e-Health systems is the effect of
overwhelming doctors at the end with too much information that will impact their
main goal-taking care of patients. The OpenNotes patient engagement [33] project
aims to provide patients access to their caregivers’ notes and possibility to con-
tribute to them. According to John Mafi M.D., a member of the OpenNotes pro-
gramme, the project’s goal is to make ‘patients feel more in control of their own
care and to correct factual errors in the record’. Its purpose is also to improve
communication with patients and other doctors. The main drawbacks of OpenNotes
felt by doctors related to the struggling with a one-size-fits-all: the note had to
include the doctor’s opinions, suggestions, prescriptions, billing information, pre-
vious patients’ analysis, other doctors’ prescriptions and the patient’s input
addressing potentially sensitive issues. For example, in one occasion doctors had to
change ‘obesity’ to ‘body mass index’ unmanageability due to the number of
involved actors (nurses, medical students, patients, etc.). Also, the progress note
documents have a predefined standard, while open notes can become hard to
maintain when multiple actors review them.
Such healthcare issues imposed the development of new directions in the IoT
realm. Drug management, for example, is one of the biggest challenges the industry
faces today. According to Forbes [34], the average cost to create and develop an
approved drug is around 55 million. Electronics development led to major
improvements in diagnostic applications in the medical field. Such examples are
‘smart pills’. A communication approach is presented in [35], where the external
device is reliably connected to an internal electronic pill. In [36] authors present a
system for local drug delivery using telemetry communication based on the master–
slave model. The pill can be directed by the master in the organism, and it can be
assisted to record temperature, measure body pH, drug delivery, etc. IoT devices
and process may have an impact on cost management in this area. WuXi Pharma-
Tech and TruTag Technologies [37] are two companies which focused on such
‘smart pills’.
AdhereTech [38] is another healthcare technology company interested in
developing ‘smart’ healthcare devices. In order to improve medication adherence,
the company focused on developing a ‘smart pill’ bottle. The bottle has the role to
verify whether patients are taking the medication and to generate alerts in case of a
dose miss. Patients can also provide feedback via text or phone calls providing the
reason why they missed their dose. For instance, if a patient misses a dose due to
side effects, AdhereTech can gather data in the first days of treatment, instead of
having access to patients’ feedback on his/her next visit to the doctor [39].
Introduction to enhanced living environments
15

Mostof the current efforts in the AAL/ECE area still do not fully expressthe power
of human being and the importance of social connections. Therefore, the societal
activities are less noticed. Effective AAL/ELE solutions today require appropriate ICT
algorithms, architectures and platforms, having in view the advance of science in this
area and the development of new and innovative networking solutions, particularly in
the areas of pervasive and mobile systems, big data and cloud computing.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the EU ICT COST Action IC1303: Algorithms, Architectures
and Platforms for Enhanced Living Environments (AAPELE), ICT COST Action
IC1406: High-Performance Modelling and Simulation for Big Data Applications
(cHiPSet) and TD COST Action TD1405: European Network for the Joint
Evaluation of Connected Health Technologies (ENJECT).
References
[1]
deRoos D., Deutsch T., Lapis G., Sit S., Zikopoulos P.C., and Eaton C.
Understanding Big Data Book. 2008. Tinne Tuytelaars Luc Van Gool
Herbert Bay, Andreas Ess. Speeded-up robust features (surf). 2007
[2]
Migliardi M. and Gaudina. M. A context aware, mobile system providing
memory support for ageing people. 2011 Proceedings of the 34th Interna-
tional Convention MIPRO, Opatija, 2011, pp. 535–540
[3]
Taylor R. and Yao J. Tetrahedral mesh modeling of density data for anato-
mical atlases and intensity-based registration. In Delp S.L., DiGoia A.M.,
and Jaramaz B. (eds) Medical image computing and computer-assisted
intervention – MICCAI 2000. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 1935, pp. 531–540, 2000
[4]
Free C., Phillips G., Galli L., et al. (2013). The effectiveness of mobile-
health technology-based health behaviour change or disease management
interventions for health care consumers: a systematic review. PLoS Medi-
cine, 10(1), pp. e1001362. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001362
[5]
Ciobanu R.-I. and Dobre C. Employing opportunistic networks in dementia
patient monitoring. In: Advanced Technological Solutions for E-Health and
Dementia Patient Monitoring. IGI Global, 2015. pp. 106–136. doi:10.4018/
978-1-4666-7481-3.ch005
[6]
Shortliffe E.H. and Cimino J.J. Biomedical Informatics: Computer Appli-
cations in Health Care and Biomedicine (4th ed.). New York, NY: Springer,
2014
[7]
Assimacopoulos A., Alam R., Arbo M., et al. (2008). A brief retrospective
review of medical records comparing outcomes for inpatients treated via
telehealth versus in-person protocols. Telemedicine Journal of E-Health, 14,
762–768
16
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[8]
Celi L.A., Hassan E., Marquardt C., Breslow M., and Rosenfeld B. (2001).
The eICU: It’s not just telemedicine. Critical Care Medicine, 29(8),
N183-N189
[9]
Bliss M. Harvey Cushing: A Life in Surgery. New York, NY: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2007
[10]
Haupt S., Berger M., Goldberg Z., and Haupt Y. (2003). Apoptosis – the p53
network. Journal of Cell Science, 116(20), 4077–4085
[11]
Hahn U., Romacker M., and Schulz S. (2002). MEDSYNDIKATE: A nat-
ural language system for the extraction of medical information from finding
reports. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 67(1/3), 63–74
[12]
Grunfeld A., Ho K., and Walls, R. (1996). The Internet: What’s all the fuss
about? The Journal of Emergency Medicine, 14(6), 769–770
[13]
Jha A.K., Doolan D., Grandt D., Scott T., and Bates D.W. (2008). The use of
health information technology in seven nations. International Journal of
Medical Informatics, 77(12), 848–854
[14]
Krist A., Woolf S., and Rothemich S. (2010). Improving care through AHRQ
health IT tools. Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov/about/annualconf10/
krist_rosenthal/krist.HTM
[15]
Ozkaynak H., Baxter L.K., Dionisio K.L., and Burke J. (2013). Air pollution
exposure prediction approaches used in air pollution epidemiology studies.
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 23(6), 566–572
[16]
Martı´ Ruiz I., La´zaro Ramos J.P., and Aracil Ramo´n A. (2003). Remote
health care system for elderly people with chronic diseases. AriaDna:
cultura, educacio´n y tecnologı´a. i(1)
[17]
Ahmed F., Rahman S., Ahmed N., et al. (2011). Evaluation of Neolamarckia
cadamba (Roxb.) Bosser leaf extract on glucose tolerance in glucose-
induced hyhperglycemic mice. African Journal of Traditional, Com-
plementary and Alternative Medicines, 8(1), 79–81
[18]
Hripcsak G., Knirsch C., Zhou L., Wilcox A., and Melton G.B. (2011).
Using discordance to improve classification in narrative clinical databases:
an application to community-acquired pneumonia. Computers in Biology
and Medicine, 37(3), 296–304
[19]
Tang, P.C. and McDonald C.J. Electronic health record systems. Biomedical
Informatics. New York: Springer, 2006, pp. 447–475
[20]
Berwick, D.M., Nolan T.W., and Whittington J. (2008). The triple aim: Care,
health, and cost. Health Affairs, 27.3, 759–769
[21]
Feldman, B., Martin E.M., and Skotnes T. (2012). Big data in healthcare
hype and hope. Dr. Bonnie 360
[22]
Dalton B., Morocco C.C., Tivnan T., and Rawson Mead P.L. (1997). Sup-
ported inquiry science: Teaching for conceptual change in urban and sub-
urban science classrooms. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 30(6), 670–684
[23]
Schneider, S., Barkauskas V., and Keenan G. (2008). Evaluating home
health care nursing outcomes with OASIS and NOC. Journal of Nursing
Scholarship, 40.1, 76–82
Introduction to enhanced living environments
17

[24]
Sixsmith, Andrew, et al. (2010). A user-driven approach to developing
Ambient Assisted Living systems for older people: The SOPRANO Project.
Intelligent Technologies for Bridging the Grey Digital Divide, 30–45
[25]
Irigoin, F., Jouvelot P., and Triolet R. Semantical interprocedural paralleli-
zation: An overview of the PIPS project. ACM International Conference on
Supercomputing 25th Anniversary Volume. ACM, 2014
[26]
Ball, Gene, et al. (1997). Lifelike computer characters: The persona project
at Microsoft research. Software Agents, 191–222
[27]
http://www.preventicesolutions.com/technologies/body-guardianheart.html
[Accessed June 2017]
[28]
New Applications in EP: The BodyGuardian Remote Monitoring System,
EP Lab Digest, volume 12, issue 11, November 2012
[29]
https://www.zebra.com/gb/en/solutions/healthcaresolutions.html [Accessed
June 2017]
[30]
Gonc¸alves N., Costa S., and Rodrigues J. Detection of stereotyped hand
flapping movements in Autistic Children using the Kinect Sensor, 2014
IEEE International
Conference on Autonomous Robot Systems and
Competitions (ICARSC) May 14–15, Espinho, Portugal
[31]
Lennon R.G. Changing user attitudes to security in bring your own device
(BYOD) & the cloud, Tier 2 Federation Grid, Cloud & High Performance
Computing Science (RO-LCG), 2012 5th Romania, Cluj-Napoca
[32]
http://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/ [Accessed June 2017]
[33]
http://www.opennotes.org/ [Accessed June 2017]
[34]
http://www.forbes.com/forbes/welcome/ [Accessed June 2017]
[35]
Fawaz N. and Jansen D. Enhanced telemetry system using CP-QPSK
Band-pass modulation technique suitable for smart pill medical application,
Wireless Days, 2008. WD ’08. 1st IFIP, 1–5, 24–28 November, 2008
[36]
Goffredo R., Accoto D., Santonico M., Pennazza G., and Guglielmelli E. A
smart pill for drug delivery with sensing capabilities, Engineering in Medi-
cine and Biology Society (EMBC), 37th Annual International Conference of
the IEEE, 25–29 August 2015, pp. 1361–1364
[37]
http://www.wuxiapptec.com/press/detail/284/18.html [Accessed June 2017]
[38]
https://adheretech.com/ [Accessed June 2017]
[39]
DeMeo D. and Morena M. Medication adherence using a smart pill bottle,
Emerging Technologies for a Smarter World (CEWIT), 11th International
Conference & Expo on, 29–30 October 2014, pp. 1–4
Biographies
Ciprian Dobre is professor within the Computer Science Department, University
Politehnica of Bucharest (Habil. since 2014, Dr Since 2008 with Cum laudae). He
currently leads the activities within Laboratory on Pervasive products and services,
and MobyLab. Ciprian Dobre’s research interests involve research subjects related
to mobile wireless networks and computing applications, pervasive services,
18
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

context-awareness and people-centric or participatory sensing. He has scientific
and scholarly contributions in the field of large-scale distributed systems con-
cerning mobile applications and smart technologies to reduce urban congestion and
air pollution (MobiWay, TRANSYS), context-aware applications (CAPIM),
opportunistic networks and mobile data offloading (SPRINT, SENSE), monitoring
(MonALISA), high-speed networking (VINCI, FDT), Grid application develop-
ment (EGEE, SEE-GRID) and evaluation using modelling and simulation
(MONARC 2, VNSim). These contributions led to important results, demonstrating
his qualifications and potential to go significantly beyond the state of the art.
Ciprian Dobre was awarded a PhD scholarship from California Institute of Tech-
nology (Caltech, USA) and another one from Oracle. His results received one IBM
Faculty Award, two CENIC Awards and three Best Paper Awards (in 2013, 2012
and 2010). The results were published in over 100 chapters in edited books, articles
in major international peer-reviewed journals and papers in well-established inter-
national conferences and workshops.
Dr Ivan Ganchev is a senior member of the Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers (IEEE), the IEEE Communications Society, the IEEE
Consumer Electronics Society, the IEEE Internet of Things Community, the IEEE
Smart Cities Community and the IEEE Consultants Network. He received his doc-
toral and engineering (summa cum laude) degrees from the Saint-Petersburg State
University of Telecommunications. He is a Deputy Director of the Tele-
communications Research Centre (TRC), University of Limerick (Ireland), an
Associate Professor from the University of Plovdiv ‘‘Paisii Hilendarski’’, an ITU-T
Invited Expert and an IET Invited Lecturer. Dr Ganchev was involved in 35þ
international and national research and education projects. His research interests
include novel telecommunications paradigms, future networks and services, smart
ubiquitous networking, context-aware networking, mobile cloud computing, Inter-
net of Things, Internet of Services, ambient assisted living, enhanced living envir-
onments, trust management, Internet tomography, mHealth and mLearning ICT. Dr
Ganchev
has
served
on
the
Technical
Program
Committee
of
200þ
prestigious international conferences, symposia and workshops. He has authored/co-
authored 6 books (including 2 edited books) and 240þ research papers in refereed
international journals and conference proceedings. Dr Ganchev is on the editorial
board of and has served as a Guest Editor for multiple international journals.
Nuno M. Garcia holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science Engineering from the Uni-
versity of Beira Interior (UBI, Covilha˜, Portugal) (2008) and he has a 5-year B.Sc.
(Hons.) in Mathematics/Informatics also from UBI (1999–2004). He is Assistant
Professor at UBI and Invited Associate Professor at the School of Communication,
Architecture, Arts and Information Technologies of the Universidade Luso´fona de
Humanidades e Tecnologias (Lisbon, Portugal). He was founder and is coordinator
of the Assisted Living Computing and Telecommunications Laboratory, a research
group within the Instituto de Telecomunicac¸o˜es at UBI. He was also cofounder and
is coordinator of the Executive Council of the BSAFE LAB — Law enforcement,
Introduction to enhanced living environments
19

Justice and Public Safety Research and Technology Transfer Laboratory, a multi-
disciplinary research laboratory in UBI. He is the coordinator of the Cisco Acad-
emy at UBI, Head of EyeSeeLab in Eye-See Lda (Lisbon, Portugal) and member of
the Consultative Council of Favvus IT HR SA (Lisbon). He is also chair of the
COST Action IC1303 AAPELE — Architectures, Algorithms and Platforms for
Enhanced Living Environments. He is the main author of several international,
European and Portuguese patents. He is member of the Non-Commercial Users
Constituency, a group within GNSO in ICANN. His main interests include next-
generation networks, algorithms for bio-signal processing, distributed and coop-
erative protocols.
Rossitza Goleva received her Ph.D. in Communication Networks in 2016 and
M.Sc. in Computer Science in 1982 at Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria. She
was part of the research staff of the research Institute of Bulgarian PTT between
1982 and 1987. Since 1987, she is with Department of Communication Networks at
Technical University of Sofia. At present, Rossitza works on communication net-
works, communication protocols and software engineering. Her research interests
are in Quality of Service in communication networks, communication protocols,
traffic engineering, cloud and fog computing, performance analyses. She is an
IEEE Member, is involved in IEEE Bulgaria section activities, has more than 85
research publications and was part of more than 30 research projects including and
EU COST IC1303 AAPELE action.
Carlos Alberto Valderrama is director of the Department of Electronics and
Microelectronics at the Polytechnic Faculty of the University of Mons, in Belgium,
since 2004. He obtained, in 1998, the Ph.D. degree in Microelectronics at the INPG
in Grenoble, France, the M.Sc. degree from the Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro (UFRJ-COPPE) in 1993 and graduated electrical-electronics engineer from
the National University of Cordoba (UNC), Argentina, in 1989. He was visiting
professor at two Brazilian universities, at the Federal University of Pernambuco
(UFPE) in 2004 and at the Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN) in
1998. Between 1999 and 2004, he was leading the Hardware-Flow team in CoWare
NV. (today acquired by Synopsys), Belgium. In 2009, he was responsible for
the creation of the spinoff Nsilition (http://www.nsilition.com/) resulting from the
IPfundry project funded by the Walloon Region. His primary research interests
include wireless communication, EDA and system-level design of reconfigurable
embedded architectures. He has participated in more than 15 national and inter-
national research projects from the development of 4G chips to next-generation
tracking devices and software architectures for the IoT, satellite and multicore
industry, collaborating with partners such as Alcatel, STMicroelectronics, NXP and
Thales. He serves as technical reviewer and committee member of multiple
journals and international conferences. His research activity is supported by more
than 150 publications on international conferences, more than 10 books chapters
and more than 30 scientific journals. He is IEEE senior member since 2006.
20
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Chapter 2
Enhanced living environments from the
viewpoint of socioecological psychology
Tama´s Martos1 and Viola Sallay1
Abstract
The chapter provides an overview for studying and understanding the psychological
aspects of enhanced living environments (ELEs). First, socioecological psychology is
presented as a macro theoretical approach to human environmental behaviour and
relationships along with the main concepts of niche construction theory that may be
used to broaden the theoretical foundations of ELEs. Second, the psychologically
relevant literature of the home is reviewed with an emphasis on the transactional
processes between individuals and their built and natural environments. Third, self-
determination theory (SDT), a macro theory of human relationships and motivation, is
described. SDT may provide insight about optimal conditions for constructing social
ecological niches, most importantly for the development of home environments. As a
conclusion, the chapter defines major themes and research directions where socio-
ecological psychology may enrich research and practice around ELE themes.
2.1
Introduction
In the present chapter, we provide a theoretical overview and framework for studying
and understanding the psychological aspects of enhanced living environments (ELEs).
We present the basic tenets of socioecological psychology as a macro theoretical
approach to human environmental behaviour and relationships [1]. As a specific
concern of socioecological psychology, we refer to the niche construction theory
(NCT) [2]. NCT is originally an evolutionary biological theory; however, its main
concepts are spreading rapidly to other disciplines such as socioecological psychology
and may be used to broaden the theoretical foundations of ELEs. Since home and home
environment are among the most universal examples of human micro niches and
at the same time homes are deeply affected by new technological inventions, we review
the psychologically relevant literature of the home with an emphasis on the transac-
tional processes between individuals and their built and natural environments [3].
1Institute of Psychology, University of Szeged, Hungary

Finally, we present self-determination theory (SDT), an evolving macro theory of
human relationships and motivation [4]. SDT may provide insight about optimal con-
ditions for constructing social ecological niches, most importantly for the development
of home environments that are optimally embedded in interpersonal and intrapersonal
relationships. As a conclusion, we define major themes and research directions where
psychological approaches, in general, and socioecological psychology, in particular,
may enrich research and practice around ELE themes.
2.2
Socioecological psychology as a framework
Our main approach is based on the theoretical concepts of a socioecologically and
psychologically informed approach to human social behaviour and functioning.
Broadly speaking, socioecological psychology investigates how human beings and
communities adapt cognitively, emotionally and behaviourally to physical, inter-
personal, economic and even to cultural and political environments [1]. Moreover,
socioecological psychology also focuses on those processes whereby people
actively construct and modify their physical, social and cultural environments by
relying on their psychological states (cognitions, emotions). This aspect of
the person–environment relationship may be labelled as ‘niche construction’ [1].
Socioecological psychology typically tries to reflect the two sides of the same coin:
those environmental factors that give a macro context for the human psyche as well
as the human mental and behavioural activities that shape these external conditions.
One group of macro contexts that is important in relation to the rise of ELEs
refers to demographical changes in ageing and increase of the proportion of old and
senior people in the society. This is accompanied by an increasing individualization
in the culture and changing solidarity between the generations. The other macro
factor is the rapid development of new systems in information technology.
These macro contexts are well-known processes and present both challenges
and tools for searching new ways for an active and independent living in elderly
and in populations with chronic conditions. From this point of view, ELE solutions
may be interpreted as social adaptations to these macro environmental challenges.
Below we will explore in more detail how psychological aspects of home may
provide insights regarding the psychological processes involved in this adaptation,
in general, and how they may inform the search for ELE solutions, in particular.
Before that, however, we explore the active and constructing aspect of this adap-
tation process and will use the concept of niche construction.
2.3
Concept of ‘human niche construction’ as a universal
human phenomenon
Niche is originally an ecological concept. It refers to an integrated set of biological
and material life conditions that provide specific environment for the growth and
life of an organism and a species. Niche is the specific environment, organized in
space and time where the organism lives.
22
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

NCT [2] describes evolutionary processes as constant and cyclical transactions
between the organisms, their environment and their genetic heritage. The core
assumption behind NCT is that those changes that the organisms make in their
environments become evolutionary forces themselves. Therefore, adaptation is not
a unidirectional process that leads only from environment and environmental
pressures to gene selection but there is an opposite direction as well. Organisms are
to some extent coauthors of their (and also others’) evolution. For the best and the
worst, human beings are among the most successful niche constructors on the earth:
our intelligence and culture enable us to modify our social and physical environ-
ment in a way that may support the fitness of the species of Homo sapiens. In
return, these modifications exert new selective pressures that have effects on both
biological and cultural levels (e.g. values, preferred and rewarded traits). In recent
years, many applications of NCT arose outside of evolutionary theorizing. Princi-
ples of niche construction were applied to cultural differences and heritage [5–7], to
modern economy [8], to individual developmental processes and its social context
[9], and on the psychological level to interpersonal relationships, for example,
friendship [10]. Niche construction seems to prevail as a universal phenomenon at
every domain and level of the human–environment socioecological systems. It is
present both on the micro and on the macro levels, as well as on a lifespan and on
an evolutionary time scale.
Niche construction may involve several domains and forms. With every
domain or form, it aims at constructing and modifying a specific aspect of a broadly
defined environment (see also Figure 2.1). These aspects are
●
ecological aspects – biological environment of landscapes, plants and animals;
●
social aspects – relationships, communities, institutions;
●
technological aspects – the construction of artefacts, tools, buildings,
systems;
●
symbolic (affective and cognitive) aspects – symbolic spaces and information
systems including language, meaning systems, practices of knowledge sharing,
learning and information transmission.
These domains are not exclusive for each other; rather, they are closely inter-
related aspects of the same phenomena. In fact, human activity almost inevitably
involves all kinds of niches. For example, when we consider ELE, it is obviously
bound to the development of pervasive technological changes for a living envir-
onment. Moreover, technological niche construction is accompanied by a huge
amount of corresponding information and knowledge about technology, usage,
pathways of cooperation between human and non-human agents, maintenance
processes, etc. Social niche construction cannot be dismissed either; social partners
(e.g. family members, patients and practitioners, designers, clients and service
providers) need to develop and maintain partly new ways of communication,
norms, forms of cooperation. As a distal change, even ecological niches would be
affected for better or worse through industrial production and building, through
energy consumption, the increase or decrease of long-term transportations due to
innovations, etc.
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
23

Note, however, that this multiple construction process occurs in a socio-
ecological environment that has already been constructed. This means that existing
ecological, social, technological and cognitive niches (with their own limits and
possibilities) would balance between resistance and fit. As psychologists, we are
especially interested in those niches that are the closest to the personal experience of
the person: the cognitive and social niches. At the same time, we are rightly aware of
those more distal but very basic influences that ecological and technological aspects
of niches may exert on the individual and communities.
One important contribution of NCT to the human social phenomena is the
emphasis on the feedback track. Humans not only modify – whether intended or
unintended – several aspects of their and others’ ecological, technological, social and
cognitive environment, but are also subject of the resulting selective pressures. These
pressures may also act on several levels. Genetic alterations are extremely slow,
changes in social institutions and norms may happen also in historic perspective.
However, traits, norms, attitudes on individual and relational level may undergo rela-
tively rashmodifications. There are also exaptations and technological innovations both
at micro, mezzo and macro levels that may follow the modifications of the environment.
2.4
Home as a niche
Home is neither just another place among important places in life nor just a tech-
nical solution for shelter and basic functions. For most people, home has also a
unique and powerful symbolic and emotional significance [12–14] and this condi-
tion warrants home environments high place among the most important human
niches. In fact, home as a niche has a rich web of features from ecological, tech-
nological, symbolic and relational aspects.
Symbolic aspects
(affective + cognitive meaning)
Relational aspects
The person:
body + mental processes
Technological aspects
Ecological aspects
Figure 2.1
Aspects of niche construction processes in human micro niches
24
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

It is a fundamental human need to have some central place in a living environ-
ment (e.g. the home) and to experience in this place security, autonomy, well-being
or at least an improvement in the actual emotional state as well as positive interac-
tions with others [13,15]. A home heavily influences the health of its inhabitants
depending on whether self-regulation processes, place attachment and place identity
associated to one’s home carry mostly positive or negative emotions [13,15,16].
Therefore, the home is of utmost significance throughout one’s life cycle.
Place attachment is influenced by our (mostly unconscious) effort to organize
our human existence around significant places [17]. We may form long-term,
personally significant attachment to places (e.g. to the home) where we have
experienced something important and that contributed to the satisfaction of our
needs [18]. Place identity, which is an integral part of self-identity [17], consists of
place-related cognitions (memories, emotions, values and behavioural patterns) and
at the same time it incorporates place attachment as well. Place identity is based on
the experiences gained with places (e.g. the home) to which the person has formed
an attachment and which played a significant role in the regulation of their emo-
tional balance or the relationship to themselves [19].
The home is also a place where people and their environment coexist in a
dynamic interaction (person–environment transaction) [20,21], where the physical
characteristics of the place cannot be understood without its social aspects, and in
turn, social relationships are shaped by the physical characteristics of the place. The
term home as a socio-physical environment is used in this sense by the transactional
approach of the person–environment relationship [22].
Personal interaction with physical spaces and environments may be especially
effective ways for emotion regulation. Individuals spend a lot of time in their homes,
where they elaborate a series of routines. In addition, many of their significant
relationship experiences – to some extent – are also attached to their homes. Hence,
emotions and emotional regulation processes are integral part of the home experience
[14]. Physical environment of the home, together with the many aspects of human
sociality (home as a socio-physical environment), provides an almost inexhaustible
set of paths and potentials for individuals to regulate their emotional states and family
relationships. At the same time relative stability of the physical features of the home
may give stability and predictability for their inhabitants.
Qualitative research on the histories of homes across the lifespan reveals that
individuals’ home environments are often reconstructions of past experiences of
places where people felt themselves safe and secure [23]. Histories of environmental
experiences may have a strong impact on the individual’s preferred home setting
through the (often unconscious) emotional meaning of those significant places [12].
2.4.1
Emotional processes in the home: lessons learnt with the
Emotional Map of the Home Interview
Based on previous diagnostic techniques in family therapy [24, p. 105], Sallay and
colleagues developed the ‘Emotional Map of the Home’ Interview protocol
(EMHI) [25]. Through the EMHI protocol, the researcher can uncover the basic
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
25

emotional, relational and environmental self-regulation processes in the space of
the home.
The interview begins with the ‘anamnesis of the homes’, that is, recalling pre-
vious homes of the person and associated emotions. As a second step, interviewees
are asked to draw a layout of the home indicating the function and important furniture
in each room. Then they are asked to mark the place(s) of 1 emotions/experiences on
the layout (e.g. ‘Where is the place of security for you in your home?’). For every
steps and emotions, stories are asked for (e.g. ‘What stories are associated with the
manner in which you experience security in the kitchen?’). The interview protocol
refers to nine emotions/experiences: (1) security, (2) insecurity, (3) well-being,
(4) tension, (5) healing/change, (6) suffering, (7) belonging, (8) withdrawal and
(9) illness. Finally, (10) symbol of the home is asked for.
Below we summarize the results of a qualitative investigation where adult
patients with chronic illness (epilepsy and back pain), as well as their adult family
members living in the same household, were interviewed with EMHI. Interviews
were transcribed literally and were analysed via grounded theory methodology
[26]. Figure 2.2 depicts the core categories that were developed through the ana-
lysis and that are described below. Core categories condense the most characteristic
strategies and processes by which family members regulate their emotional states
while using the space of the home in their specific way.
According to the experience of the studied families, they relied on specific sets
of rules and rituals that connected spaces and people. These rituals constituted the
central part and ‘engine’ of the emotional space of the home and the self-regulation
processes in this space. The central piece of the model (‘rituals in the home’)
Internal images of the
home
(from past, present and
future)
Rituals in the
home
Emotional detachment
from the home
Self-regulation through
active shaping of the home
Figure 2.2
Processes of emotional self-regulation in the home: core categories of
the Emotional Map of the Home research. Arrows refer to potential
interrelations
26
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

represents those cyclically repeated and dynamically changing everyday rituals that
are used by family members to realize their coordinated environmental self-
regulation strategies in the home. These are mental and behavioural strategies that
regulate physical and emotional closeness and distance of the family members.
They also guide specific home-based ‘choreographies’ of co-movements and
retreats. Rituals are highly characteristic to the relational dynamics of the actual
family. This choreography includes the physical space, the persons, their relation-
ships and their methods of communication in the space. Ritually repeated move-
ments may contribute to the experience of security and relationships but also to the
survival of tensions in the relationship and the experience of losing one’s place.
The environmental self-regulation processes revealed how rituals of space usage
served the emotional security of family members. Consequently, the way family
members use the space of the home deserves special attention. The mapping of
these processes may uncover the vulnerability of certain members in the family,
like those living with chronic illness, emotional needs and disabilities.
In light of the developmental model of place attachment [17], we may hypo-
thesize that two types of strategies may be connected to broader internal working
models of transactions with the environment. As for one, the rituals of environ-
mental self-regulation in the home may be realized through the intensive usage of
the physical space of the home. This type of self-regulation is called the ‘active
shaping’ (see Figure 2.2). It consists of processes by which family members
regulate their inner states and relationships, for example, by drawing borderlines or
making borderlines passable, by controlling the space of the home and by the
ritualized usage of home places. People who report experiences of ‘active shaping’
competently use the physical environment of the home to regulate their internal
states. These experiences involve strong emotions that are predominantly positive
but strong negative emotions (and the corresponding negative place attachment)
may also be present. Another typical strategy of the self-regulation processes in the
home is ‘detachment from the home’. Alternatively, people, whose narratives are
dominated by this kind of experience, find their security in fantasies of indepen-
dence from the environment. They do not give any significance to their attachment
to the important places of their life, neither in a positive nor in a negative way. These
families and family members develop fantasies of emotional separation and dis-
connection from the environment and use this as a strategy to maintain their security
and self-regulation (see ‘emotional detachment’ in the model). The two strategies of
environmental self-regulation, that is, the ‘active shaping’ and the ‘emotional
detachment’, are potential candidates for two basic place attachment styles.
Finally, inner images of the home – whether they are realistic, idealized or
desired – have a crucial role in the development and existence of the above-
described self-regulation processes (see ‘internal image of the home’ in the model).
Attachment to the childhood home (similarly to human attachment) may be as
strong and dominant through the deficits as through the positive experiences.
Childhood place attachment is formed by both physical characteristics of the place
and the family relations. One possible way of adult development is that people can
exert control and competency in their adult home over the environment, thus they
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
27

are able to make corrections for the deficits of the childhood home. This corrective
developmental process compares to the more general model of personality devel-
opment which connects the phases and processes of personal development to the
joint experience of autonomy and competence as well as the active search for these
experiences [4]. Another way the internal image of the childhood home may have
an impact on the self-regulation process is that people try to recreate the char-
acteristic features of their childhood home that they felt subjectively significant.
From the socioecological psychological point of view, mental and physical
health can be described as equilibrium between experiences of agency and commu-
nion in the environment [27,28]. Among modes of environmental self-regulation, it is
the ‘detachment from the environment’ mode that seems to be more associated with
giving up environmental agency. In certain instances, it may also be characterized by
an emphasis on ideal family connections and communion without negative feelings.
In contrast, ‘active shaping’ as an environmental self-regulation mode represents
agency, shaping internal states and the space of the home at the same time through
person–environment transaction processes. Processes of emotional self-regulation
and relationship dynamics are fundamental aspects of home environment. Therefore,
these aspects have to be included in the research and practice of ELE. Now, we turn
to another aspect of the niche construction process: we present SDT that contributes
to our understanding of healthy relational and motivational processes.
2.5
Legacy of Self-determination theory
Self-determination theory (SDT) [4] is a growing and flourishing psychological
meta-theory of human self-regulation, motivation, personal growth and well-being.
Since its origins in the 1980s, concepts of SDT are well grounded both theoretically
and methodologically. As we proposed elsewhere, SDT describes several core
psychological conditions that are essential for a human niche construction process
aiming at the support of growth and well-being of the individual [29]. Concepts of
autonomy, basic psychological need (BPN) support and satisfaction as well as
internalization and motivated action seem especially relevant to the niche con-
struction process.
2.5.1
Core concepts of SDT
The concept of BPNs is one of the core assumptions in SDT. BPNs are those
conditions that are necessary for the human person to grow psychologically and to
actualize her full potential. To put it in another way, BPNs are those ‘nutriments’
that are necessary for a healthy development and functioning in a person’s life. In
SDT three BPNs are postulated.
1.
Autonomy: the need for free, volitional acts and existence in general.
2.
Competence: the need for being an active and efficient agent in one’s pursuits.
3.
Relatedness: the need for supporting, caring and warmly tuned personal
relationships.
28
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

There are a series of corollary assumptions regarding these BPNs. First, autonomy
is a centrepiece of the theoretical construction of SDT. Given its central role in the
theory, it is worth presenting briefly what autonomy is from an SDT point of view
and what it is not. The latter is probably the easier question: theorists of SDT often
claim that autonomy is not individualism, egocentrism or disconnection from oth-
ers. Rather, as Chirkov [30] points out, psychological autonomy refers to the inner
capacity of self-direction, either in general, in the individual’s life as a whole
(personal autonomy) or on a specific domain (motivational autonomy, e.g. in health
behaviour, in relational decisions, etc.). Psychological autonomy refers to (1) a set
of self-generated and meaningful life-goals and values where inner capacity for
self-direction refers to the ability of choosing and pursuing such goals; (2) aware-
ness and reflections on body, sensual and affective impulses where autonomy lies
also in using appropriate skills for dealing with these impulses; and (3) the
awareness and understanding of cultural and social norms and expectations along
with an inner capacity to freely decide whether to follow or reject them. Cultures
and social settings may greatly differ in the endorsement of an autonomous
personal position but the dilemmas are similar.
Second, SDT is deeply concerned with specific forms of autonomy support and
control strivings in different kinds of human relationships. Much attention was paid to
the questions of how autonomy and control processes work in different interpersonal
settings and what their consequences are. A great part of SDT-inspired research is
aimed at how people who have influence on others (e.g. parents, health professionals,
teachers, coaches and supervisors) facilitate behavioural change (e.g. smoking ces-
sation, acquiring new skills) and/or attitude change (e.g. value internalization) and
support persistence. As a general principle, controlling (non-autonomy supporting)
relationship acts and the subjective interpretation of being controlled in a relationship
are regarded as detrimental for growth, healthy functioning and good quality of
relationships; for supporting data, see [31–35]. Even more generally, several studies
demonstrated that need supporting attitude and behaviour (in terms of BPN satisfac-
tion) are in fact necessary prerequisites for these desirable outcomes in several
settings.
Third, SDT holds that it is indispensable for healthy functioning to provide an
equally high level of satisfaction for all three types of needs. It is also important to
note that the need concept of SDT differs considerably from other concepts that
treat needs as individual difference features. As opposed to other concepts, in SDT
the main concern is not about how individuals differ from each other in the strength
of their actual or long-term needs. Instead, the question is – in SDT terms – how
social environments are different from each other in providing these basic needs for
the individuals. Empirical studies demonstrated that personal experience of higher
satisfaction of BPNs, autonomy, competence and relatedness was connected to
higher well-being and better psychological health in everyday settings [36,37] and
close relationships [38].
Fourth, the quality of social environment and the resulting level of basic need
satisfaction have a profound impact on the internalization process. Internalization
refers to the process whereby behaviours, attitudes and values are accepted by the
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
29

person and treated as their own. While intrinsically motivated actions and experi-
ences are pursued without any external rewards, just for the joy and inner interest
inherent in the behaviour, internalization process refers to externally initiated
motivation. However, SDT distinguishes between different types of external
motivations such as external, introjected, identified and integrated regulation [4].
These motivational states – although different in degree – are all forms of an
externally fuelled self-regulation and differ substantially in the subjective experi-
ence of autonomy, causation and internalization. Identified and integrated regula-
tions represent autonomously regulated motivation and behaviour that contribute to
optimal human functioning. Moreover, more autonomous types of motivation were
found to be personally more satisfying and more efficient and creative at the same
time [39–41]. On the other hand, people look for intrinsically motivated states and
behaviours even if they have autonomously internalized goals and strivings. In this
way, intrinsic motivation is close to the ‘flow’ state of mind as described by Miha´ly
Csı´kszentmiha´lyi [42].
Fifth, SDT posits that the feeling of relatedness alone is not enough to build
and maintain satisfactory relationships [43]. Mutual support of autonomy and
competence are also vital ingredients of every well-functioning relationship.
Although the authors refer to the possibility of conflict between autonomy and
relatedness – as they may often be experienced as contradictory demands – they are
not necessarily antitheses for each other. In fact, the theory of BPNs posits that both
are prerequisites for healthy human functioning. In contrast, conditional regard and
the resulting relationship-contingent self-esteem represent the darker side of a
relationship. Conditional regard offers relatedness at the cost of autonomy and
builds the relationship on exerting interpersonal control.
2.6
Putting it all together: socioecological psychological
aspects of ELE
To briefly summarize our main points, we would like to highlight the following key
features:
1.
A broad framework: niche construction.
Niches are organized and meaningful sets of physical, biological and social
agents that are, on the one hand, outcomes of human activity and on the other,
they provide places and connections for this activity to shape the human
experience and behaviour. The concept of niche construction captures this
bidirectional relationship with its technological, relational and informational
aspects. Niches are meaningful environments that mirror the strengths and
weaknesses of the human body and mind; while in turn niches shape minds and
bodies as well. Human well-being is closely tied to niche construction activ-
ities and processes.
2.
A significant place for niche construction: the home
One of the most prominent niches is ‘the home’ and much of human niche
construction may be regarded as home setting. Home not only provides shelter
30
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

and other practical services but through its symbolic power it represents an
anchor for individual and relational identities as well. Everything that happens
in the ‘home niche’ has a meaning on several levels.
3.
A viable way for optimal construction processes: BPN satisfaction
The concept of BPNs (autonomy, competence and positive connectedness) and
self-determination formulates those core conditions that are necessary for any kind
of optimal niche construction processes. If agents involved in this process experi-
ence need satisfaction, their activity will most likely contribute to real human
growth and well-being.
Now, we are going to explore how these concepts can be applied to the
research and development of ambient assisted living and enhanced living solutions.
2.6.1
ELE as niche construction
There is relatively sparse scholarly activity that would make use of the niche
construction concept for ambient assisted living domain. Fontes and colleagues
[44] refer to technological niches. Technological niches are ‘protected’ environ-
ments and social structures (actors, networks and institutions) where the creation of
new technologies and user specifications that are still in the process of becoming
stable can be sheltered and nurtured. This approach may apply for the develop-
mental niche of ELE technologies and not directly for the users’ niches. Moreover,
through new assistive technologies new environments are being created for their
users. According to NCT, there are two interwoven processes that deserve our
attention. First, new technologies create new niches in several aspects: they affect
the spatial and material structure, the information and cognition structure, and the
social-relational structure as well. Second, these altered environmental states would
exert new pressures on the agents and would be selective to new habits, traits and
norms.
Magnani and Bardone [45] use the concept of cognitive niche to give a
theoretical foundation for Ambient Intelligence research and practice: ‘Humans
constantly organize their brains through an eco-cognitive activity that reifies them in
the external environment’ [45, p. 3]. Relying on external objects as extensions of the
cognitive capacities is a fundamental feature of the human niche construction
processes. There is, however, a new aspect of today’s development: Ambient Intel-
ligence solutions reached a considerable extent of autonomy in artificial perceptions,
decisions and actions.
2.6.1.1
What is already known?
As one author puts it, ‘Niche construction will increasingly become a key com-
ponent of clinical innovation’ [46, p. 130]. In this optimistic approach, techno-
logical innovations may provide new supporting environments for certain groups
of people living with disabilities who could otherwise be regarded as ‘digital
outcasts’. Thus, through information technology, digital niche construction could
provide these people with new means to extend their abilities and to ensure their
better survival.
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
31

For example, Ambient Intelligence as a new kind of cognitive niche not only
mirrors the structures and representations of our minds (this was the case for most
traditional object as well) but also may react and adapt itself to the preferences of
the users [45]. Moreover, it is possible that this new form of extended cognitive
functioning anticipates the preferences, actions and decisions of the human agents,
eventually without the conscious processing of the users. This innovation delegates
massive amount of cognitive functions to the environment, thus redistributing the
cognitive load that humans are subjected to. Magnani and Bardone [45] understand
all kinds of material-technological modifications of the environment as cognitive in
nature. Therefore, cognitive niche construction seems to be interwoven with the
material-technological niche construction. They speak of a new ‘eco-cognitive’
smart environment. Environmental engineering becomes the core process of niche
construction and will be progressively dominated by technologically represented
distribution of cognitive functions. This can be viewed as a qualitatively new way
of cognitive niche construction in the human history. This approach is close to our
notion that ELE as niche construction process involves ecological, symbolic,
relational and technological aspects as well.
Benetazzo and colleagues [47] outline an optimistic perspective how ELE
technologies may support the specific needs of elderly people. They collect and
present several technological innovations around a theoretical need structure
derived from the widely known Maslow need hierarchy model. According to their
analysis, ELE technologies may be effectively used for constructing new niches
where
●
physical and psychological needs,
●
socialization needs,
●
mobility needs, and
●
environmental and personal safety needs
can be met by a series of monitoring systems, wearable multi-sensory devices and
intelligent robots. There are several technological requirements that have to be
faced, for example, ‘design for all’ principles, low invasivity and high privacy,
simplicity of use and integrability with existing environments [47]. Once these
requirements are fulfilled, the technological niche would satisfy the above-
mentioned needs.
2.6.1.2
What can be added?
While technological innovations exert massive alterations on our human socio-
ecological niches, there is little known about how the other basic features of NCT,
that is, the feedback loop may function in these eco-cognitive niches. Adaptive
intelligent systems will certainly exert selective pressures on human agents
towards certain outcomes. In fact, these systems are readily designed to reach
such effect. However, there may still be other, unintended selective pressures on
the individuals (and also on the relationships) that also become salient when an
eco-cognitive niche and human agents in it are functioning together. The ‘ther-
apeutic landscape’ concept was suggested by Williams [48] as a framework to
32
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

explain the health-promoting aspects of home as well as to untangle the physical,
individual, social and cultural factors that come together in the healing process.
The basic assumption is that if a healthy, positive place identity fit exists, the
home is regarded therapeutic as it contributes to well-being. Research conducted
in this vein should explore how such a healthy fit can be achieved.
As Milligan [49] assumes, home as a context for care (i.e. a micro-landscape of
care) shapes both the care itself (e.g. the availability of formal support to family
caregivers) and has a huge impact on how people perceive and experience their
homes. Moreover, it may have impact how people meet each other, for example,
those whose needs are met by artificial intelligent agents. While on the one hand
these solutions address basic needs for social contact [4], on the other hand they
may also contribute to devaluing (human) care and reinforcing negative social
attitudes towards older persons as unworthy of our attention and effort [50]. These
considerations are very much in line with the NCT approach.
Moreover, new types of niches are created where the boundaries are difficult to
define. Milligan [51] speaks of ‘extitutional’ (instead of institutional) arrangements
in cases where many parts of new care technologies are distributed in a web of
places, agents and functions. Call centres, teleconferences, teams of telediagnosis,
monitoring stations involve places and processes of care that are connected to
traditional institutions (like homes and healthcare arrangements) but that are also
separated in considerable spatial and cognitive distance as well. While person–
environment fit is one of the key topics of the research on socioecological and
psychological niches, these new ‘extitutions’ bring up the question: where is
exactly the niche that the person should be fit in? This may be not just a theoretical
question but also a concern for the stakeholders.
Another interesting question is how agency, autonomy and power are dis-
tributed in the process of niche construction. Often it is the designer who initially
and almost exclusively sets the rules how an intelligent system would process
information and react (making environmentally selective pressures). Symbolic and
relational aspects of the human niche construction have to be considered in order to
build an assistive environment integrated with human needs as much as possible.
This may help to avoid potential maladaptive outcomes: the problems of loss of
agency and uncertain liability; loss of traditional, culturally evolved ways of
maintaining positive identity. For example, little is known about how constant
monitoring, tracking and (quantitative) feedback on our own behaviours may alter
the sense of self (see the quantified self-concept) [52,53].
Finally, a massive use of new technologies and the resulting altered socio-
ecological conditions with these new technologies make selective pressure towards
redefining the ethics of care. Several authors seek to understand how those possi-
bilities and challenges can be handled ethically and how ethical principles may be
built in the niche construction process [50,54,55]. Obviously, there are also
potential positive outcomes. Organically created ELE solutions as niche construc-
tion processes may support our perceptions, actions and cognition. Moreover, they
may make decisions for us by adapting themselves to human agents through
constant interactions with them. One implication of NCT can be an ELE solution
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
33

in its final functioning state, when all participants may inevitably be regarded as
co-creators. All agents will be part of the process of construction. The question is
how this process may be formed in the best possible way. Research shows that
personally tailored, highly personalized design process is viable through constant
cross-checking of the real needs and fears of inhabitants [56] and maintaining
sensitivity for their language barriers [57]. Moreover, with the increasing perva-
siveness of ELE niches, the resulting selective pressures may prioritize traits like
higher technology acceptance [58] or technology readiness [59] in individuals and
communities.
2.6.1.3
ELE and niche construction processes:
potential research topics
Further studies and research may focus on a series of important questions regarding
the niche construction processes in human micro niches. These may include what
are the specific construction processes that may integrate technological aspects
with symbolic and relational aspects of niche construction? Knowing that ethics are
important when designing a new technological intervention, how can the process of
the construction of new niches address a series of ethical issues?
2.6.2
ELE and home niches: the potential places
of technology in a complex system
According to our approach, home is a rich web of spatial, emotional and relational
activities. There are pre-existing routines and rituals of potential users in the space
of the home and these rituals mean security and comfort to them. New ELE ele-
ments in the home not only introduce new technical agents into the ‘landscape of
care’ [49] but may also challenge the emotional and relational processes that
characterize the space of the home [25].
Qualitative and quantitative studies suggest that home becomes an especially
significant place for the elderly [51,60,61] and serves as a final basis of maintaining
personal independence and autonomy [62]. A repeatedly proven insight is that most
of the older person’s time is clearly spent within the home, a pattern which
becomes particularly pronounced for the oldest old [63]. Several authors note that it
is necessary to invent new strategies for very old people whereby they can be
supported in staying as active and independent as possible in their own homes.
Moreover, there is a need for supporting both independence (not relying on others,
maintaining competencies) and autonomy as used in SDT tradition, namely feeling
volitional, having choices between meaningful alternatives and owning the actions
to be taken. Finally, relational aspects of the home are also significant [25]. Support
for living in the home may serve these functions as well.
2.6.2.1
What is already known?
Desjardins and colleagues [64] review several empirical studies to identify different
approaches to domestic technology research in human–computer interaction (HCI)
domain. They found and presented seven genres and evaluated them with regard to
34
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

their basic questions for investigation and potential contributions to the home
research. The genres and their evaluations are the following:
●
Social routines in the home: The basic question is how the home is organized
socially through communication processes (often involving technological
devices) and use of artefacts. Technology may support these processes.
●
Ongoing domestic practices: This line of research refers to everyday activities
in the home and their meanings for the inhabitants and may inform the
development of new interactive technologies.
●
The home as a testing ground: Home environment may explicitly be used as a
test place for certain devices, systems and solutions.
●
Smart homes: Experimental studies are able to assess the complex experience
of living in a smart home environment, often using living lab settings.
●
Contested values of a home: This approach seeks to understand alternative modes
of home experiences and definitions of the homes that deviate from the mainstream
cultural trends (e.g. mobile homes, alternative practices and needs) and critically
evaluates the potential of technology in approaching home-related challenges.
●
The home as a site for interpretation: Home is accepted as a complex web of
interpretative and creative functions where technology may both support
playfulness, discovery and exploration and be the object of these processes.
●
Speculative visions of the home: This final genre explores the future visions of
the home that broaden the present views and provoke new dialogues about the
future role of home technologies.
Moreover, Desjardins and colleagues [64] identify two dominant research perspec-
tives in HCI domain: the third-person (observer/interpreter) perspective and the
anthropocentric perspective. As a parallel for these two, they also offer two other
complementary perspectives that may broaden the horizon of HCI research on home
technologies. A material view of the home (e.g. articulating how intelligent objects
are looking at the world) may be an alternative of the anthropocentric perspective.
A first-person perspective would include the subjectivity of the researcher herself
and may form a counterpart of the objectivist third-person position.
2.6.2.2
What can be added?
Rubinstein [65] described three classes of psychosocial processes through which
people give meaning to the home environment: social-centred, person-centred and
body-centred processes.
●
Social-centred meaning is based on a personal set of sociocultural rules for
domestic order and it also captures the interpersonal experiences in the home.
●
Person-centred meaning is an expression of one’s life course through the
features of the home.
●
Body-centred meaning is created by the experiences of the body in its envir-
onment. It is still understudied how these powerful meaning-making processes
help or hinder the integration of specific new technologies and conversely,
how they are affected by them.
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
35

In many instances, home experiences represent core aspects of the self and one’s
most important relationships [25]. Therefore, successful integration of new care
technologies into the home or home-like settings requires not only technological
solutions but also that the technologies do not dominate the overall function and
experience of the home [51]. An interesting new cultural concept is the need for
‘cocooning’ which can be readily addressed by technological solutions but may
also be diminished by them. Cocooning is the need for retrieval from public into
personal spaces (e.g. into the home, into the private use of telecommunication
devices) [66,67]. As much as the need for cocooning becomes a culturally endorsed
goal, technological solutions increasingly have to consider this aspect of human
experience. People not only want to use an object but also want to feel
it, experiment with it, give meanings to it both in a cognitive-emotional and in
relational ways. However, there is lack of research on emotional symbolic and
relational meanings of these processes.
2.6.2.3
ELE in home niches: potential research topics
Research based on the following questions could further contribute to our knowledge
of the emotional–relational meaning of home environments. These may include how
new care technologies act to reshape the home and people’s experiences of being ‘at
home’ is thus critical to development of ‘good care’? How can the EMHI be used to
study rituals in the home and the ways how rituals are rearranged around new
technologies?
2.6.3
Constructing ELE solutions in home niches:
the importance of psychological need support
In recent years, SDT inspired a great number of studies on the applied domains of
health, well-being, education, sport and human conduct in general. By now, it has a
growing international community of scholars and practitioners as well. SDT as a
macro theory has a series of features that make this approach especially suitable for
behavioural research. Here we briefly review the main assumptions in relation to
our main focus, the socioecological–psychological aspects of ELE.
First, the human person is seen embedded in social systems and relationships
while at the same time functioning according to an intrinsically developing and
self-organizing self-system. With this humanistic view of psychological phe-
nomena, SDT is clearly an outstanding frame of reference for studying human
functioning in an interpersonal context. As we described earlier, the ELE
development process is embedded in social structures both around end users and
developers – therefore, the applicability of SDT can be assumed. Second, SDT
refers to evolutionarily based principles of human functioning. For instance, SDT
assumes that BPNs (see detailed below) are universally evolved human
phenomena that are mostly independent of culture. Moreover, human beings are
by nature active and growth-oriented organisms who seek to get in creative,
intrinsically driven and constructive relationship with their social as well as with
36
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

their physical environment. Therefore, according to SDT, we may assume that
BPNs and intrinsic activity as evolved human adaptations are important vehicles
in human niche construction processes. The ELE as an interrelated web of cog-
nitive, social and technological niche construction process may be analysed in
terms of SDT. Third, well-being and positive functioning are core topics in SDT.
Recognition of universal human tendencies in SDT is clearly bound to the search
for the conditions of more satisfying lives, more positive functioning both on a
personal and on an interpersonal level. There is a great bulk of research in the
SDT tradition that concerns the use and adoption of different behavioural and
technological interventions like health behaviours, treatment adherence and even
new technological challenges [68]. Since adoption and use of ELE technologies
require a lot of decision and self-regulation, propositions of SDT may be
important for the well-being of the involved partners.
2.6.3.1
What is already known?
Concerning the need for autonomy, there is clearly room for improvement.
According to evidence on user experience, users of new care technologies may feel
like ‘the big brother was watching them’ [51, p. 81]. In these cases, implementation
of monitoring care technology (sensors, webcams, smart clothing, etc.) may be
regarded as a kind of invasion of their territory unless it is managed in an autonomy
supportive way. For example, older people who require care and support can often
feel a clear lack of control over their own lives – a feeling that can be exacerbated
by surveillance technologies and reliance on remote care technologies instead of
personal attendance. Interestingly a number of studies have revealed how some
older people seek to demonstrate agency and regain control by actively resisting
these kinds of technologies; for a review, see [51,69]. This highlights not only the
importance of understanding the person–environment transactions within which
new care technologies are to be located, but also that there is a clear requirement to
ensure that the social and affective needs of older people do not become subsumed
by their medical needs. Indeed, researchers have pointed to the importance of
ensuring developments in new care technologies to take seriously older people’s
ongoing and ever-changing need for meaningful human interactions.
The need for competence may be supported by technological solutions but it
can also be challenged at the same time. While new technologies may enhance the
persons’ ability to remain physically, cognitively and socially active, for example,
to ‘age in place’, these gains are counterbalanced to some extent by the cost of
increased dependence on new forms of care. There are relatively clear design
requirements that enable users to efficiently interact with devices [70]. These
include effective support for interaction, efficiency of user actions, high potential
acceptance and learnability of the provided information, and minimalization of
human errors. These requirements are in line with the human need for competence
and competence support.
The need for relatedness seems to be the most complex phenomenon when
approaching ELE solutions. When a health monitoring system is embedded in a
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
37

home, older people can remain safely in their home while receiving medical
support, preserving their quality of life, living in a familiar environment within an
established social network, promoting healthy behaviour and lifestyles for con-
tinued community living [71,72]. Expectations of clients and various user groups
(family members, caregivers) concerning a certain fall detection system could be
characterized by the preference for experienced safety (i.e. not just technical
components) while social acceptance was also important especially for users [73].
Other results also show that user acceptance is based both on the system’s safe
functionality and the availability of at least a few other people who can be
confidently accessed when necessary [74].
As a summary on the aspect of basic need satisfaction, we may cite Bitterman
and Shach-Pinsly’s notion: ‘Most studies concerning smart homes demonstrate the
feasibility of a technological solution or describe a preliminary evaluation approach
with a limited number of subjects, most commonly in a laboratory setting’ [71,
p. 268]. The importance of using multiple outcome measures and involvement
of multiple stakeholders was also emphasized for later studies [71]. In fact,
consumers’ real needs are sometimes overlooked in technology-driven projects.
Instead, an abstract, rational decision-maker is assumed and there is a tendency to
focus on optimizing efficiency as if technology could alone solve complex human
issues [75].
Mitchell and colleagues [76] advocate a mixed method approach to research
and design issues. They used interactive floor plan method as a research tool for
mapping human activity as well as for advancing collaborative activities between
users and designers. While their focus were on specific activities, the applied
methodology is similar to our EMHI [25]. In fact, emotional processes and activ-
ities are the two sides of the same coin as our previously presented results
demonstrate. Therefore, EMHI may be applied in collaborative design for ELE
solutions as well. The use of EMHI can offer an especially appropriate methodol-
ogy to uncover complex emotional–relational processes and basic expectations
regarding the complex functionality of a home.
Burrows and colleagues [77] call for assessing personalized needs and
expectations of potential users in order to be presented for designers. Such pro-
files (‘personas’) may sensitize developers and designers for the real variety of
individual and communal expectations. Previous research also highlighted the
importance of finding a shared language in the cognitive construction of the niche
[57]. Moreover, it seems that a cooperative design process can efficiently support
the BPNs as well.
2.6.3.2
What can be added?
Remote information recording raises several questions concerning communication
among health and social care providers and informal carers, particularly with
regard to the exchange of information about the care recipient. New care technol-
ogies have the potential to intervene in relationships previously thought to be more
38
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

private. Such interventions can have an impact on the relationships between family
members, for example, between the adult informal carer and her parent or with her
siblings, where a sense of ‘rivalry’ may emerge [51]. New care technologies not
only raise important questions about possible unequal or problematic caring roles
but also raise ethical questions about everyday interactions, privacy and
consent between carer and care recipient [51].
Remote diagnosis and monitoring system may support higher safety but may
also reduce the need for face-to-face care by informal carers, nurses and clin-
icians. Thus, it may also contribute to an increased social isolation and depression
among those who receive care and support at home. So, on the one hand, these
technologies can be seen as having a role to play in enhancing the ability of older
people to manage their lives within their own homes, but on the other hand, they
hold the potential to exacerbate exclusion and isolation. Occasionally, profes-
sional and informal carers who are involved in the delivery of technological
solutions may fail to consider psychological aspects and meaning of the home to
the care recipient [51]. At worst, this may have a detrimental impact on the health
of recipients [78].
While technological development is tremendous, relatively little is known
about the impact these new possibilities may have on family relationships and
social interactions. There may be concerns that technology, automation and robotic
interaction would replace face-to-face communication and direct human contact
and, paradoxically, this would lead to increased isolation [71]. Privacy and con-
fidentiality are yet other issues that have to be addressed: who will be the master at
home when everything is automated? What degree of dependence/independence
will users have when being manipulated by decisions made for them? Sorell and
Draper [54] examine the possibility of autonomy conflicts between certain values
that govern the construction and use of technology and argue that autonomy should
be given primacy as an organizing value of the ethical framework for the design. In
sum, there may be a certain amount of conflict between the needs of the care
recipient and those of the carers who are also individuals requiring support [51].
However, there may be ways to find well-functioning ‘relational contract’ [79]
between the two parties. Principles of SDT may be of utmost importance in guiding
this construction process.
2.6.3.3
ELE and psychological needs: potential research topics
Further studies and research may focus on a series of important question and may
be informed by the theory of BPNs. These may include how can important personal
projects be supported by personalized technological settings in the home [56]? How
can be processes of participatory design framed most effectively as autonomy and
competence support of designers, providers and users? How can the concept of
relational contract in changing relationships around ELE solutions? How can one
explore the person–environment transaction processes involved in participatory
design?
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
39

2.7
Conclusions
Greenhalgh and colleagues [80] describe three generation of ongoing research on
smart homes and assisted living developments (technical design, experimental
testing and patient experience) and propose a fourth aspect (generation) for further
investigation. According to them, ELE technologies should be studied within their
organizational, social and policy context. The proposed research paradigm
acknowledges the complex dynamic nature of the social environment that ELE
solutions are embedded in. In our terms, the broader socioecological niche is also
part of the processes and developments in the ELE field. Therefore it is also worth
exploring the connections and mutual selection processes between the ELE field
and the broader sociocultural environment. Greenhalgh and colleagues [80]
describe this fourth paradigm as one that
1.
invokes interdisciplinary research approaches;
2.
embraces the complexity of the whole social-technological system that ELE
technologies are part of;
3.
holds a recursive, circular view of the web of interconnections and effects;
4.
is ecological, that is, it acknowledges the context bound nature of all human
phenomena and strives for technological solutions that are (at least partly)
developed locally and collaboratively, owned by the community; and
5.
nourishes a critical view that is unbiased as much as possible to evaluate the
often competing and conflicting interests of key stakeholders in the domain.
Although we previously pointed to potential scholarly activities in several domains,
let us summarize the basic tenets of future research directions from the viewpoint of
socioecological psychology again.
1.
Systemic view of the surrounding subsystems where technologies are embedded
in the higher system levels, from the micro level (e.g. human psyche and devices)
through small-scale systems (e.g. families, healthcare institutions) to macro level
(societal changes and attitudes, domain specific and general processes).
2.
Description of mutual feedback loops and processes according to the niche
construction concept. These feedback loops may also be built/capitalized on
when designing innovations in ELE technologies.
3.
Inclusion of relational and emotional processes – as an addition to the cogni-
tive aspects – into the models and descriptions. Research should aim at those
conditions and specific processes in this field that promote BPN satisfaction of
users, carers and also implementing specialists. This approach seems espe-
cially important in order to keep the human aspect of these technologies.
We think that from a socioecological psychological point of view much of the
success of future development depends on its potential to dynamically adapt to both
the actual environmental context and the dynamically changing human needs,
evoking and reacting not only to human cognitions but also to human emotions and
finding a place in the web of human relationships [81,82].
40
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Acknowledgements
Preparation of the manuscript was partly funded by the Hungarian National
Research Fund (OTKA-NKFIH) under the grant number PD 105685. The authors
would like to thank for inspiration and valuable help from the COST action IC1303
AAPELE and Marianna Nagy.
References
[1]
Oishi S. ‘Socioecological psychology’. Annual Review of Psychology.
2014;65:581–609
[2]
Odling-Smee F.J., Laland K.N., Feldman M.W. Niche construction: the
neglected process in evolution (No. 37). Princeton: Princeton University
Press; 2003
[3]
Gifford
R.
‘Environmental
psychology
matters’.
Annual
Review
of
Psychology. 2014;65:541–579
[4]
Ryan R.M., Deci E.L. ‘Self-determination theory and the facilitation of
intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being’. American
Psychologist. 2000;55:68–78
[5]
Kendal J.R. ‘Cultural niche construction and human learning environments:
investigating sociocultural perspectives’. Biological Theory. 2011;6(3):
241–250
[6]
Laland K.N., O’Brien M.J. ‘Cultural niche construction: an introduction’.
Biological Theory. 2011;6(3):191–202
[7]
Yamagishi T., Hashimoto H. ‘Social niche construction’. Current Opinion in
Psychology. 2016;8:119–124
[8]
Dew N., Sarasvathy S.D. ‘Exaptation and niche construction: behavioural
insights for an evolutionary theory’. Industrial and Corporate Change.
2016;25(1):167–179
[9]
Flynn E.G., Laland K.N., Kendal R.L., Kendal J.R. ‘Target article with
commentaries: developmental niche construction’. Developmental Science.
2013;16(2):296–313
[10]
Bahns A.J., Crandall C.S., Gillath O., Preacher K.J. ‘Similarity in relation-
ships as niche construction: choice, stability and influence within dyads in a
free choice environment’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
2017;112(2):329–355
[11]
Papadopoulou M. ‘The ‘‘space’’ of friendship: young children’s under-
standings and expressions of friendship in a reception class’. Early Child
Development and Care. 2016;186(10):1544–1558
[12]
Israel T. Some place like home: using design psychology to create ideal
places. New York: Academy Press; 2003
[13]
Manzo L.C. ‘For better or worse: exploring multiple dimensions of place
meaning’. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 2005;25, 67–86
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
41

[14]
Graham L.T., Gosling S.D., Travis C.K. ‘The psychology of home envir-
onments: a call for research on residential space’. Perspectives on Psycho-
logical Science. 2015;10(3):346–356
[15]
Manzo L.C. ‘Beyond house and haven: toward a revisioning of emotional
relationships with places’. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 2003;23,
47–61
[16]
Dyck I., Kontos P., Angus J., McKeever P. ‘The home as a site for long-term
care: meanings and management of bodies and spaces’. Health and Place.
2005;11:173–185
[17]
Morgan P. ‘Towards a developmental theory of place attachment’. Journal
of Environmental Psychology. 2010;30:11–22
[18]
Korpela K.M., Hartig T., Kaiser F.G., Fuhrer U. ‘Restorative experience and
self-regulation in favorite places’. Environment and Behaviour. 2001;
33:572–589
[19]
Korpela K.M., Hartig T. ‘Restorative qualities of favorite places’. Journal of
Environmental Psychology. 1996;16:221–233
[20]
Giuliani M.V., Scopelliti M. ‘Empirical research in environmental psycho-
logy: past, present, and future’. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 2009;
29:375–386
[21]
Werner C., Altman I., Oxley D. ‘Temporal aspects of homes: a transactional
perspective’ in Altman I., Werner C. (eds.). Home environments. New York:
Plenum Press; 1985. pp. 1–32
[22]
Canter D.V., Craik K.H. ‘Environmental psychology’. Journal of Environ-
mental Psychology. 1981;1:1–11
[23]
Cooper Marcus C. House as a mirror of self: Exploring the deeper meaning
of home. Berkeley: Conari Press; 1997
[24]
Sherman R., Fredman N. Handbook of structured techniques in marriage
and family therapy. New York: Brunner/Mazel; 1986
[25]
Sallay V., Martos, T., Chatfield S.L., Du´ll A. ‘Emotional Map of the Home
Interview: new research tool for family studies’. Journal of Family Therapy.
2017; submitted for publication
[26]
Strauss A., Corbin J. Basics of qualitative research: grounded theory
procedures and techniques. Thousand Oaks: Sage; 1998
[27]
McAdams D.P., Josselson R., Lieblich A. Identity and story: creating self in
narrative. New York: APA Books; 2006
[28]
Pisani A., McDaniel S.H. ‘An integrative approach to health and illness in
family therapy’ in Lebow J.L. (ed.). Clinical family therapy. Hoboken:
Wiley and Sons; 2005. pp. 569–590
[29]
Martos T., Sallay V. ‘Self-determination theory and the emerging fields
of relationship science and niche construction theory’. European Journal of
Mental Health. 2017;12(1):53–72
[30]
Chirkov V. ‘The universality of psychological autonomy across cultures:
arguments from developmental and social psychology’ in Weinstein N. (ed.).
42
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Human motivation and interpersonal relationships; theory, research, and
applications. Dordrecht, Heidelberg, New York, London: Springer; 2014.
pp. 27–51
[31]
Deci E.L., Ryan R.M. ‘Facilitating optimal motivation and psychological
well-being across life’s domains’. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie cana-
dienne. 2008;49(1):14–23
[32]
Guay F., Ratelle C.F., Larose S., Vallerand R.J., Vitaro F. ‘The number of
autonomy-supportive relationships: are more relationships better for moti-
vation, perceived competence, and achievement?’ Contemporary Educa-
tional Psychology. 2013;38(4):375–382
[33]
Haerens L., Aelterman N., Vansteenkiste M., Soenens B., Van Petegem S.
‘Do perceived autonomy-supportive and controlling teaching relate to phy-
sical education students’ motivational experience through unique pathways?
Distinguishing between the bright and dark side of motivation’. Psychology
of Sport and Exercise. 2015;16:26–36
[34]
Ratelle C.F., Duchesne S. ‘Trajectories of psychological need satisfaction
from early to late adolescence as a predictor of adjustment in school’.
Contemporary Educational Psychology. 2014;39:388–400
[35]
Roth G., Weinstock M. ‘Teachers’ epistemological beliefs as an antecedent
of autonomy-supportive teaching’. Motivation and Emotion. 2013;37
(3):402–412
[36]
Reis H.T., Sheldon K.M., Gable S.L., Roscoe J., Ryan R.M. ‘Daily well-
being: the role of autonomy, competence, and relatedness’. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin. 2000;26(4):419–435
[37]
Ryan R.M., Bernstein J.H., Brown K.W. ‘Weekends, work, and well-being:
psychological need satisfactions and day of the week effects on mood,
vitality, and physical symptoms’. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology.
2010;29(1):95–122
[38]
Patrick H., Knee C.R., Canevello A., Lonsbary C. ‘The role of need fulfill-
ment in relationship functioning and well-being: a self-determination theory
perspective’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2007;92(3):
434–457
[39]
Deci E.L., Ryan R.M. ‘The general causality orientations scale: self-
determination in personality’. Journal of Research in Personality. 1985;19:
109–134
[40]
Weinstein N., Przybylski A.K., Ryan R.M. ‘The index of autonomous
functioning: development of a scale of human autonomy’. Journal of
Research in Personality. 2012;46:397–413
[41]
Wong M.M. ‘The relations among causality orientations, academic experi-
ence, academic performance, and academic commitment’. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin. 2000;36:315–326
[42]
Csı´kszentmiha´lyi M. Flow: the psychology of optimal experience. New York:
Harper Perennial; 1991.
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
43

[43]
Deci E.L., Ryan R.M. ‘Autonomy and need satisfaction in close relationships:
Relationships Motivation Theory’ in Weinstein N. (ed.). Human motivation
and
interpersonal
relationships:
theory,
research,
and
applications.
Dordrecht, Heidelberg, New York, London: Springer; 2014. pp. 53–73
[44]
Fontes M., Sousa C., Ferreira J. ‘The spatial dynamics of niche trajectory:
the case of wave energy’. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transi-
tions. 2016;19:66–84
[45]
Magnani L., Bardone E. ‘Ambient intelligence as cognitive niche enrich-
ment’ in Chong N. Y., Mastrogiovanni F. (eds.). Handbook of research
on ambient intelligence and smart environments: trends and perspective.
Hershey: IGI Global; 2011. pp. 1–17
[46]
Smith K. ‘How digital outcasts can pilot the future of health care’. World
Future Review. 2013;5(2):127–134
[47]
Benetazzo F., Ferracuti F., Freddi A., et al. ‘AAL technologies for
independent life of elderly people’ in Ando` B., Siciliano P., Marletta V.,
Monteriu` A. (eds.). Ambient assisted living. New York: Springer; 2015.
pp. 329–343
[48]
Williams A. ‘Changing geographies of care: employing the concept of
therapeutic landscapes as a framework in examining home space’. Social
Science and Medicine. 2002;55:141–154
[49]
Milligan C. ‘‘‘Bearing the burden’’: towards a restructured geography of
caring’. Area. 2000;32(1):49–58
[50]
Elder A. ‘False friends and false coinage: a tool for navigating the ethics of
sociable robots’. ACM SIGCAS Computers and Society. 2016;45(3):248–254
[51]
Milligan C. There’s no place like home: place and care in an ageing society.
Farnham: Ashgate Publishing; 2012.
[52]
Dudley J.T., Listgarten J., Stegle O., Brenner S.E., Parts L. ‘Personalized
medicine: from genotypes, molecular phenotypes and the quantified self,
towards improved medicine’. Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing. 2015;
342–346
[53]
Lupton D. The quantified self. New York: John Wiley Sons; 2016.
[54]
Sorell T., Draper H. ‘Robot carers, ethics, and older people’. Ethics and
Information Technology. 2014;16(3):183–195
[55]
Waycott J., Morgans A., Pedell S., et al. ‘Ethics in evaluating a socio-
technical intervention with socially isolated older adults’. Qualitative Health
Research. 2015;25(11):1518–1528
[56]
Brotman R., Burleson, W., Forlizzi J., Heywood, W., Lee J. ‘Building
change: constructive design of smart domestic environments for goal
achievement’. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM; 2015. 3083–3092
[57]
Burrows A., Gooberman-Hill R., Coyle D. ‘Shared language and the design
of home healthcare technology’. Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM; 2016. 3584–3594
44
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[58]
Davis F.D. ‘User acceptance of information technology: system character-
istics, user perceptions and behavioural impacts’. International Journal of
Man-Machine Studies. 1993;38:475–487
[59]
Parasuraman A. ‘Technology Readiness Index (TRI): a multiple-item scale
to measure readiness to embrace new technologies’. Journal of Service
Research. 2000;2(4):307–320
[60]
Milligan C., Wiles J. ‘Landscapes of care’. Progress in Human Geography.
2010;34(6):736–754
[61]
Wahl H.-W., Weisman G.D. ‘Environmental gerontology at the beginning of
the new millennium: reflections on its historical, empirical, and theoretical
development’. The Gerontologist. 2003;43:616–627
[62]
Haak M., Fange A., Iwarsson S., Dahlin-Ivanoff S. ‘Home as a signification
of independence and autonomy: experiences among very old Swedish
people’. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy. 2007;14:16–24
[63]
Baltes M.M., Maas I., Wilms H.U., Borchelt M., Little T.D. ‘Everyday
competence in old and very old age: theoretical considerations and empirical
findings’ in Baltes P.B., Mayer K.U. (eds.). The Berlin aging study: aging
from 70 to 100. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1999. pp. 384–402
[64]
Desjardins A., Wakkary R., Odom, W. ‘Investigating genres and perspec-
tives in HCI research on the home’. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM; 2015, April.
pp. 3073–3082
[65]
Rubinstein R.L., Kilbride J.C. Elders living alone: fraility and the perception
of choice. Livingstone: Transaction Publishers; 1992.
[66]
Kobayashi T., Boase J. ‘Tele-cocooning: mobile texting and social scope’.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 2014;19:681–694
[67]
Wells P.E., Xenias D. ‘From ‘‘freedom of the open road’’ to ‘‘cocooning’’:
understanding resistance to change in personal private automobility’.
Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. 2015;16:106–119
[68]
Goemaere S., Vansteenkiste M., Van Petegem S. ‘Gaining deeper insight
into the psychological challenges of human spaceflight: the role of motiva-
tional dynamics’. Acta Astronautica. 2016;121:130–143
[69]
Mort M., Milligan C., Roberts C., Moser I. (eds.). Ageing, technology and
home care: new actors, new responsibilities. Paris: Presses de l’Ecoledes
mines; 2008
[70]
Grguric A., Gil A.M.M., Huljenic D., Car, Z., Podobnik V. ‘A survey on user
interaction mechanisms for enhanced living environments’ in Loshkovska
S., Koceski S. (eds.). ICT Innovations 2015. New York: Springer; 2016.
pp. 131–141
[71]
Bitterman N., Shach-Pinsly D. ‘Smart home – a challenge for architects and
designers’. Architectural Science Review. 2015;58(3):266–274
[72]
Reeder B., Meyer E., Lazar A., Chaudhuri S., Thompson H.J., Demiris G.
‘Framing the evidence for health smart homes and home-based consumer
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
45

health technologies as a public health intervention for independent aging: a
systematic review’. International Journal of Medical Informatics. 2013;82
(7):565–579
[73]
Kolosza´r K. ‘Understanding expectations of different user groups of a
sophisticated fall detection system’. International Journal of Occupational
Safety and Ergonomics. 2014;20(2):227–238
[74]
Go¨vercin M., Meyer S., Schellenbach M., Steinhagen-Thiessen E., Weiss B.
Haesner M. ‘SmartSenior@home: acceptance of an integrated ambient
assisted living system. Results of a clinical field trial in 35 households’.
Informatics for Health and Social Care. 2016;41(4):430–447
[75]
Oliveira L.C., May A., Mitchell V., Coleman M., Kane T., Firth S. ‘Pre-
installation challenges: classifying barriers to the introduction of smart home
technology’. Proceedings of the Third International Conference on ICT
for Sustainability, (ICT4S 2015); Copenhagen, 7–9 September, 2015.
pp. 117–125
[76]
Mitchell V., Mackley K.L., Pink S., Escobar-Tello C., Wilson G.T., Bhamra
T. ‘Situating digital interventions: mixed methods for HCI research in the
home’. Interacting with Computers. 2014;iwu034
[77]
Burrows A., Gooberman-Hill R., Coyle D. ‘Empirically derived user
attributes for the design of home healthcare technologies’. Personal and
Ubiquitous Computing. 2015;19(8):1233–1245
[78]
Heywood F. ‘The health outcomes of housing adaptations’. Disability and
Society. 2004;19(2):129–143
[79]
La Guardia J.G., Patrick H. ‘Self-determination theory as a fundamental
theory of close relationships’. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie cana-
dienne. 2008;49(3):201–209
[80]
Greenhalgh T., Shaw S., Wherton J., et al. ‘SCALS: a fourth-generation
study of assisted living technologies in their organisational, social, political
and policy context’. BMJ open. 2016;6(2):e010208.0
[81]
Caleb-Solly P., Dogramadzi S., Ellender D., Fear T., Heuvel H.V.D.
‘A mixed-method approach to evoke creative and holistic thinking about
robots in a home environment’. Proceedings of the 2014 ACM/IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. ACM; 2014. pp. 374–381
[82]
Garcia N.M. ‘A roadmap to the design of a personal digital life coach’
in Loshkovska S., Koceski S. (eds.). ICT Innovations 2015. New York:
Springer; 2016. pp. 21–27
Further reading
[1]
Fleury-Bahi G., Pol E., Navarro O. Handbook of environmental psychology
and quality of life research. Berlin: Springer; 2016
[2]
Ryan R.M., Deci E.L. Self-determination theory: basic psychological needs
in motivation, development and wellness. New York: Guilford Press; 2017
46
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Biographies
Tama´s Martos, PhD, is a psychologist and senior research fellow at the Institute of
Psychology, University of Szeged, Hungary. He received his habilitation in 2016,
completed his PhD in 2010. In his theses he analysed a representative health
psychological survey with a title ‘Life goals and mental health in the Hungarian
society’. His research topics and publications include various themes of mental
health, well-being, motivation and positive functioning of individuals, families and
communities. He is the chair of the Positive Psychological Division of the
Hungarian Psychological Association. He is a practising counsellor in health
psychology, family therapy and group psychotherapy (psychodrama).
Viola Sallay, PhD, is a psychologist and senior lecturer at the Institute of Psychology,
University of Szeged, Hungary. She received her PhD in 2014 with the theses on
home environments and emotional self-regulation. She developed the Emotional
Map of the Home Interview technique to explore individual and family experiences
around relationships at home. She is a practising counsellor in health psychology
and family therapy.
Viewpoints of socioecological psychology
47

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 3
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
Kadian Davis1,3, Evans B. Owusu2, Lucio Marcenaro3,
Jun Hu1, Carlo S. Regazzoni3, and Loe Feijs1
Abstract
Global population ageing is an emerging challenge of the twenty-first century. In
an era of pervasive computing (i.e. the proliferation of ever-present smart devices),
governments, companies, and academic institutions are working together to develop
and promote cutting-edge initiatives that sustain the quality of life and address the
complexities and opportunities of an ageing world. In this chapter, we propose a
user-centred approach within a multidisciplinary framework, which incorporates
human–computer interaction, social science, signal processing, and pervasive
computing, to inspire the design of a bidirectional context-aware system to support
social connectedness between the elderly and their caregivers. Following a review
of previous works on socio-technical awareness systems and human activity
recognition models, we describe our user-driven methodological approach and
demonstrate the value and potential benefits of bidirectional activity-based
peripheral systems within ambient assisted living environments.
3.1
Introduction
In the last century, global life expectancy has considerably increased. In 1990, the
average life expectancy in the developed world was estimated between 40 and
50 years while today the predicted life expectancy is 80 years [1]. A continued rise
in life expectancy will yield a major increase in old-dependency ratios, that is, the
proportion of elderly persons not in the labour force to those of working age [2].
Following this trend, the World Health Organization predicts that the number of
persons aged 60 and over will be more than double its size going from 901 million
in 2015 to nearly 2.1 billion in 2050 [3]. This unprecedented phenomenon is driven
1Department of Industrial Design, Designed Intelligence Group, Eindhoven Univesity of Technology,
The Netherlands
2Independent Researcher, The Netherlands
3Department of Electrical, Electronic, Telecommunications Engineering and Naval Architecture (DITEN),
University of Genova, Italy

by improved nutrition, access to sanitation, increased access to education and
advances in medicine, primarily in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases [1].
Although this is a sign of progress, there are many concerns associated with
population ageing, which are yet to be addressed.
Primarily, population ageing can impose considerable economic cost and social
implications. These include increased government spending on health and long-term
care, the shortage of formal caregivers (e.g. nurses/care-home personnel), and
increased taxation for the working-age population to support pension schemes.
Moreover, population ageing imposes pressure on informal caregivers (e.g. family/
friends/neighbours living apart, who maintain social contact with the elderly once or
twice per week) trying to strike a balance between the responsibility of taking care
of their elderly loved ones and their own personal and professional lives.
3.1.1
Social isolation and loneliness as risk factors
With respect to social implications, some researchers believe that social isolation
and loneliness are affiliated with old age [4,5]. Social isolation is identifiable by a
wide range of indicators, namely living alone, having little or no social partici-
pation, perceived lack of social support, and feelings of loneliness. Some ger-
ontological studies suggest that social isolation and loneliness have precarious
health risks commensurable with smoking and obesity in older adults [6]. In fact,
social isolation has often been held accountable for increased mortality in older
adults [6,7].
Besides social isolation and loneliness, increased longevity is associated with
heightened susceptibility to several medical issues, including cognitive disorders,
cardiovascular and mental health diseases, and motor and physical disabilities
[7,8]. Despite the elderly’s increased vulnerability to social isolation, chronic ill-
nesses and disabilities, the majority are in favour of living independently and
remaining in the comfort of their own homes [9], a concept more formally coined
as ageing in place [10]. However, many homes in their current state are unfit for
accommodating the mobility limitations of older adults. Thus, prompting the
demand for safer, smarter, and more adaptable homes. To address these challenges,
both public and informal care services are searching for assistive living solutions
that enable sustained well-being and independent living while simultaneously
lowering the costs associated with elderly care. For example, the National Foun-
dation for the Elderly1 is a Dutch charity organization, which aims to promote
quality of life and prevent isolation among older adults.
3.1.2
Ambient assisted living
With the goal of meeting the day-to-day needs of older adults, ambient assisted
living (AAL)2 is an interdisciplinary field which aspires to develop innovative
technical solutions for preserving health, functional independence, and enhancing
1 https://www.ouderenfonds.nl/
2 http://www.aal-europe.eu/about/
50
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

social interaction among older adults. Ambient intelligence (AmI), the backbone of
AAL, aspires to detect people’s state and adaptively respond to their needs and beha-
viours through the integration of ubiquitous technologies in their environment [11].
Drawing from disciplines such as artificial intelligence, human–computer inter-
action, pervasive/ubiquitous computing and computer networks, AmI systems
can sense, reason, and adapt to offer personalized services based on the user’s
context, intentions, and emotions [12,13]. In this way, such systems, also known
as context-aware systems [14], can be integrated into AAL environments to
provide better care and support for the elderly living independently.
To provide context awareness, safety and autonomy, a wide array of applica-
tions are geared towards remote monitoring, indoor localization, fall risk assess-
ment, and fall detection to notify caregivers and emergency services of anomalous
occurrences in the homes of the elderly [15]. In particular, monitoring activities of
daily living (ADL) [16] are critical to determining the elderly’s functional mobility
and their competence to live independently. As a result, human activity recognition
(HAR) has become a critical feature of AAL, to support motion detection and
physical activity monitoring.
Although AAL technology has provided overarching benefits through
enhanced personal assistance, prolonged independent living, and improved quality
of life, there are some open research problems in need of further exploration by the
AAL community. Firstly, most conventional AAL tools are intended for emergency/
anomaly detection [15] with limited motivation towards improving social con-
nectedness, that is, ‘the experience of belonging and relatedness between people’
[17]. Secondly, progress in understanding the nature of the users in their physical
environments, their dynamic needs and expectations is challenged by readily
available computer simulation tools, which often ignore the real challenges
(cognitive impairments, motor and physical disabilities, social isolation and lone-
liness) faced by the ageing population. Thirdly, existing AAL solutions are usually
one-sided (i.e. only providing contextual information to caregivers), resulting in
concerns with respect to the invasion of the privacy [18,19] of older adults. Overall,
most AAL practitioners when addressing the design and validation of AAL solu-
tions are ostensibly more focused on technical features and functionality to support
the frailty of the elderly at the expense of designing to ensure that products are
acceptable and beneficial to both the elderly and their caregivers.
Towards this end, we argue for a user-centred approach to the design and
development of a bidirectional AAL solution to support social connectedness
through the mutual awareness of activity levels between the elderly and their
caregivers. Consequently, the chapter explores the idea of active user participation
in the design and evaluation of a bidirectional activity-based ambient display
platform geared towards improving social connectedness in AAL environments. In
the following sections, we provide evidence for the following claims: (1) a user-
centred approach is necessary to design AAL systems for social support, (2) robust
and reliable classification algorithms are essential for awareness systems within
AAL, and (3) bidirectional ambient displays deployed within an AAL framework
can enhance social connectedness.
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
51

3.2
A user-centred approach for designing systems
to support social connectedness
Don Norman, a pioneer in user-centred design, highlights the importance of
understanding human behaviour to affect technological designs positively [20]. He
further argues that people are not responsible for the complexities that arise from
the use of technology, but instead can be largely determined by the technology
itself. Quite often, we see this translated into the design and development of
interactive technologies for older adults, such that solutions are far more data
centric rather than user supportive.
User-centred design is a human-centred process, with a primary focus on users and
their tasks, paying keen attention to an empirical assessment of adoption and technology
use, while predominantly deploying an iterative design approach, whereby a product is
designed, modified, and repeatedly tested [21]. Thus, from the very onset, both
designers and engineers need to establish an explicit understanding of the users’ context,
tasks, values, needs, and expectations from the users’ perspective. As a consequence,
researchers can gain deeper insights into future usage scenarios to tailor solutions, which
can be incorporated into the users’ daily practice and environments.
When designing for social interaction within an AAL context, there are two user
groups to be considered, that is, the elderly and their caregivers, whether familial or
professional. Notably, each constituent group has its own needs, preferences, and
expectations. In particular, older adults are extremely diverse, with multifarious
differences in terms of physical and cognitive abilities, societal values, social
networks, religious beliefs, living arrangements, and technological expertise and
acceptance. On the other hand, younger adults are in general more abreast with
technology, tend to have busy lifestyles, and often struggle with the responsibility of
caring for older adults. Accordingly, these factors should be taken into account when
designing holistic technological tools to support the needs of all AAL stakeholders.
Participatory design is a human-centred approach, whereby users are involved
in the conception, design, and development of products [22]. Traditionally, parti-
cipatory design methods include but are not limited to the following classical
ethnographic-based techniques: (1) on-site observations, (2) audio and video
recordings, (3) self-report questionnaires, (4) in-depth interviews, (5) contextual
inquiries, (6) surveys, (7) focus groups, (8) note-taking, (9) artefact analysis, and
(10) diary collection [23].
The contextual inquiry, a mixture of interviewing and observation techniques
deployed with real users in their natural environments, is an invaluable tool for
soliciting user requirements for existing and potential product use [24]. In fact, the
contextual inquiry is known to reveal the invisible details of the stakeholder’s
environment and is viewed as an enabler for co-design and creating stronger
collaborations between the users and designers [24].
Within AAL, the potential incapacity of older adults to understand the funda-
mental concepts of novel ambient technologies could hinder their imagination and
acceptance
of such systems [25,26]. Thus, providing more contemporary
participatory design techniques, such as those based on theatrics [25] or storytelling
52
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

principles notably, co-constructing stories [27], could be beneficial to help older
adults imagine user requirements and envision future usage possibilities.
As the design cycle evolves, participatory design techniques such as low-
fidelity mock-ups and prototyping could be helpful to designers to discover
measurable user experiences and usability criteria [28]. These include but are not
limited to the following criteria: (1) ease of use, (2) effectiveness, (3) efficiency, (4)
safety, (5) pleasure, (6) utility, (7) attention, (8) learnability, and (9) memorability
[28,29]. At this point, the potential problems can be identified, thus prompting
further redesign to ensure that the system addresses the stakeholders’ needs.
In summary, by paying close attention to the aforementioned user-centred
design approaches, it is possible to deploy a set of participatory design techniques
to infer user requirements and gather rich qualitative data on usability experiences
of both the elderly and their caregivers in order to develop systems to support social
connectedness. In the next subsection, we put these techniques into action.
3.2.1
A user-centred design process
To properly understand the needs and values of users and to place users in the
centre of the design process, a domain and requirements analysis phase and a
system design and validation phase are incorporated in our design approach, as
illustrated in Figure 3.1. In this work, the co-constructing story [27] is used to
sensitize the users to the social isolation problem (through the sensitizing story) and
to help both the elderly and their caregivers imagine the user requirements of
the system and to envision future usage possibilities (via the elaboration phase).
A typical sensitizing story can be illustrated as follows [30].
Mrs. Audria Visser is a retired 75-year-old store keeper who lives indepen-
dently in an elderly apartment in Eindhoven, The Netherlands. Her husband,
Mr. Roy, Visser, died 5 years ago. Mrs. Visser’s only child, Steven Visser, is
45 years old and is a software developer in Groningen. He is married to
Tamoi Visser with children Elizabeth and Jonathan, 8 and 13 years, respec-
tively. Mrs. Visser suffers from mild hypertension and has biweekly visits
from the doctor. She cooks, cleans, goes grocery shopping, and occasionally
does her own gardening. Mrs. Visser’s social ties include her neighbours, her
church family members and her lifelong friend, Mrs. Karole Abbes, who
lives in a neighbouring community. Moreover, she is in contact with her
sister, Ms. Cheryl Aarts, and her son, Steven, and his family. Mrs. Visser
keeps in touch with her family via the telephone and has irregular visits from
Cheryl and Karole. Distance and high job demands have restricted regular
visits from Steven and his family limiting them to telephone conversations 1–
2 times per week. Steven is worried about his mother’s psychological and
physiological well-being and desires to be more aware of her activities.
Although his mother’s hypertension is seemingly controlled, Steven is fearful
that she lives alone and would like to be informed in the case of eventualities.
The sensitizing story was beneficial for sensitizing users to the ageing
problem, promoting reflection, and determining how users identified with the
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
53

characters. Thereafter, during the elaboration phase, participants viewed service
design images of the proposed technology, which led to active discussions on their
acceptance of wearable devices and ambient displays for enabling context aware-
ness and improving social connectedness.
To further gain a deeper understanding of the users in context and to measure
the effect of proposed context-aware connectedness solutions, on-site observation
and a number of quantitative measures are deployed to assess the elderly’s
independent living skills, perceived isolation (subjective feelings of loneliness),
relationship closeness, and social presence/connectedness.
●
Functional ability and independent living skills: This investigation is done to
assess an older adult’s functional abilities and their instrumental activities of
daily living (IADL), that is, the skills needed for living independently (e.g.
housework, laundering, and meal preparation). The Lawton IADL scale [31] is
a standard instrument for measuring self-care and is well-validated in geriatric
Problem definition
Presentation of
co-constructing stories
Interviews and
questionnaires
On-site observations
Initial system design
Usability testing
Domain and requirements
analysis
System design and
validation
System redesign
Figure 3.1
A user-centred design process
54
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

communities [32]. It consists of eight IADL items assessing the degree of
dependence in telephone use, mobility, grocery shopping, meal preparation,
housekeeping, laundry, medication and financial management. Within AAL,
the results of an IADL assessment may serve as an early indicator of functional
decline [31].
●
Perceived isolation: The UCLA loneliness scale [33] is widely recognized as
the gold standard for measuring subjective feelings of loneliness and social
isolation. It comprises 20 items, examining the rate of reoccurrence of feelings
of being alone and misunderstood, lack of companionship, social inclusion,
and relationship closeness. Every item is followed by a four-point Likert scale
ranging from 1 ¼ never to 4 ¼ always. In this chapter, our evaluation of the
UCLA loneliness scale is inspired by the view that social isolation and lone-
liness are objective indicators of the extent to which a person is socially
connected [34].
●
Perceived relationship closeness: Within this research, we are motivated to
understand the social relationship between the elderly and their caregivers. The
instrument, the Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale developed by Aron et al.
[35], is one of the most highly cited measures of the perceived closeness of
relationships. It consists of a seven-point pictorial scale using two overlapping
circles, whereby a closer intersection indicates stronger sentiments of love and
companionship.
●
Perceived social presence: Although social connectedness and social presence
are closely related, they are not the same. In fact, Ijsselstein et al. suggest that
these two concepts are complementary, alluding to stronger feelings of social
connectedness complemented with lower levels of social presence, regarding
awareness systems [36]. Accordingly, the Institute for Perception Social
Presence Questionnaire [36,37] was developed to focus more on measuring the
affective benefits (i.e. ‘a feeling of having company, a stronger group attrac-
tion, a feeling of staying in touch, of keeping up-to-date with other people’s
lives, and a sense of sharing, belonging, and intimacy’) of awareness systems.
Based on the outcome of the initial system requirement analysis, the system design
and validation enters into an iterative process where perceptions of users regarding
ease of use, privacy, usefulness, and the perceived effects of the initial system are
taken into account in subsequent system redesigns. This ensures that much
importance is given to user feedback in the design of the system’s functionality.
3.3
Context-aware systems for social connectedness
Mark Weiser’s seminal work [38], The Computer for the 21st Century, described
his vision for ubiquitous computing. In his narrative, Weiser imagined a world
where technology would silently reside in the background or periphery of the user’s
attention, is available at a glance, when needed. As such, the minimum allocation
of attentional resources would enable peripheral interaction with a system as sug-
gested in the statement: ‘The most profound technologies are those that disappear.
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
55

They weave themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are indis-
tinguishable from it’ [38]. To this end, ubiquitous computing aims to enable calm
technology [39], whereby information is easily transported between the centre and
periphery of attention.
The notion of context-aware computing [14], the adaption of a system’s
behaviour in response to the sensed physical environment, is therefore, a derivative
of Weiser’s vision of ubiquitous computing. Though earlier research on context-
aware computing was more focused on location-aware applications and remote
monitoring for fall detection, the domain is evolving also to support interpersonal
awareness between the elderly and their caregivers within AAL.
As mentioned earlier, context awareness is a central theme in the field of AmI,
and as such, it is of paramount importance to facilitate the sharing of health and
well-being information between remote caregivers and their elderly relatives. This
information may be provided through direct notifications to users or within the
periphery of their attention.
To achieve the latter, ambient displays, a sub-discipline of AmI, are used to
portray representations of contextual information in the periphery of users’ atten-
tion [40]. By deploying ambient displays, information can be presented through
stand-alone or a combination of visual, audio, or tactile modalities, without being
distracting. Within the AAL domain, a number of studies have demonstrated
benefits of ambient displays to enable contextual awareness and strengthen social
interaction.
The Digital Family Portrait [41,42] is a prototypical example providing sub-
stantive evidence of the use of ambient displays for enabling peace of mind of
remote family members worried about their elderly relatives living independently.
To illustrate a qualitative sense of a senior’s daily activities, location and activity
information are rendered to a caregiver using a photo frame. The results of the field
trial between an elderly mother and her adult son attest to the caregiver’s appre-
ciation of the system’s monitoring capabilities for detecting unusual events, while
not raising privacy concerns for the elderly parent. At the same time, the elderly
parent expressed satisfaction with the system, emphasizing that the notion of
someone looking in made her feel less lonely.
Similarly, visual-based studies such as the Carenet Display [43], Aurama
[44,45] (both augmented picture frames, built upon information received from
sensing devices), Daily Activities Diarist [46] (the narrative presentation of the
elderly’s routines) and MarkerClock [47] (facilitates the sharing of activity infor-
mation through a clock) rely on the automated capture and display of elderly
contextual information for enabling remote monitoring, and supporting con-
nectedness and peace of mind of caregivers.
Other systems such as the Whereabouts clock [48] enable the exchange of
location information by exploiting everyday devices such as a clock and the
smartphone. Placed in the home, for example, in the kitchen or living room, users
can explicitly receive information regarding their family member’s location such
as (home, work, school). The qualitative results of a longitudinal study suggested
affective benefits of the system while it simultaneously provided a sense of
56
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

connectedness and reassurance to family members, confirming the normality of the
other person’s situation.
On the other hand, ambient displays supporting tangible interaction include the
Lumitouch lamp [49] and SnowGlobe [50], to support the virtual exchange of
social gestures, for example, using touch or a nudge to communicate affection and
facilitate remote presence. For example, the Lumitouch lamp [49] conveys emo-
tional information through a picture frame using light patterns, such that a glow is
reflected when the other lamp is touched. In a similar design, the Snowglobe lamp
[50] exploits features such as brightness to show a remote person’s movement.
Additionally, users can virtually exchange social gestures by shaking the device.
Most of these systems provide a context information in one direction from the
elderly to the caregiver which raises trust and privacy concerns. Also, the process
by which some of these systems extract meaning (e.g. human activity patterns)
from complex sensor data is not clearly explained, and therefore, it becomes dif-
ficult to argue their reliability. Subsequent sections address these issues.
3.4
Pervasive sensing and models for HAR
Human activity patterns can convey a wealth of information with respect to health,
moods, and behaviour. Within the AAL domain, the monitoring of ADLs, for
example, bathing, dressing, housekeeping, and food preparation, is essential for
explicitly exploring the physical activity patterns for sustaining autonomy and
quality of life among older adults. In addition, ADL monitoring can facilitate early
diagnosis of a variety of diseases, including Alzheimer’s [2,51,52], Parkinson’s
[53], and Dementia [2,54], and in turn, divulge reliable information concerning an
elder’s ability to live on their own.
Since the manual assessment of ADLs is largely impractical within this context
[2], there is the need for automatic recognition of physical activities – generally
known as HAR. Common activities typically exploited include walking, walking
upstairs and downstairs, sitting, standing, and laying [55–57].
A smart home, commonly defined as a residential facility, augmented with
technology to provide comfort, energy efficiency, and safety to its occupants
[2,58], is a test bed for analysing HAR models. Within AAL, smart homes have
been utilized to assess the psychological and physical health of its occupants. For
instance, Cook et al., through the CASAS project, employed machine learning
algorithms to support remote health monitoring of the elderly [59].
Within a smart home, sensors initiate the data acquisition process by gathering
data on ADLs, so that signal processing algorithms can learn and make inferences
from the data. A variety of sensing devices have been deployed to facilitate HAR.
These include accelerometers, gyroscopes, and global positioning system (GPS),
magnetometers, radio frequency identification (RFID), and microphones to detect
changes in location and movement [2,60]. Moreover, emerging trends in recent
research show that accelerometers have been combined with gyroscopes and
magnetometers to improve recognition performance [61].
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
57

Sensing technologies can be categorized into two groups: non-wearable and
wearable sensors. Non-wearable sensing devices are usually installed in stationary
locations of the smart home. This is done to predict changes in location, gait and
activity patterns [2,53]. Within AAL, examples of non-wearable sensing technol-
ogies for ADL classification include infrared (PIR) sensors for motion and human
presence detection [62], vibration sensors for fall detection [63], pressure sensors
for detecting human presence and falls [64], cameras for activity recognition [65],
and audio sensors for detecting door opening and closing [66]. Based on the reports
in [67], the use of camera-based monitoring might not be applicable in AAL due to
greater concerns towards the privacy constraints.
On the other hand, wearable sensors are body-worn devices, which enable the
collection of context data by embedding electronic technology into everyday objects
(e.g. watches, smartphones, jewellery, or clothing) to measure motion or physiological
characteristics, for example, blood glucose, blood pressure, and cardiac activity [2,58].
Within the AAL domain, wearable sensors are in most cases used for ADL monitoring
and classification. Primarily, wrist-worn sensors including wristwatches, bracelets,
and magnetic sensors are used for activity recognition [2]. Although wearable sensors
have shown much potential for ADL monitoring, they are often sold at exorbitant cost
and are frequently challenged by their privacy and security vulnerabilities.
Remarkably, the smartphone is comparable to hand-worn sensing devices for
enabling HAR. Housing a myriad of miniature sensors, for example, accelerometer,
gyroscope, GPS, magnetometer and a microphone, the smartphone is capable of
supporting the acquisition of rich data sets as demonstrated in [2,56,57,68].
Moreover, it is equipped with a variety of components including Wi-Fi, 3G/4G, and
Bluetooth, which enables communication with other services.
Although smartphones offer great potential for HAR, there are some hardware-
related challenges, such as battery life, processing power, and memory capacity
constraints [56]. Thus, it might be challenging to compute resource-intensive
machine learning algorithms on smartphones [61]. This problem can however be
overcome by using the smartphone only for sensor data collection and then per-
forming other HAR resource-intensive tasks on a remote server. Also, the smart-
phone’s portability, affordable cost, and ubiquity make it ideal for supporting the
convenient, continuous, and unobtrusive monitoring of physical activities, without
imposing many restrictions in one’s home [69]. For example, Dai et al. [70]
developed a fall detection system using the inbuilt smartphone accelerometer.
Moreover, our proposed HAR hybrid model [56] advocates the use of the smart-
phone, placed on users’ belts for sensor data collection.
To facilitate the successful adoption of pervasive sensing technologies in AAL,
user comfort with respect to the amount and location of deployed sensors must be
carefully considered as it directly affects the acceptance of the system [60]. In fact,
sensors placed in certain positions or deployed in multiple locations might nega-
tively influence the users’ ability to perform activities normally and comfortably
within AAL.
Also, HAR models used in AAL should be accurate and reliable to prevent mis-
detection and false alarms as false positives may cause excessive anxiety and result in
58
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

unnecessary worrying, especially for caregivers. Therefore, the need arises for being
able to explore very accurate HAR models suitable for deployment within AAL.
There is a wide spectrum of approaches towards sensor-based human activity
classification and recognition ranging from simple pattern recognition models,
for example, threshold-based classification methods [71], to more advanced
machine learning classification models. The most common models employ super-
vised learning techniques [72], conditional random field [73], rule-based reasoning
[74], artificial neural networks (ANNs) [75], and probabilistic modelling [76,77].
Also, unsupervised learning methods have been proposed for HAR [78].
Although these methods have shown progress in the field of sensor-based
activity recognition, it has been difficult to achieve very high accuracies within the
AAL domain due to these challenges:
●
The inconsistency of ADLs, that is, different people perform activities in dif-
ferent ways and in different sequences [56,79].
●
Sensor data tend to be noisy or ambiguous, thereby affecting classification
results [56].
●
A large majority of previous activity recognition experiments were conducted
using data from relativity young people. This data might not be truly repre-
sentative of activity characteristics of older adults [60].
Notwithstanding these challenges, generative models have been reported to suc-
cessfully handle these uncertainties [80]. Generative models estimate the joint
probabilities of observed samples, which are used to predict the likelihood of a
class to which a new sample belongs. More importantly, hidden Markov models
(HMMs) have shown solid potential for addressing the ambiguities of interpretation
within the AAL domain [76]. HMMs are mostly useful for activity recognition by
virtue of their ability to exploit the temporal and sequential characteristics of
activity data, thereby enabling the prediction of future states from current obser-
vation data. Though HMMs have demonstrated notable success, they are not
without limitations [81]. To begin with, they struggle in representing concurrent or
interleaved activities, which can be problematic when modelling continuous
activities which occur in the AAL domain. Second, their strict independence
assumptions make them inadequate for the capturing of transitive dependencies of
observations. Moreover, it is not feasible to model the feature vector extracted from
accelerometer and gyroscope sensors.
As opposed to generative models, discriminative models estimate the conditional
probability distribution of labelled sequences from the observations. A feasible solu-
tion to overcome the shortcomings of HMMs is to use a discriminative model such as
the support vector machine (SVM) to determine the emission probabilities of an
HMM, which can then be combined with the dynamic temporal features of the HMM
to give improved classification accuracy. In particular, it has been demonstrated that
the hybrid SVM-HMM model achieves better performance when contrasted with
stand-alone SVM and ANN classifiers [82]. Nonetheless, this improvement in recog-
nition accuracy was achieved using a network of binary sensors, which is different
from the goal of deploying as few sensors as possible. In addition, the method used for
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
59

data collection was quite invasive as participants wore many wearable sensors on
various parts of the body including the thigh, both wrists, and neck. For user comfort,
in this work, we advocate the deployment of as little sensors as possible for activity
recognition. Taking advantage of the powerful in-built sensors of the smartphone and
the complimenting potentials of SVM and HMM, we developed and evaluated a
hybrid SVM-HMM model for detecting six basic activities (standing, sitting, walking,
walking upstairs and downstairs, and laying) within AAL.
3.5
A case study evaluating the HMM-SVM model
To overcome the drawbacks of generative and discriminative models, we combined
a multi-class SVM model and an HMM into a single hybrid model [56]. The
standard multi-class SVM model employs one of the two strategies: (1) a one-
against-all strategy in which one SVM is used for each class and (2) a one-against-
one strategy in which an SVM is used for each pair of classes. The one-against-all
strategy, which has shown better results for multi-class classification problems
[83], is used here. The one-against-all strategy consists of building k number of
SVM models and then training the ith model, where i 2 k, with data samples
belonging to class i as positive samples and all others as negative samples. The
classification of samples is therefore formulated using winner-takes-all approach
[84] given by (3.1), where fi is the ith model.
f ðxÞ ¼ argmaxifiðxÞ
(3.1)
HMM, on the other hand, seeks to infer hidden states from observed data
samples. The first-order HMM shown in Figure 3.2 consists of a hidden state vector
x0; . . . ; xk; . . . and an observation vector y1 ,...,yk ,... where the observation vector
represents quantities that can be measured by sensors or derived from sensor data
deterministically while the state vector represents the corresponding class labels
which must be inferred.
HMM is characterized with two conditional probability density functions:
(1) pðxkjxk1Þ depicted as horizontal arrows in Figure 3.2, which is referred to
as the state transition model and (2) pðykjxkÞ represented with vertical arrows in
xk – 1
xk
yk – 1
yk
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Figure 3.2
Hidden Markov model IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [56]
60
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Figure 3.2, which is called the emission model. Note that the standard multi-class
SVM is a discriminative model and therefore, does not generate the conditional
probabilities used by the HMM. However, simple post-processing can map the
output of the SVM to these conditional probabilities also known as posterior
probabilities. Having calculated the posterior probabilities, the activity class is
obtained as the maximum a posteriori state [56,85].
In order to evaluate the accuracy of the developed hybrid model, we collected
5;744 accelerometer and gyroscope data samples using a similar approach adopted
in [86] where participants wore a waist-mounted smartphone around their waist to
perform the six basic activities (standing, sitting, laying, walking, walking upstairs
and downstairs). Each activity was performed for exactly 1 min. Figure 3.3 shows a
participant performing the walking upstairs activity.
Each data sample was represented by 561 features extracted from the accel-
erometer and gyroscope on a fixed length sliding window of 2:56 seconds (s) with a
50% overlap. The feature vector consisted of statistical measures (mean, standard
deviation, etc.) of the jerk of the angular velocity, body and gravitational accel-
eration [56,83].
Figure 3.3
A participant with a waist-mounted phone for data collection
ACM. Reprinted with permission from [69]
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
61

The initial 5;744 data samples were obtained from 31 healthy volunteers within
the age range of 22–79 [56], thereby providing varied samples with respect to gait.
Also, each activity was performed in the homes and workplaces of the volunteers,
thereby providing varied samples with respect to staircase structure. To increase the
size of our data samples and to reduce the biases within our own data set, we
merged the collected data set with the publicly available data set [86], whose col-
lection approach we adopted. Xiangxin et al. [87] emphasized that the need for
large and varied data sets for training classification models is as equally important
as the need for more complex models. In total, we obtained 16,043 data samples for
training, cross-validating and testing the hybrid SVM-HMM model [56].
To determine the classification accuracy of the hybrid model, we applied the
famous 10-fold cross-validation [88] technique where the total data set was divided
into 10-folds, and 9 out of the 10 parts of the data was used for training, and one
part was held out for testing in each cross-validation phase. The overall accuracy
obtained was 99.7% [56]. To compare the obtained accuracy with the performance
of other classifiers, we trained and tested a stand-alone multi-class SVM model [83]
and a standard ANN model in a similar way on the data set [56]. The overall
accuracies obtained were 97.6% and 91.4% for the multi-class SVM and the ANN,
respectively.
3.6
Context-aware connectedness systems
Even though earlier connectedness-oriented systems (Digital Family Portrait,
CareNet, Diarist, etc.), demonstrated promising early results on aspects of con-
nectedness, for example, sentiments of safety and reassurance, there is a lack of
empirical evidence surrounding an understanding of the needs, acceptance, and
perceptions of the elderly and their caregivers. In particular, these studies lacked
the relevant measurement instruments to quantitatively assess or objectively
quantify the user experience. In addition, only a few systems were evaluated in a
real-life context or for an extended period. Thus, warranting further confirmation
through an increased number of participants and longer trial durations.
In addition to the level of user acceptance, earlier connectedness-oriented
systems were in most cases unidirectional. Generally speaking, the elderly party
was mainly observed to determine situational awareness, for example, daily rou-
tines, medications, or anomaly cases while the caregiver acted as an observer, to
provide care and support when needed, while simultaneously gaining a peripheral
sense that everything is happening as anticipated with their elderly counterpart.
This unbalanced communication channel could have considerable privacy impli-
cations especially with respect to the violations of privacy and dignity rights for the
elderly. On the contrary, in cases where bidirectional deployment was attempted, it
was difficult to obtain equal acceptance of the system. This was evident in the
Aurama display [45], whereby the elderly were allowed to marginally inspect the
caregiver’s information while the caregiver was capable of observing more details
with respect to their elderly loved one. Overall, bidirectionality was not equally
62
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

supported or appreciated as caregivers were more accepting of this feature while
the elderly believed it was more relevant to caregivers.
From the literature review, a considerable number of connectedness-oriented
studies assessed the elderly’s ADLs by deploying sensors in and around the home.
However, the number and type of sensors deployed were too many and in some
cases obtrusive. Specifically, the Digital Family Portrait [42] deployed a wide array
of 16 sensors ranging from wearable RFID tags to wireless motion detectors. In
hindsight, noisy signals and instability of the detection field with respect to motion
sensors were some of the issues raised by Rowan in his Digital Family Portrait
study. Also, in some instances, the use of intrusive camera-based sensing to support
activity recognition was observed, for example, in [89]. Consequently, prompting
the need for gerontological studies to provide motion sensing technologies that
provide long-term detection stability and noise reduction while simultaneously
respecting the elderly’s privacy needs by avoiding camera-based sensing technol-
ogies and deploying as little sensors as possible.
Due to the emphasis placed on sustaining the elderly’s health within AAL,
careful consideration should be given to the accuracy and reliability of the sensing
infrastructure and by extension the overall system performance. This is necessary
to build system trust, guarantee the authenticity, and validity of the information
received, and thwart undue stress on the part of the caregiver. It should be noted
that earlier deployments of connectedness-oriented systems suffer from limitations
surrounding the reliability and accuracy regarding the interpretations of the sensed
data. For example, in the case of the Diarist [46], an erroneous system caused
regular misdetection, resulting in needless distress for the caregiver. Also, with
respect to system performance, to the best of our knowledge, only one connected-
ness-oriented system minimally discussed their activity recognition approach and
its performance. In fact, overall system accuracy reported was 73%, which is
moderately low for an AAL context. Considering the shortcomings of the previous
connectedness-oriented systems in AAL, we propose the next generation of sys-
tems and research aimed to
●
Provide a holistic understanding of the users’ context, their needs, perceptions,
and insights relating to context-aware connectedness-oriented technologies
in AAL.
●
Maximize on the opportunistic sensing capabilities of the smartphone in an
effort to avoid intrusive camera-based sensing and to deploy as little sensors as
possible.
●
Provide a more robust and accurate activity recognition approach for
connectedness-oriented systems to better support a realistic representation of
the users’ context in AAL.
●
Encourage equal communication and acceptance in both directions via a
bidirectional human activity-based ambient display to improve social con-
nectedness and context awareness between the elderly and their caregivers.
This bidirectional system is illustrated in Figure 3.4 and discussed in the rest of
this section.
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
63

The proposed bidirectional connectedness system comprised four main components:
●
Wearable sensors (smartphones): These collect activity information by means
of their in-built accelerometer and gyroscope sensors and actively send this
information to the HAR server/engine. With modern smartphones’ high com-
puting power, some simple pre-processing (e.g. cleaning of the data) can
already be performed by the phone before the data is sent to the server. Note
that the desired context information in this setup is the human activity
information.
●
An HAR engine: This receives sensor data from the wearable mobile phones,
extracts 561 features from every 2.56 s of data with a 50% window overlap
[83] and applies the trained HAR model to detect the activities performed in
each window.
Elderly’s world
Caregiver’s world
Sensors
Mobile phones
Wearable sensors
Ambient displays
Generative art based
Hue light based
Abstraction layer
Mobile phones
Wearable sensors
Ambient displays
Generative art based
Hue light based
HAR engine
Figure 3.4
Bidirectional activity-aware system for improving social
connectedness
64
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

●
To protect users’ privacy and to engage the minds of the elderly for intro-
spection, the actual detected activities (walking, standing, etc.) are abstracted
into activity levels (low or high) according to user-defined mappings between
basic activities and activity levels [69]. Users are made to define activity
levels, based on their work, time of day, mobility, and the basic activities they
deem low or high. These maps are used by the abstraction layer to transform
the outputs of the HAR classifier into activity levels, which in turn serves as
input to the ambient displays.
●
Ambient displays: These may be projected with a hue lamp or a computer-
based visualization, which renders the received activity information based on
predefined patterns of light, colour, motion, and speed.
In essence, equal complexity and detail of information is bidirectionally shared
between caregivers and their elderly counterparts alleviating the fear of privacy
invasion, which is usually expressed in unidirectional connectedness systems where
only the elderly’s activity information is shared with the caregivers.
3.7
Experimental results
Adopting the proposed user-centred approach in designing bidirectional context-
aware systems for social connectedness, two studies have been undertaken to
explore the perceptions of the elderly and their caregivers on context-aware solu-
tions, and to also evaluate an initial design of an activity-based context-aware
system for promoting social connectedness.
3.7.1
Perceptions on context-aware solutions
for social connectedness
This experiment introduces the preliminary phase towards a user-centred approach to
designing context-aware solutions for social connectedness between the elderly and
their caregivers. Over a period of 3 months, 10 caregivers and 10 senior citizens,
contacted through personal networks and house-to-house recruitment, participated in
an exploratory study [30]. In terms of demographic data, participants were highly
educated and were primarily from Western Europe with one exception from Canada.
The co-constructing stories technique [27], accompanied by in-depth interviews,
observations and service images, was deployed to collect in situ data from partici-
pants. Questions regarding the user’s context (social ties, loneliness situation, social
engagement, and the frequency of contact with loved ones), perspectives on pervasive
sensing (sharing and receiving physiological information, and relevance) and pre-
ferences (wearable sensors, ambient lighting characteristics, and privacy and control)
were investigated. A thematic analysis [90] was performed to analyse the data.
With respect to the social environment, the loneliness levels of the elderly
participants were much lower than anticipated [30]. Nonetheless, a few elderly
respondents admitted to perceived loneliness tendencies and one participant high-
lighted his dependence on assistive technologies to sustain his independence.
Scepticism regarding the deployment of wearable sensors was initially evident
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
65

among a few participants. This was mainly due to the privacy issues associated with
sensor deployment (e.g. obtrusiveness of the sensors and ethical concerns surround-
ing the sharing of physiological information) [30]. Also, some participants felt that
sensors for elderly safety monitoring were more appropriate for the frail elderly
population. In keeping with Weiser’s vision of ubiquitous technology [38], partici-
pants requested an ‘invisible’ form of technology, whereby the wearing of the device
would evade conscious attention. Thus, participants generally endorsed wearable
smart watches, jewellery and undergarments for their subtlety and unobtrusiveness.
Participants generally reported a positive attitude towards ambient lighting dis-
plays for social connectedness in AAL [30]. Accuracy and reliability of the context
information, aesthetics, and subtlety were some of the features articulated during the
requirements-gathering phase. Warmer lighting colour temperatures for presenting
context information were generally agreed to evoke positive moods and trigger past
memories of interactions with loved ones. Moreover, participants largely preferred
customisable colour options based on context and personal preference. On the other
hand, a few elderly participants raised concerns at the use of ambient technologies to
enhance social relationships. One elderly participant emphasized that in order to
improve social connectedness among older adults and their relatives one has to first
strengthen their communication with them instead of using only technology as a
means to improve the interaction. Therefore, technology should support interpersonal
interactions and should not be used to replace personal interaction in AAL. Table 3.1
gives a summary of the themes that arose from the study [30].
3.7.2
HAR-based activity displays for social connectedness
In a second experiment, we exemplified a user-centred approach through the design
and evaluation of a human-activity-based display for social connectedness [69].
The main objective of this study was to assess the social connectedness implica-
tions of the deployment of a bidirectional physical activity-based ambient display
in the users’ home and/or work context. In addition, indicators such as functional
ability, loneliness, and relationship closeness were also studied. Finally, the value
of the system was explored to describe the participants’ experience in terms of
social presence, with a focus on the affective benefits of the system. Design
guidelines were acquired from a heuristic evaluation with six usability specialists,
who compared an animated curve stitching pattern against regular pulse waves for
showing activity data. The animated curve stitching pattern was largely preferred in
the expert analysis and was later used to design the ambient display.
A usability study was conducted in Canada, with six elderly–caregiver pairs
[69]. Caregivers were between 49 and 58 years while elderly participants ranged
from 72 to 93 years. Only two male caregivers participated in this study. The
experiment lasted for 5 days, applying a repeated-measures design methodology [91],
with an AB-BA format for counterbalancing. The sensor platform consisted of a
waist-mounted smartphone, with in-built inertial sensors (accelerometer and gyro-
scope) to detect six activity states (walking, laying, standing, etc.). An abstraction
layer was used to map activity states to activity levels (low and high) for privacy
66
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Table 3.1
Summary of themes/findings in the preliminary experiment
Theme
General findings
Autonomy
One elderly participant emphasized the need for having a sense of
independence and competence to execute his ADL and lead a
normal life.
Social support
Generally, our elderly participants did not succumb to the
loneliness ageism stereotype as they actively sought to maintain
social connections with their families, friends, and neighbours.
Rituals
Three common rituals were observed during the interviews, which
included improving physical well-being through sporting
activities, church attendance for spiritual growth and
community involvement to enable a richer and more enjoyable
ageing process.
Guilty feelings
Due to busy lifestyles, a few caregivers reported that they felt
guilty for not calling or visiting their elderly relatives and as
such were more appreciative of technologies to increase
awareness and augment social connectedness.
Tension reduction
One caregiver mentioned that the receipt of a close family
member’s context information could increase emotional anxiety
especially if one knows that the individual is ill. Thus, he
proposes decreased interactions as a coping strategy.
On-demand service
Some caregivers highlighted the relevance of being able to turn
off ambient device as needed.
Privacy
Some participants were extremely concerned about the ethical and
the privacy implications of receiving context information
including the following: the type of information shared, access
rights, and potential security risks.
Cynicism
A few elderly participantswere sceptical regardingthe use of assistive
technologies for improving social connectedness. In reality, they
were more appreciative of classical communication techniques
such as telephone calls or face-to-face interactions.
Aesthetics
Warm colours were generally appreciated among all participants.
Also, some participants demonstrated the need for customisable
colours.
Value of the non-
conscious processes
Some caregivers mentioned that certain colours could implicitly
invoke pleasant memories, impart meaningful information and
thereby positively affect moods and interpersonal relationships.
Moreover, subtlety was highly valued by the participants
concerning embedded sensors and inconspicuous light sources
that could be easily integrated into the participants’
environment.
Risks and emergencies
Even though our bidirectional application was directed towards
social connectedness, risks and emergencies were recurring
themes among most participants.
Accuracy and
reliability
Caregivers generally highlighted the value of highly reliable and
accurate information sources to avoid false positives within
AAL environments.
Relevance to the
frail elderly
There was a common tendency to assume that assistive
technologies were more relevant to the weak and frail elderly
among the elderly participants.
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
67

preservation purposes. Moreover, pre-attentive attributes such as colour, speed, and
form discussed in [92] were used to communicate activity levels to participants.
Overall, the study results indicated that participants generally had positive
experiences with the system [69]. Moreover, the findings showed that the subjective
rating of relationship closeness was higher after system deployment. The most
remarkable comment regarding the bidirectional display was the sense of co-presence
it gave whereby a caregiver participant commented that she ‘literally’ felt her
mother’s energetic presence while at work. In addition, the majority of the partici-
pants remarked that they could see the value of the system to increase their awareness
of their loved ones’ activities as well as they generally appreciated the sense of
privacy it gave. In essence, all the participants mentioned that the display provided a
certain assurance that all was as expected with their loved ones. Also, some elderly
participants saw a direct value in the tool for activating reflection on past interactions
with loved ones. Furthermore, some elderly participants commented on the benefits
of the system for stimulating mental activity, such that they likened the system to a
puzzle, whereby they would actively try to determine what their loved one was
doing. Table 3.2 summarizes the major findings in this experiment [69].
Table 3.2
Summary of major findings in the second experiment
Theme
General findings
Positive perception of the
bidirectional peripheral
awareness systems
Participants generally articulated that bidirectionality was
equally necessary to strengthen social interactions between
the elderly and their counterparts. This was reflected by an
increase in telephone calls and face-to-face visits post
system deployment.
Sense of security and
peace of mind
Some caregivers argued that the system triggered an indirect
sense of assurance knowing that their family members
were healthy and active.
Accessibility and
affordability
Two participants expressed satisfaction that context-aware
solutions were now affordable and accessible as in the past
it was merely accessible to incredibly wealthy people.
Positive perception of the
abstraction of activity
information
Participants generally appreciated the abstraction of activities
as they felt it gave a sense of privacy and conveyed a
measure of mysteriousness in trying to reason what the
other person was doing. Thus, stimulating an engaging,
lively, and fascinating interaction with their counterparts.
Promotes reflection
A few elderly participants mentioned that the system
triggered memories of their past interactions with
caregivers and helped them to recollect moments of high
activity in their youthful days.
Reliability and accuracy
For health purposes, accuracy and reliability, were recurring
themes throughout the post interviews.
Value of aesthetically
pleasing designs
The aesthetic value of the patterns was highly appreciated by
the participants, thus demonstrating the significance of
colour, form, speed, and motion in the design of ambient
displays.
68
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

3.8
Challenges
Although designing context-aware systems to support social connectednessbetween the
elderly and their caregivers is a promising research venture, it is not without challenges.
As de Barros and Vasconcelos [93] argued, there are certain ethical principles that
should be considered before conducting research with senior citizens. For instance, the
researcher should bear in mind that activities with older people should last only for a
short duration. In the case of this chapter, as discussed in [69], it was initially difficult
to recruit some elderly participants as they thought the experiment was too extensive.
This was countered in [30] by the use of creative and imaginative tools to unleash their
curiosity, imaginations, and ideas about the possibility of the system. Another chal-
lenge points to the individual differences in the level of concentration and alertness of
both target groups. In the case of the elderly, discussions with property managers,
caregivers and elderly stakeholders revealed that experiments were best conducted
with the elderly in the mornings. This can be attributed to reports and observations of
high peaks of alertness and concentration of the elderly participants.
Also, even though permission was granted from the property manager of a
Canadian independent living facility for the experiment discussed in [69], oppor-
tunities for caregiver recruitment proved difficult. In fact, some caregivers declined
to participate due to time constraints and the geographical distances between
themselves and their elderly loved ones. Thus, hampering the participation of many
potential elderly participants.
Moreover, since the experiment was a real-life setting, privacy was critical. Con-
cerning the collection of activity information, participants were assured in the informed
consent that audio and camera sensors were disabled and they could discontinue the
experiment at any point of the study [69]. However, two elderly participants reported
that theydid not discussprivate matterswhile wearingthe smartphone forfearofprivacy
violations. Arguably, this self-conscious awareness of the smartphone could be attrib-
uted to the short duration of the study. For that reason, a longer experiment is necessary
to moderate such effects of self-awareness. On one occasion, one elderly participant
reported that she did not know if the ambient display was capable of visually sensing her
home activities. Nonetheless, she asserted that she proceeded with her activities as
normal due to her trust in the principal researcher. This confirms the importance of
gaining the elderly’s trust when conducting research with ambient displays.
Finally, the short duration of study factored certain limitations, such as novelty
effects [69]. In some cases, more attentional resources were utilized due to curiosity
than anticipated. It is estimated that a long-term study could gradually stabilize the
effects of novelty over time.
3.9
Conclusion
This chapter endorses a user-centred approach to designing context-aware systems
for supporting social connectedness between the elderly and their caregivers. It
demonstrates that by placing users at the centre of the design process, system
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
69

usability, attractiveness, and acceptance can be enhanced. Moreover, the chapter
emphasizes the importance of understanding the users’ social context before
deploying AAL innovations for social support.
To increase the acceptance of pervasive sensing technologies in AAL, careful
consideration must be given to user comfort regarding the amount and location of
deployed sensors. Consequently, we have explored the use of a single waist-
mounted smartphone to take advantage of its multiple embedded sensors for
collecting activity data and deploying as little wearable sensors as possible.
Furthermore, our findings suggest that participants are increasingly aware of
the ethical and privacy implications of collecting and retaining their physiological
data and as such demonstrated the need for assistive social technologies that pre-
serve their privacy. Also, to reduce false messages in communicating the elderly’s
well-being information, the chapter advocates for accurate and reliable HAR
models to precisely represent the users’ context and gain their trust in the system.
In addition, in presenting contextual information, bidirectionality and abstraction
are two critical features of social connectedness systems so as to engage the minds of
the elderly and reduce privacy invasion concerns often expressed in unidirectional
systems (where only the caregivers receive the elderly’s contextual information).
Concerning the limitations, we acknowledge that a larger sample size would
have contributed to our findings. Nevertheless, the current findings are in line with
similar studies, for example, [50], deploying activity-based displays for social con-
nectedness. Recruiting a larger sample size in subsequent studies may be challenging
due to time constraints imposed by the experiment and the willingness of regular
participants to deploy AAL solutions in their homes. However, collaborating with
elderly care agencies could substantially circumvent the recruitment problem.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Erasmus Mundus Joint Doctorate (EMJD)
in Interactive and Cognitive Environments (ICE), which is funded by Erasmus
Mundus under the FPA no. 2010-2012.
References
[1]
UNFPA H. Ageing in the twenty-first century: a celebration and a challenge.
London: United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), New York, and Help-
Age International; 2012.
[2]
Debes C, Merentitis A, Sukhanov S, Niessen M, Frangiadakis N, Bauer A.
Monitoring activities of daily living in smart homes: understanding human
behavior. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 2016;33(2):81–94.
[3]
WHO. World population ageing. United Nations, New York; 2015.
[4]
Halmos P. Solitude and privacy: a study of social isolation, its causes and
therapy. Routledge, Abingdon; 2013.
70
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[5]
Sheldon JH, The Social Medicine of Old Age: Report of an Inquiry in
Wolverhampton. Oxford University Press, Oxford; 1948.
[6]
Cornwell EY, Waite LJ. Social disconnectedness, perceived isolation, and
health among older adults. Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 2009;50
(1):31–48.
[7]
Steptoe A, Shankar A, Demakakos P, Wardle J. Social isolation, loneliness,
and all-cause mortality in older men and women. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. 2013;110(15):5797–5801.
[8]
Helal AA, Mokhtari M, Abdulrazak B. The engineering handbook of smart
technology for aging, disability, and independence. Wiley Online Library;
2008.
[9]
Farber N, Shinkle D. Aging in place: a state survey of livability policies and
practices. In: A Research Report by the National Conference of State
Legislatures and the AARP Public Policy Institute. AARP Public Policy
Institute; December 2011. p. 1–149.
[10]
Wiles JL, Leibing A, Guberman N, Reeve J, Allen RE. The meaning of
‘‘ageing in place’’ to older people. The gerontologist. 2011; p. gnr098.
[11]
Vasilakos A, Pedrycz W. Ambient intelligence, wireless networking, and
ubiquitous computing. Artech House, Inc., Norwood, MA; 2006.
[12]
Acampora G, Cook DJ, Rashidi P, Vasilakos AV. A survey on ambient
intelligence
in
healthcare.
Proceedings
of
the
IEEE.
2013;101(12):
2470–2494.
[13]
Cook DJ, Augusto JC, Jakkula VR. Ambient intelligence: technologies,
applications, and opportunities. Pervasive and Mobile Computing. 2009;5
(4):277–298.
[14]
Schilit BN, Theimer MM. Disseminating active map information to mobile
hosts. IEEE Network. 1994;8(5):22–32.
[15]
Bennett TR, Wu J, Kehtarnavaz N, Jafari R. Inertial measurement unit-based
wearable computers for assisted living applications: a signal processing
perspective. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 2016;33(2):28–35.
[16]
Katz S. Assessing self-maintenance: activities of daily living, mobility, and
instrumental activities of daily living. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society. 1983;31(12):721–727.
[17]
van bel DT, Smolders K, IJsselsteijn WA, de Kort Y. Social connectedness:
concept and measurement. Intelligent Environments. 2009;2:67–74.
[18]
Davis K, Owusu E, Regazzoni C, Marcenaro L, Feijs L, Hu J. Perception of
human activities a means to support connectedness between the elderly and
their caregivers. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on
Information and Communication Technologies for Ageing Well and e-Health.
SCITEPRESS; 2015. pp. 194–199.
[19]
Davis K, Hu J, Feijs L, Owusu E. Social hue: a subtle awareness system for
connecting the elderly and their caregivers. In: IEEE International Con-
ference on Pervasive Computing and Communication Workshops (PerCom
Workshops), 2015. IEEE; 2015. pp. 178–183.
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
71

[20]
Norman DA. The design of everyday things: revised and expanded edition.
Basic Books, New York, NY; 2013.
[21]
Rubin J, Chisnell D. Handbook of usability testing: how to plan, design and
conduct effective tests. John Wiley & Sons, Indianapolis, IN; 2008.
[22]
Douglas S, Aki N (eds). Participatory Design: Principles and Practices.
Erlbaum Associates Inc., L. Hillsdale, NJ; 1993.
[23]
O’Reilly K. Ethnographic methods. Routledge, Abingdon; 2012.
[24]
Holtzblatt K, Jones S. Contextual inquiry: a participatory technique for system
design. Participatory Design: Principles and Practices. 1993; pp. 177–210.
[25]
Kanis M, Alizadeh S, Groen J, et al. Ambient monitoring from an elderly-
centred design perspective: what, who and how. In: International Joint
Conference on Ambient Intelligence. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg; 2011. pp.
330–334.
[26]
Tang Hh, Kao Sa. Understanding the user model of the elderly people while
using mobile phones. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction. Citeseer, Las Vegas, NV; 2005. pp. 1–5.
[27]
Buskermolen DO, Terken J. Co-constructing stories: a participatory design
technique to elicit in-depth user feedback and suggestions about design
concepts. In: Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference:
Exploratory Papers, Workshop Descriptions, Industry Cases-Volume 2.
ACM; 2012. pp. 33–36.
[28]
Abras C, Maloney-Krichmar D, Preece J. User-centered design. Bainbridge,
W Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction. Thousand Oaks: Sage
Publications. 2004;37(4):445–456.
[29]
Rogers Y, Sharp H, Preece J. Interaction design: beyond human computer
interaction. John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY; 2007.
[30]
Davis K, Feijs L, Hu J, Marcenaro L, Regazzoni C. Improving awareness and
social connectedness through the social hue: insights and perspectives. In:
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Interactive Technology and
Ageing Populations. ITAP ’16. New York, NY, USA: ACM; 2016. pp. 12–23.
[31]
Graf C. The Lawton instrumental activities of daily living scale. The
American Journal of Nursing. 2008;108(4):52–62.
[32]
Elsawy B, Higgins KE. The geriatric assessment. American Family Physician.
2011;83(1):48–56.
[33]
Russell DW. UCLA loneliness scale (version 3): reliability, validity, and
factor structure. Journal of Personality Assessment. 1996;66(1):20–40.
[34]
Tomaka J, Thompson S, Palacios R. The relation of social isolation, lone-
liness, and social support to disease outcomes among the elderly. Journal of
Aging and Health. 2006;18(3):359–384.
[35]
Aron A, Aron EN, Smollan D. Inclusion of other in the self scale and
the structure of interpersonal closeness. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology. 1992;63(4):596.
[36]
IJsselsteijn W, van Baren J, van Lanen F. Staying in touch: social presence and
connectedness through synchronous and asynchronous communication media.
Human-Computer Interaction: Theory and Practice (Part II). 2003;2(924):e928.
72
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[37]
De Greef P, Ijsselsteijn WA. Social presence in a home tele-application.
CyberPsychology & Behavior. 2001;4(2):307–315.
[38]
Weiser M. The computer for the 21st century. Scientific American. 1991;265
(3):94–104.
[39]
Weiser M, Brown JS. The coming age of calm technology. In: Beyond
Calculation. Springer; 1997. pp. 75–85.
[40]
Pousman Z, Stasko J. A taxonomy of ambient information systems: four
patterns of design. In: Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced
Visual Interfaces. ACM, New York, NY; 2006. pp. 67–74.
[41]
Mynatt ED, Rowan J, Craighill S, Jacobs A. Digital family portraits: sup-
porting peace of mind for extended family members. In: Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
New York, NY; 2001. pp. 333–340.
[42]
Rowan J, Mynatt ED. Digital family portrait field trial: support for aging in
place. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY; 2005. pp. 521–530.
[43]
Consolvo S, Roessler P, Shelton BE. The CareNet display: lessons learned
from an in home evaluation of an ambient display. In: UbiComp 2004:
Ubiquitous Computing. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg; 2004. pp. 1–17.
[44]
Dadlani P, Sinitsyn A, Fontijn W, Markopoulos P. Aurama: caregiver
awareness for living independently with an augmented picture frame display.
AI & Society. 2010;25(2):233–245.
[45]
Dadlani P, Markopoulos P, Sinitsyn A, Aarts E. Supporting peace of mind
and independent living with the Aurama awareness system. Journal of
Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments. 2011;3(1):37–50.
[46]
Metaxas G, Metin B, Schneider J, Markopoulos P, De Ruyter B. Daily
activities diarist: supporting aging in place with semantically enriched
narratives. In: Human-Computer Interaction–INTERACT 2007. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg; 2007. pp. 390–403.
[47]
Riche Y, Mackay W. MarkerClock: a communicating augmented clock for
elderly. In: IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg; 2007. pp. 408–411.
[48]
Sellen A, Eardley R, Izadi S, Harper R. The whereabouts clock: early
testing of a situated awareness device. In: CHI’06 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY; 2006.
pp. 1307–1312.
[49]
Chang A, Resner B, Koerner B, Wang X, Ishii H. LumiTouch: an emotional
communication device. In: CHI’01 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY; 2001. pp. 313–314.
[50]
Visser T, Vastenburg MH, Keyson DV. Designing to support social
connectedness: the case of SnowGlobe. International Journal of Design.
2011;5(3):129–142.
[51]
Galasko D, Bennett D, Sano M, et al. An inventory to assess activities of
daily living for clinical trials in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer Disease &
Associated Disorders. 1997;11:33–39.
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
73

[52]
Nyga˚rd L. Instrumental activities of daily living: a stepping-stone towards
Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis in subjects with mild cognitive impairment?
Acta Neurologica Scandinavica. 2003;107(s179):42–46.
[53]
Muro-de-la Herran A, Garcia-Zapirain B, Mendez-Zorrilla A. Gait analysis
methods: an overview of wearable and non-wearable systems, highlighting
clinical applications. Sensors. 2014;14(2):3362–3394.
[54]
Barberger-Gateau P, Commenges D, Gagnon M, Letenneur L, Sauvel C,
Dartigues JF. Instrumental activities of daily living as a screening tool for
cognitive impairment and dementia in elderly community dwellers. Journal
of the American Geriatrics Society. 1992;40(11):1129–1134.
[55]
Capela NA, Lemaire ED, Baddour N. Feature selection for wearable
smartphone-based human activity recognition with able bodied, elderly, and
stroke patients. PloS One. 2015;10(4):e0124414.
[56]
Davis K, Owusu E, Bastani V, et al. Activity recognition based on inertial
sensors for Ambient Assisted Living. In: 2016 19th International Conference
on Information Fusion (FUSION). IEEE, Heidelberg; 2016. pp. 371–378.
[57]
Ortiz JLR. Smartphone-based human activity recognition. Springer, Basel;
2015.
[58]
Rashidi P, Mihailidis A. A survey on ambient-assisted living tools for older
adults. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics. 2013;17
(3):579–590.
[59]
Cook D, Schmitter-Edgecombe M, Crandall A, Sanders C, Thomas B.
Collecting and disseminating smart home sensor data in the CASAS pro-
ject. In: Proceedings of the CHI Workshop on Developing Shared Home
Behavior Datasets to Advance HCI and Ubiquitous Computing Research,
Boston, MA; 2009. pp. 1–7.
[60]
Chernbumroong S, Cang S, Atkins A, Yu H. Elderly activities recognition
and classification for applications in assisted living. Expert Systems with
Applications. 2013;40(5):1662–1674.
[61]
Ustev YE, Durmaz Incel O, Ersoy C. User, device and orientation inde-
pendent human activity recognition on mobile phones: Challenges and a
proposal. In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing Adjunct Publication. ACM, New York, NY; 2013.
pp. 1427–1436.
[62]
Skubic M, Alexander G, Popescu M, Rantz M, Keller J. A smart home
application to eldercare: current status and lessons learned. Technology and
Health Care. 2009;17(3):183–201.
[63]
Zigel Y, Litvak D, Gannot I. A method for automatic fall detection of elderly
people using floor vibrations and sound-proof of concept on human
mimicking doll falls. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering.
2009;56(12):2858–2867.
[64]
Lim JH, Jang H, Jang J, Park SJ. Daily activity recognition system for the
elderly using pressure sensors. In: 2008 30th Annual International Con-
ference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE,
Vancouver, BC; 2008. pp. 5188–5191.
74
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[65]
Fleck S, Straßer W. Smart camera based monitoring system and its appli-
cation to assisted living. Proceedings of the IEEE. 2008;96(10):1698–1714.
[66]
Popescu M, Li Y, Skubic M, Rantz M. An acoustic fall detector system that
uses sound height information to reduce the false alarm rate. In: 2008
30th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society. IEEE, Vancouver, BC; 2008. pp. 4628–4631.
[67]
Chernbumroong S, Atkins AS, Yu H. Perception of smart home technologies
to assist elderly people. In: The Fourth International Conference on Software,
Knowledge, Information Management and Applications (SKIMA 2010), Paro,
Bhutan; 2010. pp. 90–97.
[68]
Kwapisz JR, Weiss GM, Moore SA. Activity recognition using cell phone
accelerometers. ACM SigKDD Explorations Newsletter. 2011;12(2):74–82.
[69]
Davis K, Owusu E, Hu J, Marcenaro L, Regazzoni C, Feijs L. Promoting
social connectedness through human activity-based ambient displays. In:
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Interactive Technology and
Ageing Populations. ITAP ’16. New York, NY, USA: ACM; 2016. pp. 64–76.
[70]
Dai J, Bai X, Yang Z, Shen Z, Xuan D. PerFallD: a pervasive fall detection
system using mobile phones. In: 2010 8th IEEE International Conference on
Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PERCOM Work-
shops). IEEE, Mannheim, Germany; 2010. pp. 292–297.
[71]
Shin S, Park C, Kim J, Hong H, Lee J. Adaptive step length estimation
algorithm using low-cost MEMS inertial sensors. In: 2007 IEEE Sensors
Applications Symposium. IEEE, San Diego, CA; 2007. pp. 1–5.
[72]
Rodriguez-Martin D, Sama A, Perez-Lopez C, Catala A, Cabestany J,
Rodriguez-Molinero A. SVM-based posture identification with a single
waist-located triaxial accelerometer. Expert Systems with Applications.
2013;40(18):7203–7211.
[73]
Zhao L, Wang X, Sukthankar G, Sukthankar R. Motif discovery and feature
selection for crf-based activity recognition. In: 2010 20th International
Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR). IEEE, Istanbul; 2010. pp. 3826–
3829.
[74]
Paganelli F, Giuli D. An ontology-based system for context-aware and
configurable services to support home-based continuous care. IEEE Trans-
actions on. Information Technology in Biomedicine. 2011;15(2):324–333.
[75]
Lubina P, Rudzki M. Artificial neural networks in accelerometer-based
human activity recognition. In: 2015 22nd International Conference Mixed
Design of Integrated Circuits & Systems (MIXDES). IEEE, Torun; 2015.
pp. 63–68.
[76]
Patterson DJ, Fox D, Kautz H, Philipose M. Fine-grained activity recogni-
tion by aggregating abstract object usage. In: Ninth IEEE International
Symposium on Wearable Computers, 2005. Proceedings. IEEE, Osaka;
2005. pp. 44–51.
[77]
Duong TV, Bui HH, Phung DQ, Venkatesh S. Activity recognition and
abnormality detection with the switching hidden semi-Markov model.
In: IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
75

Recognition, 2005. CVPR 2005. vol. 1. IEEE, Washington, DC; 2005.
pp. 838–845.
[78]
Kwon Y, Kang K, Bae C. Unsupervised learning for human activity recog-
nition using smartphone sensors. Expert Systems with Applications. 2014;41
(14):6067–6074.
[79]
Rashidi P, Cook DJ, Holder LB, Schmitter-Edgecombe M. Discovering
activities to recognize and track in a smart environment. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 2011;23(4):527–539.
[80]
Jurek A, Nugent C, Bi Y, Wu S. Clustering-based ensemble learning for
activity recognition in smart homes. Sensors. 2014;14(7):12285–12304.
[81]
Kim E, Helal S, Cook D. Human activity recognition and pattern discovery.
IEEE Pervasive Computing. 2010;9(1):48–53.
[82]
Ordo´n˜ez FJ, de Toledo P, Sanchis A. Activity recognition using hybrid
generative/discriminative models on home environments using binary sen-
sors. Sensors. 2013;13(5):5460–5477.
[83]
Anguita D, Ghio A, Oneto L, Parra X, Reyes-Ortiz JL. Human activity
recognition on smartphones using a multiclass hardware-friendly support
vector machine. In: International Workshop on Ambient Assisted Living.
Springer; 2012. pp. 216–223.
[84]
Rifkin R, Klautau A. In defense of one-vs-all classification. Journal of
Machine Learning Research. 2004;5(Jan):101–141.
[85]
Platt J. Probabilities for SV machines. In: Advances in Large Margin Clas-
sifiers. MIT Press, Massachusetts, MA; 1999. pp. 61–74.
[86]
Anguita D, Ghio A, Oneto L, Parra X, Reyes-Ortiz JL. A public domain
dataset for human activity recognition using smartphones. In: Proceedings of
the 21st European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computa-
tional Intelligence and Machine Learning (ESANN); 2013. pp. 437–442.
[87]
Zhu X, Vondrick C, Ramanan D, Fowlkes C. Do we need more training data
or better models for object detection? In: BMVC. vol. 3. Citeseer, Surrey;
2012. p. 5.
[88]
Ravi N, Dandekar N, Mysore P, Littman ML. Activity recognition from
accelerometer data. AAAI, Pittsburgh, PA. vol. 5; 2005. pp. 1541–1546.
[89]
Dadlani P, Gritti T, Shan C, de Ruyter B, Markopoulos P. SoPresent: an
awareness system for connecting remote households. Ambient Intelligence.
Springer International Publishing, Cham; 2014; p. 67.
[90]
Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative
Research in Psychology. 2006;3(2):77–101.
[91]
Winer BJ, Brown DR, Michels KM. Statistical principles in experimental
design. vol. 2. New York, USA: McGraw-Hill; 1971.
[92]
Ware C. Information visualization: perception for design. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA; 2012.
[93]
de Barros AC, Vasconcelos A. Human-centred design with older adults:
examples and recommendations for research, ideation and testing. Active
and Assisted Living: Technologies and Applications. 2016; p. 409.
76
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Further reading
[1]
Davis K, Owusu E, Marcenaro L, Feijs L, Regazzoni C, Hu J. Evaluating
human activity-based ambient lighting displays for effective peripheral com-
munication. In: Proceedings of the 11th EAI International Conference on
Body Area Networks; Turin, Italy. 3068648: ICST (Institute for Computer
Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering); 2016;
pp. 148–154.
[2]
Davis K, Owusu EB, Marcenaro L, Feijs L, Regazzoni C, Hu J. Effects of
ambient lighting displays on peripheral activity awareness. IEEE Access.
2017;5:9318–9335.
[3]
Davis K, Owusu E, van den Boomen G, Apeldoorn H, Marcenaro L,
Regazzoni C. et al. Presenting a real-time activity-based bidirectional frame-
work for improving social connectedness. In: Rojas I, Joya G, Catala A,
editors. Advances in Computational Intelligence: 14th International Work-
Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, IWANN 2017, Cadiz, Spain, June
14–16, 2017, Proceedings, Part II. Cham: Springer International Publishing;
2017; pp. 356–367.
Data set
[1]
Davis K and Owusu E. Smartphone Dataset for Human Activity Recognition
(HAR) in Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) [Internet]. UCI Machine Learn-
ing 2016 [cited 9 March 2017]. Available from: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/
ml/datasets/SmartphoneþDatasetþforþHumanþActivityþRecognitionþ
(HAR)þinþAmbientþAssistedþLivingþ(AAL)
Biographies
Kadian Davis is a Ph.D. candidate in the Erasmus Mundus Doctorate Programme in
Interactive and Cognitive Environments (ICE) at the Eindhoven University and the
University of Genova. She serves as the Ph.D. representative for ICE students and is
currently pursuing research in the area of design for social interaction for AAL
environments, where she has made academic presentations in Portugal, the United
States, China, Japan, Spain, and Italy. She pursued a bachelor and master of philo-
sophy degree in computer science at the University of the West Indies (UWI),
Jamaica. Prior to her Ph.D. scholarship, Davis worked as the head of the Information
Technology Department at the University College of the Caribbean (UCC) for
2 years and as a teaching assistant for the Department of Computing at UWI for over
4 years. Her other research interest lies in the field of Internet Governance, where
she serves as a member of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Num-
bers (ICANN) and the DiploFoundation. She has also received fellowships from
global organisations, such as ICANN, the Internet Society (ISOC), Verisign and the
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
77

American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) to pursue Internet governance
courses. Davis has also offered recommendations regarding the changes of Jamaica’s
Cyber Security Act and was the UCC representative to the Cyber Emergency
Response Unit of the Ministry of Science, Technology, Energy and Mining in
Jamaica.
Evans B. Owusu is an independent researcher with research interest in machine
learning, data mining and service oriented architectures. He currently works as a
software engineer in the semi-conductor industry. He obtained his Master of
Science in Embedded Systems from Eindhoven University of Technology and a
Bachelor of Science in Electronic and Computer Engineering from the Polytechnic
University of Turin. He was a research trainee at the European Commission
Research Center in Ispra, Italy, between October 2011 and September 2012.
Lucio Marcenaro, Ph.D., enjoys over 15 years experience in image and video
sequence analysis, and authored about 100 technical papers related to signal and
video processing for computer vision. An Electronic Engineering graduate from
Genova University in 1999, he received his Ph.D. in Computer Science and Elec-
tronic Engineering from University of Genova in 2003. From 2003 to 2010 he was
CEO and development manager at TechnoAware srl. From March 2011, he became
Assistant Professor in Telecommunications for the University of Genova. His main
current research interests are video processing for event recognition, detection and
localization of objects in complex scenes, distributed heterogeneous sensors
ambient awareness systems, AmI and bio-inspired cognitive systems. He was
involved in many video-surveillance projects funded by the Italian Ministry of
University and Scientific Research and the European Union. He is the organizer
of the Symposium on Signal Processing for Understanding Crowd Dynamics at
GlobalSIP 2016 and AVSS 2017. Since 2015 Lucio Marcenaro is an Expert on
video analytics for ERNCIP Video Analytics & Surveillance for Security of
Critical Infrastructures Thematic Group of the European Union.
Dr. Jun Hu is a senior member of ACM, currently the head of Designed Intelli-
gence, and an Associate Professor in Design Research on Social Computing at the
Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e). He
is a Distinguished Professor at the School of Digital Media, Jiangnan University,
and is currently the co-chair of the working group ‘Art and Entertainment’ of IFIP
(International Federation for Information Processing) TC14 (Technical Committee
on Entertainment Computing). He is the coordinator of the TU/e DESIS Lab in
the DESIS network (Design for Social Innovation and Sustainability network). He
serves the editorial boards for several international journals. He has more than 180
peer-reviewed publications in conferences and journals in the field of HCI, indus-
trial design, computer science and design education. Dr. Jun Hu has a Ph.D. in
Industrial Design and a Professional Doctorate in User-system Interaction, both
from TU/e. He has also a B.Sc. in Mathematics and an M.Eng. in Computer Sci-
ence. He is a System Analyst and a Senior Programmer with the qualifications from
78
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, and the Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology of China. From 2006 to 2007 he served as the
Secretary-General for The Association of Chinese Scholars and Engineers in the
Netherlands (VCWI) and from 2008 to 2009 as the Chairman.
Carlo S. Regazzoni, Ph.D., is full professor of Cognitive Telecommunications
Systems at DITEN, University of Genova, Italy. His main research interests include
cognitive dynamic systems, adaptive and self-aware video processing, tracking and
recognition, generative models and inference schemes based on hierarchical
dynamic Bayesian networks, software and cognitive radio (for more details see
www.isip40.it). He has been responsible for several national and EU-funded
research projects and is currently the coordinator of international PhD courses on
Interactive and Cognitive Environments involving several European universities.
He is author of peer-reviewed papers on international journals (90) and interna-
tional conferences/books (350). He served as general chair (IEEE AVSS2009),
technical program chair (IEEE ICIP2005, NSIP2002), associate editor (IEEE Trans
on Image Processing, IEEE Trans on Mobile Computing, et al.) and guest editor
(Proceedings of the IEEE, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, et al.) in interna-
tional conferences and journals. He has served in many roles in governance bodies
of IEEE SPS. He is currently serving as Vice President Conferences IEEE Signal
Processing Society in 2015–2017.
Loe Feijs is professor of Industrial Design at Eindhoven University of Technology.
He has an M.Sc. in Electrical Engineering and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from
Eindhoven University of Technology. In the 1980s he worked on video compres-
sion and telephony systems. He joined Philips Research to develop formal methods
for software development. In 1994, he became part-time professor of Mathematics
and Computer Science, in 1998 scientific director of the Eindhoven Embedded
Systems Institute, and in 2000 vice dean of the new department of Industrial Design
at TU/e, Eindhoven. Feijs is the author of three books on formal methods and
of over 100 scientific papers. His present research interests include creative
programming, design of wearable systems and biofeedback systems.
Pervasive sensing for social connectedness
79

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 4
Ethics in information and communication
technologies: training the elderly in making
gerontechnology accessible
He´le`ne Geurts1, Marie-Claire Haelewyck1,
and Carlos Valderrama2
Abstract
Technologies have become an integral part of our daily lives and have contributed
to the pace of history. Thus, our societies are made up of multiple generations who
have diverse expectations and experiences with technology. On the other hand,
ageing generations are not equal in the interest and the use of technological tools.
By using a multidisciplinary approach, our chapter proposes to clarify the char-
acteristics of the ageing generations and to reflect on the principles of adaptation
and acceptability of gerontechnologies. Our contribution therefore wishes to
articulate the shared challenges between the technological and social ger-
ontological domains in order to think beyond a commercial logic and to base the
technological innovation more on the complex needs expressed by the elders and
their families. To this end, we discuss the limits to overcome and the ethical stakes
to pursue in order to develop participatory approaches that ensure both social
innovation and economic development.
4.1
Introduction
For decades, technology has been an important part of our lives and our society.
Therefore, it incorporates itself at the core of different systems such as human and
social sciences, medicine, media, engineering or even education, which contribute
to the emergence of hyper-connected human generations. For example, the writing
of this chapter required the use of a computer, Internet access and tele-
communication between the authors. Indeed, as Cohen stated (2009, p. 156; quoted
by [1]), ‘I cannot imagine doing without some of the things I own that did not know
1Clinical Orthopedagogy Department, University of Mons, Belgium
2Electronics and Microelectronics Department, University of Mons, Belgium

existed just ten years ago. The mobile phone and internet access are things that
have become essential once one has discovered their existence’. However, if
researchers cannot do without these tools, could it be stated that these technologies
have an important place in the life of every age group? Algorithms, models, tech-
nological innovations and services must all agree on supporting secure, robust and
acceptable solutions, all having ethics as the masterpiece of the system. Thus, the
ethical concern implies a multidisciplinary approach, integrating clinical perspec-
tives, psychological, sociological, organizational and legal. Indeed, the feelings and
needs of patients, caregivers and relatives impact innovative technologies the same
way as parameters such as the effectiveness of medical treatment (reduction of
anxiety or stimulation communication and cognitive ability), binding measures and
legal questions concerning responsibilities.
This chapter first proposes a reflection and revision of the principles of
adaptability and acceptability of technologies. Indeed, the innovation cannot be
restricted to topical technical challenges but must also meet specific needs
expressed by the population. Therefore, beyond the technical solutions, much of the
innovation remains in the School of Social Gerontology, which aims to analyse
the coping behaviours and needs expressed by an ageing population. In this context,
the chapter brings together technological challenges and social gerontology, con-
tributing to the promotion of an inclusive society. A society where these two
resources, often guided by a commercial logic, conceive ethical goals, of support-
ing and strengthening the quality of life, based on complex needs, expressed by the
elders and their relatives, with a positive impact on their health, mobility, safety
and blossoming while preserving their personal and relational integrity [2]. In the
domain of ageing this issue is dealt by ‘gerontechnology’, a neologism at the heart
of our reasoning and of this chapter.
The chapter is structured into 8 sections. Section 4.2 explores patterns char-
acterizing a generation according to societal concerns and technological affinities.
Section 4.3 focuses on the main issues related to demographic evolution and the
opportunities for technological innovation to improve the quality of life of an ageing
population. Section 4.4 reports major deviations observed when considering beha-
viours and responsibilities of all actors involved, in order to ultimately articulate ways
to improve the scope of future prototypes. Section 4.5 balances the rights and
responsibilities of elders with the acceptability and adequacy of technological objec-
tives. Section 4.6 deals with the identification and preservation of life activities as a
way not only to compensate deficiencies but also to maintain and develop societal
resources. Section 4.7 focuses on existing and effective design concepts helping to
solve ethical problems associated with the adoption and acceptability of technologies.
Finally, Section 4.8 provides some concluding remarks and future perspectives.
4.2
Generation effect
Our introduction raises the generation question. In sociology, a generation is
described as a group of people born during the same period. Therefore, these people
82
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

have a shared context and have lived through similar events. The gap between
generations was previously related to the age difference between people, but its
nature has now changed. Indeed, our society is prone to develop new technologies
which are modifying significantly our surroundings [3]. This fast evolution
increases the gap between young people and non-technologically savvy seniors
[4–6]. Baron and Bruillard [4] confirm this position by putting in perspective the
two utmost continuum of life, namely the young people and the elders, which is
prone to echo our initial observations. Thus, while the former demonstrates a steady
use of technologies, reflected in the development of cognitive and training styles
different from their ascendants, the ageing population, on the other hand, would
suggest a limited use of these media. In this way, it is not rare to see the ageing
population described as ‘non-technological’, manifesting a lack of skills to ade-
quately deal with complex devices [6].
The inclusion within a specific generation is often identified as a possible
barrier to the integration of technologies from another era [7], treating the digital
gap as mainly related to age [7,8]. As a matter of fact, a significant part of a
theoretical review would foreshadow a breakdown between, on one side, the
‘digital natives’ immersed in technologies since their first breath and, on the other
side, the ‘digital immigrants’ fallen into this digital universe that appears suspi-
cious, perhaps even anxiety-provoking [5]. However, the ageing population cannot
be restricted to reject technology.
An increasing number of elderly people want to test their adaptability potential
related to these new technologies [8]. To illustrate this, Conci et al. (2009; quoted
by Plaza et al. [6]) state that the use of mobile phone shows its strongest progres-
sion among the older generation [6]. Valenduc [9] emphasized a significant
increase in the number of elderly Belgians using the computer between 2005 (36%
of 55–64 years old and 12% of 6574 years old) and 2011 (69% of 5564 years
old and 69% of 6574 years old). Indeed, with the steady rise of life span,
including in good health, some numerical devices such as the computer stated
earlier are perceived as new opportunities to live a second life while keeping pace
with the innovations of a shifting society. In the light of this, Brard [10] observed
that 61% of adults over 50 claim to use Internet in a communicative and sociali-
zation perspective, notably intergenerational.
Despite the tendency to use more and more new technologies, Chen and Chan
[11] claim that the elderly are still lagging behind other generations. This could be
explained by the lack of skills and training due to the increasing complexity of
technology [12].
4.3
Gerontechnology is a neologism vector of the future
Since the 1990s, technologies have been specifically designed for elderly in order
to address the generational acceptability issue. On that basis, ‘gerontechnology’ is
defined as an interdisciplinary study integrating the conception, the realization, the
evaluation and the promotion of tools, environments and services aimed at creating
Ethics in information and communication technologies
83

better living and working conditions, finally providing appropriate health care for
the elderly in need of assistance [2]. This new trend is at the crossroads between
two disciplines: the ageing of the population and the advancement of the technol-
ogy sciences. It aims to offer the elderly a space adapted to their physiological
abilities; an environment that facilitates their daily life, without creating the painful
and stigmatizing feeling of being dependent on others [13]. In other words, ger-
ontechnology develops the possibility of a social involvement while providing
assistance to increase well-being, comfort and empowerment of the elderly and
their entourage [11,14].
Over the last few years there has been an increase of interest in geron-
technology, particularly justified by demographic and epidemiological projections.
Indeed, people from the ‘baby-boom’ are now reaching old age. This ageing gen-
eration is more prone to develop chronic diseases that require better health support.
Piau et al. [15] therefore argue that gerontechnology has a vested interest in
focusing its actions on the common clinical syndrome of frailty. In fact, it can be
defined as a syndrome that leads to an increased risk of poor health outcomes,
including falls, incidents, disabilities, hospitalization and mortality [16]. This
irreversible situation shows the importance of identifying the first signs of its
emergence, as well as the importance of developing interventions, among others,
helping elders to stay in their homes [15]. It is therefore appropriate to consider
new support methods, including outpatient care, to reduce the economic pressure
brought on society and on the health services.
The development of independent support technologies is perceived as bene-
ficial for both the ageing population and the socio-economic balance of society.
Indeed, Reerink Boulanger [17] presents gerontechnology as likely to complete or
supplement the costs of traditional modes of assistance whose deployment remains
insufficient. In other words, faced with these major issues, Gaßner and Conrad [18]
present the socio-economic and technological innovation as a real opportunity to
improve the quality of life of an ageing population while looking critically at the
realities of the demographic changes and creating new opportunities for both
employment and business.
This interest in technological innovation has been highlighted by the Council
of Europe [19] stating that ‘all those dependent upon assistance or likely to become
dependent, regardless of their age, race, convictions, origins and of the nature or
severity of their condition, should have the right to assistance and support required
to be able to lead their life’s to the full potential and to the highest possible level
and will therefore need access to quality services and to appropriate technologies’.
The council confirms the priority to develop the gerontechnologies by claiming, in
2008, that the
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) are crucial in today’s
society and economy and they can greatly improve personal autonomy
and quality of life, particularly for people with disabilities or elderly.
E-accessibility is a necessary prerequisite for a widespread use of ICT, and
its cost can be greatly reduced through ‘design for all’ approaches
84
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

and better interoperability between services and devices . . . Better
e-accessibility entails major social and economic gains for several groups
of people and for public and commercial service providers. For example,
people with disabilities and elderly, people living in remote areas and
people who are disadvantaged for economic or educational reasons can be
more active as workers or consumers. Public and commercial service
providers can reach a larger customer base. [20]
Thus, although embryonic, heterogeneous and fragmented, the silver economy
market is presented as promising for years to come. According to Gaßner and
Conrad [18], despite a lack of European standards and of clear national policies,
gerontechnology presents a real opportunity. For example, in a study published by
the Frost & Sullivan Society in 2011, the European market was valued at $154.92
million in 2009 to $525.58 million in 2015 [21]. Since 2008, the European
‘Ambient Assisted Living Joint Programme’ (600 million euros) has funded more
than 150 projects engaged in promoting independence for the elderly, 20% has
specifically been designated for people with neurocognitive diseases such as Alz-
heimer’s [22]. However, if gerontechnologies are increasing in demand, it is
important to reflect on their development.
4.4
Pitfalls to be avoided
Gerontechnology is at the crossroads between the world of research and technol-
ogy. Therefore, it needs a greater knowledge of the multiples characteristics of the
ageing process. In this way, for example, the ageing population, despite being
heterogenic, is the evidence of an increased propensity to develop sensory and
cognitive losses. This information is essential for the creation of a prototype.
However, it should not be overshadowed that these limitations and their percep-
tions are intrinsically affected by other variables like age, gender, life trajectory,
social capital and education that are likely to affect or not the recourse to the
proposed device and its modalities [18]. According to Bjering et al. [23], the
interest for this new field lies in the complex comprehension of the needs and
the aims pursued by the ageing population and the different actors who surround
them. Thus, this transdisciplinary approach raises ethical issues, highlighting the
responsibilities of all actors involved in the development [24]. As such, we propose
to report major deviations observed so ultimately to articulate ways of improving
the scope of future prototypes.
A first challenge is limited to understanding the health objectives. Indeed, the
popularity of geriatrics tends to convey a predominantly medical view of the con-
cept. However, as stated by the World Health Organization (1946), health is not just
the absence of disease. It is better defined as ‘a state of complete physical, cognitive
and social well-being’. To illustrate a difficulty regarding this, take the example of
geolocation for people with Alzheimer’s disease. If this technology has the objec-
tive to alleviate some symptoms of the disorder, such as wandering, it could also
have a negative effect on human dignity and social health of the elderly [25].
Ethics in information and communication technologies
85

Indeed, as well as the intrusion into privacy, wearing a wristband that uses geo-
location could be seen as a humiliating manifestation of the person’s fragility.
These arguments have been used to justify the failure of some products and have
reduced the availability of supplies. A second example is the telecare device which
is worn around the neck or wrist. Again, it would herald difficulties that could get
worse over time. The acceptance of such technology can therefore be held back by
the fear of future difficulties regarding security and monitored by a medical staff
[26]. To limit these effects, the elderly persons are looking for valuable tools that do
not take away their dignity. They are seeking for the development of discrete,
lightweight technologies that do not point them out as elderly and infirm, but allow
integrate into society. Therefore, they are more attracted to telecare devices inte-
grated into a watch or mobile phone device [27]. In the end, Lai et al. [28] evaluated
the Chinese elder’s perception about the development of ICT improving the
security at home. The collected results affirm that 91% of the sample esteem that a
home-based non-intrusive monitoring system is useful to satisfy this purpose.
However, if the majority of elderly persons request the device, few of them declare
that they want to personally access this gerontechnology. They justify their way of
thinking by claiming that the monitoring is not perceived as useful in their actual
everyday life for all their needs.
Another criticism of gerontechnology says it wishes to restore ‘normality’. In
wishing to eradicate the risk and overcome limitations, it would limit the accep-
tance of the differences between people. Moreover, it would be very likely to
maintain the person in a fragile position [29]. An ethnological study by these
authors examined 119 residents of nursing homes who were wheelchair users. The
results showed that some senior citizens because of the use of these technologies
were prevented to access lifts or to certain recreational areas for security reasons. In
addition, elderly users complained that bed alarms and chair alarms were too sen-
sitive to pressure. In fact, they systematically rang when they wanted to take the
initiative to get up on their own. Moreover, the noise the staff found it difficult to
discriminate which alarms were ringing, undermining the perception of good
quality protection. In fact, although the gerontechnology sought to provide security
for the elderly with limited mobility, the users described themselves as being more
isolated and with fewer opportunities to participate. Dayez [27] corroborates these
findings claiming that some devices may limit the self-determination of the elderly
and indeed to be in opposition to the initially sought goal. As such, the provision of
a fall detector would be better appreciated if it does not immediately report a fall,
but allows the person the opportunity to get up by themselves. In other words, the
extent of surveillance should take into account the amount of surveillance sought
by the user and the potential risk involved.
This cult of standardization is also at the heart of criticism related to ‘active
ageing’. Indeed, frequently used in political speeches, this elitist attitude to
age more or less fuels consciously imperious injunctions to participate, to con-
sume, to be independent according to a certain standard considered as good
adaptation. The elderly who do not meet these ‘standards’ could, in fact, be
86
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

frowned upon by society. As such, Rivie`re and Brugie`re [13, p. 10] emphasize the
importance of not reducing gerontechnology ‘to medical and social assistance
role, maintaining a vision of old age as synonymous with loss of autonomy and
independence’. To do this, it must move away from a utilitarian vision of the
accompaniment to promote opportunities for action, interactions and deci-
sions [2]. In this context, ‘It is thus not only about ways of making decisions and
giving democratic rights of control over the technological developments, but also
about removing the many obstacles and barriers that will prevent the users of
sound mind from directly benefiting from the use of this technology’ [1, p. 160].
The Satori project [30] reflects these concerns in the context of the EU (European
Union). In particular, the project exposes the social exclusion that older and
disabled people can suffer regarding ICT technology. Indeed, the inclusive design
principle emphasizes the accessibility and needs of the weakest members of the
target group when designing products and services. This principle promotes
socially sustainable development because the accessibility concept refers to bar-
riers that might exclude users with weaker skills or prevent the diversification of
users due to specialized designs. As regards the elderly and the disabled, legis-
lative pressures against discrimination will lead to the development of accessible
systems, promoting independent living, improving the quality of life and social
participation. However, this principle can hinder a rapid evolution of products
when concepts such as customizable, derivative and adaptable design are not
involved.
Another thing blocking progress is the high cost of these measures. For
example, the buying of a robot for an individual. Home electric automation is also
likely to increase the digital divide felt by an ageing population [25,30]. Or
according to Chen [11], if the price of the products and services is beyond the
budget of the elderly they are likely to be opposed to use these goods and services.
In the light of this, Dayez [27] announced his fears, if there is not sufficient
financial support, then the gerontechnologies will be available only for those with a
comfortable financial situation. However, it is also important to think about the
possibility of providing financial assistance so that in the future a disastrous sce-
nario can be avoided in which the medical costs will be reimbursed depending on
whether or not the elderly use gerontechnologies or not. For example, the health-
care expenses that come from a fall should not be dependent on whether the person
involved uses an alarm system or not as this would mean an increase in the states of
disengagement with the elderly.
The National Commission on Informatics and Liberty in France (CNIL) [25]
also warns against possible rejection of responsibility of the society which places its
trust in fallible gerontechnology. In fact, these tools cannot replace human inter-
vention, but should provide daily assistance. In other words, to optimize the inte-
gration of technology in the daily routine of the elderly who are potentially
resistant, these means should be considered like ‘crutches’ accompanying the
elderly helping them to make their own decision concerning their future despite the
disabilities they encounter [22]. Therefore, ethical guidelines need to be collectively
Ethics in information and communication technologies
87

thought about in order to avoid falling into ‘the theory of the technological night-
mare scenario’ described as follows
The extension and remote data transmission, automation, robotics acts,
makes it seem a long time since medicine was described as an art,
uncertain and fallible. Now asserting itself as an exact science, sucked in
by the wave of cyber-technologies, advanced medicine represents the
human body as a source of information. Buttons and screens of artificial
intelligence are called on for any situation to assist the doctor, and soon,
why not replace them. Dematerialized, virtualized, the patient becomes
data that can be managed by remote control. Away with the sick, he is to
be replaced by a health manager guided by a data manager physician.
Welcome to the best medical world, a world of robots and computers.
(Braumann – mentioned by Rialle [31], p. 7)
The limits that were mentioned beforehand can also be illustrated by the work
of Piau et al. [15]. Thus, the authors claim that few studies were focused on home
support gerontechnology services for elders. Furthermore, the researches illustrate
frequent methodological weaknesses (small sample, limitative context, etc.)
restraining the generalization of the results and the implementation of recommen-
dations. Then, the largest randomized controlled trial to assess telemonitoring of
physiological data in elderly persons with multiple illnesses is associated to limited
effects on the pursued aims despite a considerable potential commercial impact.
Therefore, several obstacles were identified to justify the results, namely the
complexity of the technology itself (installing process, using comprehension,
maintenance, low interconnectivity between the systems and lack of interoper-
ability to guarantee continuity of information), the high cost and the fragmented
comprehension of the needs expressed by the users (technology-push rather than
demand-pull approach). Finally, a lack of respect for the ethical rules (stigmati-
zation, invasion of personal everyday life and privacy) and the scientific assessment
of efficiency is also pinpointed.
4.5
Ethical issues at stake
Faced with these multiple abuses, according to Bjering et al. [23], the challenge of
gerontechnology lies in the complex understanding of the needs and objectives of
the ageing population. This identification would then create technological solutions
ensuring the person’s well-being. To do so it is important to offer ways to prevent
or offset certain losses while highlighting the resources that the elderly still have.
Indeed, the creation of a gerontechnology is a daunting task insofar as the devel-
opment of a standardized technology solution is not enough.
To contribute to the acceptability of these projects, the authors recommend
therefore to effectively engage the target audience in the research, the design of the
prototypes, its implementation and evaluation, according to the principle of user
rights. In this context, the ageing population directly affects the guidance protocol
88
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

and ensure its adequacy with respect to the objectives pursued. This involvement
also ensures a ratio of positive power in respect of potentially future users. On this
basis, there are identified five principles for the elderly persons that are now
included in the declaration of the Rights and Responsibilities of Older Persons of
the International Federation of Ageing [32]. These rights are therefore for the
purpose of (1) developing a potential environment to maximize the independency
and autonomy; (2) promoting full participation within the society; (3) improving
care service and quality; (4) offering a platform for self-fulfilment and (5) respect-
ing individual dignity. Rialle [22] corroborates this position by identifying four key
steps to create a gerontechnology: understanding the needs and wishes expressed
by groups of users; conceptualization of products and services in connection with
this community; the prototype test with the elderly and their entourage and the
development of a suitable marketing strategy. Therefore, evaluating that a system
attests good performances turns out to be essential to the development of a device
and its commercialization. However, this criterion cannot guarantee the technol-
ogy’s acceptability by the targeted population. In other words, if the system does
not match with the reality lived by the elders, the latter cannot perceive any valid
reasons, despite an accessible cutting-edge technology, that justify its use. Analysis
of the user’s request that is complementary to the technological advance prospect is
a major issue that cannot be ignored. However, even if this participatory metho-
dology seems widely acclaimed and led to positive results, Hofmann [33] argues
that there are few scientific articles studying the efficiency of products available
and the adequacy of initial expectations of users. According to Plaza et al. [6],
designers cite various reasons for this low take up, namely the declining health of
the target population, the difficulty in integrating the entire process and limited
interest from non-governmental organizations for senior citizens to take part in
empirical research. Beyond these arguments, Rialle [1], for his part, denounced the
strength of the commercial argument that outweigh the psychological and social
aspects. However, as previously stated, the issue of ethics, supplementary to the
medico-social and technological innovation cannot be separated from ger-
ontechnology [22].
Orb et al. [34] evaluated ethical issues regarding the qualitative research pro-
cess when considering privacy and rights of patients. The qualitative research
focuses on examining people in relation with their natural environments. Therefore,
ethical issues can be drawn from these interactions, including the relationship
between researchers and participants, in addition to the observation of private
experiences in relation to the health or illness. Thus, the relevance of the research
and other aspects, such as methodology, funding sources and reporting data, can
still pose ethical problems. For instance, research protocols should include aspects
such as informed consent or confidentiality when collecting, generating and ana-
lysing data. However, the interview process can be affected by the patient/
researcher relationship (the quality of their social interactions could inhibit access
to the information) as well as the observation of collected data can be mis-
interpreted for similar reasons. Confidentiality and anonymity may also be infrin-
ged by legal or confirmation needs (other investigators must review the data).
Ethics in information and communication technologies
89

Thus, the respect for people includes the right to be informed about the study or
informed consent [35].
For the elderly to contribute to the economy while ensuring that they are not
considered just as passive recipient of gerontechnology, two fundamental questions
need to be asked, in conclusion: What are the needs expressed by the elderly in
regards to this technology? How to assure the accessibility and acceptability of this
technology? Hence these are at the heart of what will follow.
4.6
Identification of needs, the keystone of reflection
Among the expectations set out frequently by the ageing population is the will to
live as long as possible at home. As previously stated, the society also shares that
interest and would like to develop the support network in order to manage the daily
life and activities deemed necessary. However, the continuous increase in life
expectancy also represents a growing number of people with chronic diseases
requiring care. According to Gaßner and Conrad [18], it would be important
therefore to offer means for helping with home cleaning, walking, driving, with
keeping cultural and social relations active while allowing the exercise of one’s
citizenship. Hofmann [33], in turn, identifies six gerontechnology objectives,
namely communication, assistance, security, support for daily life, remote proces-
sing and entertainment, as detailed in Figure 4.1. Each objective can be associated
to a set of tools and required functionality that in some cases can be seen from
multiple different aspects and used to satisfy more than one objective. For instance,
functionality needed for health care and well-being such as E-health can be com-
bined to assessment and diagnostic tools to accomplish risk prevention. Tools and
functionalities can be reusable, for instance, the same previous set of tools can also
be needed to satisfy assistance and comfort objectives such as training. The latest
can take multiple forms, according to the context or acting environment, such as
social, cognitive or physical. Thus, as explained earlier, the technologies do not
only aspire to compensate for deficiencies but also set out to maintain and develop
resources.
Gaßner and Conrad [18] also refer to the work of the German company VDI/
VDEIT, in which collaboration with the European Executive Board of the Ambient
Assisted Living Association has developed a model classifying the plural needs of
the elderly into nine inherent areas concerning the welfare and quality of life, that
is, health promotion (telehealth telecare and tele-rehabilitation, E-health); home
maintenance; support with domestic tasks (such as cleaning windows, vacuum
cleaning, bed making, lifting, shopping, etc.) security, while ensuring the respect of
privacy; mobility over short and long distances (including driving); continuous
education and information (including the use of technology); social interactions;
hobbies (keeping or finding new opportunities) and work (aimed especially at
assisting with the transition to retirement and adapting to this new stage in life).
Faced with the challenge of identifying needs, Dayez [27] states, in turn, the
importance of asking preliminary questions: ‘Who does this serve?’ and ‘Why is
90
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Social group
& caregivers
Dictionary &
translation
Visual contact
& remote communication
Health
check
E-Health
Therapy &
remediation
Assessment &
diagnostic
Health
empowerment
Risks &
prevention
Home
assistance &
smart home
Personal security
and monitoring
(smart clothes...)
Global
positioning
Safety
ICT
Instrumental
activities of
daily life
Activities of
daily life
Activities (with
caregivers)
Game
(virtual)
Leisure
Citizenship
(In)formations
Ergonomic
& adaptability
Training
Social
Cognitive
Physical
Sensory
Mobility
& transport
Voice training/processing
Alternative
communication
Fooding/drinking
Bathing/dressing
Medication
Finances
Driving
from
functions
functions
functions
functions
functions
functions
objective
objective
objective
objective
objective
objective
Daily life &
independance
Work &
entertainment
Assistance &
comfort
Communication &
social link
Health care
& well-being
Figure 4.1
Assistive technologies listed according to their objectives and functions

this useful?’ So, like other examples, the wanderings of a disoriented person, is it
more of a concern to the elderly person involved or for their entourage? For
instance, a humidity sensor was developed in order to remotely monitor the con-
dition of the diaper of incontinent person. On this basis, it is claimed that this
gerontechnology could allow the caregiver to save time by removing the necessity
to manually control the diaper [15]. However, will the saved time still be used to
take care of the relational needs of the supported person?
It should be borne in mind that the elderly person must be at the heart of the
business process. Then the question of ‘why’ invites the designer not to limit its
action to physiological issues, forgetting the needs of security, belonging, self-
esteem and accomplishment [36]. Furthermore, the pursuit of a need cannot be at
the expense of another. In this regard, consider the example of tele-cardiology.
Does it systematically respect ethical rules of confidentiality and the right to
privacy? According to Dayez [27], if gerontechnology allows monitoring devices
implanted in the body, it is also likely to analyse other forms of activity that may
cause distrust of the user towards it. Therefore, if technology needs to collect pri-
vate and intimate (psychic, mental and/or social) to ensure the safety of the elder,
several ethic rules must be respected. Thus Leikas and Koivisto [30] argue that
stakeholders have to
●
collect only those user-related data essential to the achievement of the specific
objectives set;
●
provide to the user with the ability to quickly and easily control and verify
private information, while restricting third-party access (strict confidentiality
guidelines);
●
inform the user about the span of the storage of private information and respect
fixed deadlines;
●
inform the user about the content of the data collected, the reasons and the way
in which they will be exploited and
●
allow the user the ability to easily cancel the permission to access, collect and
exploit personal data.
In other words, as said by Mittelstadt et al. [37, p. 5]:
When privacy is interpreted as control over personal data. Trust is defined
in the context of information privacy as an interaction between a system
which collects and processes data, users which provide the data, and sta-
keholders who access it. [ . . . ] Trust can be understood as a sum of the
credibility, motivation, transparency and responsibility of a system.
Credibility is linked to loyalty or reputation (Little and Briggs, 2009;
Rashid et al., 2007); a stakeholder must be seen as responsible or credible
enough to handle sensitive personal data. Motivation refers to the inten-
tions of stakeholders, or how they intend to use the data of users.
Monitoring of parameters or putting data to uses beyond those explicitly
agreed upon by users was taken to undermine trust. These motivations,
and intended uses of data, should be transparent to users, as should the
92
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

sum of data collected and held about them. To achieve trust, systems must
allow users to review and control their data.
Consulting with elders is, on the other hand, widely valued. De facto, before
the implementation of a device, Donnelly et al. [38] realized structured interviews
with elderly persons with dementia. The analysed results claim that the sample
demand assistance in the management of medicines, appointment reminder, meal
time reminder and the management of electronic devices. This information justifies
the development of electronic Pill jars, for example, that can remind the medication
hours and signal an eventual omission. Adapted calendars are also considered
useful by users. However, caregivers deplore the constant reminding to refer to
technology [15].
4.7
Need for acceptability, the secret of success
Our reflection has addressed the plural and diverse needs of the ageing population.
As such, although all agree on the importance of respecting dignity, independence
and privacy, there are differences from one individual to another. Ethical issues
demand therefore a plural and interdisciplinary understanding of the issues studied.
However, this expertise can be time consuming. To reduce these delays, the focus
is on existing and effective concepts.
Our attention was focused on inclusive design factors including adoption and
acceptability of technologies [24]. The recourse to the principles of universal
design makes it possible to take a critical look at technological advances and
future innovations. Indeed, as D’Souza affirm it [39, p. 7] [40]: ‘Universal design
in recent years has assumed growing importance as a new paradigm that aims at a
holistic approach ranging in scale from product design (Balaram, 2001) to archi-
tecture (Mace, 1985), and urban design (Steinfield, 2001) on one hand and systems
of media (Goldberg, 2001) and information technology (Brewer, 2001) on the
other’. Coleman [41,42] initiated the concept of ‘design for our future selves’. The
latter was introduced in order to encourage the developers to take up the challenge
of demographic ageing and to collaborate closely with the ageing population
within the developed projects. However, if the terminology of universal design is
widely spread, its meaning is still unclear. On this basis, our attention was drawn
to the presentation of the studied concept as well as to its operationalization in
distinct stages.
The meta-synthesis (N ¼ 89) realized by Rocque et al. [43] offers a definition
of the universal accessibility which let us consider its objective assessment.
Therefore, according to the authors, this evaluation indicates the nature of a pro-
duct, a service, an environment that offers, in an equity and inclusive perspective
(social, professional, transport, hobbies, etc.), the opportunity for everyone to carry
out activities in an independent, autonomous way and to achieve similar results for
everyone. Hence, beyond the personal benefits, the issue of fairness refers to a
democratic and civic design where all individuals, with or without limitations, have
the rights and favourable conditions to exercise it. In other words, the universal
Ethics in information and communication technologies
93

accessibility wishes to avoid stigmatization of users and making designs that are
appealing for all.
In keeping with operationalization, the inclusive design was created with the
wish to meet the expressed needs for the majority of potential users of the devel-
oped prototype. On this basis, as stated earlier, it is important to identify this
population, their characteristics and their needs in order to meet their expectations
and to eliminate all the obstacles towards their motor, social, sensorial and cogni-
tive skills. To that end, the universal design is associated with seven fundamental
principles [44]. The first focuses on the fair use of gerontechnology. Therefore, the
tools should be affordable and useful to users with different skills. Knowledge
associated with the ageing process is essential in order to adapt to their evolution in
terms of their perceptual, cognitive, physical and psychosocial development. So,
the prototype needs to demonstrate a certain flexibility to adapt to the user’s pre-
ferences. The third principle, meanwhile, emphasizes a simple and intuitive use of
the device. In fact, prior experience should not be necessary for the appropriation
of technology.
Chen and Chan [11] point out that the elderly tend to see themselves less
competent towards technologies notably in view of a low suitability in the design
and a certain complexity to understand their usage. Gucher [7] also mentions the
importance of developing a relationship between humans and their tools to ensure
safe usage. As such, the entourage has a great influence to the extent that the
elderly who have people around them and who are encouraged by their relatives
appear to be more prone to acquire skills to use these innovations [8]. The fight
against the feeling of these tools being foreign to the elderly is also related to the
fourth principle, namely the development of a perceptible information. Thus, it is
important to users that the product transmits the necessary information efficiently,
regardless of the environment and the potential limited sensory abilities of the
elderly user. In this context, the question of prior consultation of the elderly is
especially appreciated for adapting the requirements associated with the tool.
Moreover, the device needs to demonstrate a fault tolerance so as to minimize the
negative consequences of a false move or of an intentional one. Sixth, as demon-
strated by Dayez [27], the product should require little physical effort and focus on
the comfort of the elderly person. A final element of reflection is ultimately focused
on the size and space of gerontechnology. Indeed, it must be within reach, be able
to be manipulated and used by anyone, regardless of the person’s position and the
person’s mobility.
Another conception of universal accessibility referred back to a specific
design. Indeed, the latter aims at catering to the needs of the users with specific
limitations for whom the universal design does not provide solutions for some
difficulties. In other words, this design was created with the wish of developing
arrangement dedicated to a limited number of elders in order to help them carry out
some tasks in a more independent way. In this respect, the challenge is mainly
focused on the conception of a suitable solution, while remaining the most discreet.
For instance, Louis Braille, who became blind at the age of three, created a writing
of salient points in order to access to the written communication. Since 1825, this
94
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

technology is in a continual progress. On this basis, it is shown that an adjustment
realized as part of a specific design can become an introduced measure in an
inclusive expanded design [43].
4.8
Conclusion
The demographic and epidemiological transition to a hyper-connected society
poses new challenges. This has led in particular to a growing interest in technolo-
gies. Indeed, these new technologies will be able to offer additional support to the
elderly in the fulfilment of their needs and the management of their everyday lives.
The socio-economic innovation is presented as an opportunity to improve the
quality of life of the elderly, offering services to them as well as creating new
opportunities for financial investments. However, to do this it is important not to
limit innovation to the development of advanced technologies, but to ask the
question of the usefulness and accessibility of the devices. The question of ethics
must be at the heart of the debate dealing with the pursuit of technical excellence
and socio-economic sustainability.
Multidisciplinary gerontechnology must therefore resort to an analysis of the
needs and characteristics of the elderly with regard to technology. Indeed, each has
his own values, wishes, desires and individuality that greatly influences the idea of
what is useful. The idea of the participation of the ageing population being involved
in the design of the prototypes for these new technologies, in both meeting the
objectives sought and the developed form, is widely acclaimed but little used in
practice. However, from an ethical point of view, it appears essential to base an
approach on the famous slogan ‘nothing about us, without us’.
Acknowledgements
The Authors would like to acknowledge the IC1303 COST Action AAPELE in
stimulating and supporting the topics presented in this chapter.
References
[1]
Rialle V. Quelle autonomie peut apporter la technologie? De l’aide a` la
personne aˆge´e a` la naissance d’une nouvelle socie´te´. Ethics, Medicine and
Public Health. 2015;1:155–162. DOI 10.1016/j.jemep.2015.03.008.
[2]
Bobilier Chaumon M, Oprea Ciobanu R. Les nouvelles technologies au
service des personnes aˆge´es: entre promesses et interrogationsune revue de
questions. Psychologie Franc¸aise. 2009;54(3):271–285.
[3]
Dupont C, Letesson M. Comment de´velopper une action interge´ne´rationnelle.
De Boeck, Bruxelles (ISBN 978-2-8041-6004-3); 2010.
[4]
Baron G, Bruillard E. Technologies de l’information et de la communication
et indige`nes nume´riques: quelle situation? Revue des Sciences et Technol-
ogies de l’Information et de la Communication pour l’Education et la For-
mation (STICEF). 2008;15:1–12.
Ethics in information and communication technologies
95

[5]
Prensky M. H. Sapens digital: From digital immigrants and digital natives to
digital wisdom. Innovate: Journal of Online Education. 2009;3(5):1–6.
[6]
Plaza I, Martin L, Martin S, Medrano C. Mobile applications in an aging
society: Status and trends. Journal of Systems and Software. 2011;84(11):
1977–1988. DOI 10.1016/j.jss.2011.05.035.
[7]
Gucher C. Technologies du «bien vieillir et du lien social»: questions
d’acceptabilite´, enjeux de sens et de continuite´ de l’existence-la canne et le
brise-vitre. Ge´rontologie et socie´te´. 2012;141(2):27–39.
[8]
Alava S, Moktar N. Les seniors dans le cyberespace. Entre appropriation et
rejet. Recherches & e´ducations. 2012;6:179–196.
[9]
Valenduc G. Une ge´ne´ration internet parmi les seniors : les TIC entre
ine´galite´s et opportunite´s. Note d’e´ducation permanente de la Fondation
Travail - Universite´ (FTU). 2012;1:1–5.
[10]
Brard C. Les seniors s’accrochent a` la toile! Analyses E´ne´o. 2012;2012(26):1–4.
[11]
Chen K, Chan A. Gerontechnology acceptance by elderly Hong Kong Chi-
nese: A senior technology acceptance model (STAM). Ergonomics. 2014;57
(5). DOI 10.1080/00140139.2014.895855.
[12]
Roupa Z, Gerasimou E, Zafeiri V, Giasyrani L, Kazitori E, Sotiropoulou P.
The use of technology by the elderly. Health Science Journal. 2010;4
(2):118–126.
[13]
Brugie`re A, Rivie`re A. Bien vieillir graˆce au nume´rique : Qualite´ de vie,
autonomie, lien social. FYP (ISBN 978-2-916571-43-0); 2010.
[14]
Cudennec T, Rogez E. Ge´rontechnologies et projet de vie. Soins et Ge´r-
ontologie. 2008;(13)74:1–17.
[15]
Piau A, Campo E, Rumeau P, Vellas B, Nourhashemi F. Aging society and
gerontechnology: A solution for an independent living? The Journal of
Nutrition, Health & Aging. 2014;18(1):97–112.
[16]
Xue Q. The frailty syndrome: Definition and natural history. Clinics in
Geriatric Medicine. 2011;27(1): 1–15. DOI 10.1016/j.cger.2010.08.009.
[17]
Reerink Boulanger J. Services technologiques inte´gre´s dans l’habitat des per-
sonnes aˆge´es: examen des de´terminants individuels, sociaux et organisationnels
de leur acceptabilite´ [Doctoral dissertation]. Universite´ Rennes 2; 2012.
[18]
Gaßner K, Conrad M. ICT enabled independent living for elderly. A status-
quo analysis on products and the research landscape in the field of Ambient
Assisted Living (AAL) in EU-27. Institute for Innovation and Technology,
Berlin (ISBN 978-3-89750-160-7); 2010.
[19]
COE. Recommandation du comite´ des ministres aux e´tats membres relatives
a` la de´pendance. R(98)9. Council of Europe; 1998. [site] http://www.coe.
int/t/democracy/migration/ressources/recommendations-resolutions_fr.asp
[online] https://wcd.coe.int/rsi/common/index.jsp date 2016.11.26.
[20]
COE. Council conclusions on accessible information society. 2935th
TRANSPORT, TELECOMMUNICATIONS and ENERGY Council meet-
ing. 8176/09 (Presse 73). Council of Europe; 2009. [site] http://www.
consilium.europa.eu/Newsroom [online] http://www.consilium.europa.eu/
uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/trans/107025.pdf.
96
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[21]
Frost & Sullivan, editors. Rapidly Ageing Population in Europe Boosts
Prospects of Assisted Living Technologies Markets; 2011. 2011-01-18.
Available
from:
http://www.frost.com/prod/servlet/press-release.pag?
docid¼221950118.
[22]
Rialle V. Technologies nouvelles susceptibles d’ame´liorer les pratiques
ge´rontologiques et la vie quotidienne des malades aˆge´s et de leur famille:
rapport. France Ministe`re de la sante´ et des solidarite´s. 2007; p. 74. 2016-10-09.
Available from: http://www.ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/rapports-publics/
074000390/index.shtml.
[23]
Bjering H, Curry J, Maeder A. Gerontechnology: The importance of
user participation in ICT development for older adults. Studies in Health
Technology and Informatics. 2014;204: 7–12. DOI 10.3233/978-1-61499-
427-5-7.
[24]
Bouma H. Professional ethics in gerontechnology: A pragmatic approach.
Gerontechnology
(ISSN/EISSN
1569-1101
1569-111X).
2010;9(4):
429–432. DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.4017/gt.2010.09.04.018.00.
[25]
CNIL. Activity report 2013: Analyses juridiques. Commission Nationale de
l’informatique et des liberte´s. 2013;34. [online] https://www.cnil.fr/sites/
default/files/typo/document/CNIL_34e_Rapport_annuel_2013.pdf.
[26]
Ben-Ahmed L. La question de la stigmatisation des ge´rontechnologies de
te´le´assistance et ge´olocalisation. Les cahiers de l’anne´e ge´rontologique.
2012;4(4): 394–397. DOI 10.1007/s12612-012-0314-6.
[27]
Dayez J. Comment les aıˆne´s appre´hendent-ils les ge´rontechnologies?
Balises, Journal des cadres d’Eneo. 2014;46:5–20.
[28]
Lo S, Lai C, Tsui C. Student nurses’ perception and understanding of elder
abuse. International Journal of Older People Nursing. 2010;5(4): 283–289.
DOI 10.1111/j.1748-3743.2009.00196.x.
[29]
Mortenson W, Sixsmith A. Gerontechnology and residential care: reducing
or reproducing disability among individuals with cognitive impairment?
Gerontechnology
2010.
2010;9(2):
1–144.
DOI
dx.doi.org/10.4017/
gt.2010.09.02.076.00.
[30]
Leikas J, Koivisto J. SATORI project, editor. Ethics assessment in different
fields: Social gerontechnology, in ethical assessment of research and inno-
vation: A comparative analysis of practices and institutions in the EU and
selected other countries. Stakeholders acting together on the ethical impact
assessment of research and innovation, Annex 2.c.3, Deliverable 1.1; 2015.
Available from: http://satoriproject.eu/media/2.c.3-Social-gerontechnology.
pdf.
[31]
Rialle V, Duchene F, Noury N, Bajolle L, Demongeot J. (2002). Health
‘‘Smart’’ home: information technology for patients at home. Telemed J E
Health. 2002 Winter;8(4):395–409.
[32]
Withney G, Keith S. Active ageing through Universal Design. Ger-
ontechnology. 2006;5(3):125–128.
[33]
Hofmann B. Ethical challenges with welfare technology: A review of the
literature. Science and Engineering Ethics. 2013;19(2):389–406.
Ethics in information and communication technologies
97

[34]
Orb A, Eisenhauer L, Wynaden D. Ethics in qualitative research. Journal of
Nursing Scholarship, Profession and Society. 2001;33(1):93–96. Available
from:
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Laurel_Eisenhauer/publication/
12078123_Ethics_in_qualitative_research/links/00b7d522f5660d8e36000000.
pdf date 2016.11.26.
[35]
Kvale S. Interviews: an introduction to qualitative research interviewing.
Thousand Oaks, Calif. Sage Publications (ISBN 0803958196); 1996. 326 p.
[36]
Thielke S, Harniss M, Thompson H, Patel S, Demiris G, Johnson K.
Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs and the adoption of health-related
technologies for older adults. Ageing International. 2012;37(4):470–488.
[37]
Mittelstadt B, Fairweather NB, McBride N, Shaw M. Privacy, Risk and
Personal Health Monitoring. Proceedings of the ETHICOMP 2013 Con-
ference, Kolding, Denmark. 2013.
[38]
Donnelly M, Nugent C, Craig D, Passmore P, Mulvenna M. Development
of a cell phone-based video streaming system for person with early stage
Alzheimer’s disease. Conference Proceedings – IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society. 2008; pp. 53305333. DOI 101109/
IEMBS20084650418.
[39]
D’Souza N. Is universal design a critical theory? In: Keates S, Clarkson J,
Langdon P, Robinson P, editors. Designing a More Inclusive World.
Springer (ISBN 978-0-85729-372-5); 2004. pp. 3–9.
[40]
D’Souza
N.
Is
universal
design
a
critical
theory?
Proceedings
of
CWUAAT’04, Cambridge, UK. 2004.
[41]
Coleman R, Pullinger D. Designing for our future selves. Applied Ergo-
nomics Special Issue. 1993;24(1), Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK: 3–4.
[42]
Coleman R. Designing for our future selves. Royal College of Art, Bookbarn
International, Bristol (ISBN 1874175454); 1993.
[43]
Rocque S, Langevin J, Chalghourni H, Ghorayeb A. (s.d.) Accessibilite´
universelle et designs contributifs dans un processus e´volutif. 2016-10-09;
2011; http://www.ripph.qc.ca/fr/revue/journal-19-03-2011-01.
[44]
CUD. Universal design principles. Center for Universal Design, NC State
University; 2008. [online] https://www.ncsu.edu/ncsu/design/cud/about_ud/
udprinciplestext.htm.
Further reading
[1]
Kwon S. Gerontechnology: Research, Practice, and Principles in the Field of
Technology and Aging. New York: Springer Publishing Company; 2017.
[2]
Giaccardi E, Kuijer L, Neven L. Design for Resourceful Ageing: Intervening
in the Ethics of Gerontechnology. Proceedings of DRS 2016, Design Research
Society 50th Anniversary Conference. Brighton, UK, 2730 June 2016.
[3]
Littlechild R, Tanner D, Hall K. Co-research with older people: perspectives
on impact. Qualitative Social Work. 2015;14(1):18–35. DOI: 10.1177/
1473325014556791; 2015.
98
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Biographies
He´le`ne Geurts is a PhD student within the Clinical Orthopedagogy Department,
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences (UMONS, Belgium). She cur-
rently works on a thesis dealing with the process of empowerment in the elderly.
Marie-Claire Haelewyck is professor and head of the Clinical Orthopedagogy
Department, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences (UMONS, Belgium).
The department leads his researches with vulnerable people, ageing people
and/or persons with disabilities. It pursues a desire for social inclusion, promotion
of quality of life, self-determination and health throughout the course of life. The
scientific and scholarly contributions are in the field of social gerontology, com-
munity psychology and health psychology. This perspective allows members to
investigate the bio-psycho-social model of ageing, an ecological and holistic
approach centred on the elderly considered in terms of its different characteristics.
The service has expertise in the development of personalized care and innovative
methodologies to promote the participation of older people in research projects,
including in the development and validation of technological tools.
Carlos Alberto Valderrama is director of the Department of Electronics and
Microelectronics at the Polytechnic Faculty of the University of Mons, in Belgium,
since 2004. He obtained, in 1998, the Ph.D. degree in Microelectronics at the INPG
in Grenoble, France, the M.Sc. degree from the Federal University of Rio deJaneiro
(UFRJ-COPPE) in 1993 and graduated electrical-electronics engineer from the
National University of Cordoba (UNC), Argentina, in 1989. He was visiting pro-
fessor at two Brazilian universities, at the Federal University of Pernambuco
(UFPE) in 2004 and at the Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN) in
1998. Between 1999 and 2004, he was leading the Hardware-Flow team in CoWare
NV. (today acquired by Synopsys), Belgium. In 2009, he was responsible for the
creation of the spinoff Nsilition (http://www.nsilition.com/) resulting from the
IPfundry project funded by the Walloon Region. His primary research interests
include wireless communication, EDA and system-level design of reconfigurable
embedded architectures. He has participated in more than 15 national and inter-
national research projects from the development of 4G chips to next-generation
tracking devices and software architectures for the IoT, satellite and multicore
industry, collaborating with partners such as Alcatel, STMicroelectronics, NXP and
Thales. He serves as technical reviewer and committee member of multiple jour-
nals and international conferences. His research activity is supported by more than
150 publications on international conferences, more than 10 books chapters and
more than 30 scientific journals. He is IEEE senior member since 2006.
Ethics in information and communication technologies
99

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 5
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios
in smart personal environments
Serge Autexier1, Rossitza Goleva2, Nuno M. Garcia3,
Rumen Stainov4, Ivan Ganchev5,6,
Constandinos X. Mavromoustakis7, Ciprian Dobre8,
Ivan Chorbev9, Vladimir Trajkovik9, and Eftim Zdravevski9
Abstract
This chapter presents results from ambient assisted living (AAL) and enhanced
living environment (ELE) service identification and testing performed within an
AAL lab. Possible end-user testing groups and scenarios of ‘AAL as a service’ and
‘ELE as a service’ (ELEaaS) platforms are described and specified. Firstly, pro-
tocols and services classifications are presented according to the end-user-specific
requirements from communication and information point of view as the chapter
aims to show how end-users, caregivers and service providers can be prepared for
the challenges of the market.
The aim of the test group is to verify and validate the platforms and services
for the ELE created, integrated, described and specified. The testing is based on
the platform technology and depends on the user requirements’ analysis and
ongoing work throughout use-cases. Existing living labs experience has been
used and enriched by customized information and communication services known
from the information and communication technologies sector. Description of
the ELEaaS is done in general terms along with the testing needed to be performed
against the general type of provided functionalities. Furthermore, customization of
1RD Cyber-Physical Systems, DFKI Bremen, Germany
2Department of Communication Networks, Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria
3Universidade da Beira Interior, Portugal
4Applied Computer Science Department, University of Applied Sciences, Germany
5University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland
6University of Plovdiv ‘‘Paisii Hilendarski’’, Bulgaria
7Department of Computer Science, University of Nicosia, Cyprus
8University of Politehnica of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania
9University Ss Cyril and Methodius University, Republic of Macedonia

the services, applicability to the needs of all stakeholders, flexibility for data
exchange, integration and interoperability between different versions and types of
platforms need to be also verified.
5.1
Introduction
The need of test groups for service development, verification and validation is an
essential part of the service creation process in information and communication
technologies (ICT). Technical and contextual testing is one thing. Social perception
of the service in the fields like medicine, caregiving for elderly, patients and chil-
dren is another thing. The resistance from the service has social and psychological
roots and there is a need of time to overcome it [1] (see Chapter 3).
The vast enrichment of the services provided to the end-users and high
requirements for customization changed the way to perform the business. Tele-
coms, Internet Service Providers and other utility companies need to respond to the
market demands and change the services they provide towards ambient assisted
living (AAL) and enhanced living environment (ELE) domains. There is a possi-
bility also to see new utility companies of caregiving services soon that will offer
remote and local ICT services related to active ageing and health management [2].
The portfolio of such services and its dynamic and intensive testing is essential for
good perception of the market. The lifetime of specific service is becoming shorter
than usual and typical phases of requirements, analyses, design, testing and
implementation tend to be also shorter than before. The vast number of new devices
interconnected and linked to the cloud lead to new solutions that need continuous
updates in features and therefore continuous testing [3,4].
This is especially true for the sensitive services for elderly, ill people and
children, and medicine-related applications and fitness applications where the
importance of the service for personal life or well-being is essential for the end-
users and makes the service requirements very high [5,6].
The main difference in ‘ELE’ and ‘AAL’ as terms is that while AAL is more
related to the patients and elder’s supportive services, ELE is a broader term. It is
enriched by services and applications for good living for everybody. In this sense, the
technology is applied to support better family life and better life in the society [7].
The aim is to incorporate the idea of ELE into future smart cities, smart homes
and smart businesses and other similar Internet of Things environments [8]. Most of
the proposed solutions are virtualized at different levels [9,10]; however, there are
still challenges that need to be addressed [11]. There had been many projects fun-
ded worldwide [12] on the AAL topic. More or less, they have been related to
medical problems, specific product or specific application to be created and tested.
The experience gained in AAL labs worldwide, in different hospitals and countries
to support electronic services for doctors, caregivers and patients, is a good starting
point for interconnectivity and virtualization [13].
Most of the work on the subject is done in isolated small user groups. The
interconnection between these islands is the next step ahead. There are attempts
102
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

for service globalization and virtualization throughout devices like Fitbit [14,15].
Some countries, such as the United States, are advanced in electronic records
development. There are projects that attempt to highlight standardization and
legislation issues [16]. The use of general type of equipment in hospitals and
medical equipment at home are two different activities that need to be mapped.
The necessity of interoperability with other technologies available on the market
[17] should be supported by all available devices. ICT service development based
on AAL as a service (AALaaS) and ELE as a service (ELEaaS) is still far from
being mature or even feasible. Furthermore, the standard requirements to the
hospital appliances, and home and personal equipment are different. Often local
standards and rules prevent data mapping and analyses and the use of the analysed
data by medical doctors and patients. This convergence process may continue for
decades worldwide, and to be implemented in customized ways in different
countries. On the other hand, global health insurance companies may play a sig-
nificant role for this aggregation process, stepping to the market in many countries
at the same time.
This chapter is organized as follows: state of the art, stressing on the tendency
of the market and market needs; living labs architectures and their possible
expandability and interconnection; end-user groups description paying attention to
the requirements; moving data from sensors to the cloud and back to actuators,
stressing on data modelling and availability; use-case scenarios in AAL/ELE
environment interconnection; and service definition and abstraction. The reader
could find further reading at the end of the chapter.
5.2
State of the art
Composition of ICT services for AAL and ELE needs special attention, not only in
regards to the dynamic requirements and performance of the services, but also in
relation to the interoperability and traffic engineering [17]. Existence of sensing
technologies of different types, software and hardware, different generation and the
necessity to connect everything in a network is a challenging task for standardi-
zation organizations and markets also. Many solutions that are more of less pro-
prietary ones should be interconnected via gateways, regardless of the place and
time [16]. Medical-related standards are very strict and the end-to-end (E2E)
technological solutions are still expensive.
Target groups for testing include primary, secondary and tertiary end-users of
the AALaaS and ELEaaS services. The primary users include patients, elderly,
children and active living people who like to measure and keep track on personal
physical status [4,14]. The group of secondary users consists of caregivers or family
members, whereas the group of tertiary users includes insurance companies, hos-
pitals, municipalities, medical and patient associations [15]. When defining the ICT
services, there is a need to address all end-users and adaptively customize the
services. This requirement is usually solved through service parameterization and
intensive testing [18].
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
103

The socio-economical point of view on end-users and software system testing
is presented in [19]. Most of the companies test the social effect of the service
throughout different kinds of surveys. However, customers tend to avoid surveys
due to the time limits and annoying questions they should answer. Smart ELEaaS
and AALaaS services need to assess the end-user satisfaction indirectly by obser-
ving the end-user behaviour or emotions expressed during the service usage. Using
broad range and variety of different test groups, including pilot projects like AAL
labs, is important during service analysis and validation. Therefore, the pricing and
the offering of these services is not a straightforward process, which needs smart
marketing strategies, analysis and design [20].
The E2E approach towards the ELEaaS and AALaaS needs special attention
due to the required protocol conversions. Cloud/edge/fog/dew computing, as well
as the variety of sensor technologies, allows vast virtualization of the platform and
services. This will create possibility for independent platform development and
testing throughout platform planes and hierarchical levels (see Chapter 9). Service
virtualization will allow the services to cross the national boundaries. Recently,
smart dust computing, smart pills (see Chapter 8) and textile sensing technologies
in wearables enhance the capability to measure and sense the status of the people.
There is no strict definition on what extent this process could be applied to and who
is ruling it, that is, a patient or a medical doctor.
Another important issue in this topic is related to the local legislation and
global standardization. Medical standards are very demanding towards both critical
and not so critical platform parameters. On the contrary, living, the home auto-
mation and environment automation standards are more relaxing. The trade-off
between the strict and not so strict requirements will need special research and
analysis in the following years [16,21].
There is a need for an end-user profiling that will allow setting services per
profile. Services for elderly are different from the services for children. Services for
people with disabilities are different from services for the people with dementia.
The focus of this chapter is on a few possible profiles and use-case scenarios
aiming to reach interoperability between them.
Special attention is being paid to the cultural requirements. There is a big
difference in elderly’s care systems in countries such as Germany, Norway and the
United Kingdom on one side, and Bulgaria, Romania and Bosnia and Herzegovina
on the other side. These details will influence the profiles and services imple-
mentations in different environments. The marketing of the platforms and services
in different societies should be highly customized too [18]. The challenge from a
technical point of view is how to parameterize in values generic and customized
parameters of the services that will allow easy service creation, testing, imple-
mentation and usage [22].
During last decades, there were many projects and conferences on AAL. With
new ideas for smart environments the enhanced living solutions are also becoming
increasingly popular. The existing solutions, however, are still very specific and
experiments are still defragmented. There is not one common approach towards
104
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

AAL labs consolidation and internetworking. Chapter 9 deals with the development
of a personal living platform from this point of view. Some highlights also point to
the main features of the existing solutions that might be helpful in getting the
overall picture of the market and technology today.
The study described in [23] demonstrated a hybrid approach towards the users
and agents in general within an AAL environment including robots. The use of
location services in an AAL is shown in [24]. Specific verification technology is
presented in [25]. Behavioural semantics and time constraints are considered in
[26,27]. Abstraction of services modelling is presented in [28]. Model specification
is demonstrated in [29]. Everyday activities abstraction is shown in [30]. A lan-
guage for formal service description is proposed in [10]. Differences between the
application-level testing and infrastructure level testing are demonstrated in [8].
An approach, based on privacy preserving sensors for activity recognition in smart
homes, is discussed in [31].
A broader approach towards service definition could be seen in [32]. A clas-
sical approach for service assessment is shown in [33]. Possible implementations
are demonstrated in [34]. Using bio robots in assisted living is developed in [35].
Robots are widely applied in rehabilitation services, remote assistance for surgery,
training of special disabled groups remotely and many more. The movement of the
patients is commanded by the rehabilitator and the robot could repeat the same
patterns many times for proper exercise. Remote sensing is also used to record and
analyse the activity of elder or disable person. This is further used for setting proper
rehabilitation and exercise programme.
A broad collected experience in service and application validation is presented
in [36]. Walsh presented experimental results of end-user testing in the community
[37]. AAL house is shown in [38]. An advanced idea about Internet of Sensors
could be seen in [39]. A nice experiment on quality-of-life estimation is shared in
[40]. A living-lab-feature is presented in [41]. A testing and usability evaluation
approach is demonstrated by Dias in [42].
Some of the applications are quite developed like in [43]. Standardization and
further globalization, however, are still not considered well [15].
An active ageing application is presented in [44]; the tests had been carefully
managed. Many use-cases could be found in [45]. This is a detailed report with an
impressive completeness. Use-cases are classified based on the type of the event or
activity.
The testing group selection is essential for the final results obtained [46]. There
is a need for broad assessment with support from many possibly different end-users
worldwide. Due to the complexity of the service customization, it could be done at
different layers and on different scale. The numerical scoring approach proposed by
many authors towards testing is not to be the only one possible for the end-user
judgement, of course. Part of the tests in gerontechnology could be misunderstood,
guided in a wrong way, depending on a specific condition of the testing group
members, etc. The best approach is to use a combination of socio-economical,
physiological and technical approaches towards testing [42].
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
105

5.3
Living lab architecture
The end-user groups’ definition and profiling are based on the accumulated living
labs experience and state-of-the-art analysis [20,38,47,48].
An AAL lab usually occupies a small (open or closed) area where one or more
persons could use supplementary ICT services for better living. A typical AAL
system includes sensors, actuators, controllers, gateways and special equipment such
as respirators, robots, wheelchairs, smart phones, tablets, home servers, switches,
routers and other smart devices. These are connected through controllers to one or
more management consoles and through the gateways to the rest of the world.
Some of the devices could be partially independent, for example, robots or
wheelchairs, while other devices are dependent on the entire configuration, for
example, sensors. The mobility of some of these objects is also a matter of con-
figuration. By allowing object mobility the network, and the platform, is becoming
partially ad hoc. That means that some critical and basic functionality relies on
fixed devices and infrastructure while the ad hoc part on the top is software-defined
one that relies on the presence of other devices. In this sense, the created personal
living environment (PLE) is also considered as being software-defined and
distributed.
Most of the living laboratories are developed for special purposes and only
volunteers work and live there. The fast technology development towards the real
market with millions of implementations is a step that still needs to be done. The
Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of AAL laboratories is either 4 (i.e. laboratory
testing of a prototype component or a process) or 5 (laboratory testing of an inte-
grated system). Part of the verification process in the AAL laboratories is also
performed as some features of TRL level 6. Pilot experiments with integrated
solutions in some hospitals cover partially also the TRL 7 [49]. The services,
however, are being developed in their boutique versions and are still expensive. As
a conclusion, one may state that there is still a long way to go before reaching the
status of having products ready for the massive market.
A typical AAL lab works as part of a corporate/home Local Area Network
(LAN) and is based on known access network technologies such as ZigBee,
EnOcean, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, Ethernet, 3G/4G/5G, etc. The experience gained in
AAL labs is LAN-related or wireless LAN-related by nature (Figure 5.1). Many
hospitals use Bluetooth equipment for short-range equipment management like
surgery consoles. The use of equipment in some of the frequencies might be dan-
gerous, however [50]. There is a vast amount of analyses and research done on the
electromagnetic compatibility of devices and possible interference between them.
However, there is still lack of a single solution applicable worldwide.
A typical AAL lab network is shown in Figure 5.1. It is heterogeneous by
nature as it may include both fixed and mobile devices and utilize different com-
munications technologies like Bluetooth, ZigBee, 3G/4G/5G, Ethernet, Wi-Fi, etc.
Part of the equipment is fixed for the comfort of the end-user seating in a wheel-
chair. For example, a personal digital assistant or a tablet could be part of the
wheelchair dashboard, and sensors/actuators on the windows and doors are also
106
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

fixed; while other sensors on cloths, kitchen appliances or sport equipment could be
mobile. Even though it is easy to receive signals and collect data from different
devices, significant delays will be faced if part of the network is arranged in ad hoc
fashion, which may lead to frequent changes in the network topology [51,52].
An AAL lab network also includes one or more gateways for communication
with the external world. For reliability reasons, the use of at least two different
channels should be considered when the data is critical for the people’s health.
A home server acts as a front point in a dew computing infrastructure [53,54].
It stores the raw data from the lab and possibly makes preliminary data analysis,
time stamping, location stamping, that is, data acquisition. Smart home servers
could raise an alarm if a critical state is reached [55].
Different objects, connected in such a network, may form different systems,
for example, for lighting, power supply, wheelchair mobility, medical treatment,
activity management, infotainment, air conditioning, configuration, administration
and management, etc. All systems could be interconnected to form a smart envir-
onment (see Chapter 9) [55].
The virtualization of services allows to move parts of the services to the dew,
fog or cloud for data storing, processing, analysing, mining, decision-making, etc.
[56]. Though this raises obvious issues like privacy and reliability (due to con-
nectivity requirements) that need to be addressed, this approach nevertheless makes
the local configuration and management easy. In fact, it is a step forward to the
remote configuration and management, offered by third-party bodies. Local infra-
structure will be used for access and edge parts of the network and additional
storage area networks (SAN) on the global plane will form the cloud. The level of
virtualization depends on the specific implementation of the services. There is a
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
Living room
Personal mobile
3G/4G/5G gateway
Mobile 3G/4G/5G
gateway – personal
and wheelchair
Bathroom
Bedroom
Personal mobile
3G/4G/5G gateway
Kitchen
Ethernet/Wi-Fi router or
3G/4G/5G gateway, home server
sensor/actuator
Figure 5.1
A heterogeneous AAL living lab network
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
107

tendency to move all data processing and raw data storage to the cloud level (see
Chapter 9) [54]. Being distributed and smart in nature, the PLEs exist on the top of
the ICT facilities and communication networks (including software-defined net-
works) and provide services in a way like the social networks.
5.4
End-user groups
Testing scenarios could be seen from the perspective of different subjects and
objects in the platform. End-users are disabled people, active ageing people,
medical doctors, family members, nurses, physicians, insurance companies, system
administrators and maintenance personnel. In some cases, one may speak about
end-devices like robots, controllers, wheelchairs, servers, management applications
or just objects involved in a machine-to-machine communication. Identification
of all players in the system, whether they are humans or not, is critical for the
reliability and usability of the system. It reflects protocols and interfaces to be
applied. End-users and end-devices could be primary, secondary and tertiary users
and devices.
Figure 5.2 demonstrates the complexity of the testing scenarios. The con-
sidered scenario presents the main features of the PLE of a child, who is a primary
user, is equipped with different sensors, for example, for temperature, localization,
activities. The child is connected to his/her parents through a data sharing and the
alarm management used is based on the data processing. The main communication
activity is performed via messages. The full testing of such a PLE includes the
child, parents, all sensors, actuators and gateways, the PLE customization and
End-users
End-devices
Profiles
Information
services
Communication
services
Testing per
Primary users,
secondary users,
tertiary users,
primary devices,
secondary
devices,
tertiary devices,
person,
family members,
doctors,
caregiver,
system
administrators,
sensor, gateway,
switch, router,
server,
storage area
network
Elder,
child,
active-aging,
patient,
nurse, doctor,
family member,
insurance
company,
service
provider,
information
storage device,
information
processing
device,
communication
device
Sensor data
storage,
additional data
storage,
data analyses,
passive data
analyses
reporting,
proactive data
analyses
reporting,
localization,
alarm
management,
data sharing,
searching,
notification
management
Sensor
connection,
PAN equipment
provision,
PAN configuration,
PAN
reconfiguration,
sensor testing,
PAN extension,
PAN connection to
the caregiver,
hospital, doctor,
capacity
management,
messaging,
video service,
audio service,
data service
Service,
device,
user,
profile,
end-to-end,
device-to-
device,
user-to-user
customization,
interoperability,
reliability
Figure 5.2
Subjects, objects, profiles, services, devices and tests in a sample
testing scenario
108
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

configuration, E2E service, device-to-device communication, data transfer, secur-
ity, etc. Security especially needs attention at all platform layers.
This chapter tries to separate the ICT at the access, edge and cloud level of the
AALaaS and ELEaaS platforms. Definitions of the precise data models and data
processing flows are essential for the platform success on the market. Integrated
profiles and relation to the use-cases are considered in [18]. The document presents
details on selected use-cases, profiles, transaction and data models, as well as
standard conformance to be taken into account.
Performance tests of the platform connectivity should check logical and phy-
sical interconnections. The ELE platform needs a back-up for internal and external
connections. The same rules need to be applied to all platform layers, and the SAN
with doubled, quadrupled and eightfold connectivity is a good example. It should
be capable to work without an external connection by keeping all necessary data
locally while getting connected. Attention should be paid to the gateways, inter-
faces, applied protocols, data exchange formats, etc.
The ELEaaS definition is not possible without having clear requirements on
functionality, precise data models and data processing vision. An ELE platform
supports a variety of functions, for example,
●
Critical functions (including alarms) needing a regular 24/7 attention.
●
Basic functions supporting the active living such as washing, cooking, enter-
taining, cleaning and even services’ configuration and administration.
●
Additional functions, related to standalone management applications, home
backup servers, statistical tools, data backup and restore, alarm function on
subscriptions, extensions of the existing services as graphical tools, data ana-
lytical tools, data filters, etc.
It is easy to define internal and external services based on the functionality of
the ELE platform. Internal services are mostly related to the daily activities of the
end-user like washing, bathing, cooking, cleaning, ordering, dressing, resting, tak-
ing medicines, etc. External services involve different type of connections, for
example, with social networks, caregivers, insurance companies, family members,
doctors, friends, system administration, etc. External services are mostly related to
data processing, storage, mining, statistical analysis, service subscription, service
configuration and management. These may include also notifications when new
functionalities are deployed in the cloud.
Service parameterization is an ability to set values for performance support
separately from the running code. It could allow also data measuring that will
ensure the service quality in a completely predictable way. Parameterization is also
related to the states of the service and its reaction to the specific activities from the
end-users/devices. There is no place for wrong behaviour or misinterpretation of
the end-user/device reaction. This should be kept as a rule even in the case of
device damaging or completely misinterpreted behaviour of the end-user.
Service scenarios are defined using ontology or sequence charts together with
data models. They use standard communications protocols like TCP/IP, UDP/IP,
3G/4G or others like HTTP, Message Queue Telemetry Transport, MODBUS TCP,
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
109

etc. The data models explain messages used in different scenarios, and data storage,
mobility processing, mining and dependence. Scenarios could be client/server or
peer-to-peer [54]. The data processing, mobility, presentation, dependencies, rela-
tions and associations represent all data processing, storage and mining services,
and require efficient storage designs to cope with the vast volumes of data [57],
while being able to apply virtually different algorithms for big data analysis and
artificial intelligence [58,59].
The collected experience in different AAL labs worldwide demonstrated the
capability of the ICT to solve different tasks related to the people with partial
disabilities. The vast development of the 5G technology towards active life or just
well-being life sets additional possibilities to build smart homes, smart PLEs and
smart living standards that are highly customized. The main testing could be per-
formed using the existing facilities. Virtualization of the ELE services or simply
going to ELEaaS at dew/fog/cloud level allows further unification of platforms and
possible service globalization.
5.5
From single user and single sensor to the cloud and back
Figure 5.3 demonstrates a typical AAL environment where each end-user sets up
and utilizes a Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN) while communicating
(working together) with other users in the same Wi-Fi domain. The connection
between different WPANs and the Wi-Fi could be arranged through a WPAN
coordinator, whereas the connection to the external world is done via a gateway.
The gateway could be set up on a smartphone and placed at any point in the lab.
(For simplicity, the gateway, the WPAN coordinator and the Wi-Fi router are
shown together on the upper right corner of the figure.) Each WPAN is configured
separately and could involve cooperative sensors/actuators, which may work also in
an ad hoc manner. For instance, the temperature sensor for the patient in the
wheelchair could be read by/visible not only to him/her but also by/to the care-
givers in the living room and in the kitchen. The priority to clear the sensor data,
change sensor configuration, set up notifications, updates, etc., could be delegated
to one of the WPANs.
Figure 5.4 depicts the same testing scenario by further showing the two pos-
sible options for WPANs interconnection. Apart from being done via a WPAN
coordinator, as an alternative, communication between different WPANs could be
set up in an ad hoc manner. To allow the latter, all WPANs need to work on the
same communication channel, which may lead to a possibility of interference.
This issue, however, may be considered not so serious for transmitting non-critical
data [54].
Depending on the configuration, part of the sensors/actuators could be asso-
ciated permanently with a WPAN, whereas other sensors/actuators may not be. For
instance, the sensors/actuators on the left-hand side in Figure 5.5 are associated
permanently with WPAN1 and sensors/actuators on the right-hand side  with
WPAN2. The sensor/actuator in the middle, however, is not associated with any of
110
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/
actuator
Bathroom
Bedroom
Kitchen
Personal mobile
3G/4G/5G gateway
Personal mobile
3G/4G/5G gateway
Mobile 3G/4G/5G
gateway – personal
and wheelchair
WPAN coordinator / Wi-Fi router
/ 3G/4G/5G gateway
Living room
Figure 5.3
A living lab communication infrastructure, based on WPANs

these WPANs and is visible from both. The communication of this ‘free’ sensor/
actuator to the WPANs is performed in an ad hoc mode; it could send data to both
WPANs independently. Some of the WPANs could be also coordinatorless. All
sensors that share the same communication channel listen, receive and retransmit
all incoming messages.
Figure 5.6 shows a strict sensor/actuator association, whereby the sensor/
actuator in the middle is associated with WPAN2. It sends and receives data only
through the WPAN2 central (master) node. In many medicine-related applications,
this scenario is considered as a more reliable one and thus is recommended espe-
cially for data-critical sensors/actuators. Other non-critical sensors/actuators could
be associated or not with WPANs, depending on the circumstances. Similar situa-
tion may appear in other application areas such as public transport, hospitals, shops,
business buildings, parks, streets, etc.
Communication with sensors is usually in the range of a few bytes per minute,
whereas communication with the WPAN coordinator is rather complex. There
might be voice/video/audio sessions involved with rates ranging from 8 kbps up to
500 kbps. The WPAN coordinator keeps client applications and supports the
interface to the end-user. It keeps raw data temporarily along with most recent
reports/medical advices, received from the cloud. Therefore, the data is only par-
tially stored and processed at the WPAN coordinator but completely in the cloud.
It includes also all logs related to the use of services, and their configuration and
management.
The flow of reports backward is a very important part of the services provided
to the end-user. These include configuration and management reports, reports for
the client, report for the applications, backup-related reports, etc. Based on the
Message 1
Message 1
forwarding
WPAN
coordinator
Message 2
forwarding
Centralized WPAN
interconnection
Ad hoc WPAN
interconnection
Message 2
Message 2
Message 1
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
Figure 5.4
Centralized and ad hoc connectivity options for WPAN
interconnection
112
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
Message
Message
WPAN2
WPAN1
Reliable data broadcasting
Reliable data broadcasting
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
Figure 5.5
Coordinatorless and coordinator-based sensor/actuator configuration (for the sensor/actuator shown in the middle of
the figure)

utilized technology, further in this chapter some highlights of atomic ICT services,
as well as complex E2E service compositions, are provided.
5.6
Scenarios
Some scenarios are more related to the complex services, which are a composition
of elementary or atomic ICT services as explained in Chapter 9. Many scenarios
could be similar for many end-users (and their profiles) like patients, elderly and
people on rehabilitation, etc.; some other scenarios are more specific, like going to
the party, visits at home, etc. Thus, it is important to distinguish daily routine
activities from unusual behaviour and try to identify situations that require alarms
(by minimizing false alarms as much as possible).
Everyday activities are usually based on schedules. Some of the schedules are
strict such as taking medicines, getting up from the bed, going to the bathroom, etc.
Other activities are more relaxing and their order is not strict, for example, dres-
sing, having a breakfast, reading and walking around the house, etc. Services at
home could be divided in small modules, that is, more specialized services or
atomic services such as moving wheelchair straight, back, right or left; open/close a
door/window; increase/decrease the light intensity, temperature or music/sound
volume; call the caregivers/relatives, etc. The composition of these atomic services
forms complex scenarios to be supported like the one detailed in Table 5.1. Some of
the activities shown in this table are considered more important than others. This is
the reason for setting up priorities. Each scenario and the possible schedule of the
atomic services could be different depending on the customer habits.
A typical communication, supporting a ‘getting up from/going to the bed’
scenario, is shown in Figure 5.7. It involves different sensors and actuators, located
in the bedroom, concerning opening/closing windows, getting up from/laying
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
WPAN1
WPAN2
Reliable data
broadcasting
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
Reliable data broadcasting
Message
Figure 5.6
Coordinator-based strict sensor/actuator association (the sensor/
actuator in the middle is associated with WPAN2)
114
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

sensor/actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
Living room
Kitchen
Bedroom
Bathroom
Wi-Fi router
or 3G/4G/5G gateway
Mobile 3G/4G/5G
gateway – personal
and wheelchair
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
Figure 5.7
A typical communication, supporting a ‘getting up from/going to the
bed’ scenario
Table 5.1
Daily activities and possible priorities
Daily activities
Priority
Schedule 1
Schedule 2
Schedule 3
Cooking
Medium
Using ready recipe
with navigator in
the kitchen
Adding new
recipe to the
navigator in
the kitchen
Free style cooking
with kitchen
navigator off
Bathing
High
Refreshing
Partial bath
Complete bath
Dressing
High
Day
Night
Outside
Walking in the
house
High
Typical in-house
walk
Checking all
rooms
Specific task
Walking outside
the house
Low
Routine walks [60]
Adding route
Free walk tracking
Location service
Medium
Strict
On demand
Disabled
Going to the
shop, cafeteria,
other homes as
a guest
Medium
Routine tasks
Adding a point
Free shopping
Going to the
hospital or for
rehabilitation
High
Compulsory
On demand
Occasionally
Ordering and
cleaning
Medium
Everyday
On demand
Scheduled
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
115

down in the bed, opening/closing the door, turning light on/off, moving within the
room and listening to the music, etc.
Some services could be activated to check more precise details in the patient
condition like sitting on the wheelchair, pressing the wheelchair left or right arm,
standing from the wheelchair, pushing the backside with head, etc. In many cases,
this could be an indication of the condition of the elderly and necessary data could
be notified to the rehabilitation personnel and/or the doctor. Sensors on the floor
could be used to track the movement of the patient and to detect his/her incidental
falling.
Similar scenarios will be performed when dressing next to a wardrobe, cooking
in the kitchen, bathing in the bathroom, entertaining in the living room, etc.
Schedules and scenarios could be used to track how often all these activities had
happened and in which order.
The caregivers’ WPANs could be used as supplementary communications
infrastructures, for example, for service logging and notifications. There is a need
to associate the sensors, actuators and data to the patients in this case. When the
patient coordinator and gateway is not activated or is temporally out of order, the
caregiver’s WPAN could be used instead for a short time (Figure 5.8). The acti-
vation and configuration of such a service could be used for backup purposes or
separately as a main service. The priority of such a service is essential from a
security point of view.
The personal assistant or caregiver could be a human being or a robot
(Figure 5.9). Depending on the configuration of the network the end-user might act
as coordinator and gateway. The caregiver device will be like a router for the
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
Bedroom
Living room
Bathroom
Kitchen
Personal mobile
3G/4G/5G gateway
Wi-Fi router
or 3G/4G/5G gateway
Figure 5.8
Use of a caregiver’s WPAN as a supplementary communication
infrastructure
116
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

sensors in the network. The scenario presented uses Wi-Fi connectivity to the home
gateway, ZigBee technology between the coordinator, the router and the sensors in
the two clusters. When the patient could coordinate the network, the roles of the
coordinator and/or routers could be changed. The caregiver or personal assistant
could be a human being or a robot. Depending on the network configuration, the
patient’s mobile device might act as a WPAN coordinator whereas the caregiver’s
device may act as a WPAN router for some of the sensors/actuators in the network.
The scenario presented in Figure 5.9 utilizes a Wi-Fi connectivity between the
WPAN coordinator and the home gateway, and a ZigBee technology between
the WPAN coordinator, the WPAN router and the sensors/actuators in the two
clusters shown. The role of a WPAN coordinator could be played also by the
caregiver’s device; in that case the patient’s device will act as a WPAN router.
In the case when a robot is a caregiver, the scenario in Figure 5.9 is also valid.
It is a matter of future research and analysis to prove if functions of a WPAN
coordinator could be trusted to a robot. Many of the scheduled everyday tasks in a
house could be delegated to the suitable robots.
A special set of services could be comprised by notification services. The end-
users need different level of notifications and alarms, for example, through a panic
button with a predefined procedure on how to proceed when used. Some notifica-
tions are just related to the logging process, which could be local at the dew
computing level or more general at the fog/cloud computing level. The transfer of
logs and log analysis provided by the service provider could support the service
maintenance and development as well as the service customization (see Chapter 9).
There is a need for relation between activities and corresponding notifications
made as shown in Table 5.2. Sensors/actuators should be classified at least at three
levels: critical, non-critical and basic. The classification levels should be related to
the activities necessary to be performed.
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
WPAN router
WPAN coordinator
Home
gateway
ACK
Cluster 2
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
Data 1 requesting
Cluster 1
Data 2
broadcasting
Data 1 receiving
Data 2 sending
Data 2 broadcasting
Data 1 forwarding
Figure 5.9
Patient’s and caregiver’s mobile devices, acting interchangeably as a
coordinator and a router in a WPAN
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
117

For example, when the pulse of a patient is going above 150 beats per second,
this might be an indication of a problem with the patient, but also could be an
indication of technical problem with a sensor/actuator. In this case, the state of
notification is raised as ‘warning’ and the measure of the pulse is repeated at least
three more times in the next few minutes. Other parameters measured by nearby
sensors are also checked carefully, such as body temperature, room temperature,
noise level, blood pressure, etc. Technically damaged or faulty devices should be
immediately isolated.
Table 5.2
Activities and two-level-priority notification services in ELE
Activity
High-priority notification
Low-priority notification
Falling
To the local personnel and the
doctor, emergency call
To the service provider for
logging, home server,
relatives
Pushing panic button
To the local personnel and the
doctor, emergency call
To the service provider for
logging, relatives, home
server
Critical sensor
threshold at
warning level
To the local personnel and the
doctor
To the service provider for
logging, home server and
relatives
Critical sensor
threshold at long
warning level
To the local personnel and the
doctor, checking through
other sensors and/or com-
munications channels
To the service provider for
logging, technician, relatives
Critical sensor
threshold at
emergency level
To the local personnel and the
doctor, emergency call
To the service provider for
logging, relatives and home
server
Walking
If outside typical area, to
relatives and caregivers for
tracking
To the service provider for
tracking and logging
Cooking
Kitchen appliances working
and no movement in the
kitchen
Logging, recording, updating
Taking medicines
To the local personnel and the
doctor, to the end-user’s
records
Health records
Dressing
Abnormal situation or order
Home server or personal records
Bathing
Abnormal situation or order
Home server or personal records
Dining
Abnormal situation or order
Changing, customization, free
style dining
Home server or personal records
Sensor/actuator
deconfiguration
Technical support at urgent or
non-urgent level depending
on the type of sensor/actuator
Personal records for checking
Sensor/actuator
configuration
Technical support at urgent or
non-urgent level depending
on the type of sensor/actuator
Personal records for checking
118
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

In the case of technical problem identification for a particular sensor/actuator,
the sensor/actuator should go to a deconfiguration state. In the case of emergency-
level identification, the emergency team should be called automatically.
Special schedules and scenarios are necessary for the states and events that are
considered dangerous. In relation to a patient, there is a need of a preliminary
analysis for events like:
●
No use of bath for more than 12 h
●
No meals and liquids taken for more than 12 h
●
Medicines are not taken
●
Staying in the bed for more than 12 h
●
Being awaken for more than 18 h
●
Walking around without sitting for more than 6–8 h
●
Walking less than 100 steps daily
●
Running less than 1 km daily
All events could be also classified in accordance to the emergency level and
personal activity thresholds. For example, running is a normal event for children,
walking for all people, staying in the bed for more than 12 h might be a symptom of
disease, too much walking might be a symptom of stress, etc.
Scenarios while walking in the park, going for shopping and travelling by
public transport are similar to those defined at home (Figure 5.10). Part of the
sensors is publicly accessed and others are not. The associated logging service need
to track the path of the user/patient and conditions during walk like, for example,
temperature, humidity, moisture, rain, wind, etc.
PAN
PAN
Sensor
Sensor
Sensor
Figure 5.10
Scenarios during walking in the park, shopping and travelling by
public transport
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
119

The remote assistance from doctors, caregivers and suppliers requires special
configuration. Once the user/patient gets out of the home, she/he may need frequent
or continuous communication with caregivers, nurses, doctors and service provi-
ders, as illustrated in Figure 15.11 (for simplicity, the service provider’s con-
nectivity to the end-user is not shown in the figure). The scenario could be very
flexible and customized, based on the client interface software and service virtua-
lization in general. Furthermore, virtualization of the network will allow collection
of raw data through different devices via gateways with standard interfaces and
data records. This also allows implementation of the software for searching and
analysing, and of more globalized services regardless of the basic sensor types in
the access part of the network. Remote sensing, configuration, advising and social
contacts will improve the presence of the patients in the society and their feeling of
being useful and valuable citizens.
The same scenario (or connectivity model) could be used for patients’ com-
munication with third parties, such as social networks, insurance companies,
patient associations, professional associations, etc. The main differences are in the
definition of notifications and allowances throughout the access, edge and core
parts of the networks. This applies also to the data presentation between dew/fog
and cloud storages.
5.7
Customized ELE ICT services
The attempt to classify the ELE end-user scenarios, presented earlier, allows to start
defining the corresponding ICT services. The need for atomic services, composite
services, aggregated services and managed services has been already mentioned.
Parks
PAN
Edge networks
Core networks
Access networks
Transport
Houses
Caregivers
Big storages
Service providers
Remote caregivers
Caregivers
Hospitals, nurses, doctors
Flats of apartments
Business buildings
Houses
Figure 5.11
Different types of communications involved in an ‘out-of-home’
scenario
120
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Part of the services are local, others are global. All issues, concerning details of the
service definition, could be left to the service providers to deal with. The main set
of services for consideration is presented later.
Communication services for primary users could be:
●
Sensors/actuators setup and interconnection (e.g. in a wireless sensor network,
WSN)
●
Sensors/actuators testing (under different scenarios)
●
WPAN equipment provision
●
WPAN configuration and reconfiguration
●
WPAN extension
●
WPAN connection to caregivers, nurses, doctors, etc.
●
Capacity management
●
Messaging
●
Video service
●
Audio service
●
Data service
Information services for primary users could be:
●
Sensor (raw) data storage
●
Additional data storage
●
Data analysis and mining
●
Passive data analysis reporting
●
Proactive data analysis reporting
●
Localization
●
Alarm management
●
Data sharing
●
Searching
●
Notification management
●
Reporting
Communication services for secondary users could repeat those of the primary
users partially. This is true in all cases when the caregiver’s equipment is used as a
backup for the primary user. Secondary and tertiary users also need services like:
●
Network connectivity through fixed and mobile networks
●
Optional user interfaces and multihoming
●
Multitasking capability
●
Time scheduling and management
Information services for secondary and tertiary users are a place for big data
analytics and could be very rich, such as:
●
Customized applications for caregivers, nurses, doctors, service providers,
technicians, insurance agencies, patient organizations, social networks
●
Sensor data storage, management, backup, access, analysis and mining
●
Additional data storage, management, backup, access, analysis and mining
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
121

●
Data analysis customized for different users
●
Passive data analysis reporting
●
Proactive data analysis reporting
●
Localization support
●
Alarm management
●
Data sharing
●
Searching
●
Notification management
●
Configuration management
5.8
Conclusions and further research directions
In conclusion, one may point out the necessity to analyse in details the outcomes
from the experienced living laboratories and to select the most appropriate way for
their possible interconnection. The establishment of networks of living environ-
ments with a good scaling option will allow the deployment of AAL/ELE services
in different regions and possible interconnection with other local and global ser-
vices and providers.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks go to the EU ICT COST Action IC1303: Algorithms, Architectures and
Platforms for Enhanced Living Environments (AAPELE), ICT COST Action
IC1406: High-Performance Modelling and Simulation for Big Data Applications
(cHiPSet) and TD COST Action TD1405: European Network for the Joint Eva-
luation of Connected Health Technologies (ENJECT).
References
[1]
Toolbox. Ambient Assisted Living Association: Brussels; 2013. Available from
http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/AALA_ToolboxA5_
online.pdf [Accessed 9 Mar 2017]
[2]
Universaal project, Services Providers Offering AAL Services in Ustore.
Available from http://universaal.sintef9013.com/index.php/en/press-room/
rucs2/ustore-rucs/16-rucs/category-2/86-ruc10-services-providers-offering-
aal-services-in-ustore [Accessed 9 Mar 2017]
[3]
Nedopil C., Schauber C., Glende S. (ed). Knowledge Base AAL Stakeholders
and Their Requirements. Ambient Assisted Living Association: Brussels;
2013. Available from http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/
02/AALA_Knowledge-Base_YOUSE_online.pdf [Accessed 9 Mar 2017]
[4]
Goleva R., Garcia N., Mavromoustakis C.X., Dobre C., Mastorakis G.,
Stainov R. ‘End-Users Testing of Enhanced Living Environment Platform
and Services’ in Dobre C., Mavromoustakis C.X., Garcia N., Goleva R.,
Mastorakis G. (eds). Ambient Assisted Living and Enhanced Living
122
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Environments: Principles, Technologies and Control. 1st edition, ISBN:
9780128051955: Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann; 2016. p. 544, Biomedi-
cal engineering book series, pp. 427–440
[5]
Goleva R., Stainov R., Savov A., Draganov P. ‘Reliable Platform for
Enhanced Living Environment’. First COST Action IC1303 AAPELE
Workshop Element 2014, in Conjunction with MONAMI 2014 Conference.
Wurzburg, 24 Sept. 2014, 978-3-319-16291-12015, Springer International
Publishing;
2015,
Available
from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
16292-8_23, pp. 315–328
[6]
AAL Forum 2015 Full Proceedings. Available from http://www.aal-europe.eu/
wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Proceedings_Print.pdf [Accessed 9 Mar 2017]
[7]
Arteaga S.M., Chevalier J., Coile A., et al. ‘Low-Cost Accelerometry-Based
Posture Monitoring System for Stroke Survivors’. ASSETS; 2008. pp. 243–244
[8]
Garcia N.M., Rodrigues J.J.P. Ambient Assisted Living. CRC Press: Boca
Raton, FL, USA; 2015
[9]
Goleva R., Stainov R., Savov A., et al. ‘Automated Ambient Open Platform
for Enhanced Living Environment’. ELEMENT 2015 Workshop, Ohrid,
FyROM, 1 Oct. 2015: Springer International Publishing, Switzerland: 2016,
Loshkovska S., Koceski S. (eds). ICT Innovations 2015, Advances in
Intelligent Systems and Computing, DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-25733-4_26,
pp. 255–264
[10]
Autexier S., Hutter D. ‘SHIP – A Logic-Based Language and Tool to Pro-
gram Smart Environments’. International Symposium on Logic-Based
Program Synthesis and Transformation. Springer-Verlag; 2015
[11]
Dimitrievski A., Zdravevski E., Lameski P., Trajkovik V. ‘A survey of
Ambient Assisted Living systems: challenges and opportunities’. ICCP
2016 – IEEE 12th International Conference on Intelligent Computer Com-
munication and Processing. 8–10 September 2016, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
[12]
Catalogue of Projects 2008–2013. Ambient Assisted Living Joint Pro-
gramme:
2015;
Available
from
http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2015/09/15-1805_AAL_Catalogue_2015_ONLINE.pdf
[Accessed
9 March 2017]
[13]
Dobre C., Mavromoustakis C., Garcia N., Mastorakis G., Goleva R.
‘Introduction to the AAL and ELE Systems’ in Dobre C., Mavromoustakis
C.X., Garcia N., Goleva R., Mastorakis G. (eds). Ambient Assisted Living
and Enhanced Living Environments: Principles, Technologies and Control.
1st edition, ISBN: 9780128051955: Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann;
2016. p. 544, Biomedical engineering book series, pp. 1–16
[14]
Fitbit. Available from https://www.fitbit.com/eu [Accessed 10 Mar 2017]
[15]
European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing (EIP on
AHA).
Available
from
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ageing/innovation_en
[Accessed 10 Mar 2017]
[16]
Roadmap for Standardization on AHA Facing 2020. Available from http://
www.makingspeechestalk.com/ch/RIAHA/?id_speech¼53
[Accessed
10
Mar 2017]
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
123

[17]
Summary of Standards. Ambient Assisted Living Association: Brussels;
Available from http://nero.offis.de/projects/aaliance2/start%2520 [Accessed
9 Mar 2017]
[18]
Eichelberg M., Ro¨lker-Denker L., Helmer A. (ed). AAL Use Cases and
Integration Profiles. Action Aimed at Promoting Standards and Interoper-
ability in the Field of AAL, Deliverable D2: AAL Use Cases and Integration
Profiles. Ambient Assisted Living Association: Brussels; 2016. Available
from http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/AAL_JP_Interop_
D2_AAL_Use_Cases_and_Integration_Profiles_2016.pdf [Accessed 9 Mar
2017]
[19]
Guideline the Art and Joy of User Integration in AAL Projects. White paper:
2015. Available from http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/
02/AALA_Guideline_YOUSE_online.pdf [Accessed 10 Mar 2017]
[20]
AHA Living Labs. Available from http://aha-livinglabs.com/ [Accessed 10
Mar 2017]
[21]
Mohanty S.P., Choppali U., Kougianos E. ‘Everything You Wanted to
Know About Smart Cities: The Internet of Things Is the Backbone’ in IEEE
Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 5, no. 3, July 2016. doi: 10.1109/
MCE.2016.2556879, pp. 60–70
[22]
Kriegel J., Auinger K. ‘AAL Service Development Loom – From the Idea to
a Marketable Business Model’. Series ‘Studies in Health Technology and
Informatics’. Vol. 212: ‘eHealth2015 – Health Informatics Meets eHealth’
10.3233/978-1-61499-524-1-125, pp. 125–133
[23]
Schwartz T., Feld M., Mronga D., et al. ‘Hybrid Teams of Humans, Robots,
and Virtual Agents in a Production Setting’. 2016 12th International Con-
ference on Intelligent Environments (IE), London; 2016, pp. 234–237 doi:
10.1109/IE.2016.53
[24]
Mandel C., Autexier S. ‘People Tracking in Ambient Assisted Living
Environments Using Low-Cost Thermal Image Cameras’. Proceeding
ICOST 2016 Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Inclusive
Smart Cities and Digital Health. Vol. 9677, pp. 14–26, Wuhan, China, May
25–27, 2016, Springer-Verlag, New York, Inc. New York, NY, 2016, ISBN:
978-3-319-39600-2
[25]
Przigoda N., Soeken M., Wille R., Drechsler R. ‘Verifying the Structure and
Behavior in UML/OCL Models Using Satisfiability Solvers’. IET Cyber-
Physical Systems: Theory & Applications, Vol. 1(1). December 2016,
pp. 49–59, 10.1049/iet-cps.2016.0022
[26]
Peters J., Wille R., Przigoda N., Ku¨hne U., Drechsler R. ‘A Generic
Representation of CCSL Time Constraints for UML/MARTE Models’. 2015
52nd ACM/EDAC/IEEE
Design Automation Conference (DAC), San
Francisco, CA, 2015, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1145/2744769.2744775
[27]
Hilken C., Peleska J., Wille R. ‘A unified formulation of behavioral
semantics for SysML models’. 2015 3rd International Conference on
Model-Driven Engineering and Software Development (MODELSWARD),
Angers, 2015, pp. 263–271
124
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[28]
Stoppe J.U., Rolf Drechsler. ‘Analyzing SystemC Designs: System C Ana-
lysis Approaches for Varying Applications, Sensors’. Open Access Journal,
15, 10399–10421, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 2015
[29]
Drechsler, R., Autexier, S., Lu¨th, C. ‘Model-based Specification and
Refinement for Cyber-Physical Systems’. International Conference on
Dynamics in Logistics, Springer, 2016
[30]
Krieg-Bru¨ckner B., Autexier S., Rink M., Nokam S.G. ‘Formal Modelling
for Cooking Assistance’ in De Nicola R., Hennicker R. (eds). Software,
Services and Systems – Essays Dedicated to Martin Wirsing on the Occasion
of His Emeritation. Vol. 8950, LNCS: Springer International Publishing
Switzerland; 2015, pp. 355–376
[31]
Dimitrievski A., Zdravevski E., Lameski P., Trajkovik V. ‘Towards appli-
cation of non-invasive environmental sensors for risks and activity detec-
tion’. ICCP 2016 – IEEE 12th International Conference on Intelligent
Computer Communication and Processing, 8–10 September 2016, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania
[32]
MIT Living Labs. 2016. Available from http://livinglabs.mit.edu/ [Accessed
9 Mar 2017]
[33]
Martins A., Queiro´s A., Cerqueira M., Alvarelha˜o J., Teixeira A., Rocha N.
‘Assessment of Ambient Assisted Living Services in a Living Lab
Approach: A Methodology Based on ICF’. doi: 10.5220/0003878300630071
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Living Usability Lab Workshop on
AAL Latest Solutions, Trends and Applications (AAL-2012), pp. 63–71
ISBN: 978-989-8425-93-5
[34]
Available from http://aal-brussels.s3.amazonaws.com/BTH-A2L2_Agata%
20Kosno.pdf [Accessed 9 Mar 2017]
[35]
Bio Robotics Institute. Available from http://sssa.bioroboticsinstitute.it/
portfolioricerca [Accessed 9 Mar 2017]
[36]
Colomer J.B.M., Salvi D., Cabrera-Umpierrez M.F., et al. ‘Experience in
Evaluating AAL Solutions in Living Labs’ in Sensors; 2014, 14, pp. 7277–
7311; doi:10.3390/s140407277
[37]
Polygerinos P., Galloway K.C., Sanan S., Herman M., Walsh C.J.
‘EMG Controlled Soft Robotic Glove for Assistance During Activities
of
Daily
Living’.
2015
IEEE
International
Conference
on
Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), Singapore; 2015, pp. 55–60, doi:
10.1109/ICORR.2015.7281175
[38]
Available from http://aalhouse.esda-lab.cied.teiwest.gr/index.php/en/targeted-
services-en [Accessed Dec 2016]
[39]
Available
from
http://www.brl.ac.uk/researchthemes/assistedliving.aspx
[Accessed Dec 2016]
[40]
Available from http://www.qosis.com/ [Accessed Dec 2016]
[41]
Available from http://www.alcotra-innovation.eu/progetto/doc/Short_guide_
on_Living_Labs_and_some_good_practices.pdf. [Accessed Dec 2016]
[42]
Dias M.S., Vilar E.A., Sousa F., et al. ‘A Living Labs Approach for
Usability Testing of Ambient Assisted Living Technologies’ in Design, User
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
125

Experience, and Usability: Design Discourse: 4th International Conference,
DUXU 2015, Held as Part of HCI International 2015, Los Angeles, CA,
USA; August 2–7, 2015: Proceedings, Part I’; 2015, Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp. 167–178, 978-3-319-20886-2
[43]
ALFRED, The Virtual Butler, Personal Interactive Assistant for Independent
Living and Active Ageing’. Available from http://www.ub.edu/senesciencia/
noticia/alfred-virtual-butler/ [Accessed 9 Mar 2017]
[44]
The Result of Applying the Ambient Intelligence Paradigm to Ageing.
Available
from
http://www.ub.edu/senesciencia/noticia/ambient-assisted-
living-aal/ [Accessed 9 Mar 2017]
[45]
Eichelberg M., Ro¨lker-Denker L., Helmer A., Doma A. (eds). Action Aimed
at Promoting Standards and Interoperability in the Field of AAL. Deliver-
able 7 Use-Cases. Ambient Assisted Living Association: Brussels; 2016.
Available
from
http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/
AAL_JP_Interop_D7_Use_Cases_2016.pdf [Accessed 9 Mar 2017]
[46]
Hyer K., Skinner J.H., Kane R.L., et al. ‘Using Scripted Video to Assess
Interdisciplinary Team Effectiveness Training Outcomes’. Journal of
Gerontology & Geriatrics Education. 2004, vol. 24(2), pp. 75–91, 10.1300/
J021v24n02\_07
[47]
Dobre C., Mavromoustakis C.X., Garcia N., Goleva R., Mastorakis G. (eds).
Ambient Assisted Living and Enhanced Living Environments: Principles,
Technologies and Control. 1st edition, ISBN: 9780128051955: Elsevier,
Butterworth-Heinemann; 2016. p. 544, Biomedical engineering book series,
Available
from
https://www.elsevier.com/books/ambient-assisted-living-
and-enhanced-living-environments/dobre/978-0-12-805195-5
[48]
Bremen Ambient Assisted Living Laboratory. Available from https://
www.dfki.de/web/living-labs-en/baall-bremen-ambient-assisted-living-lab?
set_language¼en [Accessed 15 Dec 2016]
[49]
Technology Readiness Level. Available from http://www.innovationseeds.
eu/Virtual_Library/Knowledge/TLR_Scale.kl [Accessed 15 Dec 2016]
[50]
Devices That May Interfere with Pacemakers. Available from http://
www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Conditions/Arrhythmia/PreventionTreatment
ofArrhythmia/Devices-that-may-Interfere-with-Pacemakers_UCM_302013_
Article.jsp#.WMPMuDvfpPY [Accessed 13 Dec 2016]
[51]
Mirtchev S., Goleva R., Atamian D., Mirtchev M., Ganchev I., Stainov R.
‘A Generalized Erlang-C Model for the Enhanced Living Environment as a
Service (ELEaaS)’. in Journal of Cybernetics and Information Technologies,
Bulgarian
Academy
of
Sciences, Volume
16,
No
X, Sofia;
2016,
pp. 104–121
[52]
Goleva R., Atamian D., Mirtchev S., et al. ‘Traffic Analyses and Measure-
ments: Technological Dependability’ in Mastorakis G., Mavromoustakis C.,
Pallis E. (eds). Resource Management of Mobile Cloud Computing Networks
and Environments. Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/
978-1-4666-8225-2.ch006; 2015, pp. 122–174
126
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[53]
Goleva R., Stainov R., Wagenknecht-Dimitrova D., et al. ‘Data and Traffic
Models in 5G Network’ in Mavromoustakis C.X., Mastorakis G., Batalla
J.M. (eds). Internet of Things (IoT) in 5G Mobile Technologies. Springer
International Publishing: Cham; 2016, ISBN 978-3-319-30913-2, 10.1007/
978-3-319-30913-2_20, pp. 485–499
[54]
Stainov R., Goleva R., Mirtchev S., et al. ‘AALaaS Intelligent Backhauls
for P2P Communication in 5G Mobile Networks’. BlackSeaCom 2016, June
6–9, 2016: Varna, Bulgaria
[55]
Goleva R., Garcia N., Mavromoustakis C.X., et al. ‘AAL and ELE Platform
Architecture’ in Dobre C., Mavromoustakis C.X., Garcia N., Goleva R.,
Mastorakis G. (eds). Ambient Assisted Living and Enhanced Living Envir-
onments:
Principles,
Technologies
and
Control.
1st
edition,
ISBN:
9780128051955: Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann; 2016. p. 544, Biomedi-
cal engineering book series, pp. 171–210
[56]
Chorbev I., Trajkovik V., Goleva R., Garcia N.M. ‘Cloud Based Smart
Living System Prototype’ in Dobre C., Mavromoustakis C.X., Garcia N.,
Goleva R., Mastorakis G. (eds). Ambient Assisted Living and Enhanced
Living Environments: Principles, Technologies and Control. 1st edition,
ISBN: 9780128051955: Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann; 2016. p. 544,
Biomedical engineering book series, pp. 147–170
[57]
Zdravevski E., Lameski P., Kulakov A. ‘Row key designs of NoSQL
database tables and their impact on write performance’. Proceedings of the
24th Euromicro International Conference on Parallel, Distributed, and
Network-Based Processing, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, 17–19 February
2016
[58]
Vakintis I., Panagiotakis S., Mastorakis G., Mavromoustakis C.X. ‘Evalua-
tion of a Web Crowd-Sensing IoT Ecosystem Providing Big Data Analysis’.
in Pop F., Kołodziej J., Di Martino B. (eds). Resource Management for Big
Data Platforms Algorithms, Modelling, and High-Performance Computing
Techniques. Book Series: Computer Communications and Networks:
Springer International Publishing, Print ISBN: 978-3-319-44880-0, Electro-
nic ISBN: 978-3-319-44881-7; 2016. p. 530
[59]
Chilipirea C., Petre A.C., Dobre C. ‘Big Data Uses in Crown Based System’
in Pop F., Kołodziej J., Di Martino B. (eds). Resource Management for Big
Data Platforms Algorithms, Modelling, and High-Performance Computing
Techniques. Book Series: Computer Communications and Networks:
Springer International Publishing, Print ISBN: 978-3-319-44880-0, Electro-
nic ISBN: 978-3-319-44881-7; 2016. p. 530
[60]
Hadjioannou V., Mavromoustakis C., Mastorakis G., Dobre C., Goleva R.,
Garcia N. ‘Cloud-Oriented Domain for AAL’ in Dobre C., Mavromoustakis
C.X., Garcia N., Goleva R., Mastorakis G. (eds). Ambient Assisted Living
and Enhanced Living Environments: Principles, Technologies and Control.
1st edition, ISBN: 9780128051955: Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann;
2016, p. 544, Biomedical engineering book series, pp. 271–286
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
127

Further reading
[1]
Agu¨ero R., Zinner T., Goleva R., Timm-Giel A., Tran-Gia P. (eds). Mobile
Networks and Management. Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer
Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering, 978-3-
319-16291-12015: Springer International Publishing; 2015
[2]
Walsh L., Doyle J., Smith E., Inomata A., Bond R. ‘Continuous Real-world
Gait Monitoring in Community-Based Older Adults’. EMBC 2015
[3]
De Nicola R., Hennicker R. Formal Modelling for Cooking Assistance.
Springer International Publishing, Switzerland; 2015. pp. 355–376
Biographies
Serge Autexier has a background in Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
(doctoral degree/PhD 2003 from Saarland University, Saarbru¨cken, Germany),
especially semantic knowledge representation, reasoning, change management with
applications to software development, mathematics and intelligent environments.
He is head of the Bremen Ambient Assisted Living Lab which belongs to the
Cyber-Physical Systems department of DFKI in Bremen. His research focuses on
intelligent assistance for humans, especially mobility assistance, low-threshold
man–machine interaction as well as safety and security of assistance processes. He
has more than 60 publications and is member of the Working groups on ‘User
Focus’ and ‘Interoperability of AAL Systems’ of the German Commission for
Electrical, Electronic & Information Technologies of DIN and VDE and member
of the Technical Committee of the OpenURC Alliance promoting the Universal
Remote Console.
Rossitza Goleva received her PhD in Communication Networks in 2016 and MSc
in Computer Science in 1982 at Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria. She was
part of the research staff of the research Institute of Bulgarian PTT between 1982
and 1987. Since 1987, she is with Department of Communication Networks at
Technical University of Sofia. At present, Rossitza works on communication net-
works, communication protocols and software engineering. Her research interests
are in Quality of Service in communication networks, communication protocols,
traffic engineering, cloud and fog computing and performance analyses. She is an
IEEE Member, involved in IEEE Bulgaria section activities, has more than 85
research publications, was part of more than 30 research projects including and EU
COST IC1303 AAPELE action.
Nuno M. Garcia holds a PhD in Computer Science Engineering from the
University of Beira Interior (UBI, Covilha˜, Portugal) (2008) and has a 5-year BSc
(Hons.) in Mathematics/Informatics also from UBI (1999–2004). He is Assistant
Professor at UBI and Invited Associate Professor at the School of Communication,
Architecture, Arts and Information Technologies of the Universidade Luso´fona de
128
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Humanidades e Tecnologias (Lisbon, Portugal). He was founder and is coordinator
of the Assisted Living Computing and Telecommunications Laboratory (ALLab),
a research group within the Instituto de Telecomunicac¸o˜es at UBI. He was also
cofounder and is coordinator of the Executive Council of the BSAFE LAB – Law
enforcement, Justice and Public Safety Research and Technology Transfer
Laboratory, a multidisciplinary research laboratory in UBI. He is the coordinator of
the Cisco Academy at UBI, Head of EyeSeeLab in Eye- See Lda. (Lisbon, Portu-
gal) and member of the Consultative Council of Favvus IT HR SA (Lisbon). He is
also chair of the COST Action IC1303 AAPELE – Architectures, Algorithms and
Platforms for Enhanced Living Environments. He is the main author of several
international, European and Portuguese patents. He is member of the Non-
Commercial Users Constituency, a group within GNSO in ICANN. His main
interests include Next-Generation Networks, algorithms for bio-signal processing,
distributed and cooperative protocols.
Rumen Stainov received his BS and MS from the Technical University Ilmenau,
Germany, and his Dr.-Ing. from the Dresden University of Technology, Germany.
Before joining Fulda University, he has been a Professor of Time at the University
of Aachen, Germany. In fall 1997, in fall 1998, in spring and summer 1999 he has
been Visiting Associate Professor at Boston University (USA). From fall 1999
through summer 2002 he has been full-time Associate Professor of Computer
Science at Boston University. He is currently Professor of Computer Science at
Fulda University of Applied Sciences, Germany. His research interests are in the
field of networking, distributed systems, mobile communications and peer-to-peer
networks. He has more than 75 research publications; he wrote 5 technical books
and was leading investigator in 12 research projects.
Dr Ivan Ganchev is a Senior Member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers (IEEE), the IEEE Communications Society, the IEEE Consumer Elec-
tronics Society, the IEEE Internet of Things Community, the IEEE Smart Cities
Community and the IEEE Consultants Network. He received his doctoral and
engineering (summa cum laude) degrees from the Saint-Petersburg State University
of Telecommunications. He is a Deputy Director of the Telecommunications
Research Centre (TRC), University of Limerick (Ireland), an Associate Professor
from the University of Plovdiv ‘Paisii Hilendarski’, an ITU-T Invited Expert, and
an IET Invited Lecturer. Dr Ganchev was involved in 35þ international and
national research and education projects. His research interests include novel tele-
communications paradigms, future networks and services, smart ubiquitous net-
working, context-aware networking, mobile cloud computing, Internet of Things
(IoT), Internet of Services (IoS), ambient assisted living (AAL), enhanced living
environments (ELEs), trust management, Internet tomography, mHealth and
mLearning ICT. Dr Ganchev has served in the Technical Program Committee of
200þ prestigious international conferences, symposia and workshops. He has
authored/co-authored 6 books (including 2 edited books) and 240þ research
papers in refereed international journals and conference proceedings. Dr Ganchev
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
129

is on the editorial board of and has served as a Guest Editor for multiple interna-
tional journals.
Dr Constandinos X. Mavromoustakis is currently a Professor at the Department
of Computer Science at the University of Nicosia, Cyprus. He received a five-year
dipl.Eng (BSc, BEng, MEng) in Electronic and Computer Engineering from
Technical University of Crete (2000), Greece, MSc in Telecommunications
from University College of London, UK (2001), and his PhD from the department
of
Informatics
at
Aristotle
University
of
Thessaloniki,
Greece
(2006).
Dr Mavromoustakis is leading the Mobile Systems Lab. (MOSys Lab., http://
www.mosys.unic.ac.cy/) at the Department of Computer Science at the University
of Nicosia, dealing with design and implementation of hybrid wireless testbed
environments and MP2P systems, IoT configurations and smart applications, as
well as high-performance cloud and mobile cloud computing (MCC) systems,
modelling and simulation of mobile computing environments and protocol devel-
opment and deployment for large-scale heterogeneous networks and new ‘green’
mobility-based protocols. Dr. Mavromoustakis is an active member (vice-chair) of
IEEE/R8 regional Cyprus section since January 2016, and since May 2009 he
serves as the chair of C16 Computer Society Chapter of the Cyprus IEEE section.
Dr Mavromoustakis has a dense research work outcome (more than 200 papers) in
Distributed Mobile Systems and spatio-temporal scheduling, consisting of numer-
ous refereed publications including several Books (IDEA/IGI, Springer and
Elsevier). He has served as a consultant to many industrial bodies (i.e. member of
the Technical Experts for Internet of Things competition at Intel Corporation LLC
(www.intel.com) for the ChallengeMe, etc.), he is a management member of IEEE
Communications Society (ComSoc) Radio Communications Committee (RCC) and
a board member the IEEE-SA Standards IEEE SCC42 WG2040 whereas he has
served as track chair and co-chair of various IEEE International Conferences
(including AINA, IWCMC, ICC, GlobeCom, IEEE Internet of Things, etc.).
Ciprian Dobre is Professor within the Computer Science Department, University
Politehnica of Bucharest (Habil. since 2014, Dr since 2008 with Cum laudae). He
currently leads the activities within Laboratory on Pervasive products and services,
and MobyLab. Ciprian Dobre’s research interests involve research subjects related
to mobile wireless networks and computing applications, pervasive services,
context-awareness and people-centric or participatory sensing. He has scientific
and scholarly contributions in the field of large-scale distributed systems con-
cerning mobile applications and smart technologies to reduce urban congestion and
air pollution (MobiWay, TRANSYS), context-aware applications (CAPIM),
opportunistic networks and mobile data offloading (SPRINT, SENSE), monitoring
(MonALISA), high-speed networking (VINCI, FDT), Grid application develop-
ment (EGEE, SEE-GRID), and evaluation using modelling and simulation
(MONARC 2, VNSim). These contributions led to important results, demonstrating
his qualifications and potential to go significantly beyond the state of the art.
Ciprian Dobre was awarded a PhD scholarship from California Institute of
130
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Technology (Caltech, USA) and another one from Oracle. His results received one
IBM Faculty Award, two CENIC Awards and three Best Paper Awards (in 2013,
2012 and 2010). The results were published in over 100 chapters in edited books,
articles in major international peer-reviewed journals and papers in well-estab-
lished international conferences and workshops.
Ivan Chorbev, PhD, is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Computer Science
and Engineering at the Ss.Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje. He has parti-
cipated in more than 70 scientific papers in journals and conference proceedings,
book chapters and has performed several researches stay as visiting scientist. He is
an author of two books. He has been part of or coordinated several national or
EU-funded research projects. The fields of his research interests include combina-
torial optimization, heuristic algorithms, constraint programming, web development
technologies, application of computer science in medicine and telemedicine, medi-
cal expert systems, assistive technologies, knowledge extraction and machine
learning.
Vladimir Trajkovik, PhD, is University professor at Ss.Cyril and Methodius Uni-
versity in Skopje, Macedonia. He has published more than 160 research papers
presented in international conferences or journals in Computer Science and Engi-
neering. He is author of three books and nine book chapters published by Interna-
tional publishers. He has participated in more than 30 international and national
educational, research and applicative projects. He was coordinator of 15 national
and international educational, research and applicative projects. His research inter-
ests focus on distance education systems, algorithm design, distributed environ-
ments, ambient and assisted living systems and connected health systems.
Eftim Zdravevski, MSc, completed his master studies in data mining in 2010 at
the Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies at the Ss. Cyril
and Methodius University in Skopje, Macedonia. In March 2011, he started his
PhD studies at the Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering in Skopje. From
2008 to 2015 he worked at NI TEKNA – Intelligent technologies as developer-
researcher where he designed and implemented information systems and data
warehouses, and worked on fraud detection and other machine learning related
projects. Since 2010 he works as teaching and research assistant at the Faculty of
Computer Science and Engineering. He is a MENSA member since 2004. During
his research career, he has published over 30 papers in international conferences
and journals. His active fields of research interests are: big data, machine learning,
data mining, cloud computing, expert systems, knowledge based systems, decision
support systems, intelligent information systems, data bases and data warehouses,
processing of sensory data, parallel algorithms, etc.
End-users’ AAL and ELE service scenarios technologies
131

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 6
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
Valentina Markova1 and Todor Ganchev1
Abstract
Stress is widely associated with increased health risks (heart and brain diseases,
diabetes, cancer, behavioural disorders, etc.). Moreover, a prolonged exposure to
stress is known to negatively affect work performance, attitude, decision-making,
etc. Furthermore, monitoring of stress levels and proper stress management are of
crucial importance for firefighters, rescue crews, police force and other high-risk
professions in terms of mission success and workforce preservation. In this regard,
here we overview the state of the art in personal health monitoring systems and
discuss the overall architecture and technology involved in the implementation of
such functionality. A particular focus is put on the technology involved in the
assessment of brain activity and negative emotional states, which are linked to
stress, behavioural, mental disorders, etc. From application point of view we dis-
cuss the technological feasibility of stationary and mobile setups for stress-level
assessment and monitoring. Finally, we outline the current trends and future
research directions and comment on some inherent limitations of stress-level
monitoring and on some challenges that remain unaddressed.
6.1
Introduction
Nowadays, it is well understood how the human autonomic nervous system (ANS)
controls the most important body functions, and also that it is the main way to
regulate the fight-or-flight and freeze-and-dissociate responses. The unconscious
regulation of heart rate (HR), digestion, respiratory rate and urination is of primary
importance for the survival of individuals, and the sexual arousal is quite important
for the reproduction and diversity of human genes, a vital factor for the endurance
of humankind.
In order to guarantee survival, the functioning of the ANS is modulated by the
external stimuli and the environment in which an individual lives. When an indi-
vidual is subject to excessive stimuli that exceed the zone of comport, that is, when
1Faculty of Computer Science and Automation, Technical University of Varna, Bulgaria

stress is present, the ANS reacts to mobilize all resources and improve the chances
of survival in the present moment. Thus, when the environmental conditions are
challenging, when the sensorial experiences are dramatic or when a person per-
ceives threat, the ANS amends the functioning of important body systems, which is
referred to as stress response.
Due to our modern lifestyle, the lack of contact with nature, overwork, insuf-
ficient sleep, unbalanced diet, abuse with foods, drinks and medications, the high
pollution with chemicals and electromagnetic fields of the environment where we
work or live, etc., our body and mind are exposed to significant stress on a daily
basis. Besides these long-term effects and the recognized increased risk of diseases,
such as anxiety, depression, cardiovascular diseases, immune system disturbances
and degenerative neurological disorders like Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease,
there are substantial short-term negative effects that have to be considered. This is
especially important for some occupations and professions that tend to add exces-
sive amount of additional stress beyond that. For instance, among these occupations
are the firefighters, police officers, rescuer crews, military staff, flight controllers,
astronauts on long missions, professional athletes, etc. For these high-risk profes-
sions, it is already recognized that stress affects mission readiness and more
importantly cogent decision-making in crisis circumstances. Therefore, the periodic
evaluation of stress levels and the real-time monitoring of stress pressure during
action have important health aspects and are also critical for crisis and disaster
management organizations. These short-term and long-term negative effects
motivated the need of establishing stress-level monitoring methods for the high-risk
professions and establishment of strategies for stress management and prevention.
In the present chapter, we focus our attention on the technological support,
which periodic stress-level evaluation and real-time stress monitoring could obtain,
and the advantages and limitations of contemporary technology. In brief, techno-
logical support to stress levels assessment methods aims to facilitate objective
stress assessment methods, which supplement the results of traditional self-
assessment questionnaires, and question and answer (Q&A) sessions with medical
personnel, and the invasive blood and urine tests that cause stress on their own, and
hopefully extend stress assessment beyond these.
The recent emergence of new materials, sensors, communication and com-
puting technology makes feasible the real-time assessment of stress during mis-
sions. Real-time assessment of stress level opens opportunities for reallocation or
repositioning of people, change of assignments and the effective use of resources.
Such corrective measures would eventually contribute to better management of
danger and crisis, and would allow for the optimal use of resources, lowering the
risks for the people operating on terrain, and increasing the chances of a successful
mission. Awareness about the momentous stress level of personnel could facilitate
improved operation efficiency and safety during missions, and awareness about the
cumulative stress levels could help for preserving the mission readiness and health
of personnel.
Recently, a lot of effort and resources have been dedicated to the development
of personal health systems for continuous monitoring and diagnosis of the
134
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

individuals regardless of their location. Regardless of whether the personal health
systems are designed as wearable, implantable or portable, their data processing
workflow can provisionally be divided into three main stages: data acquisition, data
analysis and person/doctor communication (Figure 6.1).
The functionality of such a personal health system is well suited to the needs of
future monitors for stress and stress assessment aids during work or daily routine of
individuals. In the rest of this chapter, we provide detail on the technology behind
these three stages and outline the most recent trends in personal mobility, with
focus on the introduction of intelligent, wearable and implanted sensors.
Specifically, in Section 6.2 we overview the state of the art in personal health
monitoring systems, discussing the overall architecture, the functionality of indi-
vidual components and the technologies involved in the implementation of such
functionality. Next, in Section 6.3, we discuss the technology involved in the
assessment of brain activity, negative emotional states, mental disorders and neu-
rological diseases, which are linked to stress, behavioural, mental disorders, etc.
The focus here is on data acquisition and modelling methods and research for the
discovery of causality between physiological measurements and mental stress. In
Section 6.4, we outline the two main setups for stress assessment and monitoring –
stationary and mobile – and discuss their technological feasibility. In this regard,
we overview recent and ongoing research and technology development projects and
discuss interesting use cases, which make use of health and stress monitoring sys-
tems. Finally, in Section 6.5, we overview the current trends and future research
directions and mention some inherent limitations of stress-level assessment and
challenges that remain unaddressed.
6.2
State-of-the-art personal health monitoring systems
6.2.1
Physiological parameters and stress
The stresses to which humans are exposed to have their influence on their phy-
siological status. They affect some vital signs like increases blood pressure (BP),
changes HR, alters heart rate variability (HRV), affects skin resistance, glandular
Personal health system
Data acquisition
Person/doctor 
communication
Data analysis
Acquiring data and 
information regarding 
health status of a person
Processing, analysis and 
interpretation of the 
acquired data
Communication and 
feedback between various 
individuals, involved in 
the process
Figure 6.1
Structure of a personal health system
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
135

secretions and other physical parameters [1]. It is well known that stress alters the
balance within the ANS and activates secretion of stress hormones, such as cortisol,
the epinephrine and norepinephrine into the blood stream, which increases the BP
and muscle tension. The ANS is separated into two sections: sympathetic (SNS)
and parasympathetic (PNS). SNS controls the body’s fight-or-flight responses, that
is, how body reacts to the remarked danger. Any stimulation of the SNS ultimately
increases the BP and HR and decreases HRV (e.g. during sports), while activation
of the PNS (during sleep) induces a lower BP and HR together with higher HRV.
The PNS controls homeostasis and returns body to the relax state. Many studies
show that negative emotions produce an increase in sympathetic activity and ele-
vated neuroendocrine responses.
HRV is defined as the change in the time interval between two adjacent
heartbeats. Power spectral density of HRV provides useful information for a
person’s level of stress. The low-frequency component of the power density (0.04–
0.15 Hz) reflects both SNS and PNS, whereas the high-frequency power component
(0.18–0.4 Hz) is reaction only of the parasympathetic activity and reflects main-
tenance of physiological homeostasis. The third widely used component in HRV
spectrum is low-frequency (LF) to high-frequency (HF) ratio which is used as an
indicator for autonomic balance. It has been reported in studies [2,3] that persons
with increased low-frequency power and decreased high-frequency power are more
likely to have a high level of psychological stress and high BP. HRV response to
stress varies among individuals due to genetic features, gender and age. The HRV
analysis could be accomplished based on time-domain parameters: HR mean; RR
mean (mean heartbeat interval); SDNN (standard deviation of RR-intervals
between successive RR-intervals); RMSSD (root mean square of the difference
between consecutive RR-intervals); and pNN50 (the percentage of heartbeat inter-
vals with a difference in consecutive heartbeat intervals more than 50 ms).
For example, the LabVIEW Biomedical Toolkit provides several analysis
methods for HRV, both in the time domain and frequency domain, including sta-
tistics, histogram, FFT and AR spectrum, and STFT spectrogram. Figure 6.2 shows
an HRV analysis from an electrocardiographic (ECG) signal (results are obtained
by HRV analyzer.vi from NI LabVIEW examples). Some common HRV para-
meters in time domain are presented in Figure 6.2(a) and the corresponding FFT
power spectrum (Figure 6.2(b)).
Galvanic skin response (GSR) is another parameter often used to measure
stress levels. Skin conductivity changes with the alteration of the body emotional
state. The level of cortical arousal that depends on a person’s level of awareness
influences the skin conductivity. In the relax state, the skin resistance is higher than
1 MW. When the stress level rises, the resistance decreased to 500 kW or less [4].
The emotional stress of lying could be detected by measuring skin resistance, HR
and body temperature [5]. Typically, when someone is lying, his/her hands are
colder, skin resistance is lower and sympathetic nervous system is subconsciously
activated.
Usually GSR is measuring on the hands, where the density of sweat glands is
the highest. The GSR analysis has two components: skin conductance level (SCL)
136
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

VLF (0÷0.04) Hz
HF (0.15÷0.4) Hz
LF (0.04÷0.15) Hz
Figure 6.2
HR analysis in time domain (a) and frequency domain (b)
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
137

and skin conductance response (SCR). The SCL can be calculated as the mean
value of skin conductance over a window of data. The SCR is a fast-moving part of
the GSR and response to a single stimulus. The amplitude and latency of SCR and
mean SCL values are widely used features extracted from GSR.
The electroencephalography (EEG) is a diagnostic procedure, which consists
of reception, amplification and logging of the electrical activity of the human’s
brain. The EEG is recorded by electrodes distributed over the scalp surface. The
number of electrodes used depends on whether only a survey of representative
areas is targeted or a detailed comparison of many areas should be made in order to
localize some disorders like epilepsy or a brain tumour. The amplitude of the EEG
signals varies between 10 and 100 mV. The EEG pattern depends on the age and the
attitude of the object, and mainly on the degree of wakefulness. There are sig-
nificant differences between the EEGs recorded on different people. The EEG
recording could be influenced by different metabolic disorders, the impact of
medicines, drugs, neurological diseases, etc.
The EEG pattern provides useful information for changes in mental state
because of its high temporal resolution. Each brainwave represents a specific level
of brain activity and depends on the conscious level of the person. Brainwaves are
indicative of different mental states and can be stimulated to achieve the desired
results. For instance, gamma waves (typical for conditions as high concentration,
inspiration, enlightenment, insight, exalted states of the mind) are the fastest cortex
signals and are associated with peak concentration and high level of information
processing. Beta waves (typical for daily states of consciousness, in the process of
learning, communication, games and general cognitive processes) have sub-
stantially smaller amplitude as compared to the a-waves. They can be taken out
from the entire brain cortex in wakeful condition and with eyes opened. Under
intense mental activity and mental stress, EEG registers more b-waves and less
a-wave, even with eyes closed. Alpha waves (transitional relaxed state of con-
sciousness, dreaming, soaring, meditation, creativity) can be taken out best from
the occipital and parietal cortical area in wakeful and calm state with eyes closed.
Alpha waves, but with significantly less amplitude, may also appear from time to
time in other regions of the cortex. When the eyes open, the a-waves greatly
decrease in voltage and slower (beta) waves begin to appear. Alpha waves are
associated with learning, processing and storing information. Theta waves (typical
for states of nap, intense relaxation, visualization) are slower, as compared with
a-waves, but may have greater amplitude thereof. On adults, they can be found
mainly during the first three phases of slow wave sleep, but sometimes they can be
taken out even in wakeful states from the temporal or frontal cortical area during
strong emotional experiences. Delta waves (states of deep sleep, primary levels of
consciousness and catatonic states of meditation) are the slowest waves of EEG
pattern but their amplitude reaches 150 mV. They are associated with being
unconscious, in a state of deeper dreamless sleep, when we do not remember
anything.
Many studies confirmed the correlation between mental stress and EEG pat-
tern. In stressful situation, the power of the q-waves increases, opposite of the
138
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

power of the a-waves that decreases showing the change in response to the stress.
In Table 6.1, we summarize the activity of brainwaves in stress situation [6].
For the correct interpretation of physiological parameters, in addition to the
activity states of the person being monitored various ambient parameters should
be taken into account. Simple activities like sleeping or walking have their influ-
ence upon vital signs such as HR and BP. In the traditional health monitoring
systems, the visual control performed during a diagnostic test provides enough
contextual information. However, in the remote ones, the task gets complicated
because the recognition of the respective activities requires understanding of the
context in which these take place. In such cases, for example, the readings of an
accelerometer would allow the identification of activities, such as walking, run-
ning, sleeping or the body position as lie down, sitting or standing. Often the data
from more than one sensor need to be combined in order for the contextual infor-
mation to be precisely identified.
6.2.2
Overview of system architectures
Architecture of a stress monitoring system, which is based on the multi-tier tele-
medicine system [7], is presented in Figure 6.3. Each tier represents a quite com-
plicated subsystem with a local hierarchy utilized to ensure enough efficiency,
portability, security and reduced cost. The lowest level of such a system (Intra BAN
Table 6.1
Brainwaves activity in stress
Brainwaves
Frequency
Activity in stress
Delta (d)
<4 Hz
Power increases during difficult conditions
Theta (q)
4–8 Hz
Power increases in the stress situations
Alpha (a)
8–13 Hz
Power falls down in the stress situations
Beta (b)
13–30 Hz
Power varies according to task difficulty
Gamma (g)
>30 Hz
Severe stress, fear, anxiety (panic)
EEG
Tier-1
Tier-2
Tier-3
EKG
PC
Gateway
Internet
Hospital
Emergency
Doctor
Data
centre
Family
GSM
3G/4G
GSM
EMG
Motion
sensor
Blood
pressure
Figure 6.3
Stress monitoring system
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
139

network) encompasses a set of sensor nodes that are incorporated in a body area
network (BAN). Specifically, each node can sense and process one or more phy-
siological signals. Subsequently processed physiological data is transferred to the
personal server (PS) in tier 2. For instance, an ECG sensor is used for measuring
heart activity, an EEG sensor for brain activity monitoring, etc. Tier 2 is body
central unit also called PS, which could be smartphone, laptop, personal computer
or PDA. The PS as derived from its name Inter-BAN network is tasked with com-
munication between BAN sensor nodes, connection to the top tier servers through
the Internet and providing graphical interface to the user. The PS is responsible for
registration and initialization of the sensor nodes in the network. It defines a secure
communication link. Once the BAN is configured, PS handles the network. Tier 3
comprises a network of remote healthcare servers, which keep medical data
archives of registered users, and provides various services to the medical staff or
other authorized users.
Each BAN consists of multiple interconnected nodes on, near or within a
human body, which are used to acquire, process and transfer data [8]. For example,
one node with ECG and BP sensors monitors simultaneously both heart activity and
BP. The acquired data is then processed and analysed to identify what information
is clinically relevant and useful in diagnosis or treatment of a condition. Part of data
processing is performed locally at the acquisition part (e.g. with on-body electro-
nics or at PS) and other remotely at medical servers.
Wireless body area network (WBAN) has tremendous potential as part of a
system for identification of emotions and stress conditions; however, for their
practical adaption a large number of technical and social challenges need to be
overcome. WBANs are similar to the general wireless sensor networks (WSNs);
consequently, their design could be based on the knowledge and experience
acquired with regard to the latter. However, in the design of BANs some specificity
should be taken into account: they should be small, unobtrusive, ergonomic, easy to
attach and non-invasive (when it is possible) or implanted in the human body. The
smaller size implies smaller batteries, which respectively means optimal trade-offs
between the power consumed by different modules and the throughput and latency
required by the applications. The placement of the nodes should be another
essential design consideration since all nodes should be safe and comfortable. BAN
nodes need to be compatible with other nodes, existing inter BAN networks, and
even with existing electronic health record systems.
In traditional body networks, different sensors and monitoring systems are
unwieldy wired, which limits the overall activity of patients, their comfort and thus
negatively influences the patient. Consequently, the process of data acquisition may
introduce bias, which could compromise the measurements and subsequent diag-
nostics. Recent advances in microelectronics, power supply miniaturization,
reduced energy consumption and miniaturization of sensor devices encourage the
use of implantable or wearable sensors. Usually, these sensors are placed on the
human body as tiny tapes or embedded in clothes or in the accessories such as
watches, belts and wristbands, which allow pervasive continuous health monitoring
of people in their natural environment for long periods of time.
140
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Various studies investigate the opportunities offered by wearable monitoring
systems. For instance, researchers from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
have developed a body-worn system called MIThril, integrated in a ‘tunic’. The
proposed wearable application was used to study human behaviour by analysing
data acquired by ECG, GSR and skin temperature sensors [9]. Another research
carried out at Harvard University, referred to as Code Blue project, was focused on
the development of parent’s monitoring system based on wireless sensors (pulse
oximeter, ECG and triaxle accelerometer motion sensor). CardioNet M COT is a
telemetry system consisting of the three-lead ECG sensor connected to PDA. The
system provides continuous real-time data monitoring, analysis and reply to
patients with cardiovascular diseases.
Hexoskin smart shirts are used by many researchers all over the world in dif-
ferent remote health monitoring projects, providing a convenient way to understand
human health in a real-life environment. The sensors are integrated into T-shirts,
which send continuous data to a secure cloud-based analytics platform. The pro-
cessed useful data is returned back to the user via a PDA. A common trait of these
platforms is that these aim to ensure unobtrusive, pervasive, continuous health
monitoring and response back to the patient irrespective of the geographical
location.
6.2.3
Short-range wireless network technology
Advances in wireless technologies and mobile solutions such as cellular 3G/4G
allow vital information from sensors to be accessed anywhere and at any time
within the healthcare networks. Contemporary communication standards, such as
Bluetooth, ZigBee and Wi-Fi, compete for data transmission medium in healthcare
applications. In the following subsections, we overview some current short-range
wireless technologies with potential for use in stress monitoring system.
6.2.3.1
IEEE 802.15.x standards
In recent years, wireless personal area network (WPAN) and WSN have rapidly
gained popularity. WPANs are used for short-distance sharing of information in a
closed group of participant devices. Opposite to the wireless local area network
(WLAN), a connection made through a WPAN does not need so complicated
infrastructure which makes possible the usage of small, low-power and inexpensive
devices. The WPANs are included in the IEEE 802.15 standard.
The oldest and widely used WPAN technology is Bluetooth, standardized in
IEEE 802.15.1. The IEEE 802.15.1 standard defines the architecture and operation
of Bluetooth devices, but only in the first and second layers of the OSI models.
Higher protocol layers as in the other standards of the IEEE 802.15 group are
standardized by others (Bluetooth Special interest Group (SIG), ZigBee Alliance,
etc.). Bluetooth technology was initially defined to provide voice and data con-
nection between battery-powered mobile devices in small personal networks.
Nowadays almost all mobile phones and laptops support Bluetooth technology,
which facilitates access to mobile networks and the Internet. Bluetooth interoper-
ability enables interesting options for diverse medical applications.
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
141

The IEEE 802.15.4 standard specifies the wireless connectivity requirements
for devices in physical (PHY) and medium access control (MAC) layers. The
position of the devices can vary in distances between 10 and 75 m depending on the
RF environment and the output power of the device [10,11]. This standard supports
four types of frames:
1.
Beacon frames, used by the coordinator to present the channel access to other
nodes
2.
Data frames, used to carry varying amount of payload (2–127 bytes)
3.
Acknowledgement frames for the reliable data and control frame transmissions
4.
MAC control frames with network management functions, such as association
to and disassociation from the network
The BAN (IEEE 802.15.6) is optimized for low-power devices and operation on, in
or around the human body that can be used in a variety of applications including
health monitoring, ambient living environments, consumer electronics, etc. It
seems to be the preferred choice for future technology health systems, implemented
with implantable and wearable sensors.
6.2.3.2
ZigBee
ZigBee is a simple, flexible and low-data-rate wireless networking protocol that is
targeted towards remote control and monitoring applications. Features such as low-
power consumption, reliable data transfer and relatively easy implementation make
it suitable for small-size, low-rate battery-powered medical devices at low prize.
ZigBee standard extends IEEE 802.15.4 standard with interoperability functions
similar to Bluetooth.
In a low-rate WPAN network can operate two types of devices: full-function
device (FFD) and reduced-function device (RFD). An FFD can exchange data with
both FFD and RFD while an RFD can communicate only with an FFD. An FFD
can perform functions as coordinator or router [12]. The coordinator manages the
network tree and controls the PAN network (initiates, terminates and routes com-
munication around the network). It is responsible for memorizing and keeping the
information about network (defining radiofrequency channel, unique network
identifier and security keys). There is only one coordinator in each network. The
router is FFD with routing function. It only relays data from other devices. ZigBee
routers may extend PAN network. An RFD can be used only as end device, which
is extremely simple with limited functionality in the MAC layer. It collects infor-
mation from different sensors and sends it to FFD devices (the coordinator or a
router). The end device cannot relay data from other devices. This reduced func-
tionality leads to reduction of their cost. Unlike coordinator and routers, end
devices may not stay awake the whole time, which allowing expending battery life.
ZigBee devices may operate in either of two topologies: star topology or peer-to-
peer (divided in mesh and cluster tree) topologies.
ZigBee technology operates in three radiofrequency bands: 868 MHz (EU and
Japan), 915 MHz (ISM, USA) and 2.4 GHz (worldwide). The spacing between the
142
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

channels in the 915 MHz radio band is 2 MHz and between the channels in the
2.4 GHz band is 5 MHz. The channels’ bandwidth in the 2.4 GHz band is 2 MHz.
6.2.3.3
Bluetooth
Bluetooth is a standard communications protocol for short-range, low-data rate
communications. In Bluetooth, a trusted communication link between two devices
referred to as pairing is established by exchanging shared secret codes denoted as
PINs. Bluetooth devices can be either a master or a slave. A master device has the
option of pairing with up to seven slave devices establishing a network referred to
as a piconet. A piconet exists as long as the creator needs it.
A piconet contains at least one master device and one or more slave devices.
The terms ‘master’ and ‘slave’ are relative and are not assigned to the Bluetooth
device at manufacture process. Any device can change the master/slave role at any
time. The master is responsible for synchronization of all Bluetooth devices in a
given piconet. The slaves interconnect with their own master only through point-to-
point connection. The master communicates with all slaves in the piconet using
either point-to-point or point-to-multipoint connection. In given time interval only
one slave and the master can exchange data. A Bluetooth device can participate
simultaneously in several piconets, which can be used to eliminate Bluetooth range
restrictions. A device in a scatternet could be a slave in some piconets, but a master
in only one of them.
SIG of Bluetooth technology developed four Bluetooth versions with different
specification to offer various options to the user. The most notable editions of those
are shown in Table 6.2, along with their maximum data rates.
Recent Bluetooth version 4.0 was developed for low-power PAN devices. It
provides features such as low-power consumption, low latency and small-coin
battery cell. Bluetooth 4.0 is considered the best protocol for Internet of Things
(IoT) applications. The Bluetooth 4.0 includes classic, high-speed and low-energy
protocols. The classic Bluetooth 4.0 features are very similar to Bluetooth 2.1,
while those of high-speed Bluetooth 4.0 are comparable to Bluetooth 3.0. It is
important to note that the specifications shown in Table 6.2 are the upper bound
limits, and these values are lower in applications.
Bluetooth technology operates in the 2.4 GHz ISM band (2.400–2.480 GHz),
using frequency hopping spread-spectrum full-duplex signal [13,14]. BLE has
Table 6.2
Bluetooth specifications
Version
Maximum data rate
(Mbps)
1.2
1
2.1 þ enhanced data rate
3
3.0 þ high speed
24
4.0 Bluetooth low energy
1
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
143

40 channels with 2 MHz spacing between them, while the classic Bluetooth
has 79 channels with 1 MHz spacing.
6.2.3.4
IEEE 802.15.6
Recent improvements in health monitoring systems shifts focus of the WPAN
to short-range, low-power and low-cost technologies. WPANs do not fulfil the
medical requirements for on-body/in-body measurements. The IEEE 802.15.6
standard supports a variety of applications including medical, consumer electro-
nics, personal entertainment, etc. [15]. It is optimized for low-power devices and
function on, in or around the human body. Most current implementation of WBAN
uses Bluetooth or ZigBee technologies. The network lifetime is very important in
WBAN as the devices are expected to execute their functions for longer periods.
In the IEEE 802.15.6 standard WBAN nodes are classified depending on the
manner they are implemented within the body as implant, body surface and
external nodes. Based on their role in the network, WBAN nodes can operate as
coordinator, relay or end nodes. The functionality of these nodes is similar to the
one in related standards: the coordinator of a WBAN is a PDA, through which all
other nodes communicate. Relay nodes serve as intermediate nodes that retranslate
received messages to other nodes. The end nodes in WBANs are capable of
implementing only their embedded functions [16].
According to IEEE 802.15.6 standard, WBANs can operate in a heterogeneous
environment, where devices supporting different standards should collaborate and
exchange data. It is necessary to be able to add or remove nodes to the network in
less than 3 s. Communication between nodes needs to be reliable even when the
person is on the move (walk, run, wave arms and others activities).
The IEEE 802.15.6 standard specifies three physical layers: narrowband (NB),
ultra-wideband (UWB) and human body communications (HBC). The choice of the
PHY layer depends on the target application (medical/non-medical, in, on and
around body). A WBAN can integrate UWB with NB broadcast to cover different
environments and support high data rate. The MAC layer in IEEE 802.15.6 controls
a channel access. The coordinator divides the entire channel into superframe
structures. The superframe comprised the same size network beacons. The coor-
dinator is also responsible for choosing the boundaries of the beacon period, con-
veying a beacon frame in each beacon period in the superframe. The MAC layer in
the IEEE 802.15.6 standard uses one of the following three access modes: beacon
mode with beacon period superframe boundaries, non-beacon mode with beacon
superframe boundaries and non-beacon mode without superframe boundaries. Full
description of the IEEE 802.15.6 can be found in [17,18] and other web sources.
6.2.3.5
IEEE 802.11
IEEE 802.11 and 802.11x refer to a family of specifications for WLAN technology,
often named Wi-Fi. They are mostly used for connecting computers, laptops and
mobile devices to the Internet through routers. However, they can be used to
establish a connection between two devices. Using a WAP device the user can
connect to a hotspot and acquire Internet access. Wi-Fi technology is a proper
144
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

choice for medical devices that are designed for connection directly to the LAN
network. However, its usage in a hospital, for purposes other than connection
between usual devices (computers, laptops and printers), might be problematic due
to the intensity of communication and the strong interferences this might cause.
The Wi-Fi standard 802.11.x has two specifications, which allow operation in the
2.4 or 5 GHz bands. Among the most popular setups is 2.4 GHz band with three
channels (1, 6, 11), each with bandwidth of 22 MHz and spacing of 25 MHz.
Table 6.3 presents an overview of standards applicable in tier 1 of stress
monitoring system. The interested reader might want to refer to a comprehensive
overview on wireless technology with applications to e-health, as well as an ana-
lysis of future trends and challenges in [19].
6.3
Stress and emotion assessment
Stress can be detected by psychological questionnaires or by measuring bodily
responses, such as cortisol and epinephrine levels, or physiological signals such as
ECG, GSR, skin temperature and EEG. In brief, the psychological questionnaires
are mainly used to identify stress in terms of behavioural changes. The biochemical
measurement techniques are intrusive and consequently are not convenient for
continuous use, except in some specific medical conditions and in few high-risk
professions, such as astronauts and divers, where the blood samples are taken
regularly for other reasons. The acquisition of physiological signals is less intrusive
and therefore is somehow more acceptable to applications, which require frequent
measurements or continuous monitoring. Therefore, contemporary approaches for
Table 6.3
Overview of standards applicable in tier 1
Technology
ZigBee
Bluetooth
v.4 BLE
Wi-Fi
UWB
NB
HBC
Standards
802.15.4
802.15.1
802.11a/b/g
802.15.6
Frequency
2.4 GHz
ISM
2.4 GHz
ISM
2.4 GHz
3.1–10.6 GHz
MICS
WMTS
ISM band
27 MHz
Data rate
250 kbps
1 Mbps
54 Mbps
110–480 Mbps 10 kbps to
10 Mbps
1 Mbps
Coverage
10–100 m
10 m
30–120 m
5–10 m
1–5 m
Up to
20cm
Number of
nodes
65,000
7
2007
256
256
256
Modulation
O-QPSK,
BPSKþ
ASK
GFSK
OFDM,
DSSS
OFDM,
BPSK,
QPSK
BPSK,
QPSK,
GMSK
FSK
Battery life
Years
Months
Hours
Months
Months/
years
Months
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
145

the identification of stress, negative emotional states, depression and mental dis-
orders are inclined towards the use of physiological signals.
6.3.1
Stress assessment procedure
In physiological studies, various experimental methods and computational techni-
ques for the classification of stress are used. The classification accuracy reported in
relevant studies varies considerably depending on the experimental protocol, sen-
sors and analysis methods. In addition, the physiological responses to the stressors
differ among people, depending on their capability and aptitude to cope with stress.
In this regard, the definition of a baseline, which quantitatively defines the levels of
stress among different people, is required. Furthermore, the definition of an effec-
tive methodology and technology for stress assessment (in the various circum-
stances described earlier) requires careful consideration of practical aspects and
factors. At least one needs to investigate the
1.
Experimental design (protocol) that defines the stressors, data for analysis
(psychological questionnaires and physiological parameters), participants and
experimental procedure.
2.
Data acquisition that includes the design and implementation of the measuring
system (sensors, data acquisition modules and other devices).
3.
Feature extraction is a type of dimensional reduction that efficiently converts
raw data into a set of useful descriptors. Afterwards, feature selection can be
performed in order to refine the feature vector and keep only the informative
and complementary descriptors.
4.
Modelling and analysis methods that select appropriate machine-learning
algorithms and assess their performance based on an evaluation data set with
known ground true annotations.
Speaking generally, stressors are external or internal stimulators that cause psy-
chological and/or physical stress [20]. Researchers often classify stressors accord-
ing to their frequency or direction. Various experimental protocols have been
defined in the literature in order to stimulate cognitive, emotional and physiological
body functions. Some widely spread experiments as Stroop test, Montreal image
stress task, Mensa test or basic arithmetic questions under time limits including
math or decision-making tasks, memory retention and other high workload mental
tasks. In the following we briefly overview few indicative examples which chart
different ways to address the stress-level assessment problem.
In a recent work, assessment of mental stress was based on research related to
HR and HRV. The changes in HR and HRV in a group of 28 subjects at rest and
with mental stressors were studies in [21]. The results indicated a higher sympa-
thetic activity with a mental task when compared to rest condition.
In [22] the study participants were confronted with mental stress while
involved in three different activities: sitting, standing or walking. The sensor data
from an accelerometer, ECG and GSR sensors were collected for the three physical
activity conditions and with three experimental settings (a baseline measurement
146
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

with no stressor, measurement during the mental tasks and a recovery segment). It
achieved 92.4% accuracy of mental stress classification for 10-fold cross-validation
and 80.9% accuracy for between-subject’s classification thanks to the activity
information obtained from the accelerometer. These results maintain that the use of
accelerometer data boosts the mental stress detection in a mobile environment.
Moreover, accelerometers are already available in most contemporary mobile
phones, tablets and other portable devices.
Jovanov et al. [23] proposed wireless intelligent sensor system for synchro-
nized monitoring of a group of subjects. The system collected HR data from the
military trainees during several days of training in order to measure HRV changes
before, during and after stress exposure.
Khan et al. [26] developed a stress monitoring system aimed at monitoring the
user’s stress level throughout the day. The system can gather data from GSR, ECG,
skin temperature and EEG sensors before and after a stress event. The system
permits an individual to monitor alterations in his or her stress levels and provide
feedback to help keep an optimal health status by avoiding high stresses.
6.3.2
Emotion recognition
Emotions are often assessed through analysis of the person’s emotional expression
or/and physiological signals. Most studies on emotion assessment are based on
observation and correct interpretation of verbal and non-verbal behaviour messages
as analysis of facial expressions, gestures and speech to decide a person’s emo-
tional state. Recent technological advances have motivated many researchers to
evaluate emotion by combining heterogeneous data streams from various physio-
logical sensors.
Self-assessment manikin (SAM) is a widely used non-verbal assessment
technique for measuring the pleasure, arousal and dominance, which presents a
person’s response to a great diversity of stimuli [24]. The SAM has been effectively
used to assess emotional reaction in a variety of situations, including reaction to
videos, pictures, images, sounds and more. Participants are asked to rate emotions
in the three major dimensions: valence, arousal and dominance. The SAM ranges
from a smiling, happy figure to a sulking unhappy one in valence dimension, and
ranges from an impassioned to a relaxed, sleepy figure in the arousal dimension.
The dominance dimension presents variations in control with changes in the size of
SAM – a large size of the figure corresponds to maximum control in the situation.
It was experimentally confirmed by Bradley and Lang [24] that the SAM is
an effective method for evaluating feeling states and the changes due to time,
therapeutic intervention or other conditions affecting emotional reactions to con-
textual stimuli.
The multimodal data set for analysis of human emotional states is presented in
[25]. The database contains EEG recordings of 32 participants, where each parti-
cipant watched and rated their emotional response to 40 music videos in terms of
the level of arousal, valence, like/dislike, dominance and familiarity. In addition,
data from various physiological sensors as GSR, electrooculography (EOG), EMG
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
147

and plethysmograph were gathered. Stimuli selection method – leading to division
of selected stimuli regarding the emotions in four quadrants of the valence-arousal
space: low arousal/low valence, low arousal/high valence, high arousal/low
valence and high arousal/high valence – was proposed. For each video, it was
required to calculate a normalized arousal and valence score by taking the mean
values divided by the standard deviation. The effective extraction of the targeted
emotional states can be reported by the significant differences between the con-
ditions in terms of the ratings of valence and arousal. Part of the hundreds of
features extracted from EEG and the physiological signals are average skin resis-
tance, average of derivative, average and standard deviation of HR, HRV and inter
beat intervals, average respiration signal, greatest breath, eye blinking rate, spec-
tral power for each EEG electrode, etc. Experimental results were reported for
single-trial classification of arousal, valence and like/dislike rating using EEG,
peripheral and MCA modalities. The database used in this study is publicly
available for research purposes [39].
6.4
Use cases
Here we distinguish between two main methodological setups for stress assessment
and monitoring, namely stationary and mobile. These setups are independent of the
intended use of data, specific application domain, provide dissimilar functionality,
make use of different data acquisition strategies and different communication
channels, and have different purpose.
Although in the following we discuss the stationary and mobile setups sepa-
rately, we then emphasize that these setups complement each other and can be used
jointly for stress-level monitoring with the idea to obtain better accuracy and better
understanding of the effects of stress build-up. Such an improved understanding
facilitates the elaboration of more efficient stress management strategies, and
countermeasures for prevention of negative consequences due to short-term or
long-term explosion to substantial stress.
As presented in Figure 6.3 multi-sensor multimodal data such as EEG, ECG,
EMG, GSR, signals combined with measurements of HR, HRV, BP, etc., are
obtained with appropriate sensors and then transferred to a storage repository,
which could be local or Internet-based cloud storage service.
6.4.1
Stationary setup
The stationary setup makes use of laboratory equipment, including a specialized
stand. The last limits its applicability mainly to periodic evaluation of cumulative
stress level. Specifically, it requires that people
1.
visit the lab according to predefined schedule,
2.
fill in self-assessment tests,
3.
attend the measurements with specialized stress-level assessment stand,
148
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

4.
provide blood and urine samples and
5.
get involved in a Q&A session with a psychologist.
Such an integrative approach to stress-level assessment requires specialized facility
and medical personnel. This is the reason for the low admission capacity of such
facilities (as a single stand and a doctor can handle just few persons per day), which
reflects high cost of operation. Both the need of specialized equipment and low
admission capacity limit scalability. Conditions for integrative approach are
becoming expensive.
On the other hand, the stationary setup also possesses a number of advantages,
such as
●
permits a wider range, various types and large number of sensors to be used
(including 32- or 64-channel EEG), and to implement multichannel signal
recording;
●
sensors are attached for a limited amount of time, so comport and restriction of
movements are not of major concern;
●
there are no strict restrictions about power consumption and other technical
aspects such as availability of computational resources, operative memory,
storage, wireless data transfer, communication bandwidth, etc.;
●
there is no need of real-time processing of data, and therefore data can be
processed offline, and correlated and analysed with both online and offline
methods;
●
results of the objective test on the stand are complementary and can be easily
combined with self-assessment questionnaires, Q&A sessions with medical
staff, invasive medical exams (blood, urine samples), etc.; and
●
equipment complexity and cost are not of primary concern.
Since comfort and mobility are not of primary concern during the test, the biome-
dical signals could be acquired in a wire or wireless manner and then collected in a
data concentrator and gateway (usually both implemented via a PC), which trans-
fers these data processed or unprocessed to a storage repository (either local or
Internet based).
While the use of smart sensors, wireless transmission of data, data aggregation
and compression is not mandatory, it can facilitate the optimization of data col-
lection and provide some convenience to both medical staff and person under
evaluation.
6.4.2
Mobile setup
Mobile setup envisions opportunities for lightweight periodic stress assessment
evaluation but more importantly for real-time stress-level monitoring, meaning that
data acquisition is implemented while a person is performing activities related to
her/his professional obligations.
The most significant advantage is that data is collected during field activities,
which allows awareness about environmental conditions, registering peaks of stress
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
149

stimuli and recording behaviours in real situations. These data are essential for the
creation of person-specific baseline models and broad person-independent statis-
tical models, which link stress and behaviours. Based on such models, one can infer
for subsequent events and thus provide probabilistic prognoses of situation devel-
opment or receive alerts, suggestions and recommendations for preventive action.
A practical use of such prognoses could be for workforce management during
mission (firefighters, military, rescue crews, etc.) retrieving or reallocating work-
force when predicted risks are unacceptably high or pull out workforce when the
prognosticated development of events does not favour successful completion of the
specific mission.
Due to the requirement sensors and equipment to be worn for many hours per
day, these have to be miniature, preferably integrated in clothes, light weight,
convenient to carry, should not require maintenance or service during workday and
should not obstruct or delay body and limb movement. The sensors and equipment
have to be fast to wear and should remain correctly positioned and firmly attached
during extreme environmental conditions and intense physical activities.
Therefore, because in mobile setups people need to wear sensors, equipment
and carry these for many hours, the esthetical design, comfort of movement and
user acceptability are issues of major concern. These requirements impose
numerous additional restrictions and technological challenges, such as miniature
sensors and lightweight equipment size, low-power consumption during all opera-
tional modes. These are in a direct relation to the technological feasibility and
desired functionality implementation trade-offs.
The mobile setup also favours the use of miniature, smart, wireless sensors,
which transmit data to a data concentrator and logger. The data concentrator aligns
the data and relays these to a portable mobile device. For instance, an ordinary
smartphone could serve this purpose (cf. Figure 6.3). The mobile device provides
connectivity and data transfer to the Internet by making use of the available 3G/4G
wireless infrastructure.
However, the most significant restriction of the mobile setup is that it has to
deal with limited number of sensors as only certain types of sensors are feasible.
The requirements for the sensors to remain firmly attached, withstand mobility
and intense activities, to have low-power consumption, to be comfortable to wear
for many hours, etc., lead to simplification and restricting the number of sensor
channels. This limitation certainly leads to the exclusion of multichannel EEG
and BP measurements. In some cases, few EEG channels can be integrated
directly in a helmet; however, the use of EEG signals in mobile setup is less
attractive due to the need of dealing with interferences form EMG, EOG and
other signals.
The limited sensor set and the restrictions to battery size and weight impose
that the mobile setup heavily depends on remote processing facilities, which are
outfitted with representative statistical models. The remote processing is based on
client–server architecture, and the recent advances of the IoT concept, the wider
availability of cloud storage and cloud computing services that chart the future
trends of technological support.
150
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

6.4.3
Recent projects
In the following, we briefly focus our attention on a few recent and ongoing
research and technology development projects, which address interesting use cases
and make use of contemporary technology for health, emotion or stress monitoring.
As already mentioned, the real-time personal stress monitoring systems are
applicable during training and psychophysiological evaluation of military staff,
firelighters, rescue crews, etc. Such systems facilitate improving accuracy of
diagnosis and treatment of certain psychological disorders, among which are
depression, stress-related behaviour and eating disorders, bipolar disorder or other
mental disorders. In this regard, there is a great variety of ongoing studies and
commercial projects in the field of remote personal health systems. In Jovanov
et al. [23] a wireless intelligent sensor system for synchronized monitoring of a
group of subjects was proposed. The system collected HR data from the military
trainers during several days of training in order to measure HRV changes before,
during and after stress exposure.
A related study [26] developed stress monitoring system, which is responsible
for monitoring the user’s stress level throughout the day. The system gathers data
from GSR, ECG, skin temperature and EEG sensors before and after stress events.
Such a system allows an individual to closely observe alterations in his or her stress
levels and gives feedback which could help to maintain the well-being by avoiding
high stresses.
In the following we mention a few indicative research projects that rely on
related technology:
●
The Centre for Integration of Medical and Innovative Technology (CIMIT)
supports early-stage collaborative research projects for improving health care,
with accent on devices, procedures and diagnosis systems [40]. The main
objective of the centre is quick implementation of emerging care technologies
into commercial products. CIMIT’s traumatic stress disorders programme funds
projects related to diagnosis and treatment of post-traumatic stress disorders.
●
The OPTIMI project, funded by FP7, developed an Internet-based computer-
ized cognitive behavioural therapy programme for preventing depression, with
or without physiological and activity sensors [41].
●
Projects funded by the European Commission under FP7 – Interstress, Mon-
arca and Psyche – aim to develop personal health systems that would improve
the treatment of bipolar disorders, depression and psychological stress [42].
●
The Code Blue project of Harvard University developed various medical
applications based on WSN technologies. Some of the potential clinic appli-
cations are trauma care and intensive care monitoring, motion analysis studies
in Parkinson’s disease [43].
●
PlayMancer project, funded by FP7-ICT programme, integrated state-of-the-
art games research, cognitive behavioural therapy and e-learning approaches in
order to develop a series of serious game modules for application in physical
rehabilitation and therapeutic support and lifestyle management programmes
for behavioural and addictive disorders [27].
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
151

●
The Human Brain Project (HBP) aims to develop six ICT platforms, which
form the core of future human brain researches. The key ideas of the HBP are
to acquire and assess EEG data, to simulate and build models of the brain, to
develop brain-inspired computing and robotics and to form a global scientific
community in fields of neuroscience, ICT and medicine. Users are stimulated
to explore the platforms and build interactive ‘collabs’ as part of the HBP
collaboration [44].
6.4.4
SLADE application scenario
Likewise other machine learning tasks, all research and technology development
activities on stress-level assessment depend on the availability of specific resources,
such as data sets and recordings, which are representative for a particular application
scenario. To this end, various stress-related databases containing primarily skin
temperature, HR, ECG, EMG and skin resistance-related signals were collected [28–
31]. Furthermore, [32] reports on the design and implementation of a biomedical
database, referred to as Stress Level and Emotional State Assessment Database
(SLADE), which consists of synchronized recordings of EEG, ECG and GSR sig-
nals. There is empirical evidence that when combined with EEG recordings, elicited
via purposely selected stimuli, these physiological signals are beneficial to stress-
level assessment. In Figure 6.4, we show the overall diagram of the data acquisition
setup used during the development of the SLADE data set. The figure shows a
particular implementation of the stationary scenario outlined in Section 6.4.1 and the
links between tier 1 and tier 2 in the conceptual diagram illustrated in Figure 6.3.
Preliminary analysis of the experimental results indicated that the combined
use of EEG, ECG and GSR signals benefits the recognition of emotional states and
the momentary cognitive load [33]. Subsequent studies on the mobile and sta-
tionary setups were reported in [33,34].
EEG
ECG
GSR
NI USB 6009
External
storage
Open BCI
Laptop
PC
Figure 6.4
Overall diagram of the data acquisition setup used in the SLADE scenario
152
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

The implementation of the stationary setup (Figure 6.4) and creation of the
SLADE database were accompanied by some challenges, which are summarized
in three categories: (1) related to the object of study, (2) sensor-related and
(3) methodology related. The first category comprises difficulties related to unrelia-
bility and instability of human subjects. On one side are problems related to the
inconsistency of human behaviour – we acquire signals associated with a particular
scenario; however, there are always some competitive/matching activities that ham-
per analysis of the results. On the other side, standing problems with variability of
human physiological and psychological conditions – momentary and overall condi-
tion influence the biosensor readings. The second category of complications is related
with the sensors. The sensor sets depend on the setup (e.g. need to be less intrusive in
mobile setups or when prolonged data collection is required) and certain human
behaviours might provoke attachment problems – positioning, contact reliability, etc.
The third category of issues arises on the side of methodology. There is little research
on non-intrusive stress-level assessment and monitoring. Non-intrusive methods are
less studied and we still lack an understanding about the strength of correlation
between stress and some physiological readings, such as EEG, ECG and GSR.
Furthermore, stress-level assessment depends on robust statistical models. The
development of these models is conditioned on the availability of representative
and reliable data sets. The aforementioned difficulties, related to sensors and
human inconstancy, lead to significant intersession variability in the collected
biomedical data. This imposes the need of multisession data acquisition in various
scenarios in order to capture all major sources of variability and the important
features of biomedical signals. These challenges and methodological issues are
among the main factors, which impede the acquisition of large representative data
sets and subsequently the development of reliable stress-level monitoring systems.
6.5
Future technology in support of stress monitoring
and management
Based on the presented overview of recent technological developments and the latest
research advances in nano-mechanics, electronics, computer science, pharmacology,
etc., we anticipate the emergence of novel technology, which will transform the
manner in which challenges related to stress and emotional disorders are monitored
and mitigated. In the following, we speculate about the transformations that will
happen on the short term, within the next 5 years, and in the near future, within the
next 20 years.
Nowadays, we already observe the transition of above-mentioned BAN to the
ubiquitous IoT networks, which consists of heterogeneous miniature unobtrusive
wearable smart sensors, smart patches placed directly on the skin, user-friendly
interfaces through mobile and wearable devices, etc., and give rise to more
advanced cloud-based services. Besides the functionalities already mentioned in
the previous sections, these services provide context awareness, automated alerts,
opportunities for remote monitoring and management of crisis situations and
health-related risks. The improved data security [35], the vast storage capacity and
the high computational power of cloud technology make it the preferable choice for
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
153

emerging technologies and we believe this trend will continue, especially in the
view of the anticipated widespread deployment to point-of-care services [36].
We anticipate that in the next decades hospitals and healthcare institutions will
migrate their local data repositories and archives to cloud-based services due to the
improved security and the lower cost for maintenance, but also because of
the opportunities to acquire most of the body measurements remotely, while people
are on the move or at their homes. The wideband communication infrastructure
needed for that purpose is already available. Hospitals and healthcare institutions
already make use of high-throughput communication, tele-medicine and relevant
services. Furthermore, in the past five years, we observed global proliferation of
high-speed optical fibre Internet for home use and the widespread availability of
3G/4G wireless networks, which provide high bandwidth and security required for
bio signal and personal data transmission.
In the near future, we anticipate the widespread use of a wide range of
implantable smart sensors, in-body autonomous mobile sensors, ingestible smart
sensors, etc., which will serve for short-term medical examinations or for long-term
monitoring of body functions. This is especially important for stress management
and coping with emotional disorders as these require long-term commitment of
efforts. Nowadays we are already witnessing the emergence of conceptual proto-
types and early technological demonstrators of swallowed smart sensors that
monitor for drug intake, diabetic conditions, etc. Since prolonged operation of such
sensors depends on the availability of power supply, such devices either harvest
energy from the human body or from the environment. Electromagnetic and
ultrasound technological solutions for power transmission are already available.
In addition, proof-of-concept prototype technology of wearables, which harvest
energy of the environment [13], was already demonstrated. Such technological
advances and the availability of commercial prototypes that generate their energy
with the help of human body open opportunities for the implementation of long-
term (and when necessary continuous) monitoring of stress, emotional disorders,
based on various biological indications and measurements [37].
Furthermore, in the near future we also expect the emergence of wearable and
implantable technology for coping with stress and emotional disorders. Specifi-
cally, in certain cases monitoring devices will be enhanced with functionality
which will facilitate the real-time application of stimulus in support of the treat-
ment of specific medical conditions or for the purpose of stress relief and rehabi-
litation. For instance, the wearable monitoring system that receives information
from various wearable and/or in-body sensors will also possess functionality to
actuate stress-relief stimulus that help coping with stress, overcoming depression,
improving mental balance, etc.
In future, we hope that the advances in nanotechnology will make possible the
emergency of nanobots that circulate in the blood stream, monitor particular che-
mical and hormone misbalances, and provide prompt alerts of increased risk or
crisis situation. This nanobots, together with evolved technology based on the smart
patch, wearable devices and sensors, wearable communication technology, etc.,
will most probably converge to some sort of personal wearable ambient intelligence
154
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

systems, which provide continuous monitoring and preventive functionality. Such
functionality would enable health problems to be diagnosed and treated in a timely
manner before they escalate to organ-level or body-level failures. Such technology
will be of great help to prevention of stress-provoked medical conditions, emo-
tional and mental disorders, cardiovascular diseases, etc.
Another promising research direction is the development of technology for
unobtrusive remote data acquisition of biosignals (EEG, ECG, HR, skin tempera-
ture, etc.). Such technology will be in symbiosis with the above-mentioned perso-
nal wearable ambient intelligence systems and will extend the range of available
functionalities and intelligence. In fact, in the recent years few technological
breakthroughs in camera sensitivity already made feasible HR and skin temperature
to be measured from distance of metres. There are promising developments
towards the remote acquisition of ECG signals in an unobtrusive and transparent
way to the human way. We imagine that the intensive research efforts on brain–
computer interfaces will also make possible the remote accusation of EEG activity,
hopefully only after consent from the person [38].
We hope that these and other key technology developments will provide the
means for holistic monitoring and management strategies for the average citizen,
which will enable stress-related medical conditions to be diminished, significantly
improving the productivity of people and also improving their quality of life.
In conclusion, we would like to make explicit our comprehension that in future
the main limitations in stress monitoring and management, and the relevant tech-
nology for monitoring of emotional and mental health, will not be technological. In
this regard, human society will need to address ethical and legal issues, to develop
consensus and workout appropriate legislation, which guarantees the privacy and
security of personal data, biosignals and all relevant information. Only then society
will accept the widespread applicability of such technology beyond the few medi-
cal conditions that badly need it. In this sense, the main obstacle for the imple-
mentation of personal ambient intelligence systems and smart monitoring and
preventive healthcare services will depend on the readiness of the average citizen to
accept the widespread use of such technology. This formulates a clear message to
legislators and policymakers to timely make the necessary first steps and consider
the consequences of such technological developments, which would definitely
bring many advantages but will also impose significant new risks to each individual
and the entire modern society.
References
[1]
Hey S., Sghil H., ‘Psycho-physiological stress monitoring using mobile and
continuous pulse transit’. eTELEMED 2011: The Third International Conference
on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine. France, 2011, pp. 126–129
[2]
Terathongkum S., ‘Relationships among stress, blood pressure, and heart
rate variability in meditators’. Sangthong Terathongkum. 2006, http://
scholarscompass.vcu.edu/etd/1497 [Accessed September 1, 2016]
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
155

[3]
Papousek I., Schulter G., Premsbeger E., ‘Dissociated autonomic regulation
during stress and physical complaints’. Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
2002; 52, pp. 257–266
[4]
Abdullah A., Hassan U., ‘Design and development of an emotional stress
indicator (ESI) kit’. IEEE Conf. on Sustainable Utilization and Development
in Engineering and Technology 2012. Kuala Lumpur, 2012, pp. 253–257
[5]
Villarejo, Viqueira M., Zapirain B., Zorrilla A., ‘A stress sensor based on
galvanic skin response (GSR) controlled by ZigBee’. Sensors. Basel,
Switzerland, 2012, 12.5, pp. 6075–6101
[6]
Subhani A., Xia L., Malik A., ‘EEG signals to measure mental stress’.
Proceedings of International Conference on Psychological Sciences and
Behaviors. China, 2012, pp. 6–10
[7]
Milenkovic´ A., Otto C., Jovanov E., ‘Wireless sensor networks for personal
health monitoring: Issues and an implementation’. Computer Communica-
tions. Elsevier (Elsevier Science Publishers B. V. Amsterdam, The Nether-
lands). 2006, 29(13–14), pp. 2521–2533.doi: 10.1016/j.comcom.2006.02.011
[8]
Ullah S., Higgins, Braem H., Latre B., et al., ‘A comprehensive survey of
wireless body area networks: On PHY, MAC, and network layers solutions’.
Journal of Medical Systems (Springer Netherlands). 2012 36(3), pp. 1–30.
doi:10.1007/s10916-010-9571-3
[9]
DeVaul R., Sung M., Gips J., Pentland A., ‘MIThril 2003: Applications and
architecture’. Proceedings of Seventh IEEE International Symposium on
Wearable Computers. 2003, pp. 4–11. doi: 10.1109/ISWC.2003.1241386
[10]
Han D., Lim J., ‘Smart home energy management system using IEEE
802.15.4 and ZigBee’. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. 2010,
56(3), pp. 1403–1410. doi:10.1109/TCE.2010.5606276
[11]
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc, ‘Part 15.1: Wire-
less medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) specifications
for wireless personal area networks (WPANs)’, pp. 1–2, IEEE Std
802.15.1TM-214 June 2005, ISBN 0-7381-4708-7, SS95323
[12]
Somani N., Patel Y., ‘ZigBee: A low power wireless technology for indus-
trial applications’. International Journal of Control Theory and Computer
Modelling (IJCTCM). 2012, 2(3)
[13]
Hu P., Zhang P.-G., Rostami M., Ganesan D., ‘Braidio: An integrated active-
passive radio for mobile devices with asymmetric energy budgets’.
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2016. Brazil, pp. 384–397
[14]
McGrath M., Scanaill C., Sensor technologies healthcare wellness and
environmental applications. Apress, Berkeley, CA; 2013
[15]
IEEE. 2013. ‘IEEE 802.15 Wireless Next Generation Standing Committee’.
Available
from
http://www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG6.html
[Accessed
September 8, 2016]
[16]
Movassaghi S., Abolhasan M., Lipman J, Smith D., Jamalipour A., ‘Wireless
body area networks: A survey’. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials.
2014, 16(3), pp. 1658–1686. doi: 10.1109/SURV.2013.121313.00064
156
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[17]
Saleem Sh., Ullah S. and Kwak K., ‘A study of IEEE 802.15.4 security
framework for wireless body area networks’. Sensors. 2011, 11 (2), 1383–
1395. [Accessed February 10, 2015], doi: 10.3390/s110201383
[18]
Kurunathan J., ‘Study and overview on WBAN under IEEE 802.15.6’.
Journal of Engineering, Porto, 2015, pp. 11–21
[19]
Khaddar M. A., El Harroud H., Boulmalf M., Elkoutbi M., Habbani A.,
‘Emerging wireless technologies in e-health trends, challenges, and frame-
work design issues’. International Conference on Multimedia Computing
and Systems (ICMCS), Tangier, 2012, pp. 440–445. doi: 10.1109/ICMCS.
2012.6320276
[20]
Thawabieh A., Qaisy L., ‘Assessing stress among university students’.
American International Journal of Contemporary Research, USA, February
2012, pp. 110–116
[21]
Taelman J., Vandeput S., Spaepen A., Van Huffel S., ‘Influence of mental
stress on heart rate and heart rate variability’, Proceedings of 4th European
Conference of the International Federation for Medical and Biological
Engineering, Belgium, Springer; 2008, pp. 1366–1369
[22]
Sun F., Kuo C., Cheng H., Buthpitiya Sh., Collins P., Griss M., ‘Activity-
aware mental stress detection using physiological sensors’. International
Conference on Mobile Computing, Applications, and Services, Springer,
2010, pp. 211–230
[23]
Jovanov E., Lords A., Raskovic D., Cox P., Adhami R., Andrasik F., ‘Stress
monitoring using a distributed wireless intelligent sensor system’. IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, June 2003, pp. 49–55.
doi: 10.1109/MEMB.2003.1213626
[24]
Bradley M., Lang P., ‘Measuring emotion: The self-assessment manikin and
the semantic differential’. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry. 1994, pp. 49–59
[25]
Koelstra S., Muehl C., Soleymani M., et al., ‘DEAP: A database for emotion
analysis using physiological signals’. IEEE Transaction on Affective Com-
puting, Special Issue on Naturalistic Affect Resources for System Building
and Evaluation, 2011, pp. 1–14
[26]
Khan F., Bourgon V., Kathrotia S., Lavoie E., Hendren L., ‘Using JavaScript
and WebCL for numerical computations: A comparative study of native and
web technologies’. Proceedings of the 10th ACM Symposium on Dynamic
languages, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 91–102
[27]
Conconi A., ‘PlayMancer: A serious gaming 3D environment’. International
Conference on Automated Solutions for Cross Media Content and Multi-
Channel Distribution, 11, 2008
[28]
Akbas A., ‘Evaluation of the physiological data indicating the dynamic
stress level of drivers’. Scientific Research and Essays, ISSN 1992-2248,
6(2), 2011, pp. 430–439. doi: 10.5897/SRE10.943
[29]
Mark R., Schluter P., Moody G., Devlin, P., Chernoff, D., ‘An annotated
ECG database for evaluating arrhythmia detectors’. IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering. 1982, 29(8), pp. 600
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
157

[30]
Moody G., Mark R., ‘The MIT-BIH arrhythmia database on CD-ROM and
software for use with it’. Computers in Cardiology. 1990, 17, pp. 185–188
[31]
Goldberger A., Amaral L., Glass L., et al., ‘Physio Bank, Physio Toolkit,
and Physio Net: Components of a new research resource for complex
physiologic signals’. Circulation. 2000, 101(23), pp. 215–220. doi: 10.1161/
01.CIR.101.23.e215
[32]
Markova V., Dicheva C., Feradov F., Kalinin Y., Ganchev T., ‘SLADE – Stress
level and emotional state assessment database: phase 1’. Computer Science and
Technologies. Technical University of Varna, Varna, 2016, 1, pp. 60–68
[33]
Markova V., Kalinkov K., Ganchev T., ‘Automated stress level monitoring
in mobile setup’. Proceedings of the IITI-2017, September 14–16, 2017,
Varna, Bulgaria
[34]
Ganchev, T., Markova, V., Lefterov, I., Kalinin Y., ‘Overall design of the
SLADE data acquisition system’. Proceedings of the IITI-2017, September
14–16, 2017, Varna, Bulgaria
[35]
Bonaci T., Calo R., Chizeck J., ‘App stores for the brain: Privacy and
security in brain-computer interfaces’. IEEE Technology and Society
Magazine. 2015, 34(2), pp. 32–39. doi: 10.1109/MTS.2015.2425551
[36]
Malkary G., ‘Healthcare without bounds: Point of care computing for nur-
sing 2012’. Spyglass Consulting Group, 2012. Available online: http://www.
spyglass-consulting.com/Abstracts/Spyglass_PCOMP_Nursing_2012.pdf
[37]
Webb A. K., Parks P. D., ‘Psychophysiological monitoring: An approach for
the diagnosis and treatment of mental health disorders’. IEEE Pulse, 2016,
7(1), pp. 31–34. doi: 10.1109/MPUL.2015.2498518
[38]
Koivuniemi A., ‘Informed consent for deep brain stimulation: Increasing
transparency for psychiatric neurosurgery patients’. IEEE Technology and
Society Magazine, 34(2), pp. 64–70
[39]
Koelstra S., Muehl C., Soleymani M., et al., Deapdatasets. Available from
http://www.eecs.qmul.ac.uk/mmv/datasets/deap/ [Accessed September 1, 2016]
[40]
http://www.cimit.org/about.html [Accessed September 1, 2016]
[41]
https://dx.doi.org/10.2147/NDT.S93315 [Accessed August 18, 2016]
[42]
http://www.coi.pitt.edu/%5C/PHS/index.htm [Accessed August 20, 2016]
[43]
http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/~mdw/proj/codeblue [Accessed August 18, 2016]
[44]
https://www.humanbrainproject.eu/platforms-overview [Accessed
August
19, 2016]
Further reading
[1]
Kim J., Andre E., ‘Emotion recognition based on physiological changes in
music listening’. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence. 2008, 30(12), pp. 2067–2082
[2]
Kreibig S., ‘Autonomic nervous system activity in emotion: A review’.
Biological Psychology. 2010, 84, pp. 394–421
[3]
Lang P., Bradley M., ‘Emotion and the motivational brain’. Biological
Psychology. 2010, 84, pp. 437–450
158
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[4]
Tyng C., Amin H., Malik A., Saad M., ‘EEG spectral analysis and functional
connectivity during learning of science concepts’. 2016 6th International
Conference on Intelligent and Advanced Systems (ICIAS), Kuala Lumpur,
2016, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/ICIAS.2016.7824051
[5]
Rainville P., Bechara A., Naqvi N., Damasio A., ‘Basic emotions are asso-
ciated with distinct patterns of cardiorespiratory activity’. International
Journal of Psychophysiology. 2006, 61, pp. 5–18
[6]
Dalgleish T., Power M., Handbook of Cognition and Emotion. John Wiley &
Sons: England, 1999
[7]
Rangayyan R., Biomedical Signal Analysis: A Case-Study Approach. John
Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 2002
[8]
Konar A., Chakrabory A., Emotion Recognition: A Pattern Analysis
Approach. John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey, 2015
List of abbreviations
ANS
Autonomic nervous system
BAN
Body area network
BP
Blood pressure
BPSKþASK
Binary phase shift keying þ Amplitude shift keying
DSSS
Direct-sequence spread spectrum
ECG
Electrocardiogram
EEG
Encephalography
FFD
Full-function device
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
FSK
Frequency-shift keying
GFSK
Gaussian frequency-shift keying
GSR
Galvanic skin response
HF
High frequency
HR
Heart rate
HRV
Heart rate variability
ICT
Information and communications technology
IoT
Internet of Things
LF
Low frequency
MCA
Multimedia content analysis
MICS
Medical implant communication service
OFDM
Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
OSI
Open Systems Interconnect
O-QPSK
Offset quadrature phase-shift keying
PDA
Personal digital assistant
PIN
Personal identification number
Technological support to stress-level monitoring
159

PNS
Parasympathetic nervous system
PS
Personal server
RFD
Reduced-function device
SAM
Self-assessment manikin
SCL
Skin conductance level
SCR
Skin conductance response
SNS
Sympathetic nervous system
STFT
Short-Time Fourier Transform
WBAN
Wireless body area network
WLAN
Wireless local area network
WMTS
Web map tile service
WPAN
Wireless personal area network
WSN
Wireless sensor networks
Biographies
Valentina Markova is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Computing and
Automation, Technical University of Varna, Bulgaria (Habil. in 2016, PhD degree
in 2007). Since year 2015, she is the head of Data Acquisition Systems Laboratory
at the Technical University of Varna. Her research interest is in the areas of circuit
and signal theory, digital filters, data acquisition systems, biomedicine, computer
design and modelling and their applications. Markova participated in over 15
national and international research projects, co-authored over 60 scientific pub-
lications and 3 textbooks.
She is a member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
and member of the National Technical Union – Varna. Currently she serves in
executive committee of the IEEE Bulgaria Section.
Todor Ganchev is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Computing and
Automation, Technical University of Varna, Bulgaria (Habil. in 2014, PhD degree
in 2005). Since year 2012, he is the head of the Applied Signal Processing
Laboratory at the Technical University of Varna. His research interest is in the
areas of digital signal processing, machine learning and their applications in com-
putational bioacoustics, biometrics, bioinformatics, speech and audio technology.
Todor Ganchev participated in over 20 RTD projects co-financed by the FP5, FP6,
FP7, LLR, COST, LIFEþ, H2020 programmes of the European Commission,
co-authored over 150 scientific publications and 2 books. In November 2013, he
was awarded with the ‘Joachim Adis Prize for Interdisciplinary Tropical Ecology’
for outstanding achievements in the area of computational bioacoustics. Since year
2010, Todor Ganchev is a senior member of the Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers (IEEE).
160
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Chapter 7
Big data healthcare system to improve
healthcare information searching in the Internet
Mariya Savova Evtimova1
Abstract
The chapter represents a new model for healthcare system that is suitable for big
data. The system contributes to enhanced living environments by providing a
medical information searching to the users. To make the system suitable for per-
sonalized searching of information, a model for user profile is presented. In the
chapter is also described a new reasoner that uses fuzzy logic and probability theory
with respect to the big data.
7.1
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to present new improvements of healthcare system as a
part of enhanced living environments that will help people to find more correct
information about their health in the Internet.
Semantics science uses the meaning and relationship between symbols, words
and phrases. Nowadays semantic is studied in many research reports for searching
information and especially for big data. Big data include size, velocity, variety and
value of the data. Researches in big data could be divided in storage, capture,
access, sharing, transfer, analysis and visualization.
Many reports for semantic are using healthcare data and the most common
ones are for search and interpretation of big data. Those reports are related to
semantic information retrieval systems. The problem discussed is about the quality
of the information represented to the end-user. That led to new concept where
information is used for knowledge retrieval. Improvements of the healthcare sys-
tems make more appropriate diagnostic when using data from the patients for
interpretation of the diseases. A result of the new generation of the healthcare
systems is the accurate returned information to the user of the system.
1Department of Programming and Computer Technologies, Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria

The purpose of the work in this direction is to analyse the methods of knowl-
edge extraction in the domain of healthcare from Internet resources. The research
presents semantic agent for personalized searching in healthcare.
Multi-agent systems are a part of distributed artificial intelligence (DAI). They
present new methods of analysis, creation of models and their implementation in
complex applications. Nowadays, most of the applications need distributed man-
agement among autonomous agents to improve their performance [1]. Intelligent
agents are able to help the user to find the filtered information in the web, sum-
marize the data learnt by the user and make recommendations to the consumers.
Consequently, it is important for the semantic search system to be realized with
agents. Agents allow the system [2]
●
to work with big data,
●
to learn from their environment and
●
to return relevant results.
A model for personalized searching in the Internet for healthcare that improves
significant results of the search is proposed. A new hybrid method for big data
reasoning is described. It uses ontologies for customization of search queries. The
latest methods and tools based on autonomous distributed agents for search and
analysis of information from large medical data text are previewed to be able to
describe the new improved model for big data personalized searching. A profile of
the user is implemented to give additional information in the system for the user.
This chapter is due to the research of the possibilities for extraction of medical text
information in incomplete and contradictory information environment through
combination of software multi-agent systems.
This research in the personalized semantic agents in the healthcare area con-
tributes to enhanced living with helping the people to receive more correct health
information. The chapter includes introduction, literature review, description of the
system, implementation results and conclusion.
7.2
Intelligent agents’ advantages and characteristics
Intelligent agents can be divided into several types using different characteristics
concerning their features.
1.
Non-collaborating and collaborating intelligent agents are divided because of
the agents’ possibility to collaborate with each other for the task implementa-
tion. Protocols and methods can reach collaboration between autonomous
intelligent agents like hierarchical delegating of the tasks, contracts and non-
centralized negotiation.
2.
Adaptive intelligent agents have the possibility to adapt to the network changes
and the surrounding environment. An example of such an agent is the Internet
personal assistant.
162
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

3.
Rational intelligent agents have autonomous characteristic. They play and can
also cooperate to increase their benefits. Basic domain for application for such
kinds of agents is the automatic trading in the Internet.
4.
Mobile agents have the possibility to travel in the Internet [3,4]. Such kinds of
agents can permit, for example, dynamic load balancing in wide networks,
reduce the transfer of the data between server information applications and also
migration of the small business logic with average range of the cooperative
intranet during searching [5–7].
Advantages of the mobile agents [8] include
1.
reduction of network loading,
2.
overcome network latency,
3.
protocol capsulation,
4.
asynchronous and autonomous implementation,
5.
dynamic adaptation,
6.
natural heterogeneity and strength and
7.
fault tolerance.
Intelligent agents use communication skills to communicate between systems,
databases, human users and other agents. A language for communication between
agents is used in middleware platforms or specific applications. Intelligent agents
are represented as ontological data, metadata, user profiles and natural input
language text and transformed into data formats proper for machine learning.
Applications with techniques for machine learning allow the intelligent agent to
request and maintain knowledge of himself and the surroundings. The coopera-
tion of the agent with the other agents can be, for example, service agency,
pairing, collaboration filtering, in cooperation with end-users and efficient
calculation.
7.3
Fuzzy logic and probability
Fuzzy logic is logic with multiple values whose true value set is in the interval
[0, 1]. Also, it is assumed that the alliance ^ is interpreted by the continuous
triangular norm, where  is binary operation with neutral value 1. Basic examples
of triangular norms are
l  m ¼ min l; m
f
g; l  m ¼ max l þ m  1; 0
f
g; l  m ¼ l  m
named, respectively, Zadeh, Łukasiewicz and product norm. Normally, it is inter-
preted as follows:
●
in conclusions ) from residue operation ? defined by the setting
●
in equivalence , from the operation $ defined by the setting
●
in negation : from the operation  defined by creating (l) ¼ l ? 0.
Big data healthcare system
163

List with the most important operations properties ? and $.l?m ¼ max{z [ U :
l  z  m} l$m ¼ (l?m)  (m?l)[9].
Relationships between the probability theory and fuzzy logic are reviewed in
the literature [10,11]. More particularly the membership function of the fuzzy sets
can be interpreted as conventional probability, which was introduced by Loginov. It
is assumed that there are fuzzy sets F in the universe of discourse D, where mF(d) is
the degree of membership function to d in F. In the world of probability, R is a
random variable that has two values F and F_, where F_ is not F. Then, mF(d) is the
conventional probability Pr(F | d).
As a more formal definition, if V ¼ {V1, V2, . . . , Vn} is a set of voters and each
Vi is a vote to classify d as F or F_, then Pr(F | d) may consider the probability that
a random voter will classify d as F. Equivalent of the fuzzy membership function
and conditional probability as a general term is considered a factor of imperfection
that covers vagueness and ambiguity. In the literature research papers exist
approaches that combine probability with fuzzy logic [12,13].
Over the past 10 years, many studies have been dedicated for combining fuzzy
logic with semantic technologies. Two different approaches can be differentiated.
One approach focuses on existing language features for adding fuzzy representation
processing of inaccurate and ambiguity information. The aim of the other approach
is to expand the language with new fuzzy logic construction that can submit inac-
curate and ambiguity information.
Fuzzy extension of Web Ontology Language (OWL) probably will not become
a part of World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) proposed standard. This fuzzy
extension is not so meaningful as it only makes one syntax modification of the
axioms in the ontology. Nevertheless, whether that fuzzy extension of the semantic
technologies becomes a part of W3C standard or not, there is still a need for
representation of the inaccurate and unclear information in the semantic domain.
Researchers will continue to try to implement fuzzy logic into the semantic and
make necessary innovation to use fuzzy ontologies in practice [14].
Creating a custom application requires modelling of subjective knowledge
bases of subjective agents. One of the main differences between the global ontol-
ogy and subjective ontology is that subjective ontology is mainly the result of the
process of learning, where some of the information is not complete, that is, partial.
The relative ontology is a conceptual model generated by the cognitive process.
During the learning process, the input data from the environment is used to update
the ontology concept model. The relative ontology depends on the training set of
the agent.
There are a wide range of extensions of classical Boolean logic to deal with the
factors of uncertainty of subjective knowledge. The formal properties of logic are
usually presented with the corresponding abstract algebra (see Lindenbaum–Tarski
theorem) [15].
The theory of the fuzzy sets uses real value of the membership function to
describe multitude around the area U. The value mA(x) from the multitude A c D
indicates the degree, where x belongs to A, and normally mA(x) [ [0,1].
164
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

The role of the probabilistic logic is to aggregate coordinated observation
using all the information required or supposed. The model allows uncertainty in the
obtained information, and the probability corresponds to the lack of information.
The events in the area are information sources where every event has a true or false
value depending on the value of the indicator for the event [15].
7.4
Meaning of big data in a personalized search of uncertain
and vague information
The data volumes stored have increased rapidly in recent years, which make
big data an important theme for discussion. Big data can define large volumes of
data and a number of techniques that convert the data stream into valuable infor-
mation [16].
Characteristics of big data include volume, velocity and variety. Big data have
a large volume and are of various types. They can be divided into structured, semi-
structured and unstructured data. Velocity presents the data stream speed rate
which requires timeliness in the analysis. The ultimate objective of the data ana-
lysis is to get valuable information from the data stream [16].
7.4.1
Value and demand in-depth analysis
Traditional analysis of data is created for structured databases. To satisfy the
requirement, developed in-depth analysis, time-in-line analysis, network diagram
analysis and what-if analysis are applied [16].
Big data covers rapidly every stage in the data processes, that is, data collec-
tion, data retrieval, data storage, data design and data implementation. With the
development of theoretical analysis and technology, big data will be used in many
different areas like health, economy, etc. Besides the above-mentioned challenges,
there are still other problems [16]. For the big data, security is a difficult topic that
needs to be defined by the law and be protected with technical measures [17].
7.4.2
Variety and heterogeneity of data
Common tools such as Structured Query Language (SQL) can deal with structured
data, but they are not effective for semi-structured or unstructured data, like audio,
video, text and web pages. Therefore, the data must be structured initially to be
processed more efficiently. The integration of data and the use of various sources
with data are prepared for personalization of medical data. The heterogeneity and
the variety of the data restrict their accessibility and reusability. Because of this,
ontology is being developed that will improve personalized medicine and make
data and resources more comprehensible. The resources are able to interpret
application integration, search and requests. Semantic technologies in web are used
to make knowledge understandable from the Internet agent to realize the integra-
tion and reuse of unstructured sources for prediction of knowledge discovery.
Big data healthcare system
165

7.4.3
Quality of data
An important aspect in ensuring the quality of data is the standardization of the data
and the terminology through semantic design. This usually requires expansion of
existing ontologies or in any case the creation of a specific domain ontology. One
big challenge in providing data quality is the coordination of semantic and syntactic
differences in data sources and the harmonization between them. When there is an
agreement of the dictionaries and ontologies, it is possible to implement appro-
priate semantics to make them more comprehensible for applications and agents in
the Internet.
7.4.4
Volume and size of data
Big data expand their volume faster than computing resources. The big volume of
data itself does not lead to solving all problems with personalized medicine. It must
summarize or extract data and transform them into an appropriate way from
information to knowledge and in the end to wisdom. It is important to explore a big
amount of data so that they can be used for decision-making. Furthermore, big data
processing often use tools such as Hadoop that can speed up processing of data and,
respectively, applications.
7.4.5
Speed and timeliness of the data
It is accepted that the bigger the volume of the data is, the longer time it takes for
data analysis. With time, the value of the data is destroyed, and in some case,
timeliness of the data processing is essential. In other words, speed is constant. The
execution of healthcare data is continuously changed and developed.
7.5
Rule-based and case-based reasoning
Two well-known reasoners, case-based and rule-based, can be implemented in
intelligent systems. Rules normally present common knowledge, while cases cover
the accumulated knowledge in certain situations. Each method has its positive and
negative characteristics that can complement each other. This is evidence for
effectiveness of the combination of rule-based and case-based reasoning in a hybrid
approach as it overcomes disadvantage of each component method.
This combination of solutions to problems and methods of knowledge pre-
sentation is developed domain from artificial intelligence research. The purpose is
to make mixed formalism that uses the advantages of each method. Advantages of
different hybrid approaches are demonstrated in a lot of application areas.
The effectiveness of these studies is because rules and cases can be added to
each other when solving a problem or in application implementation. Systems
based on the rules solve problems from the beginning, while systems based on
cases use previously stored cases to compare with the new case. Therefore, both
methods in combination are appropriate and effective. Complementary adjusting of
some positive and negative characteristics of the two methods enhance the benefits
when they are combined.
166
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

7.6
Related work
Literature review presented in Table 7.1 is made on the basis of the reports of the
Science Direct for the past 2–3 years. It expresses clear trends when working with
big data, such as the use of case-based reasoners and fuzziness. The reports from
Table 7.1 present problems with uncertainty of the data and provide searching
algorithms for effective improvement of the returned results.
7.7
Agent-based system for personalized searching
In this chapter, a conceptual model for personalized system for information
retrieval in a given uncertain and fuzzy information that is based on the last
inventions in the field of semantic retrieval is presented. The system use websites to
collect information for the user query with mobile agents. Based on semantic
analysis of the submitted search query, it searches in databases information for all
required cases to be returned to the user. The system returns only one result for a
search query. From the user point of view the query previews the fuzziness and
uncertainty of the information in the search. It makes the search more effective in
finding the necessary results. The query is consistent with profile data before
looking for information based on the case. Database with cases is represented by
ontology for which reasoning algorithm, in order to improve results for a given
Table 7.1
Literature review of the reports in recent years of big data, considering
uncertainty and data fuzziness
Research
Methodology
Results
Big data fuzzy rule-based
classification systems
[18]
Classification rule-based system
that is able to deal with
uncertainty that was
implemented in the big data
analyses
The model deals with the
problem of classification
and time for calculation
New big data fuzzy
model [19]
System with fuzzy algorithm for
sporadic prediction of the
time
Effective in tracking
problems and data
synchronization
Big data case-based rea-
soning in biomedical
search [20]
Present Monte Carlo method for
sampling based on random-
ness to expand search criteria
Improvement of the
returned results
Mining sparse and big
data by case-based
reasoning [21]
Implementation of case-based
reasoning for big data
Effective in practical
problems
Vagueness solution with
fuzzy in hierarchical
big data [22]
Apply fuzzy sets on attributes in
related data
Efficient concerning
traditional fuzzy logic
Variability reasoning for
big data [23]
Representation of ontology and
method for reasoning
Distributed method for
reasoning
Big data healthcare system
167

query, was developed, even if the query is not sufficiently precisely defined from
the user point of view. The reasoning proposed in this chapter was created to work
also with big data, which is an important requirement in the constantly growing
volume of data in the Internet. Most new approaches for information retrieval
include the volume of the information on the Internet and the uncertainty and
fuzziness of the user input query that were applied in the proposed system.
Therefore, this chapter offers some new approaches in this area. At the end of this
chapter summaries of some of the developed approaches are proposed that can be
applied to solve other tasks of the semantic web, and important conclusions about
the development and future of the semantic web that is based on the research in the
recent projects in the semantic web and the conclusions made from the developed
applications are given.
Personalized search system is designed to provide quality search of medical
information corresponding to the individual characteristics and needs of the people
of all ages who would like to receive information on a particular health problem
based on their complaints.
7.7.1
Aims and tasks of the developed system
The aim of the semantic search system is to demonstrate new methods and devices
based on autonomous distributed agents for searching and analysis of the infor-
mation in the Internet. The aim of this chapter is to represent personalized semantic
search system that can work with big data and implement methods for fuzzy and
uncertain data. Area of application of the semantic search system is medicine.
There is a description of implementation of the conceptual model of the semantic
search system and also the integration of the separate elements in the system.
Tasks for the developed semantic search system are
1.
To create semantic search system appropriate for big data as the information
from the user is fuzzy and uncertain
2.
To demonstrate the possibility to extract the information is not complete and
contradictory information environment when using software multi-agent
systems
3.
To use mobile agent for searching information in the Internet
4.
To create a conceptual model for semantic search system
5.
To create programmes of the separate modules and analyse the results.
7.7.2
Conceptual model for personalized semantic search system
when the information in the query is fuzzy and uncertain
The proposed conceptual model (Figure 7.1) helps users to find the required
information using semantic [23–25].
The conceptual model consists of three main elements. The first element is for
the semantic handling of the query and element for personalization. The repre-
sented concept model presents the user requirements when semantic analyses the
user query and personalizes the searched result. The second component is
168
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

component for the subjective ontology that saves cases in a certain domain. The
third element is data collection element and semantic annotation element, which is
responsible for defining the sources and annotated information based on hybrid
domain subjective ontology.
Agents are software objects that have specific objectives, function indepen-
dently in a particular environment and perform communication with another agent.
Agent-based design is selected for various reasons (see Section 7.2). The agent can
feel the environment that supports learning user-preferences dynamically. In
addition, the proposed model requires many areas of interaction between the user
and the system to provide to the user the right recommendations and advice. This
results in many areas of interaction between different modules. The agent has an
effective communication mechanism of abstraction that gives the reason to use
User profile store
Log for interaction
with the user
External profile
related with
integrated
systems and web
services
Agent for user
profile
Agent for
manipulation of
the query
Agent for result
personalization
Interface agent
User
Management of
domain fuzzy and
uncertain ontology
Spell checking
and synonyms
Searching
words in the
dictionary
Mobile agent
Web agent for
information extraction 
of diseases 
from Internet
Web agent for
information extraction of
medicaments for the
diseases from Internet
Figure 7.1
Conceptual model for personalized searching system of information
Big data healthcare system
169

agents. The suggested conceptual model has three functionalities. First, to be able
to understand the semantic context from the user query. It uses predefined domain
ontology. Ontology could be described as a formal knowledge representation ‘a
group of concepts within a domain using a common vocabulary to denote the types,
properties and relationships of these concepts’. Predefined ontology is used to
define sources for diseases and medicine and then to create semantic profile. Sec-
ond, they help in the analysis of consumer preferences. In the proposed conceptual
model the user creates a profile firstly by filling basic information, the medical
information and the physical condition data. Then the user enters query with free
text using the portal interface. Next, the consumer demand is combined with
semantic reasoned and then is enriched using a user profile so that the results are
customized to the needs of the user. After returning the customer results to the
customer, consumer’s behaviour is registered in order to improve future results.
The agent that learns the preferences reads these results and can update the user’s
profile. The proposed conceptual model consists of five agents: interface agent that
is responsible for all the interactions with the user, agent profile that captures and
maintains consumer preferences, agent for manipulation of the query that manip-
ulates consumer demand, agent for personalization of the results and mobile agent
looking for information in web pages. Figure 7.1 shows the proposed conceptual
model.
7.7.2.1
Interface agent
The interface agent is necessary to communicate with the user, to take information
from the user and to display the searched result. The entered data can be the
requirement entered explicitly from the user. These preferences will be transmitted
to the user profile agent to renew the user profile. The entered data can also be the
user requests that are forwarded to an agent for manipulation of the query to
implement semantic modification. The agent for semantic modification of the
query will return information again to the user. There is a need to review the query
from the user to obtain any absent information and precise spelling. Moreover,
interface agent shows the agent’s profile and formulates results from the search to
the user. It also follows the interaction of the user with the results and forwards this
information to agent user’s profile. User interaction is divided into explicit and
implicit. From one side, explicit interactions can be gathered when asking users for
their feedback on the results. From the other side, implicit interactions can be
gathered when monitoring a user’s behaviour.
7.7.2.2
User profile agent
Agent profile is needed to manage the profile. In Section 7.8, it is explained how to
construct a profile. The user is asked to fill out a form that reflects the user char-
acteristics and medical condition. Many users do not like to spend time filling out
such forms. So the agent of the user profile logs user interaction with the result and
then displays the new results. It also helps the agent for semantic manipulation
of the query and the agent enriches the request with more user information.
In addition, it helps with further processing of the results by the agent for results
170
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

personalization. The agent for the user profile can also obtain external additional
information associated with integrated systems and web services. One basic func-
tion of the agent profile is to understand and display current user health interests
concerning the user interactions and behaviours. Preferences can be learnt when
analysing the logs for personal communications.
For example, measure of the frequency of certain terms in the user queries
could help personalize and enrich the query when it is modified.
7.7.2.3
Agent for query manipulation
Agent for semantic manipulation of the query is necessary for enrichment and
processing of the user query. After receiving a user request, the agent determines
the language because each language has specific syntax and processing method.
Then the agent divides the query words and checks the spelling of the query using
spell and synonyms check. Spell check and thesaurus provide two basic operations:
check spelling and synonyms provision for each term. A dictionary that searches
words is a repository of predefined terms which help to recognize the stop words
and the relationship between the terms. It represents multilingual dictionary with a
list of terms in any added language in the search and finding of compliance with the
requested terms. Next, unnecessary words are filtered using a dictionary to search
for words that have a list of spare words. Spare words are defined as between, do,
on and others. This helps to limit the process to words that can be associated with
the domain ontology. The next step is to define the terms that are associated with
domain ontology through techniques for recognition of existing name. The agent
communicates with the case-based domain ontology to get a list of all ontological
classes and instances with simple knowledge. It identifies other terms as a possible
link between these terms using a dictionary to search for words that correspond
to predetermined terms. The agent also receives the synonyms of the terms from
spelling checker and thesaurus manager, so that to link it to terms of user request.
Then it identifies the terms it finds the best case using the cases stored in the
ontology. As we are using natural language processing we are just linking the query
with the appropriate case from the case-based ontology.
In case-based ontology are added cases from each request. Each case repre-
sents description and medicine of the disease that correspond to the query. From
the natural language processing point of view the term is identified and could be
extracted from the query compared with different cases that need to respond to the
request and at the end specified the result of the request. Defined terms are asso-
ciated with the most appropriate case. If there is no corresponding case to the user
query, the agent reviews the query using the user profile first. If the user request
does not correspond to any case in the ontology, the agent interacts with the user
about additional information. User profile is derived from the agent for the fol-
lowing reasons:
1.
To review the user request
2.
To put additional information about the user in the request
Finally, to personalize the result semantic annotation of the query is performed.
Big data healthcare system
171

7.7.2.4
Agent for personalization of the results
An agent is needed for personalization of the extracted results. First, it gets the
annotated request from the agent for semantic manipulation of the request and then
applies the algorithm for reasoning to be able to determine the appropriate case
from the case-based ontology that corresponds with the annotated query and after
that displays the content of the appropriate case to the user. In this agent, semantic
results are further processed by allocating differences, ranking and sorting after
obtaining the specific information from the agent profile. Finally, the personalized
result is sent back to the interface agent.
7.7.2.5
Coordinated mobile agent
The role of the mobile agent is to receive the searched query from the user. Mobile
agent allows to find relevant information in the Internet for this case and after that
this information is entered into the case-based ontology. The aim of the mobile
agent is to obtain updated information about a user request and to seek the relevant
information on the web pages.
After the agent for manipulation of the semantic query receives a message, it
seeks to serve the coordinating mobile agent which sent the request. Coordinating
mobile agent retrieves the desired categories by message content and looking in all
places, respectively, located in these categories. Once the categories are discovered
from the mobile agent, it starts moving from one place to another. Each location
has a corresponding website, so that when the agent arrived at the place it began
collecting the data from the page. These data are collected in a database and then
the agent passes on to the next place. This action is repeated until all the places are
visited and then mobile coordinating agent informed the agent for manipulation of
the query that the data is collected. The collected database is added to the case-
based ontology.
7.8
Concept of building a customized profile
User profile helps to better understand the context of the user query. That is
important for the results personalization. It can be presented as keywords from the
profile that gives keyword weight concerning user preferences. Profile is a form
that is completed by the user to specify the information searched by the user. As an
example, a case-based ontology of human diseases and related drugs for treatment
is presented. User profile collects information about the health of the user, medical
information that will assist in reasoning from the request searched by the user.
7.8.1
Approaches and methods for collecting user information
Implementing a user profile, additional information is provided to the search query
submitted by the user. In the user profile, log information is noted also from the
search history.
172
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

7.8.2
Conceptual scheme of the user profile
User profile is required to personalize the search results. A user profile is selected
for searching medical information in the Internet. There are a lot of uncertainties
and fuzziness when searching for medical information in the Internet. The user
profile helps to better understand the context of the user query, especially in vital
areas such as medicine.
The model in Figure 7.2 is designed to personalize the returned results from the
search system. It can be presented in different ways, such as profile with keywords
that define the weights of the keywords based on the user preferences. Figure 7.2
presents the profile, such as ontology, because it makes it easy to integrate with
ontologies in medicine. Initially a profile is created that contains the information
User
Basic information
-Name
-Age
-Sex
-Profession
-Residence
Usage of statistical data
-Previous search queries
-Annotated queries
-Visited search results
Basic medical information
-Weight
-Height
-Blood type
-BMI
Medical information
-Pregnant
-Smoker
-Chronic disease
-Allergies
-Medical history
Health condition of the user
Symptoms that appeared in
the user
Diagnosis
Has health condition
Has symptoms
Is sign of
Has solution
Ontology of the user profile
Figure 7.2
User profile model for medical information. The model was developed
with help of experts in the field of medicine
Big data healthcare system
173

about the health of the consumer using the form. Then, the profile is updated as a
result of the requested information from the user. In Figure 7.2 is presented user
profile ontology with the semantic search schema. In Figure 7.2 is shown details of
the profile of the user ontology that is divided in parts. The first part includes
common information of the user like name, gender, age, etc. The second part con-
tains fundamental information about the user health, like blood type, temperature,
body mass index (BMI), etc. The third part implements medical record, like chronic
diseases or whether the user is pregnant or not and others. The last part contains
statistics from the usage of user data, such as information from older search query
and web links that are visited. Each relationship between two concepts is shown as
dashed line and represents triplet in resource description framework (RDF) terms.
7.9
Development of applied subjective ontology: problems
and approaches
7.9.1
Storing the knowledge in the fuzzy ontology of the proposed
semantic system
An approach selected is creation of fuzzy ontology from crisp ontology.
Crisp ontology proves its role in case-based reasoning. But fuzzy ontology can
extend the potential of crisp ontology. Crisp ontologies are not appropriate to deal
with vagueness and uncertainty that belong to different domains in the real life.
There are two methods of fuzzy ontology creation. The first method is to use a map
fuzzy data. The second approach adds fuzzy part to the crisp ontology.
7.9.2
Fuzzification process in case-based ontology
The proposed system of fuzzy and uncertain information works on two axes, which
means based on ontology-presented uncertain knowledge and use of this knowl-
edge for efficient retrieval of the appropriate case. For the first axis is proposed
fuzzy and uncertain ontology. Second axis includes retrieval of the cases with
ontology algorithm that use fuzzy sets and probability theory. Ontology includes a
set of concepts, cases, properties and relationships. The concept is a class of objects
in certain domain where the objects are a part of the same concept and are cases of
this concept. But the relation from the other side connects the case of a certain
concept with other cases of a certain concept, whereas it connects one case with
common data types (integer, float, string, Boolean, etc.).
7.9.3
Design of the fuzzy and vague case-based ontology
With this model, it is covered not only fuzziness but also uncertainty (probability).
In the literature a connection is made between fuzzy and probabilistic information
as it illustrates the relationship of fuzzy membership function and the formation of
the imperfect factor [11]. The fuzzy and uncertain ontology can express uncertain
knowledge with fuzzy sets using an uncertainty degree of their fuzzy relations and
properties. Crisp ontology is considered a special occasion of fuzzy ontology where
all the relations and property degrees have number one as a value. Furthermore,
174
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

uncertain case-based ontology saves the characteristics of the crisp case-based
ontology. Crisp components that are able to become fuzzy are class properties (with
modifiers), data types and data properties (with fuzzy data-type modifiers). It is
important to mention that ontology includes modelling of:
1.
Fuzzy concepts described from cases that belong to his uncertain degree. An
example of fuzzy concept is low temperature. Because the word low is
uncertain to predicate, the concept is also uncertain, and therefore can be
represented as fuzzy. It performs statements about fuzzy concepts ‘Tempera-
ture X is a case of a low temperature with a 0.6.
2.
Two main types of fuzzy relations:
(a)
Fuzzy object relations that point to the cases if the concept degree allows
fuzzy role assertion such as ‘Patient A has a disease B in 0.8’.
(b)
Fuzzy object relationships that either assign to concept of the case the
letter value with a certain degree (e.g. patient A has residence ‘Province’
with 0.4), or fuzzy data types, which are defined for concept cases (e.g.
patient A has young age) that use fuzzy predicate age. There exist many
methodologies for fuzzy constructions, like Onto-Imprecise Knowledge
Acquisition Representation and Use-Ontology (IKARUS-Onto), Use-
Case based Fuzzy Ontology Constructing methodology (UFOS), Unified
Process for Building Fuzzy Ontology (UPFON), etc. The process of
design of fuzzy and uncertain case-based ontology that stores as case the
disease and the corresponding description and medications for the disease
are implemented using the ontology IKARUS-Onto and the fuzzy
extension of OWL2 for Prote´ge´.
The plug-in does not transform the fuzzy representation of OWL2 format. It
rather facilitates their performance, allowing detailed description of the fuzzy logic
that is used.
7.10
Description of the process of reasoning
A hybrid reasoner is described, in which is combined classical ontology and fuzzy
ontology and also case-based reasoning with rule-based reasoning.
First, the algorithm based on rules and cases is implemented. With the intro-
duction of the big data distributed reasoning is implemented. Furthermore, the basic
concept is that to expand the probability knowledge base in distributed probability
knowledge base. To realize such algorithm, a group of rules and data is distributed
in different peers. The selection of initial data set automatically leads to uncertainty
due to partial information. As example, when making diagnosis of disease using a
query heartbeat and chest pain, it can be applied to all human diseases or only heart
disease could be considered. Theretofore, the conclusion will be made with a certain
degree of uncertainty. This step can increase the coefficient of imperfection as it is
described with vagueness and variability. Two steps can be defined concerning this:
1.
Realization of subset of data
2.
Determining a data distribution
Big data healthcare system
175

The basic problem with steps 1 and 2 is the coexistence of certain events and
certain rules that will never distinguish conclusion if they do not have connection.
Other example is when there is a general understanding of heart disease. All
heart diseases have chest pain, then we are only interested in cases that are related
to heart disease.
The distribution of the rules and cases between each peer should be performed
in a way to keep the connected expression in the same peer so that every peer
linked a set of rules and a set of cases. Each peer has the following entities:
●
concept with basic rules – present a class of precise and conditional restrictions
●
case concept – present a group of cases
●
peer concept – present a group of peers
The basic rules have the following description.
Special (m | n[i]) rule, means when n hold and m normally hold with a factor of
imperfection i. The cases have the form: Case: (c|T [i]), which means that the case
value is true with factor of imperfection i. Here the coefficient represents a coef-
ficient of imperfection, that is, factor of vagueness and uncertainty. As described in
Section 7.3 fuzziness could be defined with probabilities. This shows a way of
using probability knowledge to represent vague and variety concepts.
Every object can be associated with another object if there is a connection. To
realize this, each subject can have a key value, that is,
●
When m, n have i factor and key value kv.
●
When there are i imperfection factors and key value kv, m is true.
The function of the key value is presented from
1.
General description of the rules – define rules that are used when there is
extraordinary case.
2.
Description of the cases: This describes cases which are derived from the same
result in the same general rules, that is, ‘If heart disease has chest pain with factor
1’, then this is true for all diseases of the heart as a rule chest pain is common.
This means that the procedure for conclusions needs to be applied only once for
each case. Once the key value for each object is determined, the correlation of the
two objects is determined as follows: When c1 and c2 are the subjects and i has the
equal key value, so they are connected.
The method begins with distribution of the cases and rules to each peer con-
sidering their key value. As example in the healthcare domain is, when there is a
rule of disease that affects different parts of the body, then the key is the frequency
of occurrence of a disease, and therefore diseases can be allocated to peers
depending on body parts.
Description of the algorithm with correlation factor:
1.
Determination of the peers corresponding to key values
2.
Every object is connected with the peer, that is, number of the key value of the
object
3.
For every peer is finding a result about the cases and rules of this peer.
176
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Key values determine the total quantity of used peers. Then determining each peer
that holds certain cases and rules. Next, the reasoning algorithm is applied. Rea-
soning process runs only to each separate peer without taking into account other
peers. The problem can be observed when two rules have the same result with
different coefficients of imperfection.
For example, when there are two rules, nerve diseases of the backbone have
chest pain with factor 0.5 and heart disease have always pain in the chest, then not
the first but the second rule is used. Overall, these conflicts can exist where there
are special classes (such as heart disease) and extraordinary rules, so extra classes
than the total classes.
Steps for reasoning algorithm in every separate peer:
1.
Each extraordinary rule is second.
2.
Each common rule is first.
3.
The rule engine is executed from higher to lower number.
4.
During application of the rule, the facts are stopped.
Reducing the facts is used for stop running rules with low priority. This means that
if a rule that start has second number and when the fact is reduced that causes
running, the rule with first number is not going to start.
Second step is the implementation of the algorithm for classical ontology and
calculation of semantic similarities. The similarity of medical concepts can be
carried out without semantics or vocabulary, or can be done using semantic
ontology. A second way is chosen for similarity measurement of the meaning
between each concept. The found c cases in the first level enter in another assess-
ment based on sematic similarities between the functions of the instances.
Lexical or exact similarities cannot be used for comparing the ontological
concepts. A hybrid measure based on the length of the path and the characteristics
of the concepts is proposed. First for the length of the path is applied similarity that
uses the least common ancestor (LCA) between each pair of terms and the layer
of proximity of the concepts concerning the LCA in ontology. Furthermore, the
deeper the LCA is, the more specific is considered and thus in such a way of
comparison the more liker concept is accepted. The more relatives are two concepts
to their LCA, they are more like. Secondly, to determine the quantitative similarity
of conceptual characteristics the similarities and the differences between the con-
cepts must be considered. The algorithm proposed by [26] is used to calculate the
semantic similarity based on path and functions. The equation applied has the form
SSem u; v
ð
Þ ¼ z1sfeature u; v
ð
Þ þ z2spath u; v
ð
Þ
where z1,z2(0,1] and are weights z1 þ z2 ¼ 1.
This function is making calculation of the clinical similarities between each
pair of concepts and not the semantic distance. The clinical similarity uses clinical
heterogeneity of the concepts. The concept deepness defines its specificity. For
example, the heart disease that is a more common concept of a heart attack.
Because heart disease is a more common concept, it means also other subdiseases.
Big data healthcare system
177

Finally, a result with the most similar case is proposed to the user. This algorithm
for reasoning is suitable for working with big data. It reasons with vague and
uncertain data and includes the probability definite case to be conclusion.
7.11
Metrics for evaluating the quality of the returned results
from the search system
Mainly in evaluating the performance of the search system are accepted two
parameters for estimation: precision (Pr) and recall (Rec). The aim of the semantic
search system with ontology is to increase the precision and recall, where
Precision ¼ Quantity of found relevant documents
Total quantity of found documents
Recall ¼ Quantity of found documents
Quantity of relevant documents
F-measure ¼ Pr  Rec
Pr þ Rec
In order to make the analysis of parameters presented earlier, 225 queries from
different sources, experts, user research and various websites for health information
are collected. Queries are categorized depending on the symptoms of various dis-
eases, which are taken from ontology for types of diseases from site for medical
information http://bioportal.bioontology.org/. The study is presented in Table 7.2.
In the proposed system analysis, results are not counted when an expert and the
system give different results for the same disease and therefore the parameter
negative predicted value is not calculated. As a conclusion from the analysis it is
determined that the system has a high precision 98% and the recall is 94% higher.
This shows the quality of the system that is comparative to the other new systems
described in the literature.
7.12
Conclusions
In this chapter conceptual model of personalized search system to enhance living
environment is developed, which is appropriate for vague and uncertain query and
is able to work with big data. Semantic search system is designed to run on the
client machine and is based on the latest achievements in the field of semantic
search. Using semantic and agent-oriented technology ensures scalability, adapt-
ability and work in a dynamic environment, improving quality of demand. Because
of this, the system uses hybrid reasoner algorithm for subjective ontology. The
multi-agent system enhanced living environment of the user using the system as it
gives appropriate health information.
The use of vague and uncertain information is a problem that proves its actu-
ality to many reports in the scientific field. Today there is no scientific field that
does not take into account the big data and the possibility of their processing.
178
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Table 7.2
Experimental results to determine parameters: precision, recall, F-measure of the proposed system
Category symptoms
Total
queries
Diagnosed by
the system
Diagnosed by
an expert
A1
A2
A3
Precision
Recall
F-measure
Abdominal and digestive symptom
35
34
36
31
1
3
0.96875
0.911764706
0.939393939
Cardiovascular system symptom
22
22
22
20
0
2
1
0.909090909
0.952380952
Head and neck symptom
19
19
19
18
0
1
1
0.947368421
0.972972973
Hemic and immune system
9
9
8
8
1
0
0.888888889
1
0.941176471
Musculoskeletal system symptom
8
10
8
8
0
0
1
1
1
Nervous system symptom
27
26
27
25
0
2
1
0.925925926
0.961538462
Nutrition, metabolism and
development symptom
30
32
30
28
1
1
0.965517241
0.965517241
0.965517241
Reproductive system symptom
21
20
20
18
1
2
0.947368421
0.9
0.923076923
Respiratory system and chest
symptom
32
32
33
31
0
1
1
0.96875
0.984126984
Skin and integumentary tissue
symptom
13
12
13
12
0
1
1
0.923076923
0.96
Urinary system symptom
9
9
9
8
0
1
1
0.888888889
0.941176471
Total
225
225
225
–
–
–
–
–
–
Average
–
–
–
–
–
0.98
0.94003482
0.96
A1, the system and the expert decide the same;
A2, the system and the expert have different opinions, experts believe that the disease is in another category;
A3, experts decide that is in this category, but the system does not.

Offering new approaches and methods in this area and a platform for their testing,
this system achieves its scientific research purposes. Estimation of the achievement
of the applied research is done when testing the prototype and processing the
experimental results.
References
[1]
Abdelbasset B., Okba K., Sofiane M. ‘Agent-based approach for building
ontology from text’. International Conference on Computer Medical Appli-
cation; 20–22 January 2013, IEEE, pp. 1–6
[2]
Mahdi M., Ahmad A., Ismail R. ‘Intelligent metadata web search engines:
A brief review of literature on intelligent metadata based search engines’.
International Conference on Information Technology and Multimedia;
18–20 November 2014, IEEE, pp. 255–258
[3]
Raja A., Raj E. ‘MAD-ARM: Mobile agent based distributed association
rule mining’. International Conference on Computer Communication and
Informatics; Coimbatore, India, 4–6 January 2013, IEEE, pp. 1–5
[4]
Godfrey W., Jha S., Nair S. ‘On a mobile agent framework for an Internet of
Things’. International Conference on Communication Systems and Network
Technologies; 2013, IEEE, pp. 345–350
[5]
Higashino M., Hayakawa T., Takahashi K., Kawamura T., Sugahara K.
‘Management of streaming multimedia content using mobile agent technol-
ogy on pure P2P-based distributed e-Learning system’. 27th International
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications; IEEE,
pp. 1041–1047
[6]
Vidyalakshmi B., Wong R., Chi C. ‘Decentralized trust driven access control
for mobile content sharing’. International Congress on Big Data; 2013,
IEEE, pp. 239–246
[7]
Boukhadra A., Benatchba K., Balla A. ‘DA5DCSWS: A distributed archi-
tecture for semantic web services discovery and composition’. 8th Interna-
tional Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions; 2013,
IEEE, pp. 182–187
[8]
Essa Y., Attiya G., El-Sayed A. ‘Mobile agent based new framework for
improving big data analysis’. International Conference on Cloud Computing
and Big Data. CloudCom-Asia; 2013, IEEE, pp. 381–386
[9]
Gerla G. ‘The existence of vague objects’. Journal of Fuzzy Sets and
Systems, 2015, vol. 276, pp. 59–73
[10]
Singpurwalla N., Booker J., Lindley D., Laviolette M., Zadeh L., Dempster A.
‘Membership functions and probability measures of fuzzy sets’. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 2004, vol. 99(467), pp. 867–889
[11]
Zadeh L. ‘Discussion: Probability theory and fuzzy logic are complementary
rather than competitive’. Journal of Technometrics, 1995, vol. 37(3),
pp. 271–275
180
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[12]
Dubois D., Prade H., ‘Fuzzy sets and probability: Misunderstandings,
bridges and gaps’. Proceedings of the Second IEEE Conference on Fuzzy
Systems; 28 March–1 April 1993, IEEE, pp. 1059–1068
[13]
Yen J. ‘Generalizing the Dempster-Shafer theory to fuzzy sets’. Proceedings
of the Fourth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence; 27 March
2013, Cornell University Library, pp. 529–554
[14]
Cross V. ‘Fuzzy ontologies: The state of the art’. IEEE Conference on
Norbert Wiener in the 21st Century; 24–26 June 2014, IEEE, pp. 1–8
[15]
Kova´cs L., Radeleczki S. ‘Uncertainty management in knowledge model-
ling’. 8th International Conference Interdisciplinarity in Engineering:
Procedia Technology; 9–10 October 2014, Tirgu Mures, Romania, Elsevier,
vol. 19, pp. 4–11
[16]
Li H., Lu¨ X. ‘Challenges and trends of big data analytics’. Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet Computing;
8–10 November 2014, IEEE, pp. 566–567
[17]
Jerome J. ‘Big data catalyst for a privacy conversation’. Indiana Law
Review, 2014, vol. 48(1), pp. 213–242
[18]
Lo´pez V., Rı´o S., Benı´tez J., Herrera F. ‘Cost-sensitive linguistic fuzzy rule
based classification systems under the MapReduce framework for imbal-
anced big data’. Journal of Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 2015, vol. 258, pp. 5–38
[19]
Liu L., Zhao S., Yu Z., Dai H. ‘A big data inspired chaotic solution for fuzzy
feedback linearization model in cyber-physical systems’. Journal of Ad Hoc
Networks, 2015, vol. 35, pp. 97–104
[20]
Woodbridge J., Mortazavi B., Bui A., Sarrafzadeh M. ‘Improving biomedi-
cal signal search results in big data case-based reasoning environments’.
Journal of Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 2016, vol. 28, pp. 69–80
[21]
Perner P. ‘Mining sparse and big data by case-based reasoning’. Journal of
Procedia Computer Science, 2014, vol. 35, pp. 19–33
[22]
Lewis D., Martin T. ‘Managing vagueness with fuzzy in hierarchical big
data’. Journal of Procedia Computer Science, 2015, vol. 53, pp. 19–28
[23]
Al-Nazer A., Helmy T., Al-Mulhem M. ‘User’s profile ontology-based
semantic framework for personalized food and nutrition recommendation’.
The 5th International Conference on Ambient Systems, Networks and Tech-
nologies; 2014, Elsevier, vol. 32, pp. 101–108
[24]
Karanikola L., Karali I., McClean S. ‘Uncertainty reasoning for the ‘‘big
data’’ semantic web’. IEEE International Conference on Information Reuse
and Integration; 13–15 August, 2014, Redwood City, California, USA,
IEEE, pp. 147–154
[25]
Beydoun G., Low G., Garcı´a-Sa´nchez F., Valencia-Garcı´a R., Martı´nez-
Be´jar R. ‘Identification of ontologies to support information systems devel-
opment’. Journal of Information Systems, 2016, vol. 46, pp. 45–60
[26]
El-Sappagh S., Elmogy M., Riad A. ‘A fuzzy-ontology-oriented case-based
reasoning framework for semantic diabetes diagnosis’. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine, 2015, vol. 65(3), pp. 179–208
Big data healthcare system
181

Further reading
[1]
Evtimova M. ‘Comparative analysis of multi-agent platforms for creation
of semantic mobile agents for personalize searching’. Proceedings of
National Student Scientific Technical Conference; Sozopol, Bulgaria, 2014,
pp. 225–229
[2]
Evtimova M., Momtchev I. ‘Personalize web searching strategies classifi-
cation and comparison’. Journal of Communication and Computer, 2016,
pp. 19–23
[3]
Matentzoglu N. List of reasoners [online]. 2016. Available from http://owl.
cs.manchester.ac.uk/tools/list-of-reasoners/ [Accessed 15 March 2017]
List of abbreviations
BMI
Body mass index
DAI
Distributed artificial intelligence
LCA
Least common ancestor
OWL
Web Ontology Language
SQL
Structured Query Language
W3C
World Wide Web Consortium
Biography
Mariya Savova Evtimova is assistant professor in Technical University of Sofia in
Faculty of Computer Systems and Control (since 2012). She participated in a
course for Web searching in Romania in Gheorghe Asachi Technical University in
2012. Her major fields of scientific research are semantic web, search algorithms,
agent technologies, programming languages, database, software engineering and
mobile applications. She has scientific contribution in the semantic field, especially
for creation of ontology model and algorithm for reasoning. These contributions
provide important results, demonstrating her qualifications and potential to go
significantly beyond the state of the art. Her doctoral project is in fourth place in
YES national competition for young energetic scientists (2016). The results were
published in articles in international and national peer-reviewed journals, and
papers in international conferences and seminars.
182
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Chapter 8
Sensors for wireless body area networks
Ivelina Nikolaeva Ruskova1 and Elitsa Emilova Gieva1
Abstract
The inevitable progress of health monitoring technologies leads to continuous
improvement of the monitoring sensors. They become smaller and compact, with
lower power consumption and higher accuracy. These devices are then integrated
into wireless body area networks (WBANs) which promise real-time healthcare
monitoring during daily activities. WBANs or body sensor network is a wireless
network of computing devices that can be carried over BAN devices. Sensors can
be implanted in the body, worn on the body and their position can be fixed. There
might be accompanying devices that people are free to carry in a pocket as a
garment or in a handbag. The position of the device does not influence the person’s
comfort.
8.1
Introduction: wireless body area networks and wireless
sensor network
The revolution in the wireless communications is the reason for fundamental
improvements in the telecommunication, data networking and makes the integrated
networks a reality. Their increasing use has led to the development of the wireless
body area networks (WBANs), which provide a health status of a person without
any constraints in his/her life. They can be used, for example, for distributed
wireless medical biosensors. Depending on the application, WBANs can be used
for remote monitoring, assisted living or biofeedback. They consist of biological
sensors, which are placed in specified body areas. They can be put on the body or
implanted in the person’s skin. The sensors are intended to measure different body
parameters, such as temperature, pulse, changes in vital signs, human statuses
(stress, fear or happiness, etc.).
A typical WBAN structure can be seen in Figure 8.1.
Three levels of communication can be described. The first level presents
the communication between wireless body sensors and the WBAN master node.
1Department of Microelectronics, Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria

The second level is the communication between the master node and the personal
devices. The third level involves the communication between the personal devices
and the Internet. The technologies which support such communication are Blue-
tooth, IEEE 802.15.4 and IEEE 802.15.6. Depending on the applications and on the
technology characteristics, Wi-Fi, mobile networks and Bluetooth can be appro-
priate for implementing WBANs.
WBANs applications can be divided into two groups: medical field or non-
medical field. The applications for medical purposes involve solutions mainly for
ageing and diseased population, for example, detection, home assistance, preven-
tion and monitoring of diseases, rehabilitation and biofeedback for monitoring of
emotions. Non-medical applications include detection of motion, which is helpful
for gaming, sport monitoring, for social interactions and medical help in disaster
cases [1].
A wireless sensor network (WSN) is composed of spatially distributed auto-
nomous devices with sensors which can track the status of physical or environmental
/events/conditions. Such system has a gateway for wireless connectivity to the
wired world. Some available standards include 2.4 GHz radios based on
IEEE802.11 (Wi-Fi) or IEEE802.15.4. WSN is created for applications as health
care, utilities and remote monitoring. In health care, wireless devices make patient
monitoring less invasive [2–6].
8.2
Sensor node
The main part of WSN is the sensor node [2,7], whose hardware includes four parts in
general: power, sensor, microcontroller (MC) and wireless transceiver (Figure 8.2).
A more detailed block diagram of an example for sensor node is presented in
Figure 8.3.
The power module supplies the system. The sensor obtains the environmental
and equipment status. It collects and transforms the signals (e.g. light, chemical
signals or vibration) into electrical signals and then transfers them to the MC. The
data received from the MC is processed depending on the application. Then, the
radio frequency (RF) module transfers the data in order to achieve the physical
Level 1
Sensor
nodes
Personal
device
Other
WBANs
Access point
Bluetooth
or WLAN
GPRS
Internet
Ambulance
Medical
emergency
server
Telemedicine
server
Level 2
Level 3
Figure 8.1
Three levels of communication in WBANs
184
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

realization of communication. Here, of great importance are the tiny sizes and the
lower power supply [7].
In recent years, the WSN miniaturization technology based on micro-electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS) has made an incredible progress. The main idea is to
realize the combination between microelectronics, micromachining and packaging
technologies. These miniature sensor elements, the power supply and the signal
conditioning circuits can be combined and integrated into a miniature sensor.
MEMS sensors offer a lot of benefits that support the increasing breakthrough
of this technology into the medical field. MEMS sensors are mostly manufactured
from silicon which interferes less with human body, they have a low consumption
and they can be integrated in many systems, which are built on a single chip. The
small size of the MEMS permits the use of less invasive instruments, which is less
painful. The benefits of MEMS sensors are summarized in Figure 8.4 [8–14].
The accelerometer is the most popular MEMS sensor, which measures the
acceleration of objects and is useful for quantitative body activity assessment.
Sensor
Microcontroller
Power & power
management
Transceiver
Figure 8.2
Hardware structure of a sensor node
Channel 1–Single ended
sensor
Accelerometer
Inclinometer
Displacement potentiometer 
100Hz
low-pass
filter
PGA
w/ offset
nulling
Low-power wireless sensor
12bit
ADC
Ultra low-power
microcontroller
Digital HW
shutdown
Digital comm bus
2.2 GHz
transceiver
100Hz
low-pass
filter
PGA
w/ offset
nulling
PGA
w/analog
offset
correction
Digital
Correct-
ion
15
bit
ADC
12C
bus
3 AA
battery cells
3.3 V
system
regulation
3.0 V
differential
section
regulation
3.0 V
single-ended
section
regulation
Channel 2–Single ended
sensor
Accelerometer
Inclinometer
Displacement potentiometer 
Channel 3–Differential sensor
strain
Transducer/extensometer
Earth pressure cell
Load/torque/displacement 
Channel 4–Temperature
sensor
Thermistor/temperature diode 
Figure 8.3
Block diagram of a sensor node
Sensors for wireless body area networks
185

To detect movement and posture, the triaxial accelerometer is used, which can also
monitor vibration in three planes.
A very important requirement in a surgery is the precise control of the scalpel.
This can be done with MEMS pressure sensors which can be put into a scalpel to
measure the force which exerts on the tissues and provides the necessary infor-
mation to the surgeon.
One of the elements of lab on a pill is the MEMS (Figure 8.5), which takes a
sample from body fluids and gathers patient parameters, such as temperature, pH
levels and dissolved oxygen levels.
The smart pill (Figure 8.6) is a specialized MEMS micro-pump that can be
implanted in the human body for dosage control and status track. Its biosensors
measure insulin, and the pill releases the drug when it is necessary [15].
Smart wearable sensors (SWS) are used for preventative methods in medicine
applications such as endocrine, cardiopulmonary, neurological function, vascular
and rehabilitation.
The gyroscope is also a very popular type of sensor, which can work as a
mechanical device that can measure 3D orientation. The orientation changes can be
calculated by integration of the angular velocity. In Table 8.1 a review of sensors
for clinical and non-clinical applications is presented [16].
One of the most important concerns about the SWS is their placement,
according to the patience acceptance. Fortunately, there is a wide range of such
devices in the market, which can be placed in almost every part of the body. Such
sensors can detect different variables, such as speed, steps, distance, how many
floors are climbed and how many calories are burned. SWSs can be placed not
only on or inside the human’s body, but also in gloves, rings, brooches, necklace,
Low
consumption
Invasive
applications
Less
interfere
with body
tissues
Low price
Integration
in larger
systems
Number of
systems on a
single chip
MEMS
benefits
Figure 8.4
Benefits of micro-electro-mechanical sensors
186
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

pins, etc. Such models can be used to monitor oxygen saturation in blood, heart
rates, also to record hand movement, such as eating or dressing. There is a device in
the market which can detect the body temperature using an ear probe that can detect
an infrared radiation located in the tympanic membrane. Also, a very comfortable
method for monitoring is to place the sensors in the clothing. For monitoring of
blood pressure (BP), heart rates, galvanic skin responses, body temperature and
electrocardiograms, a smart vest is used. It is also called wearable physiological
system. A sensor put in a shoe is a convenient method for detection of foot orien-
tation and position. There is a non-invasive BP sensor that is put on a wrist and
takes the BP through a small balloon, ultrasound or an actuator. For detection of
heart failure, a ring sensor can be used for hypertension management [16].
Components of
lab-on-a-pill
MEMS sensor
Boi sensor
Drug
reservoirs
CMOS
technology
digital camera
Radio
transmitter
Light source
Battery
Battery
Control
circuitry
Components of
smart pill
Figure 8.5
Components of lab on a pill to the left and smart pill to the right
Rear cap
Battery transmitter ASIC
Sensor chip
Figure 8.6
MEMS sensor technology
Sensors for wireless body area networks
187

The most critical issue when talking about medical applications is the stability
and the reliability in the incorporated sensors and switches in order to ensure the
patience safety. Another issue is the stability of the devices. The sensors should be
easy to implement and to be integrated into larger systems.
Typical applications in the medicine are, for example, in the anaesthesia
delivery machines (Figure 8.7), oxygen concentrators (Figure 8.8), sleep apnoea
machines, infusion, kidney dialysis machines (Figure 8.9), insulin and pumps,
diagnostics equipment, flow cytometry (Figure 8.10), monitoring systems, hae-
modialysis (Figure 8.10), etc. The sensors must be accurate, flexible, sensitive,
reliable, to improve patient safety, if it is possible to be cost-effective and small
in size.
Table 8.1
Sensors for clinical and non-clinical application
Applications
Location
Sensor type
Marker
Cardiopulmonary
and vascular
monitoring
Wrist
Ultrasound
Pressure of blood
Multi-variable
Oxygen saturation in
blood, blood pressure,
body temperature, heart
rhythm
Electrocardiograph
Pressure in blood; rhythm
of heart
Finger
Optical
Heart rate; temperature
RF identification
Arm/thigh
Microwave reflec-
tometric cardio-
pulmonary
Heart rate; temperature
In equipment
Optical
Blood oxygen, heart
rhythm and rate; exer-
cise stress
Electrocardiogram
electrodes
Phone
Single-channel
electrocardio-
gram
Heart rhythm; heart rate
Car seat belt
Strain gauge
Respiration rate; heart rate
Home monitoring
for glucose
Arm
Multi-variable
Glucose in blood
Subcutaneous
Glucose
Glucose in tissues
Eye
Glucose
Glucose in eye
Neurological-
function-
monitoring
Clothes
Accelerometers;
inertial sensors
Steps; distance; going up
and down stairs
Visual feedback
glasses
Inertia
Speed when walking and
steps count
Auditory feedback-
headphones
Wrist/ankle
Accelerometer
Seizure
Physical therapy;
rehabilitation
Ankle
Accelerometer;
pedometer
Step counts; distance
188
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Air
Filter
Regulator
Airflow sensor
Airflow sensor
Airflow sensor
Anaesthetic
vapour
Valve
Proximal flow and/or
pressure measurement
Board mount pressure sensor
Airflow sensor
Oxygen
sensor
Valve
Valve
Regulator
Regulator
Motor
Barometric pressure sensing
Valve
Airflow sensor
Flexible heater,
discrete thermistor or RTD
Filter
From
patient
Board mount
pressure sensor
Packaged
temperature probe
Humidiflier
Honeywell HumidlconTM temperature/humidity sensors,
humidity sensors, flexible heater, discrete thermistor or RTD
and packaged temperature probe
Hall-effect sensor ICs
Board mount pressure sensor
Heavy duty pressure sensor
Heavy duty pressure sensor
Heavy duty pressure sensor
Filter
Filter
Nitrous
oxide
Oxygen
Figure 8.7
Typical block diagram of anaesthesia machine

Muffler
Surge
tank
(Air)
Heat
exchanger
Electronic
control
circuit
Heavy duty
pressure sensor
AC hour meter
Motor
Compressor
Air in
Oxygen out
Pressure sensor
Flow meter
adjustment
valve
Pressure
regulator
Product
tank
(oxygen)
Pressure
reducing
orifices
Airflow sensor; pressure sensors; 
pressure switch
Four-way solenoid valve
Bed 1
Bed 2
Figure 8.8
Typical block diagram of oxygen concentrator
Water
Board mount
pressure sensors
Pressure
control
valve
Bubble
trap
Force sensor
Discrete thermistor
or RTD
Infrared reflective sensor,
transmissive infrared sensor
and Hall-effect sensor ICs
PUMP
Blood to patient
Blood from patient
Board mount
pressure sensors
and heavy duty
pressure sensors
Artificial kidney
Transmissive infrared sensor
and Hall-effect sensor ICs
PUMP
Membrane
Flexible heater
Venous
pressure
board mount
pressure sensors
and heavy duty
pressure sensors
Concentrate
Discrete thermistor
or RTD
Temperature
controller
Mixing
tank
Figure 8.9
Typical block diagram of dialysis membrane
190
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

The main purpose of the anaesthesia system (Figure 8.7) is to give drugs to the
patients. It provides the accurate supply of medical gases, with exact amount of
isoflurane, which is delivered to the patient. Four types of sensors are used in such
system: airflow sensor, magnetic position sensors integrated circuits, pressure
sensors and transducers and thermistors. The Hall-effect magnetic position sensor
integrated circuit provides increased output accuracy for vibration and noise
reduction. The integrated circuit is thermally balanced over a wide temperature
range and provides proper fan functionality. The pressure sensors and transducers
are used for air and oxygen pressure measurements. The pressure must not exceed
the necessity level. The warm and moist air from anaesthesia system ensures that
the patient will conformably breathe reducing sore throats, for example.
The purpose of the oxygen concentrator (Figure 8.8) is to reduce the air
nitrogen, thus increasing the oxygen, which is delivered to the patient. It is
designed for patients who have problems with the absorption of the oxygen in
blood. Sensors solutions for such system are airflow sensors, pressure sensors and
transducers, hour-meters and pressure switches. The airflow sensors should detect
ultra-low levels of flow at 0.1 cm3. The idea is to get data when the person exhales,
then the system should send a signal to reduce the airflow. The pressure sensors and
transducers also detect when the patient inhales and minimize the level of oxygen
Sheath
fluid tank
Pump
Pump
Reagent
Sample preparation
Infrared reflective
sensors;
Magnetic  position
sensor
Sample
(test tube)
Board mount
pressure sensor
Sheath fluid
Flow chamber
Optics
Detectors
LASER
Sheath fluid
Board mount
pressure sensor
Figure 8.10
Typical block diagram of flow cytometry
Sensors for wireless body area networks
191

which enables the system to be more compact and to operate more efficiently. The
compact equipment size leads to increased power consumption. There is a pressure
switch on the pressure regulator output which activates an indicator when a high-
pressure level is detected. There are cases where the switch can directly shut down
the motor.
In kidney dialysis machines six types of sensors are used, such as flexible
heaters, magnetic integrated circuits, force sensors, infrared sensors, pressure sen-
sors and transducers and thermistors. The idea of the system is to replace some
kidney functions. The blood from one of the compartments is pumped along one of
the membrane sides (Figure 8.9) and the dialysate is pumped through the other side
of the membrane in another compartment. A negative pressure is applied to the
dialysate compartment in order for an ultra-filtration to be achieved. Thus,
the water and dissolved solutes are moved to the dialysate from the blood and the
processed blood is returned back to the patient body through the circuit. The flex-
ible heater assemblies give controlled heat to warm the blood to the body tem-
perature. These assemblies are custom designed and can fit the customer
requirements. The force sensors detect the presence of dialysate cartridge before
the usage of the machine. They can also be used to monitor the pressure level of the
tube. The magnetic position sensor ICs here are also used for smooth motor control.
The infrared sensor’s purpose is to count the shaft rotation. They comprise photo
detector and infrared emitter and the detection is set when an opaque object is
passed through the package slot.
In the blood analysers flow cytometry (Figure 8.10) is used in order to examine
microscopic cells and chromosomes. They are suspended in a fluid stream
and moved through electronic detection equipment for characteristics analyses.
The system diagnoses health problems and it is also used in research practices.
The sensor solutions here are the infrared sensors which count shaft rotation;
magnetic integrated circuit which detects movement of the extraction needle;
pressure sensors which are used in the pump systems for pressure regulation and
discrete thermistor temperature sensor for temperature monitoring in the chamber
the oil-cooled motor and the diffusion lamps, preventing them from heating [17].
Other popular applications for inertial sensors, which are mostly consumer
oriented, are user interfaces, gaming, health/fitness or phone/tablet augmented reality.
8.3
Overview of sensor characteristics
In Tables 8.2–8.12 the main characteristics are summarized for various sensors
used for medical applications [17].
There are three main types, according to signal conditioning: calibrated, amplified
and unamplified, depending on the application. The linearity of such sensors varies
from 0.10% to 1 full scale span (FSS) typ. Typical temperature range can be from
–40 C to 85 C.
Airflow sensors measure the air flow, nitrous oxide and oxygen. They deliver
to the patient the necessary mixture as it is prescribed from the doctor. Such sensors
192
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Table 8.3
Characteristics for airflow sensors
Sensor
Signal
conditioning
Technology Type
Output
Power
consumption
Media
compat.
Operation
temperature
range
Measurements
in [mm]
(H  W  D)
Airflow
sensor
Amplified;
compensated
Silicon
50 to 750
SCCM
High accuracy
Analog
(Vdc),
digital
(I2C)
3.3 Vdc: 40 mW typical;
23 mW typical;
5.0 Vdc: 55 mW typical;
38 mW typical;
Dry non-
corrosive
gases
–20 C to 70 C Short – 17.6 
28.8  19.9;
long – 20 
36  19.9
Airflow
sensor
Amplified;
compensated
Silicon
High accuracy
10–300 SLPM
Digital
(I2C)
3 Vdc – 60 mW maximum;
10 Vdc – 200 mW
maximum;
Dry non-
corrosive
gases
–20 C to 70 C 110  54.4  54
SCCM, standard cubic centimeters (per) minute; SLPM, standard liters (per) minute.
Table 8.2
Characteristics for force sensors
Sensor
Signal
conditioning
Technology
Force range
Linearity
Operation
temperature
range
Measurements
in [mm]
(H  W  D)
Force
sensor
Calibrated
Silicon die
piezoresistive
0–5; 0–10; 0–15;
0–25; 0–30 psi
0.10% FSS typical, BFSL;
0.25% FSS maximum, BFSL
–28 C to 54 C
7.62  17.145
Force
sensor
Amplified
0–1.5; 0–3 lb.
1.0% FSS typical, BFSL;
3.0% FSS maximum, BFSL
0 C–70 C
8.26  17.27  25.1
Force
sensor
Unamplified
0–5; 0–10; 0–15;
0–20 N
0.5% span typical, BFSL
–40 C to 85 C
9.04  12.70  7.98
BFSL, best fit straight line.

Table 8.4
Characteristics for pressure sensors
Sensor
Signal
conditioning
Pressure
range
Device type
Output
Calibrated
Accuracy
Operation
temperature
range
Measurements
in [mm]
(H  W  D)
Pressure
sensor
Unamplified
1–100 [psi]
Flow
through
gage
Milli-volts

Linearity and
hysteresis:
0.35% typically;
–40 C to 85 C
8.89  25.65 
12.7
Pressure
sensor
Amplified
60 mbar to
10 bar
Differential;
gage
Digital (I2C
or SPI)
analog
(Vdc);

0.25% FSS BFSL
–40 C to 85 C
Varies by
package style
Table 8.5
Characteristics for board mount pressure (BMP) sensors
Sensor
Signal
conditioning
Pressure
range
Device type
Output
Total error
band
Accuracy
Operation
temperature
range
Measurements
in [mm]
(H  W  D)
BMP
sensors
Amplified
1.6 to
40 [mbar]
Differential,
gage
Digital (I2C or
SPI); analog
(Vdc);
1% to 3%
[FSS] depend
on pressure
range
0.25% FSS
BFSL
–20 C to 85 C
Variables by
package styles
Ultra low
pressure
BMP
sensors
Unamplified
1–250 [psi]
(SIP, DIP)
1–15 [psi]
(SMT)
Differential
gage
Milli-volts
–
Linearity and
hysteresis
– 0.5%
typical
–40 C to 85 C
Varies by
configuration;
7.87  10.41 
10.92
Low to mid
BMP
sensors
Amplified
60 mbar to
10 bar
Gage; differ-
ential;
absolute
Analog (Vdc);
digital (I2C
or SPI)
1% FSS
0.25% FSS
BFSL
–20 C to 85 C
Varies by
package style
Low to mid
SIP, system in package; DIP, dual in-line package.

Table 8.6
Characteristics for pressure sensors and transducers
Sensor
Measurement
type
Construction
Pressure range
Output
Accuracy
Operation
temperature
range
Measurements
(H  W  D)
Pressure sensors
and transducers
Absolute, sealed
gage
Parts of stain-
less 316 L
0–500 [psi]
through
0–5000 [psi]
0–100 mV
(nominal)
0.25% BFSL
maximum
–40 C to 125 C
Variables by dif-
ferent type body
Heavy duty
13 mm
Pressure sensors
and transducers
Vacuum gage,
absolute, gage
Parts of stain-
less 316 L
0–3 psi through
0–500 psi
0–100 mV
(nominal)
0.25% BFSL
maximum
–40 C to 125 C
Varies by different
body type
Heavy duty
19 mm
Table 8.7
Characteristics for optical sensors
Sensor
Type
Output option
Resolution
[mm]
Slot
width
[mm]
Supply
voltage
[V]
Termination style
[mm]
Mounting
configuration
Measurements in
[mm] (H  W  D)
Optical
sensors
Transmissive
encoder
Speed or direction
(A-B output)
0.03
3.18
4.5–5.5
0.51 sq leads; min.
lead length 12.7
Dual mounting
tabs
10.64  24.38  23.34
Infrared
Optical
sensors
Transmissive
encoder
Speed/direction
(tach output)
0.46
3.18
4.5–5.5
0.51 sq leads; min.
lead length 12.7
Dual mounting
tabs
10.64  24.38  23.34
Infrared
Optical
sensors
AIGaAs
(880 nm)
LED
–
–
–
–
0.51 sq leads; min.
lead length 12.7
Through-hole
2.28  4.45  18.43
Infrared
LED, light-emitting diode

Table 8.8
Characteristics for thermal sensors
Sensor
Description
Maximum
power (W/cm2)
Operating/storage
temperature range
Size constraints
Heater trace pattern
Geometry
Thermal
sensors
Silicon wire-
wound
6.2
250 C maximum
200 C maximum
(UL)
Any size and
shape; none
Specific or depend
on customer
requirements
Specific or depend on
customer require-
ments
Flex heaters
Thermal
sensors
Silicon chemi-
cally etched
6.2
250 C maximum
200 C maximum
(UL)
0.61 m  0.61 m
Specific or depend
on customer
requirements
Specific or depend on
specific customer
requirements within
size constraints
Flex heaters
Thermal
sensors
Transparent
0.8
–40 C to 85 C
0.60 m  0.43 m
Continuous layer of
ITO across the
entire surface
Specific or depend on
specific customer
requirements
Flex heaters
UL, Underwriters Laboratories Inc.; ITO, indium tin oxide.
Table 8.9
Characteristics for thermal sensors and thermistors and RTDs
Sensor
Description
Operating
temperature
range
Dissipation
constant in still
air (mW/C)
Time
constant
in air (s)
Nominal resistance at
25 C
Maximum
diameter
[mm]
Termination
material
Lead
length
[mm]
Thermal
sensors
Uni curve with
epoxy and bare
leads
–60 C to
150 C
0.75
15.0
500 W; 1000 W; 2252 W;
3000 W; 5000 W;
10,000 W; 30,000 W;
50,000 W; 100,000 W
2.413
Copper,
tinned,
alloy 180
38.1
Thermistors
and RTDs
Thermal
sensors
Uni curve with
epoxy and bare
leads
–60 C to
150 C
0.75
15.0
2252 W, 3000 W, 5000 W,
10,000 W, 30,000 W,
50,000 W, 100,000 W
2.413
Solid nickel,
Teflon
insulated
38.1
Thermistors
and RTDs

Table 8.10
Characteristics for magnetic position sensors and Hall-effect sensor ICs
Sensor
Description
Operating
temperature
range
Magnetic
actuation
Supply voltage
Measurements in
[mm] (H  W)
Magnetic position sensors
Micropower omnipolar
Hall-effect sensor
–40 C to 85 C
Omnipolar
2.2–5.5 Vdc
2.8  2.9
Hall-effect sensor ICs
Magnetic position sensors
Unipolar low-cost Hall-
effect transducer
–40 C to 125 C
Unipolar
3–18 Vdc
2.8  2.9; 3.0  4.1
Hall-effect sensor ICs
Magnetic position sensors
Omnipolar MR sensor IC
–40 C to 85 C
Omnipolar
1.65–5.5 Vdc
2.80  2.90
Magnetoresistive sensors
Magnetic position sensors
Omnipolar MR digital
sensor IC
–40 C to 150 C
Omnipolar
3.8–30 Vdc
4.5  4.5
Magnetoresistive sensors
Table 8.11
Characteristics for temperature/humidity sensors
Sensor
Description
Operating
temperature
range
Humidity
accuracy
Response time
Long-term
stability
Operating
humidity
range
Compensated
humidity
range
Voltage
supply
Temperature/
humidity
sensors
Digital output
–40 C to
100 C
4.5% RH
typical
6 s typical in
20 l/min min.
airflow
1.2% RH for
5 years
0% RH to
100% RH
20% RH to
80% RH
3.3 Vdc typ.
Temperature/
humidity
sensors
Covered,
filtered or
unfiltered
integrated
circuit
–40 C to
85 C
3% RH
5 s typical 1/e in
slow moving
airflow
1.2% RH for
5 years
0.25% RH for
each year
0% RH to
100% RH
–
2.7–5.5 Vdc
Analog series
RH, relative humidity.

Table 8.12
Characteristics for basic switches and pressure switches
Sensor
Type
Operating
temperature
range
Contacts
Set point
Operating pressure/
force [oz]
Connector/
terminals
Measurements
in [mm]
(H  W  D)
Basic
switches
Large premium
basic switch
–55 C to 85 C,
121 C and
204 C
options
Silver, silver
cadmium
oxide
–
1–28
Solder, screw,
quick connect
25.4  17.8 
50.8
Pressure
switches
Direct action
blade contact
–40 C to
121 C
Gold plated;
silver alloy
Set point
factory:
0.5–150
[psi]
250 psi for 25–150 psi
set point range;
150 psi for 0.5–
24 psi set point
range
1/8-27 NPT
male thread/#
8–32 screws
–
NPT, national pipe taper.

can be amplified and compensated; their accuracy is very high, up to 3000 standard
litres per minute, depending on the application. The output can be analog or digital
and the power consumption varies from 3 V to 3.3 V and the normal temperature
operating conditions are –20 C to 70 C.
Pressure sensors are used in most medical equipment. According to their signal,
condition can be amplified and unamplified. The expected output signal is measured
approximately in mV. Typical temperature operating range is –40 C to 85 C.
The BMP sensors are used for oxygen pressure measurement and air moisture
measurement and track if the pressure level exceeds the norms. Another applica-
tion, which involves the low and ultra-low-pressure sensors, is to detect the inha-
lation level of the patient, and this way to control the oxygen dose, in order for
more efficient and compact inhaling system to be used. Typical temperature
operating range is –40 C to 85 C. The output level is typically in mV and can be
analog or digital.
The optical sensors operate using light emission and then detecting objects.
They can sense position, detect objects and speed. The supply voltage at these
sensors is 4.5–5.5 V.
The thermal sensors geometry can be flat, but also it is customizable with different
watt densities for stable heat output depending on the application requirements. Hea-
ters can be put together with other elements from the system or to be combined with
thermistors, thermostats, thermocouples, etc. Their maximum power is 6.2 W/cm2.
The Hall-effect magnetic position sensor integrated circuit provides smoother
motor control. It reduces vibration and noise in a wide range of applications, for
example, anaesthesia machine fan systems. Its compact size allows them to be
designed and integrated into compact, lower-cost assemblies. They can be omni-
polar or unipolar (low-cost solution). The operating temperature range is –40 C to
85 C/125 C. The lower supply voltage in combination with average current which
has also very low value reduces the overall power consumption.
Humidity sensors provide warm moist air that increases patient comfort. There
is a package in which a temperature and humidity sensors are combined. Typical
operating temperature range is –40 C to 100 C.
Position switches can be used for position detection of hospital beds. Their
contacts may be fabricated from silver, gold plated or alloy [17].
8.4
WBAN technologies
Depending on the application, different WBAN technologies at different levels can
be used.
Bluetooth was designed in order to support high-security levels. It is a short
wireless communication standard. Every device can communicate simultaneously
within a single piconet with up to seven other devices. One device acts as a master
and the other seven devices act as slaves.
The attractive part of the Bluetooth is to allow devices to communicate almost
in every part of the world. The devices operate at 2.4 GHz industrial scientific and
Sensors for wireless body area networks
199

medical band, with frequency hopping at 791 MHz channels at 1600 hops per
second nominal rate in order to reduce interference. Bluetooth covers ranges from
1 to 100 m. Maximum data rate is 3 Mbps.
Bluetooth low energy (BLE) is designed as a more appropriate choice for
WBAN applications when less power consumption is necessary. It wirelessly
connects small devices to mobile terminals. Such devices are used for health
monitoring. BLE is supposed to provide a data of up to 1 Mbps. Here, synchroni-
zation in a few milliseconds can be obtained compared to Bluetooth. Due to its
nominal data rate, low energy and low latency, this technology is a perfect solution
for sensor nodes communication, which are wearable, and the access point. It is
also possible for BLE to coexist with Wi-Fi. The technology operates at 2.4 GHz
ISM band, which may be an issue at interference with other devices.
Zigbee and 802.15.4 are mostly used when low-power consumption is needed.
It is appropriate for applications, which require low data rate, secure network
(128-bit security support) and long battery life. The Zigbee technology has two
parts: first is Zigbee alliance which indicates the application layers, defines the
network, application software layers and security; the second part is the IEEE-
802.15.4 standard which defines the medium access layers. The wireless devices,
which are Zigbee-based, operated at 868 MHz, 915 MHz and 2.4 GHz frequency
band. One of the basic disadvantages is due to interferences with wireless local area
network (WLAN) transmission, mostly at 2.4 GHz. Another disadvantage is the
low data 250 Kbps rate, which is the reason to be unusable for real-time WBAN
applications.
IEEE 802.11 technology is a set of standards for WLAN. It is ideal for large
data transfers due to its high-speed wireless connection. An important advantage of
IEEE 802.11 is that all smartphones and laptops have Wi-Fi. An important draw-
back is the high-energy consumption.
IEEE 802.15.6 technology is the first WBAN standard which supports medical
and non-medical applications. This standard is used in wearable WSN as it is
specifically designed for a wide data ranges, less power consumption, full nodes
number (256) per body area network. It can reach rates of up to 10 Mbps, which is
not appropriate for WBAN applications [1,18].
8.4.1
Applications depending on the technology
Table 8.13 gives an overview of the requirements for medical applications and the
technologies which are appropriate.
The main requirements of WBANs are
●
Reliability: Due to the fact that the data sent by WBAN sensors concern heath
issues a high reliability and stability are required.
●
Security: These systems operate with personal and important critical data; the
security and privacy of this data are important issues in this case.
●
Latency: Medical applications which concern emergency information cannot
accept long time for response. So, transmission in real time with guaranteed
performance is required.
●
Power consumption: Battery change in WBANs is easy.
200
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Rehabilitation applications, for example, capture movements of patients for
monitoring his/her daily activity at a therapy. Different applications for clinical
purposes may include brain injury treatments and motor rehabilitation. The system
must provide high accuracy in data store and data process in order to take the
correct medical data.
Biofeedback offers the ability for constant monitoring of health parameters.
These parameters have to be as accurate and reliable as possible. If the sensor size
is too small, it limits the battery, and if the sensor stops working, the stored para-
meters will be lost. Many solutions use Bluetooth, such as a smartphone. The
personal digital assistant is used for communication with the sensor node, which
allows mobility of the patient. Personal digital assistants (PDAs) are able to process
data and have several gigabytes of flash storage.
Table 8.13
Applications and quality of service requirements
Applications
Examples
QoS requirements
Technologies
Latency Power Security Reliability
Telemedicine
systems
Prevention detec-
tion and treat-
ment of
diseases


Wi-Fi
Post-surgical
treatment in
home recovery
monitoring


ANT
Wireless
Remote health-
care monitor-
ing system


Bluetooth
Chronic disease
monitoring
systems




Zigbee
Activity monitor-
ing of activities
in daily life



RFID
Emergency
rescue



IEE 802.15.6
Biofeedback
of systems
User biofeedback
activity


ANT
Wireless
Bluetooth
Zigbee
Systems for
assisted
living
Assisted living
systems for
elderly people



IEE 802.15.6
Treatments for
peoples at
home



Zigbee
Rehabilitation
systems
Rehabilitation
and daily life



Zigbee
Wi-Fi
QoS, quality of service; RFID, radio-frequency identification.
Sensors for wireless body area networks
201

The ambient assisted living system provides health status monitoring. One of
their benefits is the reduced medical costs. The so-called smart homes are equipped
with vibration, acoustic and vision sensors. The security and privacy of these sys-
tems are of great importance due to the fact that personal data is collected. The
IEEE 802.15.6 has three security levels and is appropriate in such applications
[1,19–25].
8.5
Conclusion
WSNs, and even Internet of Things, are not single technologies; they represent
complex systems which use different technologies, from physical communication
layers to application programmes. This diversity leads to a complex standardization
environment.
Due to the huge advances in the MEMS system technology, the developments
in wireless communications and WSNs have also emerged. WSNs have become one
of the most interesting research areas in the past few years. The future developments
in sensor nodes must be focused to cost-effective and powerful systems in order to
be used in applications such as sensing-based cyber physical systems, underwater
acoustic sensor systems, time applications, spectrum management and cognitive
sensing. The researcher challenges include improvements in power, security, costs,
system architecture, real-time protocols, practical and analytical results.
The increasing market revenue for sensors in medical/health applications is
inevitable. There is a constant demand from the healthcare industry for improved
care, so the importance of such sensors is constantly increasing; further develop-
ments in sensor technology and new medical sensors applications are necessary.
References
[1]
Negra R, Jemili I, Belghith A. Wireless body area networks: Applications
and technologies. Procedia Computer Science, The Second International
Workshop on Recent Advances on Machine-to-Machine Communications;
23–26 May 2016; Madrid; Spain; pp. 1275–81.
[2]
International Electrotechnical Commission. Internet of Things: Wireless
Sensor Networks. 2015. p. 78.
[3]
Ullah S, Higgins H, Braem B, et al. A comprehensive survey of wireless
body area networks. Journal of Medical Systems. 2012; 36(3): 1065–94.
[4]
Al Masud S. Study and analysis of scientific scopes, issues and challenges
towards developing a righteous wireless body area network. International
Journal of Soft Computing and Engineering. 2013; 2(3): 243–51.
[5]
Hadjidj A, Souil M, Bouabdallah A, Challal Y, Owen H. Wireless sensor
networks for rehabilitation applications: Challenges and opportunities.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications. 2013; 36(1): 1–15.
[6]
Boulemtafes A, Badache N. Design of wearable health monitoring systems:
An overview of techniques and technologies. In: Lazakidou A, Zimeras S,
202
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Iliopoulou D, Koutsouris D, editors. mHealth Ecosystems and Social Net-
works in Healthcare. Switzerland: Springer International Publishing AG;
2016. pp. 79–94.
[7]
Whelan M, Janoyan K. Wireless sensor network for monitoring of geo-
structural systems. Seventh International Symposium on Field Measure-
ments in Geomechanics; 26 April 2012; Boston, USA, (307)94.
[8]
Alam M, Hamida E. Surveying wearable human assistive technology for life
and safety critical applications: Standards, challenges and opportunities.
Sensors. 201425; 14(5), 9153–09.
[9]
Acampora G, Cook D, Rashidi P, Vasilakos A. A survey on ambient intel-
ligence in healthcare. Proceedings of the IEEE. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers;
2013; 101(12): 2470–94.
[10]
Hatler M, Gurganious D, Chi C. Industrial wireless sensor networks.
A market dynamics report. ON World; 2012.
[11]
Hayakawa M, Uchimura Y, Omae K, Waki K, Fujita H, Ohe K. A smartphone-
based medication self-management system with real-time medication
monitoring. Applied Clinical Informatics. 2013; 4(1): 37–52.
[12]
Dobkin BH, Dorsch A. The promise of mHealth: Daily activity monitoring
and outcome assessments by wearable sensors. Neurorehabilitation & Neural
Repair. 2011; 25(9): 788–98.
[13]
Darwish A, Hassanien AE. Wearable and implantable wireless sensor net-
work solutions for healthcare monitoring. Sensors. 2011; 11(6): 5561–95.
[14]
Cook DJ, Thompson JE, Prinsen SK, Dearani JA, Deschamps C. Functional
recovery in the elderly after major surgery: assessment of mobility recovery
using wireless technology. The Annals of Thoracic Surgery. 2013; 96(3):
1057–61.
[15]
Thusu R. ‘Medical sensors facilitate health monitoring’. Sensors online.
1 April 2011.
[16]
Appelboom G, Camacho E, Abraham ME, et al. Smart wearable body sen-
sors for patient self-assessment and monitoring. Archives of Public Health.
2014; 72(1): 28. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/2049-3258-72-28.
Access on May 2017.
[17]
Medical Range Guide. ‘Sensors, switches, and solutions for medical appli-
cations’’, 2012 Honeywell International Inc, www.honeywell.com/sensing
[18]
Noorzaie I. Survey paper: Medical applications of wireless networks.
2008:1–15.
Available
at:
http://www.cse.wustl.edu/~jain/cse574-08/ftp/
medical/index.html. Access on May 2017.
[19]
Tobon DP, Falk TH, Maier M. Context awareness in WBANs: A survey on
medical and non-medical applications. IEEE Wireless Communications.
2013; 20(4): 30–7.
[20]
Adibi S. Mobile health: A technology road map. Switzerland: Springer
International Publishing AG; 2015.
[21]
Blilat A, Bouayad A, Chaoui NEH, Ghazi ME. Wireless sensor network:
Security challenges. 2012 Natl. Days Netw. Secur. Syst. 2012. pp. 68–72.
Sensors for wireless body area networks
203

[22]
Jain A, Kant K, Tripathy MR. Security solutions for wireless sensor
networks. 2012 Second Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Commun. Technol. 2012.
pp. 430–3.
[23]
Le XH, Sankar R, Khalid M, Lee S. Public key cryptography-based security
scheme for wireless sensor networks in healthcare. Proc. 4th Int. Conf.
Uniquitous Inf. Manag. Commun. [Internet]. New York, NY, USA:
ACM; 2010. p. 5:1–5:7. Available
from: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
2108616.2108623. Access on June 2017.
[24]
Kalita HK, Kar A. Key management in secure self organized wireless sensor
network: A new approach. Proc. Int. Conf. & Work. Emerg. Trends Technol.
[Internet]. New York, NY, USA: ACM; 2011. pp. 865–70.
[25]
Ricciardi L, Mostashari F, Murphy J, Daniel JG, Siminerio EP. A national
action plan to support consumer engagement via e-health. Heal. Aff.
[Internet]. 1 February 2013; 32(2): 376–84. Available from: http://content.
healthaffairs.org/content/32/2/376.abstract. Access on June 2017.
Further reading
[1]
Ghamari M, Janko B, Sherratt RS, Harwin W, Piechockic R, Soltanpur C.
A survey on wireless body area networks for eHealthcare systems in resi-
dential environments. sensors. 2016; 16(6).
[2]
Abidi A. Behavioral modeling of analog and mixed signal ICs. IEEE 2001
CiUSTOM INEGRATED CIRCUIT Conf. 2001. pp. 443–50.
[3]
Ibrahim L, Osman H, Osman A, Ali ES. Impact of power consumption in
sensors life time for wireless body area networks. International Journal of
Grid and Distributed Computing. 2016; 9(8): 97–108.
[4]
Newell G, Vejarano G. Human-motion based transmission power control
in wireless body area networks. Internet Things (WF-IoT), 2016 IEEE 3rd
World Forum. 2016. pp. 277–82.
[5]
Yuvaradni B, Dhanahsri D, Sonali G, Gauri T, Thite MS. Health monitoring
services using wireless body area network. Imperial Journal of Inter-
disciplinary Research. 2016; 2(5).
Biographies
Ivelina Nikolaeva Ruskova is Assistant Professor in Technical University of
Sofia, Bulgaria, since 2016. Ruskova received her Ph.D. from Technical University
of Sofia, Department of Microelectronics Bulgaria in 2013. Her Ph.D. is in the area
of magnetic sensors, in specific magnetic Hall transducers. Her research interests
are in design and investigations of MEMS, sensors, magnetic sensors and nanoscale
integrated circuits. She has been actively involved in the process of development of
several online courses in the field of nanoelectronics. She has also been an author
and co-author of several scientific papers presented on international conferences in
the field of sensorics.
204
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Assistant Professor Elitsa Emilova Gieva was born on 3 June 1982 in Ruse,
Bulgaria. She obtained a Master of Electronics Engineering degree from the
Technical University of Sofia in 2009. She received her Ph.D. from Technical
University of Sofia, Department of Microelectronics Bulgaria in 2013. Currently
she is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Electronic Engineering and Tech-
nologies, Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria. Her research is focused on
modelling of state-of-the-art microelectronic devices and bioelectronics (organic
protein hydrogen bonding networks). She has co-authored in 10 scientific pub-
lications for the last year and she has been involved in R&D projects within his
research interests including the areas of hydrogen bonding networks, proteins,
bioelectronics, nanoelectronics and MEMS.
Sensors for wireless body area networks
205

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 9
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
Rossitza Goleva1, Mara Pudane2, Sintija Petrovica2,
Egons Lavendelis2, Karl Kreiner3, Mario Drobics4,
Ivan Ganchev5,6, Nuno M. Garcia7, Rumen Stainov8,
Ciprian Dobre9, Constandinos X. Mavromoustakis10,
Ivan Chorbev11, Vladimir Trajkovik11, Eftim Zdravevski11,
and George Mastorakis12
Abstract
This chapter presents a generic ‘ambient assisted living as a service’/‘enhanced
living environment as a service’ platform. Multiple platform elements are described
by taking into account layered hierarchical models, horizontally and vertically
planning models as well as models with planes. The main goal of the work is to
identify the important platform parts, classify the existing models, and create a
framework that will allow further protocols and services classification. The chapter
starts with a presentation of the end-user requirements, continues with the analysis
and design phases, and ends with a possible implementation of the platform as a
cloud-based one, aiming to aggregate data from multiple different access and edge
technological solutions and islands, and allowing data analysis and mining at the
abstract level. This is considered as a driving force for further development of
possible business solutions. The work is based on a real-life experience gained
within living labs and conducted surveys on the topic.
1Department of Communication Networks, Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria
2Department of Artificial Intelligence and Systems Engineering, Riga Technical University, Latvia
3Center for Health & Bioresources, Austria
4Center for Digital Safety & Security, Austria
5University of Limerick, Ireland
6University of Plovdiv Paisii Hilendarski, Bulgaria
7Universidade da Beira Interior, Portugal
8Applied Computer Science Department, University of Applied Sciences, Germany
9University of Politehnica of Bucharest and National Institute for Research and Development in Infor-
matics, Romania
10Department of Computer Science, University of Nicosia, Cyprus
11University Ss Cyril and Methodius, Republic of Macedonia
12Technological Educational Institute of Crete, Greece

9.1
Introduction
Ambient assisted living (AAL) is a paradigm that focuses on the research and
development (R&D) of systems that enhance quality of life of people with special
needs, that is, elderly, people with disabilities, or people who temporarily need
assistance [1]. As by definition AAL systems are extremely complex, there are a
number of sub-goals and sub-tasks that should be fulfilled to achieve the creation of
an enhanced living environment (ELE). Pure information and communication
technology (ICT) systems are often difficult for use by non-professionals. Such
systems often have features requiring sophisticated configuration, which is beyond
the capability of the common end-users. On the other hand, part of the systems is
used professionally and needs to be designed and implemented in such a way as to
support rich professional, and reliable, services.
Humans are social beings, thus one of the most important sub-goals of the
AAL/ELE is to support social contact – this is achievable through the imple-
mentation of affect detection and processing mechanisms in a system. Affect is a
generic term used to cover feelings, mood, emotions, etc. However, the inclusion of
an affect would support not only emotional and social needs as there are two
potential goals for the integration of emotions in AAL/ELE systems:
1.
To improve the user’s mood by either communicating with user or changing
his/her environment.
2.
To enhance the system’s rational behaviour and decision-making.
This social side of the end-user equipment is becoming even more important when
speaking about elderly, children, patients with disabilities, and finally end-users
that keep track on their state (e.g. physical, emotional, etc.). A good combination
between the end-user perception and technological ICT solutions may lead to the
better understanding of the needs and better performance of the services and
equipment on the market.
Social aspects of AAL/ELE systems are closely related to the field of affective
computing (AC). This includes R&D directions and practical applications that
explore how affects such as emotions, personality, mood, etc., can be built into a
system for various purposes [2]. So far, many AAL/ELE systems have been devel-
oped that take into account affects on various complexity levels. There are many
analyses in the literature in this field. Part of them could be seen in Chapters 2–4 of
this book. Social connectedness, social inclusion, and social usefulness are con-
sidered non-technical terms that influence the work with the equipment significantly.
Currently, in most of the existing AAL/ELE environments (e.g. smart homes),
which consider affect as one of the parameters, the adaptation is carried out through
tailored music [3,4], colour [5–7], and lighting conditions [8,9]. Other emotion-
based AAL/ELE solutions, for example, mobile application ‘Optimism App’ [10],
are designed to track patient’s daily mood and to help them with mood disorders.
A social application named ‘SocialConnector’ [11] monitors the mood of the
elderly to allow caregivers or family members to react on time in supporting the
person in need. The Lifestyle and Health Management System [12] assesses
208
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

the current mood of a patient and based on acquired results suggests to perform
certain exercises to cheer up a patient or to distract his/her attention from depres-
sing thoughts. ALI system [13] has been developed to support behaviour change in
individuals with social withdrawal and mild depression.
This chapter is organized as follows. Firstly, the state of the art is presented
followed by an introduction of the protocol stack and framework of the AAL/ELE
platform for ambient assisted living as a service (AALaaS)/enhanced living
environment as a service (ELEaaS) provision, by taking into account the ICT
approach. The generic platform is exemplified by specific applications for a truly
affective system taking care of the end-user requirements. Further, the cloud aspect
of the platform is developed by defining smart dust, dew, fog, and cloud levels in
the scope of the access, edge, and core networks as well as storage area networks,
consisting of data centres and server farms. Finally, future research directions
conclude the chapter.
9.2
State of the art
The notion of ambient intelligence is known in the literature since 2005 [14]. With
recent new ideas of internetworking, when the interconnection of a big variety of
smart, and not so smart, devices is part of our everyday life, the term is becoming
more and more popular. Furthermore, the price dropping of ICT services and
devices, along with the increased abilities of new ICT technologies, for example,
cloud computing, made it possible unifying part of services while also enriching the
other part. Active people, who are capable of paying a particular service, would
also like to introduce it for use by their family members, that is, elderly, children,
disabled relatives, etc. In doing this, active people may use the service preventively
as service recipients. For instance, they may track different daily activities related
to fitness, sport, hobbies, shopping, cooking, and the need of special assistance in
their personal environments. Part of these activities could be performed with the
support of special devices like robots and controllers; other part could be just
sensed through different devices.
On the other hand, the idea of consultation with a medical doctor followed by a
prescribed treatment is changing. In many cases the presence of the doctor and the
patient in the same room is not obligatory. In this sense, the ICT could be used to
help both sides to perform better the caring tasks for the favour of the patient. Being
not all time proactive, patients continue to change their behaviour. Thus, doctors
and physicists also need to change and be proactive when prevention is needed.
Many studies try to define related terms such as patient-centric and doctor-centric
performance [15], remote operations, remote consultation services, etc. The ser-
vices that could attract both sides – patients and caregivers – are still not well
defined. Many of the already existing services are very specific [16].
The AAL/ELE platforms are a matter of serious analysis and design by dif-
ferent projects, stakeholders, national and international organizations. The topic is
considered very hot due to the population ageing and vast possibilities to use
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
209

electronic devices in medicine and everyday life. This phenomenon changed the
way of medical caring, active or passive ageing, and operation of social caring
service providers. The process uses a big variety of ICT services regardless of them
being atomic, aggregated or complex (see Chapter 5). The work in the field started
with different projects like Universaal [17]. Organizations, like the AAL Forum,
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), and the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU), are considered to be driving forces [18–22] in
the field. They started to define and experiment with platforms from different
perspectives. The AAL Forum considers the applications. The ETSI made a part-
nership with the European Commission and creates Smart Appliances REFerence
for home appliances. The ETSI is working also towards integration with machine-
to-machine communication standards [16]. The ITU issued valuable recommen-
dations on health services highlighting also their interoperability [22].
Attempts to define layers in the AAL/ELE platforms compared to the Open
System Interconnection (OSI) Reference Model are made in [23,24]. A virtualiza-
tion approach towards the data collection and processing is shown in [15,24–26].
The clear service virtualization is still coming ahead though.
A very similar plane model for social environment and its personalization is
presented by Andrew Williams in [27]. He proposed separation of the customer
plane from the infrastructure and cloud planes in the platform.
There are many works on assisted living and elderly support services. Most of
them are specific and related to diseases like dementia, Alzheimer, handicaps, etc.
The market niche for services for the active people is almost empty. Only fitness
devices that are often partially connected exist. While clinical devices are carefully
tested before their implementation into practice, the common type devices that
exist on the market do not meet the high medical standards [16]. There is a lack of
devices that could be personalized and customized [28]. There are no devices to
support family members cooperatively with caregivers [29].
A sensor-based environment example is demonstrated in [30]. The MuSAMA
project [31] also defined a sensor smart environment architecture along with mul-
tiple use-cases and scenarios concerning the smart home and environment automa-
tion [32]. Different associations also support the Internet of Things (IoT) appliance
development, for example, DesignSpark [33]. A platform application proposal,
involving a body area network and home appliances, could be seen in [34].
9.3
Generic AALaaS/ELEaaS architecture
A generic AAL/ELE architecture that could support AALaaS/ELEaaS for primary,
secondary, and tertiary end-users is presented in Figure 9.1. The architecture con-
sists of two planes. The so-called infrastructure plane is directly related to the ICT
equipment and its features. It could be compared to the OSI model as in [15,35].
The physical layer could be supported by multiple access network (AN) technol-
ogies, such as the IEEE 802.xx standards for personal, local, regional, and metro-
politan ANs, Bluetooth, ZigBee, Fibre Channel Protocol, xG mobile technologies
210
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

and beyond. Gateways could support the transmission of data from proprietary
equipment. This capability allows collection and consolidation of the vast amount
of raw data called later on ‘big data’.
The link and network layers relate to the AN infrastructure. Many different
solutions could be seen in different implementations. There is a need for clear
distinction between medical-level networks for hospitals and general-type net-
works, including social networks. Equipment, supporting general type of services
and pretending to work at clinical level, already exists on the market. The aim of
the proposed AALaaS/ELEaaS platform definition is to allow proper positioning
of such equipment with its level of development, readiness for the market, limits of
applications, reliability, and security.
The next layers in the infrastructure plane (see Figure 9.1) are related to the
process of virtualization. This could not be done without a common transport layer
providing a reliable solution for data exchange. The session layer, if separately
implemented, will allow better working in disruptive environments with inter-
mittent coverage like parks, public transport routes, flights, etc. Security protocols
should be defined at all layers. The need of personal security strategy is becoming
important because of the sensitivity of the exchanged data. The application layer
could be virtualized completely or could use locally installed applications. It could
be peer-to-peer or client/server based, depending on the specific implementation.
The virtual plane allows complete virtualization of the AAL/ELE services,
supporting data storage and processing independently from the end-users’ equip-
ment. This plane will open a new niche in the market of data processing and ana-
lysis that is considered important in the active-ageing and medical applications.
At the lowest virtualization layer, information for servers is stored, considering
them as part of the so-called smart dust and dew computing level. The data could be
Client/server, peer-to-peer, peer port applications
Operating system
Middleware
Virtual machines
Distributed processing
Distributed data
Data mobility
Virtualized application layer
Security issues (considered at all layers)
Session, virtual sessions, associations, exchanges
UDP, TCP, Mobile TCP, Modbus TCP, RTP, RTCP
Addressing, routing, topology management, IP, ZigBee, SCSI, FCP, AODV, SPF
IEEE 802.3, 802.11, 802.15.x, 802.16, 802.20, Bluetooth, 2,5G, 3G, 4G, 5G, 6G, FCP and beyond
IEEE 802.3, 802.11, 802.15.x, 802.16, 802.20, Bluetooth, 2,5G, 3G, 4G, 5G, 6G, FCP and beyond
Infrastructure plane
Virtual plane
Virtualization layer, storage in dew/ fog/ cloud
Figure 9.1
A generic AALaaS/ELEaaS architecture
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
211

pre-processed there. Services like data conversion, data replication, archiving, and
backup are supported at this level. At the fog computing level, regional or national
data centres are defined for accumulating the data from dews. Regional server
farms could process the data at this level. These usually implement services, uti-
lized in the local health systems linking the end-users’ data with the health records
processed by the general-purpose doctors and caregivers. At this level, health
insurance companies also work by implementing local rules for public and private
health services.
The cloud computing layer is the global core infrastructure, consisting of ser-
ver farms and data centres, expected to support the generic services worldwide
regardless of time and place as well as mobility in accessing the edge and core
equipment and software. It could be developed regardless of the local health reg-
ulations and peculiarity of services. The aim of the platform is to move to the cloud
layer as much services as possible in order to avoid local legislative limits and
highly customized by culture services.
The virtualization process continues at next two layers by utilizing virtual
machines (VM) and middleware, based on different technologies. There are fixed,
distributed, and even mobile solutions for VM migration. The operating system
layer supports all available types of operating systems. The application layer at the
cloud is a vast developing niche that will allow fast creation of web-based and
cloud-based services and applications on top of the collected raw data. The access
to the services through a common-type web browser and the modular approach in
data collection allow smooth and step-by-step deployment of services.
Special attention in this AALaaS/ELEaaS architecture is paid to the data pro-
cessing and data storing. The data could be considered as ethereal or water-like
substance that could move, migrate, be copied, filtered, and represented in different
ways. The data could be mobile, distributed, or consolidated and its processing
could be local, distributed, or centralized. The data presentation in common inter-
changeable formats is a new hot topic in the computing nowadays. The standardi-
zation process in this direction is still ongoing [16,21].
The main AALaaS/ELEaaS functions are summarized in Table 9.1. The defi-
nitions follow the layered structure and highlight the possibility for new technol-
ogies interconnection in the future through gateways. Precise definitions and
standard interfaces between layers and standard protocols between nodes is a
matter of further development of the platform. This is especially valid for data
formats and parameterization needed to ensure interoperability between different
parts of the platform. There are some promising implementations that could be
utilized in solving the complexity of the problem [15,23].
The AALaaS, and its more general term ELEaaS, could not be designed without
taking into consideration the traffic in the network. Different traffic flows from ANs
through edge networks towards core networks, and back, are shown in Figure 9.2. All
parts could act independently or could be interconnected at different levels. The
connectivity depends on the level of development of the networks but also on the
local, national, and international legislation. The AAL/ELE laboratories, end-user
homes, and community centres are considered to work at the dew level.
212
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Table 9.1
Main AALaaS/ELEaaS functions
Layer
Purpose/functions
Description/trends
Infrastructure plane
Physical layer
End-user access (and interfacing) via different types of
access networks (personal, local, regional, metropolitan),
with a cohesive vision towards utilization of new
technologies
The vast development of new access technologies and interfaces (standard and
non-standard) may lead to a bigger fragmentation
Link layer
End-user access (and interfacing) via different types of
access networks (personal, local, regional, metropolitan),
with a cohesive vision towards utilization of new
technologies
Point-to-point and point-to-multipoint reliable and unreliable links
Services with simplex broadcasting
Channel switching modes
In-order delivery and not-in-order delivery of data
Network layer
Addressing (e.g. IPv4/IPv6 based), routing, congestion
control, Quality of Service (QoS) control,
internetworking
Addressing is technology specific
Reliable services via alternative routing paths; multipath management
Protocols applied for network building could be also specific
Gold and premium QoS support
Internetworking is supported via multiprotocol routers or tunnels
Multihoming
Transport layer
User Datagram Protocol, Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP), Mobile TCP, Modbus TCP, Real-time Transport
Protocol, Real-time Transport Control protocol, Stream
Control Transmission Protocol, Message Queue
Telemetry Transport
End-to-end connection-oriented and connectionless transport, quality assurance
transport, multipoint acknowledged services, multicasting, service
multiplexing, etc.
Session layer
Establishment and management of multimedia sessions,
virtual sessions, and associations; dialog units exchange
and coordination.
The session could be named differently depending on the utilized technology
Special attention should be paid to disruptive technologies where bundle
protocols are applied
Presentation
layer
Interoperability between different encoding methods used
in different systems
Data encoding and conversion is a hot topic nowadays
Changes in storing technologies may have direct influence on data persistence
Application
layer
High-level services (virtualized and non-virtualized)
This layer could be virtualized or not depending on the level of the platform
implementation
Services could be urgent, non-urgent, medical-related, home and environment
automation services, lighting, transportation, activity, robot-based
services, etc.
Services may involve transmission of voice, audio, video, data, image, etc.
(Continues)

Table 9.1
(Continued )
Layer
Purpose/functions
Description/trends
Applications could be client/server or peer-to-peer
Application protocols might be of different types
Data processing could be transferred to the cloud or done locally
Some services like login, logout, timing, task, synchronization, collaboration,
persistence etc., could be atomic whereas other services like accessing health
records, reading hearth data, etc., are composite or aggregated
Virtual plane
Virtualization
layer
Storage at a dew/fog/cloud level
Complex distributed services could be supported at a dew, fog, or cloud level
Support for virtual machines and middleware
Services could be partially centralized or fully distributed, depending on the
level of migration support
Virtual machine
layer
Virtual machine support for servers in farms
Migration services for data and virtual machines
Fixed services for data and virtual machines
Virtual machines configuration and management
Middleware
layer
Middleware atomic services such as login, timing, colla-
boration, synchronization, etc., that are used for the
creation of highly customized end-user services
Services could be fixed or mobile, and are transparent in time and place
Operating
system layer
Different types of operating systems
Necessity to support different types of operating systems opening the possibility
for new solutions
Support of portable and non-portable systems as well as proprietary systems
through proper interfaces
Application
layer
Applications in different modes
Client/server, peer-to-peer, peer port applications
Sets of multiparty services
Sets of multicasting services
Data mobility
layer
Data presentation
Definition of common data interchangeable formats, data storage, data
encapsulation, data mobility, data replication, backup, restore, pre- and
post-processing
Distributed data
layer
Data distribution and search services
Attention paid to search, distribution, and migration of big data
Services, utilizing distributed data for processing
Distributed
processing
Support of centralized and distributed data processing
Services could be placed in the cloud and remain centralized
They could allow distributed processing using atomic synchronization and
collaboration services

Data collection from the dust, dew, fog, and cloud is illustrated in Figure 9.3.
The ELEaaS information and communication services depend on the infrastructure
at the dust and dew levels and are undependable of the end-user infrastructure at
the fog and cloud levels. The free movement of data and the processing facilities of
the platform will allow concentration of the service provision in places of service
necessity/interest, regardless of the supporting infrastructure. In addition, this will
Core networks
Houses
Flats of apartments
Business buildings
Shops, hospitals 
Parks 
Transport
Access networks
Server
Server
Server
Server
Server
Server
Data
centre
Data
centre
Processing server farms
Processing server farms
Big data 
storages
WPAN 
Edge networks
Figure 9.2
AALaaS/ELEaaS traffic flows
Core networks
Houses
Flats of apartments
Business buildings
Shops, hospitals 
Parks 
Transport
Access networks
Edge networks
WPAN 
Server
Server
Server
Server
Server
Server
Data
centre
Data
centre
Processing server farms
Processing server farms
Bigdata
storages
Figure 9.3
AALaaS/ELEaaS performed at the dust, dew, fog, and cloud levels
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
215

allow the use of expertise regardless of the place of the service, that is, Arctic,
Indian Ocean, Bulgaria.
The personal living environments (PLEs) and their interconnections are
defined at the dew level (see Chapter 5). Taking into consideration the mobility of
the end-users, the PLE should be built as an overlay environment on the top of the
already existing (software-defined) platform. This way of environment scaling and
free motion of data and processing capacity is going to change the way the (remote)
medical care is done.
9.4
Affective computing mapping implementation
While speaking on AC from the technical point of view, the AALaaS/ELEaaS-
related components and features are blurred along the platform. To make it clearer,
the general affective system framework proposed by Hudlicka [36] could be used
as a reference. The framework defines main building blocks of affective mechan-
isms in AAL/ELE systems, as well as corresponding functions. Such a general
approach allows systematic and organized design and implementation of necessary
processes and functions, as well as enables comparing affective mechanisms of
various systems.
One common conception is that the system has to have a complex user model
that is able to predict user behaviour. For this purpose, an internal user model as
well as simulation is needed [37]. The conceptual adapted framework in Figure 9.4
is taking into consideration the AC-related functions, that is, the mood and per-
sonality detection and exploitation. It includes three main AC blocks that are
associated with the corresponding rational processes as well as the user simulation
model in the affect computation block. The full rational model is not included in
the figure. The main idea behind this mechanism is that the system runs various
scenarios on the user model to see what could be the reaction of the user. Such a
model would be utterly incomplete without considering affect.
Affects could be mapped at the dew, fog, and cloud levels, depending on the
customization and globalization level of data processing. The important impact of
such approach is the development, usage and offering of the service to the end-user
regardless of the equipment in his/her premises.
The full-fledged affective functionality would allow not only adaptation to a
user’s needs, emotions, and behaviour but also generating an artificial social being
whose personality matches the user’s personality. The current systems lack such
social support. Nowadays, AAL/ELE systems do not have complex internal
mechanisms themselves, that is, systems do not ‘feel’ emotions. However, such
complex user modelling and internal mechanisms as well as adaptation to the user
model would enable new features and benefits from the affect implementation in
the system.
According to AC, an abstract affective component can be distinguished which
performs three processes  affect recognition, affect computation, and affect
expression [38]. Affect computation consists of emotion generation and emotion
216
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

mapping on behaviour [36]. These affective processes can be mapped onto general
rational processes as well as affective and rational functions particular for AAL/
ELE environments (Table 9.2). Rational processes that can be distinguished for
AAL/ELE system are taken from [39]. The particular architecture implementation,
that is, services or layers do not impact the needed AAL/ELE functionality as
various architectures are still targeted towards achieving the same goals.
There has been a discussion on what processes or functions are needed for the
implementation of a social function in the AAL/ELE. Aside from obvious affective
functions of AAL/ELE, such as sensor fusion and data mapping to emotion pat-
terns, there are functions that would enhance AAL/ELE environments with more
advanced functionality. For example, user profiling has a lot of benefits from
the point of view of using affective information in the system, including adaptation
to a user and prediction of a user’s behaviour (see Chapter 5). According to [1],
AAL/ELE systems must be able not only to adapt to the particular individual but
Sensor1
Actuatorn
Actuator1
Actuator
...
Sensor data
fusion
Fused
data
Affective cues
and patterns
repository
Personality
User’s
personality
Possible
response
of
the system
Affective
strategies
and goals
System’s
affective
strategies
repository
Strategies
Affective
swings
Systems goals
and strategies
Affective
reasoning
mechanism of
a system
System’s
affective
response
Emotional
pattern
Emotional
pattern
repository
Behaviour
pattern
execution
sequence
Cognitive
actions
Simulated
reasoning
mechanism of a
user
Simulated
user’s response
Goals, plans,
current
environment
Cognitive
context
User’s
personality
Current
emotional
state
History of
emotional
states
Current
emotion
Current
emotion
Response from
the user
User’s affective reactions
Emotion
history
Objective emotion
Objective emotion
Cognitive
reasoning
Affect recognition
Affect computation
Affect expression
Adaptation
User profile (Instance of user’s agent)
Sensorn
...
Figure 9.4
A conceptual framework for affective AAL/ELE systems
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
217

also to anticipate desires and needs without conscious mediation, that is, model the
user. In case of Alzheimer, detecting swings of affective state might help to set a
diagnose as well as would allow rapid action taking, such as calling for help [40].
Depending on the goal of affect implementation in the system, the system can
either be affective itself or just consider users’ affects. Thus, in the process of
performing actions, the affective function would be a direct affective interaction
with the user via, for example, interactive character, or environment adaptation to
user emotions using light, music, or other means (see Chapters 2–4).
Affect recognition is based on the affective expressions that appear across
variety of levels and modalities and through combinations of verbal and nonverbal
communication channels such as eye gaze, facial expressions, vocal intonation, and
body expressions. The perception of these expressions is a key requirement in order
to automatically recognize affect and purposefully adapt the AAL/ELE environ-
ment. Real-time measurements of affect can be implemented using a wide variety
of devices or sensors [41,42], for example, wearable or physiological sensors,
natural-contact or touch sensors, and non-contact or observational sensors. Wear-
able devices, sometimes called ‘affective wearables’, measure physiological signals
such as heart rate, skin conductance and temperature, and respiratory rate (see
Chapters 6–8). These devices can take different forms, including rings, wrist-
watches, arm bands, and gloves. More recent developments of wearable devices are
based on ‘sensor garments’, which include clothes like jackets, t-shirts, and
underwear with integrated sensors [43]. Natural-contact sensors are integrated into
surfaces that users come into contact with during typical user–system interaction.
The non-intrusive nature of these technologies is an advantage that leads to
more natural human–computer interaction. Affect can also be measured using non-
contact sensors that do not require physical contact between a human body and a
Table 9.2
Rational and affective functions of AAL/ELE systems
Rational
process
Affective process
Affective functions of
AAL/ELE
Rational functions
of AAL/ELE (as a
consequence of
emotions)
Data detection
Affect detection
Sensor fusion and data
mapping onto
databases, user
profiling
Rapid action taking
Reasoning/
learning
Affect generation
User emotion simulation
Decision-
making
Affect mapping
on behaviour
Affective behaviour adap-
tation to the user’s
emotional state
Rational action
adaptation to the
user’s emotional
state
Performing
actions
Affect expression
Direct affective interac-
tion with user
Environment adapta-
tion to the user’s
emotional state
218
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

sensor. These sensors mainly include video cameras, eye trackers, and microphones
that allow acquiring such signals as facial and voice expression, body posture, pupil
diameter, and eyes movement. The combination of aforementioned devices and
their integration into AAL/ELE environments will enable non-invasive user mon-
itoring that helps achieving the main goal of the AAL/ELE field – the creation of
unobtrusive intelligent systems able to proactively support people in their daily
activities. However, since different modalities must be combined together with
information on the situation to increase the accuracy and robustness of affect
recognition, the fusion of sensor data becomes more challenging as the number and
variety of features increase.
Affect computation is another important topic that is based on the raw data col-
lection. Currently, the existing AAL/ELE implementations are based on simple
emotional models to process various affects. Thus, for example, [44] uses the cir-
cumplex model of affect that displays mood in two dimensions  arousal and valence.
The model proposed by Takacs and Hanak [12] uses five basic emotions. However,
these models can be too simple in some cases, that is, if there is a need to detect the
possible reason of emotion. In AC, there is a variety of more advanced models that:
1.
allow to fully simulate human emotions
2.
allow deducing the reason of emotions
3.
endow an artificial unit with an ability to ‘feel’ and express emotions in a
believable way.
For personality modelling in various affective systems, as well as AAL/ELE
systems, a five-factor model has been used in [40]. The model allows modelling the
user’s personality as a set of five values each representing a dimension in the
model. To acquire user’s personality, one of the options is to use some kind of test,
that is, as in [45]. However, that is not recommended in AAL/ELE systems since
the interaction with the system must be as natural as possible. Hence, the option
is to first assume that the user has default personality, which can be later adjusted
according to actual responses.
Affect expression is a formal way to prototype the data collected. As men-
tioned before, current AAL/ELE developments mainly use acquired affective
information to adapt environmental conditions, for example, lighting in the house.
However, many AAL/ELE systems are designed as personal assistants, which not
only facilitate fulfilment of daily tasks [46] but maintain social interaction and
communication to prevent social isolation of people [47]. Currently, some of the
existing AAL/ELE systems integrate expression of affects as a response to people’s
emotions and mood. Mainly, it is accomplished through virtual agents embodied
into the interface of AAL/ELE systems or robots. The project ‘CaMeLi’ [48], with
embodied conversational agents enabling to express emotions and other human-like
behaviours, can be mentioned as an example. An Embodied Ambient Intelligent
System proposed in [49] integrates an embodied agent, which can express emotions
as behavioural responses. The NICA robot [50] possesses emotions to simulate
empathic behaviour. The ALIAS robot [51] can display emotions using a robotic
head; however, it lacks a mouth that is important feature to express most of
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
219

emotions. In general, communicating an affective state of a system to a user still
remains a challenge and it is admitted that recognition accuracy of system’s emo-
tions by humans is not high enough [49]. In addition, the personality for embodied
beings can be integrated into AAL/ELE systems since personality is one of the
main factors that influence the expression of emotions and, currently, this aspect
has been neglected in most of existing systems.
The presented framework can be used as a basis for comparing, designing, and
implementing affects in AAL/ELE systems. It provides general functions needed
for AAL/ELE systems. Perhaps for less generic AAL/ELE systems, such as the
ones directed towards people who are temporarily disabled, full-fledge identified
functions is not necessary; however, a rich affective model might be crucial in other
cases, for example, when dealing with elderly or people with depression.
Current systems lack this social aspect – although the environment adjustment
to mood is needed, it does not address the fact that humans are social beings and the
lack of social contact is unnatural and can put the user into depressed mood (see
Chapter 6). Rich emotional models would enable systems to be more emphatic and
social – thus becoming truly adaptive to the user’s needs.
9.5
KIOLA platform implementation
The KIOLA platform is a modular framework for developing applications in the
area of tele-health and AAL, built entirely on open-source technologies [52].
KIOLA has been used and validated in a variety of national and international
research projects as well as clinical routine projects. KIOLA is built around the
‘closed-loop-paradigm’, meaning that caretakers (including physicians, medical
specialists, and nurses) as well as scientists have access to a person’s health data.
The principal system architecture, mostly related to the application part of the
presented AALaaS/ELEaaS generic platform, is shown in Figure 9.5. KIOLA is
built around a three-layer architecture consisting of:
1.
a core layer
2.
a module layer
3.
care plug-ins.
Chronic heart
failure
Diabetes
Fall prevention
Activity & well-being
Organizer
Data visualization
Notification engine
Document management
Core layer
Decision support
Data export
Data search
Modules
Care plugins
Sensor management
Figure 9.5
KIOLA system architecture
220
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

The core layer is built on the open-source platform Django [53] that is a web-based
framework for rapid development of web applications. Each plug-in cooperates
with many modules. Built on top of the core layer, the generic modules provide
basic functionality required in different settings:
1.
The sensor management module allows definition of arbitrary health sensor
data, for example, blood pressure, steps taken daily, etc.
2.
The decision support module is a rule-based engine used in the area of chronic
heart failure, diabetes, and burn-out prevention to continuously monitor a
person’s health status and create appropriate recommendations and warnings
for supervising caretakers.
3.
The data visualization module takes input from the sensor management and
creates dynamically interactive visualizations on a web-based dashboard for
caretakers.
4.
The organizer and document management module allows scheduling of
examinations and meetings.
5.
The data search module provides search capabilities on structured and semi-
structured data for caretakers.
6.
The notification engine is used to send reminders, caretaker’s feedback to
participating persons.
7.
The data export module is used to export collected health data for further
investigation by scientists.
Finally, the care plug-ins use these modules to implement treatment paths,
such as chronic heart failure management, diabetes management, fall prevention
programmes, and support for an active lifestyle of elderly. Treatment paths are
formulated as processes with clinical experts and are then translated into workflows
supported through the user interfaces provided by KIOLA as depicted in Figure 9.6.
Interoperability with third-party platforms is considered an important feature
of the platform. The last decade saw a tremendous increase in commercially
Figure 9.6
KIOLA dashboard for clinical experts
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
221

available sensors capable of connecting to the Internet, sometimes referred to as
IoT [54]. Today, many of the available health sensors use a HTTP-based Repre-
sentational state transfer (REST) [55] approach to share data with interested third
parties. Therefore, KIOLA has been designed around these principles as well
exposing more than 60 application programming interfaces (APIs) for third parties.
API interfaces have been built in the area of:
1.
health sensor data submission and acquisition
2.
dynamic registration and discovery of sensors
3.
notification and end-user message management
4.
identity management following the principles of IHE Patient Identifier Cross-
Reference profile [56]
5.
generation of data visualizations.
Identity management and data visualizations are usually part of the dew, fog, or
cloud computing level, depending on the level of virtualization.
Data transfer models in the area of health sensor data submission and acqui-
sition have been especially designed following the principles of the Continua
Health Alliance [57]. Moreover, usage of the newly emerging HL7-FHIR standard
[58] as well as traditional HL7v2 interfaces in order to communicate with Hospital
Information Systems are investigated. Currently the existing API interfaces are
used by third-party mobile applications and data analytical services to mainly
retrieve and submit data. It is planned to integrate the KIOLA platform in other
health portals in the near future. Moreover, a module provides a framework to
integrate commercially available health sensors that are providing OAuth 1.0/2.0
authentication and in return follow the REST-based principles. Figure 9.7 shows
typical sensors utilized by the KIOLA platform.
KIOLA has been developed, tested, and validated in various national and
international projects: the EU-FP7-iStoppFalls project looked into online fall pre-
vention, based on computer games with KIOLA serving as data collection platform,
device management system, and decision support system. The system has been
validated with ~100 persons in Australia, Germany, and Spain in 2013 [59], with a
Figure 9.7
From left to right: iStoppFalls gaming platform; NFC-enabled
smartphone for collecting health data (developed by AIT); Withings
activity tracker
222
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

follow-up study scheduled for 2017. The EU-FP7-Project DOREMI [60] investi-
gated personalized monitoring of daily activities supported by clinical experts
through the KIOLA dashboard. The system was evaluated with support from 34
users in England and Italy during spring 2016. On a national level, KIOLA serves
as a telehealth platform in the project Diabmemory for people suffering from dia-
betes with 794 patients enrolled to the programme.
9.6
AAL/ELE laboratory and home implementation
An AAL/ELE laboratory and home implementation of the platform is highlighted
in detail in Chapter 5. The implementation shown in Figure 9.8 concerns mainly the
sensors’ and ANs’ parts of the platform. Data acquisition, data transferring and
processing are not shown in the figure. The access to the platform is heterogeneous.
It allows mapping to other systems that are interoperable through gateways to the
existing one. The platform has two levels – a wireless personal area network and a
home area network. According to the terms defined in Section 9.3, one may con-
sider this part of the platform as a ‘smart’ dust level.
There is no home server implemented in the scenario depicted in Figure 9.8.
Such a server, if implemented, may perform data collection, acquisition, and his-
tory for the support of highly customized services to the end-user. Home servers
form a dew computing level, which may overlap with the fog computing level,
connecting the end-users to the local health authorities. It could also overlap with
the cloud computing level, mapping the locally supported services with services on
the global scale.
Living room
Bedroom
Kitchen
Bathroom
WPAN coordinator / Wi-Fi router 
/ 3G/4G/5G gateway
Personal mobile
3G/4G/5G gateway 
Personal mobile
3G/4G/5G gateway 
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/
actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
sensor/actuator
Mobile 3G/4G/5G
gateway – personal 
and wheelchair
Figure 9.8
An AAL/ELE laboratory and home implementation
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
223

9.7
Conclusion and further research plan
The presented AALaaS/ELEaaS platform architecture is proposed as a generic
model that allows the description and classification of the performed AAL/ELE
scenarios and implementations. It goes beyond the classical services defined for
communications networks, for example, voice, audio, video, data, image proces-
sing, etc. [21,22]. The ELEaaS/ELEaaS requires a more heterogeneous and multi-
disciplinary approach than the creation and customization of these classical
services. There are many attempts to scale up the services starting from atomic
services and going to the complex services. This is part of the future research plans
of the authors.
Another topic of consideration relates to the cloud-level data models and
processing as well as data and processing migration at different scales. These tasks
are challenging taking into account the processing capability needed to gather big
data and the artificial intelligence algorithms applied in big data analytics.
Apart from this, the implementation of a distributed AC function is extremely
important and challenging to provide truly ambient social systems. Challenges
include non-intrusive affect detection, the fusion of sensor data, affect mapping on
behaviour, and environment adaptation to the user’s emotional state. Integration of
affective models would allow creating more advanced AAL/ELE systems that are
able to use affective information not only for their own adaptation to the user’s
needs but also for the prediction of user’s behaviour.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks to ICT COST Action IC1303: Algorithms, Architectures and Platforms
for Enhanced Living Environments (AAPELE), ICT COST Action IC1406: High-
Performance Modelling and Simulation for Big Data Applications (cHiPSet) and
TD COST Action TD1405: European Network for the Joint Evaluation of
Connected Health Technologies (ENJECT).
References
[1]
Garcia N.M., Rodrigues J.J.P. Ambient Assisted Living. CRC Press: Boca
Raton, FL, USA; 2015
[2]
Picard R.W. Affective Computing. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA; 1997
[3]
Kim J, Andre´ E. ‘Emotion recognition based on physiological changes in
music listening’. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence. Vol. 30(12); 2008, pp. 2067–2083
[4]
Castillejo E, Almeida A, Lo´pez-de-Ipin˜a D, Chen L. ‘Modeling users, con-
text and devices for ambient assisted living environments’. Sensors (Basel,
Switzerland), Vol. 14(3); 2014, pp. 5354–5391
[5]
Elliot A.J., Maier M.A. ‘Color and psychological functioning. Current
directions in psychological science’. Vol. 16(5); 2007, pp. 250–254
224
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[6]
Sokolova M.V., Ferna´ndez-Caballero A., Ros L., Ferna´ndez-Aguilar L.,
Latorre J.M. ‘Experimentation on emotion regulation with single-colored
images’. In: Cleland I., Guerrero L., Bravo J. (eds) Ambient Assisted Living.
ICT-based Solutions in Real Life Situations. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 9455. Springer, Cham; 2015, pp. 265–276
[7]
Mennicken S., Scott J., Bernheim Brush A.J., Roseway A. ‘Exploring
interactive furniture with EmotoCouch’. In Proceedings of the ACM Inter-
national Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing. 2014,
pp. 307–310
[8]
Pail G., Huf W., Pjrek E., et al. ‘Bright-light therapy in the treatment of
mood disorders’. Neuropsychobiology. Vol. 64(3); 2011, pp. 152–162
[9]
Huldtgren A., Heynderickx I., Katsimerou C., Kuijsters A., Redi J. ‘Design
considerations for adaptive lighting to improve seniors’. Mood. ICOST;
2015, pp. 15–26
[10]
Alvarez-Lozano J., Osmani V., Mayora O., et al. ‘Tell me your apps and
I will tell you your mood: Correlation of apps usage with Bipolar Disorder
State’. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Pervasive Tech-
nologies Related to Assistive Environments. 2014, Article No. 19
[11]
Mun˜oz D., Gutierrez F., Ochoa S.F., Baloian N. ‘Enhancing social interac-
tion between older adults and their families’. IWAAL 2013. LNCS,
vol. 8277; 2013, pp. 47–54
[12]
Taka´cs B., Hana´k D. ‘A mobile system for assisted living with ambient
facial interfaces’. IADIS International Journal on Computer Science and
Information Systems. Vol. 2(2); 2007, pp. 30–50
[13]
Guerrero E., Lindgren H., Nieves J.C. ‘ALI, an ambient assisted living
system for supporting behavior change’. VIII Workshop on Agents Applied in
Health Care. 2013, pp. 81–92
[14]
Weber W., Rabaey J., Aarts E.H.L. (eds). Technology Guide, Ambient
intelligence. Springer, ISBN 978-3-540-27139-0; 2005
[15]
Dobre C., Mavromoustakis C.X., Garcia N., Goleva R., Mastorakis G. (eds).
Ambient Assisted Living and Enhanced Living Environments: Principles,
Technologies and Control. Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann, Biomedical
engineering book series, 1st edition, ISBN: 9780128051955; 2016. p. 544
[16]
Roadmap for standardization on AHA facing 2020. Available from http://
www.makingspeechestalk.com/ch/RIAHA/?id_speech¼53 [Accessed 10
March 2017]
[17]
Universaal project, Services Providers Offering AAL Services in Ustore.
Available from http://universaal.sintef9013.com/index.php/en/press-room/
rucs2/ustore-rucs/16-rucs/category-2/86-ruc10-services-providers-offering-
aal-services-in-ustore [Accessed 9 March 2017]
[18]
Toolbox. Ambient Assisted Living Association: Brussels; 2013, Avail-
able from http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/AALA_
ToolboxA5_online.pdf [Accessed 9 March 2017]
[19]
AAL Forum 2015 Full Proceedings. Available from http://www.aal-europe.eu/
wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Proceedings_Print.pdf [Accessed 9 March 2017]
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
225

[20]
Catalogue of Projects 2008–2013. Ambient Assisted Living Joint Pro-
gramme;
2015,
Available
from
http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2015/09/15-1805_AAL_Catalogue_2015_ONLINE.pdf
[Accessed
9 March 2017]
[21]
Saref ontology and possible extensions – in the framework of personal health
and well being systems. Smart Appliances REFerence (SAREF) ontology.
ETSI. Available from http://ontology.tno.nl/saref/ [Accessed 1 March 2017]
[22]
‘E-health multimedia services and applications – Personal health systems,
Interoperability design guidelines for personal health systems’. ITU-T,
H.810, Telecommunication Standardization Sector of ITU, Series H:
Audiovisual and Multimedia Systems. 11/2015
[23]
Goleva R., Stainov R., Savov A., et al. ‘Automated ambient open platform
for enhanced living environment’. ELEMENT 2015 Workshop. Ohrid,
FyROM; 1 October 2015: Loshkovska S., Koceski S. (eds) ICT Innovations
2015, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing; Switzerland; 2016, pp. 255–264, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
25733-4_26
[24]
Goleva R., Garcia N., Mavromoustakis C.X., et al. ‘AAL and ELE platform
architecture’. in Dobre C., Mavromoustakis C.X., Garcia N., Goleva R.,
Mastorakis G. (eds) Ambient Assisted Living and Enhanced Living Envir-
onments:
Principles,
Technologies
and
Control.
1st
edition,
ISBN:
9780128051955: Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann; 2016, p. 544, Biomedi-
cal engineering book series, pp. 171–210
[25]
Goleva R., Stainov R., Savov A., Draganov P. ‘Reliable platform for
enhanced living environment’. First COST Action IC1303 AAPELE work-
shop Element 2014. in conjunction with MONAMI 2014 conference.
Wurzburg, 24 September 2014, 978-3-319-16291-12015, Springer Interna-
tional Publishing AG Switzerland; 2015, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-16292-8_23, pp. 315–328
[26]
Stainov R., Goleva R., Mirtchev S., et al. ‘AALaaS intelligent backhauls for
P2P communication in 5G mobile networks’. Proceedings of the IEEE
BlackSeaCom 2016. Varna, Bulgaria, 6–9 June 2016
[27]
Williams A. ‘‘‘Social’’ Language for Buildings and Communities. Devel-
oping Metadata and Methodologies to Support Assessment of the Social
Value of Buildings and Communities in Future Smart Cities. Paper 1: An
Introduction’. BIM, BRE Trust, Research Partnerships, Smart Buildings,
Social research. Available from http://brebuzz.net/2016/05/20/a-social-lan-
guage-for-buildings-and-communities/, 2016
[28]
Gangwani M., Jotwani N., Galani M., Yeole A. ‘Ambient intelligence’.
Proceedings of 14th IRF International Conference. 28th September 2014,
Chennai, India, ISBN: 978-93-84209-55-1
[29]
Sharma A., Kumar A., Bhardawaj A. ‘A review of ambient intelligence
system: bringing intelligence to environments’. International Journal of
Information
&
Computation
Technology.

International
Research
226
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Publications House, http://www.irphouse.com, ISSN 0974-2239, Vol. 4(9)2;
2014, pp. 879–884
[30]
Petkov P.,Tsiulyanu D., Kulisch W., Popov C. ‘Nanoscience advances in
CBRN agents detection’. Information and Energy Security. Springer
Netherlands; 2015, ISBN 978-94-017-9697-2
[31]
Kirste T. ‘Multimodal smart appliance ensembles for mobile applications’.
Institut fu¨r Informatik, Lehrstuhl fu¨r Mobile Multimediale Informa-
tionssysteme, A.-Einstein-Str. 22, 18059 Rostock, http://musama.informatik.
uni-rostock.de/321.html
[32]
Heider T., Kirste T. ‘Multimodal appliance cooperation based on explicit
goals: Concepts & potentials’. In Proceedings of the 2005 Joint Conference
on Smart Objects and Ambient Intelligence: Innovative Context-Aware Ser-
vices: Usages and Technologies (sOc-EUSAI ’05). ACM, New York, NY,
USA; 2005, pp. 271–276. doi http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1107548.1107614
[33]
IOT Applications Examples, available from https://www.rs-online.com/
designspark/iot-applications-examples [Accessed April 2017]
[34]
Le Moullec Y., Lecat Y., Annus P., et al. ‘A modular 6LoWPAN-based
wireless sensor body area network for health-monitoring applications’. Asia-
Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association Annual Summit and
Conference 2014
[35]
Agu¨ero R., Zinner T., Goleva R., Timm-Giel A., Tran-Gia P. (eds) Mobile
Networks and Management, Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer
Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering. 978-3-
319-16291-12015, Springer International Publishing AG Switzerland;
2015
[36]
Hudlicka E. ‘Computational analytical framework for affective modeling:
Towards guidelines for designing computational models of emotions’.
Handbook of Research on Synthesizing Human Emotion in Intelligent Sys-
tems and Robotics. USA: IGI Global; 2015, pp. 1–62
[37]
Petrovica S., Pudane M. ‘Simulation of affective student-tutor interaction for
affective tutoring systems: Design of knowledge structure’. International
Journal of Education and Learning Systems. Vol. 1; 2016, pp. 99–108
[38]
Paiva A., Prada R., Picard R.W. (eds) Affective Computing and Intelligent
Interaction. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 4738: Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007
[39]
Lloret J., Canovas A., Sendra S., Parra L. ‘A smart communication archi-
tecture for ambient assisted living’. IEEE Communications Magazine.
Vol. 53(1); 2015, pp. 26–33
[40]
Pe´rez J.G., Akker R., Lohse M., Evers V. ‘D6.1: Robot roles, personality and
interaction behaviours’. ACCOMPANY Del. 6.1. Report; 2013
[41]
Cooper D.G., Arroyo I., Woolf B.P., Calvo R.A., D’Mello S.K. ‘Actionable
affective processing for automatic tutor interventions’. New Perspectives
on Affect and Learning Technologies. New York, NY: Springer; 2011,
pp. 127–140
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
227

[42]
Desmet P.M.A. ‘Design for mood: Twenty activity-based opportunities to
design for mood regulation’. International Journal of Design. Vol. 9(2);
2015, pp. 1–19
[43]
Capineri L. ‘Resistive sensors with smart textiles for wearable technology:
From fabrication processes to integration with electronics’. Procedia Engi-
neering. Vol. 87; 2014, pp. 724–727
[44]
Rojas V., Ochoa S.F., Herva´s R. ‘Monitoring moods in elderly people
through voice processing’. Ambient Assisted Living and Daily Activities.
2014, pp. 139–146
[45]
Petrovica, S., Pudane, M. ‘Emotion modeling for simulation of affective
student-tutor interaction: Personality matching’. International Journal of
Education and Information Technologies. Vol. 10; 2016, pp. 159–167
[46]
Brumitt B., Meyers B., Krumm J. ‘EasyLiving: Technologies for intelligent
environments’. Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing. LNCS, vol. 1927;
2000, pp. 12–29
[47]
Doyle J., Skrba Z., McDonnell R., Arent B. ‘Designing a touch screen
communication device to support social interaction amongst older adults’.
Proceedings of the 24th BCS Interaction Specialist Group Conference. 2010,
pp. 177–185
[48]
Tsiourti C., Joly E., Wings C., Moussa M.B., Wac K. ‘Virtual assistive
companion for older adults: Field study and design implications’. 8th
International
Conference
on
Pervasive
Computing
Technologies
for
Healthcare (PervasiveHealth). 2014, pp. 57–64
[49]
Hanke S., Tsiourti C., Sili M., Christodoulou E. ‘Embodied ambient intel-
ligent systems. Ambient intelligence and smart environments: Recent
advances in ambient assisted living – bridging assistive technologies’.
e-Health and Personalized Health Care. 2015, pp. 65–85
[50]
Carrolis B.D., Ferilli S., Palestra G., Carofiglio V. ‘Towards an empathic
social robot for ambient assisted living’. Proceedings of the 2nd Interna-
tional Workshop on Emotion and Sentiment in Social and Expressive Media:
Opportunities and Challenges for Emotion-aware Multiagent Systems. 2015,
pp. 19–34
[51]
Geiger J., Yenin I., Rehrl T., Wallhoff F., Rigoll G. ‘Display of emotions
with the robotic platform ALIAS’. Ambient Assisted Living: 6. AAL-
Kongress. 2013, pp. 287–297
[52]
Drobics M., Kreiner K., Leopold H. ‘Next generation ICT platform to har-
monize medical, care and lifestyle services’. In Loshkovska S., Koceski S.
(eds) ‘ICT innovations 2015: Emerging technologies for better living’.
Springer International Publishing, Cham: pp. 275–283, 978-3-319-25733-4
[53]
Available from https://www.djangoproject.com/ [Accessed 1 November
2016]
[54]
Dohr A., Modre-Osprian R., Drobics M., Hayn D., Schreier G. ‘The Internet
of Things for ambient assisted living’. Proceedings of the ITNG 2010 – 7th
International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations.
IEEE, Las Vegas; 2010, pp. 6
228
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[55]
Fielding R.T. ‘Architectural styles and the design of network-based software
architectures’. Diss. University of California. Irvine, 2000
[56]
Eichelberg M., Aden T., Riesmeier J., et al. ‘A survey and analysis of
electronic healthcare record standards’. ACM Computing Surveys (Csur).
37.4; 2005, pp. 277–315
[57]
Available from http://www.continuaalliance.org/ [Accessed 1 October 2016]
[58]
Available from https://www.hl7.org/fhir/ [Accessed 1 October 2016]
[59]
Gschwind Y.J., Eichberg S., Ejupi A., et al. ‘ICT-based system to predict
and prevent falls (iStoppFalls): results from an international multicenter
randomized controlled trial’. European Review of Aging and Physical
Activity, 12, 10. http://doi.org/10.1186/s11556-015-0155-6
[60]
Bacciu D., Chessa S., Gallicchio C., et al. ‘Smart environments and context-
awareness for lifestyle management in a healthy active ageing framework’.
Progress in Artificial Intelligence, Springer International Publishing.
Switzerland; 2015, pp. 54–66
Further reading
[1]
European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing (EIP on
AHA).
Available
from
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ageing/innovation_en
[Accessed 10 March 2017]
[2]
Atamian D., Mirtchev S., Goleva R. ‘Traffic investigation of IP traffic
priority services’. Telecom 2016 Conference, October 2016, Sofia, Bulgaria
[3]
Eichelberg M., Ro¨lker-Denker L., Helmer A., Doma A. (eds) Action Aimed
at Promoting Standards and Interoperability in the Field of AAL. Deliver-
able 7 ‘Use-cases’. Ambient Assisted Living Association: Brussels; 2016.
Available
from
http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/
AAL_JP_Interop_D7_Use_Cases_2016.pdf [Accessed 9 March 2017]
[4]
Picard
R.W.
‘Affective
perception’.
Communications
of
the
ACM.
Vol. 43(3), March 2000, pp. 50–51
[5]
Picard, R.W. ‘Affective computing: From laughter to IEEE’. IEEE Trans-
actions on Affective Computing. 1.1 June 2010, pp. 11–17
[6]
Lisetti, C., Hudlicka, E. ‘Why and how to build emotion-based agent
architectures’. The Oxford Handbook of Affective Computing. Oxford
University Press; UK, 2015.
Biographies
Rossitza Goleva received her Ph.D. in Communication Networks in 2016 and
M.Sc. in Computer Science in 1982 at Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria. She
was part of the research staff of the research Institute of Bulgarian PTT between
1982 and 1987. Since 1987, she is with Department of Communication Networks at
Technical University of Sofia. At present, Rossitza works on communication net-
works, communication protocols, and software engineering. Her research interests
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
229

are in Quality of Service in communication networks, communication protocols,
traffic engineering, cloud and fog computing, performance analyses. She is an
IEEE Member, involved in IEEE Bulgaria section activities, has more than 85
research publications, was part of more than 30 research projects including EU
COST IC1303 AAPELE action.
Mara Pudane is scientific assistant and Ph.D. student of the study programme
‘Computer Systems’ at the Riga Technical University. She obtained master’s
degree in Computer Systems in 2013 at Riga Technical University, Latvia. During
her master studies, she started to work as a scientific assistant in Department of
Artificial Intelligence and System Engineering (at Riga Technical University). The
topic of her Ph.D. thesis is related to human group behaviour imitation with focus
on affective factors. Ms. Pudane’s research interests include human modelling,
multi-agent systems, and affective computing.
Sintija Petrovica obtained master’s degree in Computer Systems in 2011 at Riga
Technical University (RTU), Latvia. After finishing master studies, she started
to work as a scientific assistant at the Department of Artificial Intelligence and
System Engineering. Currently, she is a Ph.D. student of the study programme
‘Computer Systems’ at the university. She is developing her Ph.D. thesis related to the
development of pedagogical module for affective tutoring systems to adapt tutoring
process to student’s emotions. Her research interests include intelligent tutoring
systems, game-based learning, and affective computing.
Egons Lavendelis is researcher in the area of Artificial Intelligence. Egons
defended his doctoral dissertation in 2009 at Riga Technical University (RTU) in
the area of agent-oriented software engineering proposing the MASITS metho-
dology. After the defence, he has been working as senior researcher and assistant
professor at the Department of Artificial Intelligence and Systems Engineering.
Egons’s research interests are Multi-Agent Systems, Agent-Oriented Software
Engineering, communications among autonomous entities, including semantics,
different applications of agent paradigm and various Artificial Intelligence tech-
niques, lately attention has been paid to the use of multi-agent systems for inte-
gration of autonomous robots into collaborative multi-robot systems. Currently
Egons is teaching courses related to Artificial Intelligence and Databases at RTU.
He is author of more than 30 publications at various international conference pro-
ceedings, scientific journals, and book chapters.
Karl Kreiner is scientist at the Center for Health and Bioresources; holds a
bachelor degree in software development and economy and master degree in
information management. For more than 10 years, he has worked in more than 30
national and international research projects related to telehealth, ambient assisted
living with a focus on clinical decision support systems using rule-based and
machine learning methods.
230
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Dr. Mario Drobics is Senior Scientific Engineer at AIT. He received his Ph.D. in
applied mathematics in 2005 at the Johannes Kepler University Linz in Austria.
Since 2007 he is working at AIT at the Center for Digital Safety & Security, where
he initiated a research group on Active and Assisted Living in 2011. His research
focuses on IoT security and applied IoT solutions. He was technical coordinator of
the FP7 project iStoppFalls, board member of AAL-Austria and head of a working-
group on AAL at OVE-GIT.
Dr. Ivan Ganchev is a Senior Member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers (IEEE), the IEEE Communications Society, the IEEE Consumer Elec-
tronics Society, the IEEE Internet of Things Community, the IEEE Smart Cities
Community, and the IEEE Consultants Network. He received his doctoral and
engineering (summa cum laude) degrees from the Saint-Petersburg State University
of Telecommunications. He is a Deputy Director of the Telecommunications
Research Centre (TRC), University of Limerick (Ireland), an Associate Professor
from the University of Plovdiv Paisii Hilendarski, an ITU-T Invited Expert, and an
IET Invited Lecturer. Dr. Ganchev was involved in 35þ international and national
research and education projects. His research interests include novel tele-
communications paradigms, future networks and services, smart ubiquitous net-
working, context-aware networking, mobile cloud computing, Internet of Things
(IoT), Internet of Services (IoS), ambient assisted living (AAL), enhanced living
environments (ELE), trust management, Internet tomography, mHealth, and
mLearning ICT. Dr. Ganchev has served on the Technical Program Committee of
200þ prestigious international conferences, symposia, and workshops. He has
authored/co-authored 6 books (including 2 edited books) and 240þ research papers
in refereed international journals and conference proceedings. Dr. Ganchev is on
the editorial board of and has served as a Guest Editor for multiple international
journals.
Nuno M. Garcia holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science Engineering from the Uni-
versity of Beira Interior (UBI, Covilha˜, Portugal) (2008) and he is a 5-year B.Sc.
(Hons.) in Mathematics/Informatics also from UBI (1999–2004). He is Assistant
Professor at UBI and Invited Associate Professor at the School of Communication,
Architecture, Arts and Information Technologies of the Universidade Luso´fona de
Humanidades e Tecnologias (Lisbon, Portugal). He was founder and is coordinator
of the Assisted Living Computing and Telecommunications Laboratory (ALLab),
a research group within the Instituto de Telecomunicac¸o˜es at UBI. He was also
cofounder and is Coordinator of the Executive Council of the BSAFE LAB – Law
enforcement, Justice and Public Safety Research and Technology Transfer
Laboratory, a multidisciplinary research laboratory in UBI. He is the coordinator of
the Cisco Academy at UBI, head of EyeSeeLab in Eye-See Lda. (Lisbon, Portugal),
and member of the Consultative Council of Favvus IT HR SA (Lisbon). He is also
chair of the COST Action IC1303 AAPELE – Architectures, Algorithms and
Platforms for Enhanced Living Environments. He is the main author of several
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
231

international, European, and Portuguese patents. He is member of the Non-
Commercial Users Constituency, a group within GNSO in ICANN. His main
interests include Next-Generation Networks, algorithms for bio-signal processing,
distributed and cooperative protocols.
Rumen Stainov received his B.S. and M.S. from the Technical University Ilmenau,
Germany and his Dr.-Ing. from the Dresden University of Technology, Germany.
Before joining Fulda University, he has been a Professor of time at the University
of Aachen, Germany. In fall 1997, in fall 98, in spring, and summer 1999 he has
been Visiting Associate Professor at Boston University (USA). From fall 1999
through summer 2002 he has been full-time Associate Professor of Computer
Science at Boston University. He is currently Professor of Computer Science at
Fulda University of Applied Sciences, Germany. His research interests are in the
field of networking, distributed systems, mobile communications, and peer-to-peer
networks. He has more than 75 research publications, he wrote 5 technical books,
and was leading investigator in 12 research projects.
Ciprian Dobre is Professor within the Computer Science Department, University
Politehnica of Bucharest (Habil. since 2014, Dr. Since 2008 with Cum laudae). He
currently leads the activities within Laboratory on Pervasive products and services,
and MobyLab. Ciprian Dobre’s research interests involve research subjects related
to mobile wireless networks and computing applications, pervasive services, context-
awareness, and people-centric or participatory sensing. He has scientific and
scholarly contributions in the field of large-scale distributed systems concerning
mobile applications and smart technologies to reduce urban congestion and air
pollution (MobiWay, TRANSYS), context-aware applications (CAPIM), opportu-
nistic networks and mobile data offloading (SPRINT, SENSE), monitoring
(MonALISA), high-speed networking (VINCI, FDT), Grid application develop-
ment (EGEE, SEE-GRID), and evaluation using modelling and simulation
(MONARC 2, VNSim). These contributions led to important results, demonstrating
his qualifications and potential to go significantly beyond the state of the art.
Ciprian Dobre was awarded a PhD scholarship from California Institute of Tech-
nology (Caltech, USA), and another one from Oracle. His results received one IBM
Faculty Award, two CENIC Awards, and three Best Paper Awards (in 2010, 2012,
2013). The results were published in over 100 chapters in edited books, articles in
major international peer-reviewed journals, and papers in well-established inter-
national conferences and workshops.
Dr. Constandinos X. Mavromoustakis is currently a Professor at the Department
of Computer Science at the University of Nicosia, Cyprus. He received a 5-year
dipl.Eng (B.Sc., B.Eng., M.Eng.) in Electronic and Computer Engineering
from Technical University of Crete (2000), Greece, M.Sc. in Telecommunications
from University College of London, UK (2001), and his Ph.D. from the depart-
ment of Informatics at Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece (2006).
232
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Dr. Mavromoustakis is leading the Mobile Systems Lab. (MOSys Lab., http://
www.mosys.unic.ac.cy/) at the Department of Computer Science at the University
of Nicosia, dealing with design and implementation of hybrid wireless testbed
environments and MP2P systems, IoT configurations and smart applications, as
well as high-performance cloud and mobile cloud computing (MCC) systems,
modelling and simulation of mobile computing environments and protocol
development and deployment for large-scale heterogeneous networks and new
‘green’ mobility-based protocols. Dr. Mavromoustakis is an active member (vice-
chair) of IEEE/R8 regional Cyprus section since January 2016, and since May
2009 he serves as the chair of C16 Computer Society Chapter of the Cyprus IEEE
section. Dr. Mavromoustakis has a dense research work outcome (more than
200 papers) in Distributed Mobile Systems and spatio-temporal scheduling, con-
sisting of numerous refereed publications including several Books (IDEA/IGI,
Springer and Elsevier). He has served as a consultant to many industrial bodies
(i.e. member of the Technical Experts for Internet of Things-IoT competition at
Intel Corporation LLC (www.intel.com) for the ChallengeMe, etc.); he is a
management member of IEEE Communications Society (ComSoc) Radio Com-
munications Committee (RCC) and a board member of the IEEE-SA Standards
IEEE SCC42 WG2040 whereas he has served as track chair and co-chair of var-
ious IEEE International Conferences (including AINA, IWCMC, ICC, Globe-
Com, IEEE Internet of Things, etc.).
Ivan Chorbev, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Computer Science
and Engineering at the Ss.Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje. He has par-
ticipated in more than 70 scientific papers in journals and conference proceedings,
book chapters, and has performed several researches stay as visiting scientist. He is
an author of two books. He has been part of or coordinated several national or
EU-funded research projects. The fields of his research interests include combi-
natorial optimization, heuristic algorithms, constraint programming, web develop-
ment technologies, application of computer science in medicine and telemedicine,
medical expert systems, Assistive technologies, knowledge extraction, machine
learning.
Vladimir Trajkovik, Ph.D., is University professor at Ss.Cyril and Methodius
University in Skopje, Republic of Macedonia. He has published more than 160
research papers presented on international conferences or journals in computer
science and engineering. He is author of three books and nine book chapters pub-
lished by international publishers. He has participated in more than 30 international
and national educational, research and applicative projects. He was coordinator of
15 national and international educational, research and applicative projects. His
research interests focus on distance education systems, algorithm design, dis-
tributed environments, ambient and assisted living systems, and connected health
systems.
AALaaS/ELEaaS platforms
233

Eftim Zdravevski, M.Sc., completed his master studies in data mining in 2010 at
the Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies at the Ss. Cyril
and Methodius University in Skopje, Macedonia. In March 2011, he started his
PhD studies at the Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering in Skopje. From
2008 to 2015 he worked at NI TEKNA – Intelligent technologies as developer-
researcher where he designed and implemented information systems and data
warehouses, and worked on fraud detection and other machine learning related
projects. Since 2010 he works as teaching and research assistant at the Faculty of
Computer Science and Engineering. He is a MENSA member since 2004. During
his research career, he has published over 30 papers in international conferences
and journals. His active fields of research interests are big data, machine learning,
data mining, cloud computing, expert systems, knowledge-based systems, decision
support systems, intelligent information systems, databases and data warehouses,
processing of sensory data, parallel algorithms, etc.
Dr. George Mastorakis received his B.Eng. (Hons) in Electronic Engineering
from UMIST, UK, in 2000, his M.Sc. in Telecommunications from UCL, UK, in
2001 and his Ph.D. in Telecommunications from University of the Aegean, Greece,
in 2008. He is serving as an Associate Professor at Technological Educational
Institute of Crete and as a Research Associate in Research & Development of
Telecommunications Systems Laboratory at Centre for Technological Research of
Crete, Greece. His research interests include cognitive radio networks, networking
traffic analysis, radio resource management, energy efficient networks, Internet of
Things, and mobile computing. He has more than 150 publications at various
international conferences proceedings, workshops, scientific journals, and book
chapters.
234
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Chapter 10
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
in the next-generation networks
Radosveta I. Sokullu1 and Eren Demir1
Abstract
Starting from the first years of this century wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have
been envisaged as stand-alone networks that will allow us to collect and control
information from our surroundings. However, only a decade later, they have turned
into one of the main pillars of ubiquitous communications and today they have
come to exhibit variety, complexity and numbers never envisaged before. From
exotic applications, they have turned into commodities, and recently with the
introduction of machine-to-machine (M2M) communications they are seen as one
of the underlying technologies that will make the new reality.
Because of the different operational paradigm and strongly application-oriented
characteristics, WSN mandate the development of new network protocols quite
different from the traditional open systems interconnection layered protocols.
Furthermore, their enormous variety, continuously emerging new application pos-
sibilities and the need to optimize their performance have given rise to different
sub-divisions of WSN – underground WSN, underwater WSN, etc. One newly
defined area is WSN with linear topology. Since this topology presents both new
challenges and new advantages network and medium access control (MAC) layer
protocol design for these networks has become a hot research topic. In the light of
these and taking into consideration the fact that many of the proposed M2M
applications require linear topologies and this chapter introduces the details on
linear wireless sensor networks (LWSNs) and specifically concentrates on the
MAC protocols which play the most important role in optimizing their performance
from energy and delay point of view. The chapter is organized as follows: first, the
concept and terminology related to LWSN is introduced, and then their commu-
nication model and specifics are discussed, followed by a detailed overview of the
most recent MAC protocols designed specifically for LWSN. The chapter is con-
cluded with some open research issues.
1Department of Electrical & Electronics Engineering, Ege University, Turkey

10.1
Introduction
In many environmental monitoring, wireless sensor network (WSN) applications,
a sink gathers data from battery-operated sensors which are deployed on topologies
that are mostly linear and such networks are defined as linear wireless sensor
networks (LWSNs) [1]. LWSNs are useful in many specific application scenarios
such as monitoring bridges [2], gas or oil pipelines [3] and roadside or highways
(e.g. accident detection on highways) [4]. Another application scenario for LWSNs
is railroad/subway monitoring. We can consider the example of a freight train,
where suitable sensors can be positioned on the wheels or near them, since that is
where most often failures occur. Suitable sensors can be acoustic sensors for the
detection of cracked or flat wheels or thermostatic sensors for detecting overheating
in bearings. In this example, the LWSN will collect information from the sensors
and transmit to a sink located on or close to the locomotive where it can be pro-
cessed and suitable actions can be taken [5–7].
Another example is a coal mine monitoring system designed to follow miner’s
activity in tunnels with sensor nodes deployed along a linear topology at con-
siderably large distance (ultra-sparse network) [8,9]. Yet another example can be
the monitoring of underwater pipelines. Such constructions extend hundreds of
kilometres and are usually deployed hundreds of kilometres below sea level, thus
they should endure high pressure. Obviously, performing monitoring in such
conditions is really challenging. So, LWSNs can be used for monitoring under-
water pipelines [10–12]. In greenhouse agriculture, LWSNs can be very useful to
monitor crop’s growing environment. After measuring and transmitting the crop’s
environmental variables to the farmers, based on the data collected, they can make
decisions or help farmers take decisions to improve their products in terms of
quality and quantity [13]. Another LWSN application example can be the case of
Erath depth exploration (speleologist group) where the wireless network can be
deployed to secure a communication channel with the outside world while the
person or persons continue to get deeper and deeper below the surface [14].
In [15], a very interesting ‘‘lap time measurement wireless sensor system’’ is
described which consists of nodes linearly deployed in an Alpine ski resort to aid
sporting events. Another application example of linear sensor networks is parking
sensor network which is a specialized form of WSN. Similarly, the Intelligent
Traffic system is built on numerous, some with linear topology, specialized WSNs.
These types of networks have been rapidly deployed around the world and are
regarded as one of the first implemented urban services in smart cities (i.e. Smart
Santander) [16].
Among the various applications of WSNs, monitoring systems for electric
cables, boats in a watercourse, smart grids, borders and production line are other
examples of LWSNs [17–20].
From here on this chapter is organized as follows: in Section 10.2 LWSNs are
defined and a general network model of LWNs is presented and the specifics,
objectives and challenges are discussed. In Section 10.3, existing most recent work
on protocols for LWSNs is presented. In Section 10.4 a comparison and evaluation
236
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

of the suggested protocols is provided while Section 10.5 summarizes the open
research issues and concludes the chapter.
10.2
Linear wireless sensor networks
10.2.1
Network model
The topology of a WSN is defined by the positions of the distributed sensor devi-
ces, belonging to the network. In general, an LWSN consists of n sensors and one
base station, all of which are arranged along a line. This type of network is referred
to as simple linear network, chain type network or one-dimensional network.
In [21], the authors present the following two definitions of LWSN:
Definition no. 1. A simple linear network is a connected non-cyclic graph where
each node has exactly one neighbour or two distinct neighbours. There are two
nodes which will have only one neighbour and they are referred to as the endpoints
of the network.
Definition no. 2. A (N,d)-linear network is defined as an LWSN containing N
nodes, when each of the N nodes can communicate with nodes up to d hops away
(Figure 10.1). The notation for the nodes is usually n1, n2, . . . , nN where nodes
n1 and nN are the endpoints and node ni is located between node ni–1 and niþ1 for
1 < i < N.
Depending on their role in the transmission process the nodes can be divided
into three categories: (1) source node, (2) relay node and (3) sink node. In some
cases, there is only a single-source node (at one end of the chain) and a single sink
node (at the opposite end of the chain) while all intermediate nodes only relay the
data packets created by the source node. However, in most cases, more than one
node or even all nodes serve as source/relay nodes. Thus, each node has to transmit
both its own data packets and the ones coming from its upstream or downstream
neighbours. Furthermore, each node transmits packets (which can be originating at
the node itself or can be relayed from neighbour nodes) in a single-hop or multi-hop
manner to reach the sink. Node j is called downstream 1-hop-neighbor of node k
if its address (also sometimes referred to as ID number) is one less, a downstream
2-hop-neighbour for j, is the one whose address is two less than that of node j.
Neighbours in the direction farther than the sink are upstream neighbours, respec-
tively, upstream 1-hop neighbour and upstream 2-hop neighbours.
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Figure 10.1
Linear topology wireless sensor network with notation (8,2)
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
237

The following important terms can be defined for LWSN.
1.
Traffic load: The traffic load created in an LWSN is defined in terms of data
packets generated by the nodes. Let Pi denote the data packets generated by
sensor node Xi. Then, the total data load LDtotal(n) in the network is given by
(10.1).
LDtotal n
ð Þ ¼
Xn
i¼1 Pi
(10.1)
2.
Utilization: The utilization of a network of N nodes U(n) can be defined as the
fraction of time the sink is busy receiving correct data packets and is given by
(10.2).
U n
ð Þ ¼ LDcorrect n
ð Þ
LDtotal n
ð Þ
(10.2)
where LDcorrect(n) denotes the number of data packets correctly received by the
sink.
10.2.2
Variations of LWSNs
LWSNs can be divided into the following groups.
10.2.2.1
Single line
The simplest LWSN is a single-level network composed on n identical sensor nodes
which are uniformly distributed along a straight geometric line and one sink node,
which is positioned usually at one end of this line. Such a network is also called
one-dimensional network and is shown in Figure 10.2. Such topologies are used in
[5,21–23].
10.2.2.2
Chain type
Chain-type WSN is another type of LWSNs where the nodes are placed in a semi-
linear form [24] as shown in the example in Figure 10.3.
10.2.2.3
Chain tree
In many cases the data transmitting routes of a linear network can be modelled as a
tree. Since a tree network can be reduced into equivalent multiline networks, this
kind of network is called chain tree or Multiline LWSN. In [4], the so-called long
thin wireless sensor network (LT-WSN) is proposed based on ZigBee sensor nodes.
Nn
N5
d5
N4
d4
N3
d3
N2
d2
N1
d1
Sink
Nn-1
dn
Figure 10.2
One-dimensional LWSN
238
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

All nodes in this network are full function devices (FFDs) and are grouped into
clusters corresponding to the different segments of the chain tree topology
(Figure 10.4). For every cluster, two additional roles of the nodes are defined:
a node can be a cluster head and a bridge, and these nodes are manually selected.
10.2.2.4
Hierarchical
In LWSNs, directional transmission along the linear topology creates significant
latency if the end-to-end distance is long. Therefore, the number of relay nodes
needs to be limited so as to control the overall latency. A hierarchical architecture
of LWSN can balance between the number of relay nodes and the overall latency.
In [1], a classification of LWSNs is suggested depending on hierarchy. The authors
define three different types of nodes: basic sensor nodes (BSNs), data relay nodes
(DRNs) and data dissemination nodes (DDNs). The BSNs perform sensing and
collecting data which they then transmit to the nearest DRNs. In turn the DRNs
process the received data (e.g. compression, aggregation) and communicate the
Sink
Figure 10.3
Chain of sensor nodes
 
A highway system
Line segment 1
Line segment 2
Line segment 3
Line segment 4
Line segment 5
Line segment 6
Line segment 7
Intersection
Intersection
Coordinator
Cluster head node
Bridge node
Network node
Figure 10.4
An example of chain tree topology
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
239

collected information to the DDNs in a multi-hop fashion. The DDNs, which are
located at different points of the network, transmit the information to the so-called
network control centre (NCC). Another example is presented in [25], where the
authors propose an innovative multiple tiered hierarchical architecture for LWSN
and is shown in Figure 10.5.
10.2.3
Objectives and challenges of LWSNs
Stemming from the very topology of the LWSNs the packets in the network are
relayed hop-by-hop, following a chain-to-one pattern. End-to-end latency, in gen-
eral, and especially when observed for the area close to the sink, is increased. The
explanation is that nodes which are closer to the sink experience more significant
packet collisions, congestion and loss; this in turn leads to limited application
fidelity and in in many cases to the collapse of the whole WSN due to congestion [17].
Controlling the topology is an important factor for any network because it has
a direct impact on its overall performance. One of the major challenges in LWSNs
is to ensure the end-to-end data delivery. In LWSNs, the whole generated data
traffic is forwarded to the sink by a limited number of sensors, that is, sensors have
much less neighbours then generally in WSNs. This happens because the nodes
which are closer to the sink have to forward many more packets than nodes which
are farther from the sink. This phenomenon has been described as the relay burden
problem and it brings about a very disproportionate distribution of the energy
consumption in the network. The nodes close to the sink, called close-in nodes,
deplete their energy much faster and result in a greatly reduced network lifetime.
On the other hand, these same nodes cannot apply long-sleep duty cycles because
they must be in idle listening mode in order to perform their main relaying func-
tions [26]. Therefore, data traffic load must be intelligently distributed in the net-
work in order to level the energy consumed by the individual nodes and thus extend
the network lifetime as a whole.
Because of the linear topology of the network (many-to-one transmission),
data delivery in LWSNs is prone to higher failure rates than in classic WSNs –
sometimes even the failure of a single node can block the whole communication
channel. So, this is one of the major ‘‘weak links’’ of LWSNs. Furthermore, when
faulty nodes happen to be adjacent to each other, they form ‘‘holes’’ dividing the
LWSN into multiple segments, disconnected from each other and disrupt the
operation of the network as a whole. Furthermore, the failure of some ‘‘overloaded’’
Figure 10.5
A three-tier LWSN
240
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

nodes, which happens closer to sink, may also cause terminating the network’s
operation. Reasons for node failure in LWSNs can be due to battery exhaustion,
hardware failure or unintentional (natural) or intentional damage. This kind of
failures may cause severe problems, and drastic solutions need to be considered to
discover and recover from faults since there are no possible path alternatives to the
sink. More detailed research on node failure in LWSNs can be found in [27,28].
Another major problem in LWSNs, also related to the specifics of the topol-
ogy, is the accumulation of the traffic produced towards one end of the network.
The nodes closer to the sink tend to be more congested than the others, they have
more packets to send but it is more and more difficult to get access of the channel
since more and more nodes compete for it. Traffic congestion may cause buffer
overflow and packet drop, resulting in packet loss and additional increase of end-
to-end delay [29]. One approach suggested to overcome this problem is specifically
designing larger buffers for the nodes which are in the area near the sink.
Another important issue that has to be carefully considered is energy con-
sumption. In LWSNs we also observe an unbalanced energy consumption profile
which is due to the linearity and the traffic congestion at the sink side. Additionally,
problems like the ‘‘exposed terminal problem’’ and/or ‘‘hidden terminal problem’’
bring high latency and high collision rate. That is why one of the major research
goals is to design balanced energy consumption techniques that also operate within
accepted delay margins [30].
On the other hand, there are a number of potential benefits that LWSNs may
offer and which should be fully exploited. One such example is the fact that each
node knows its neighbours’ positions and can accordingly devise a suitable duty
cycle and a schedule for its packet transmissions. When nodes are positioned at an
equal distance, which is often quite convenient, and the topology is already known,
WSN techniques like flooding and network discovery will not be necessary in
LWSNs. Many researchers focus on the medium access control (MAC) protocols
used in LWNs in order to solve the problems mentioned earlier and we review these
protocols in Section 10.3.
10.3
MAC protocols for LWSNs
In recent years, following the proliferation of WSN and applications, authors have
focused on designing protocols specifically targeting the challenges of LWSNs.
Some of the most interesting and recent examples that can be found in the literature
are discussed in this section.
A large group of protocols focuses on avoiding collision by scheduling trans-
missions between the nodes. Avoiding collisions leads both to higher packet
delivery rate (PDR), but more important, by avoiding retransmissions decreases the
delay in the networks.
In [5], the authors consider a linear sensor network and apply the request-
to-send/clear-to-send (RTS/CTS) mechanism defined for IEEE 802.11 [32] to
the IEEE 802.15.4 unslotted carrier sense multiple access/collision avoidance
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
241

(CSMA/CA) [33]. The carrier sensing procedure of CSMA/CA has proved to be an
effective approach to increase throughput in shared medium environments, which
also allows avoiding the hidden terminal problem. The authors stress on the ben-
efits of combining these two mechanisms with the aim to reduce packet drops.
Using the combination of the two mechanisms mentioned earlier the authors aim to
reduce collisions. The proposed algorithm works as follows: if a node wants to send
a frame, it first attempts to send an RTS with unslotted CSMA/CA. If the channel is
detected available, in at most five attempts, the pending frame is sent and the
receiver replies by sending a CTS without backoff. Otherwise the current frame is
dropped in order to fight against overloading the medium. Upon receiving the CTS
frame, the node sends its data frame directly. Finally, as soon as the data frame
transmission ends, the receiver sends an acknowledgement (ACK). It is important
to note that both RTS and CTS contain information about the max duration of the
frame exchange.
When an RTS is transmitted, a timer of the sending entity is started with a
duration of tRTS þ 2tTA þ tCTS þ tDATA, where tRTS, tCTS and tDATA are the time to
transmit an RTS frame, a CTS frame and the data frame respectively and tTA is the
turnaround time. The length of the data frame is included in the fields of RTS and
CTS frames. When a node receives an RTS or CTS concerning another node, a
timer is also started by each node with duration depending on the length of the
pending frame. Unslotted CSMA/CA stops decrementing its backoff counter. Once
the timer has expired, unslotted CSMA/CA continues reducing the original backoff.
Also, there is a trade-off between the duration required to send RTS/CTS and the
length of the data frame. For small data frames, the benefit of RTS/CTS mechanism
is reduced. Authors also propose a leaky shift register model which is shown in
Figure 10.6. Packets flow from left to the right, hence the name shift register. With
this model, some frames can be dropped or lost, hence the name leaky register.
In this model, there are three reasons for a node to drop or lose a packet:
medium overload, first in first out (FIFO) overload and retransmission credit
exceeded (ACK). However, the main reason is the overload produced by the local
(1) (2) (3)
Local losses
Local losses
(1)  Medium overload (access) 
(2)  FIFO overload
(3)  Reception credit exceeded (ACK)
Sink
Shift register input
Shift register input
Local load
Local load
Local load
node
(1) (2) (3)
queue
Figure 10.6
Leaky shift register model
242
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

traffic. Authors also focus on evaluation of the leaky shift register. They study the
relationship between the register parameters (the local traffic load, the number of
nodes and the size of the node queue) and the leaks of the register with and without
the RTS/CTS mechanism. In the leaky shift register, forwarded packets become
increasingly important as they get closer to the sink. Simulation results show that
the number of dropped packets decreases significantly with RTS/CTS, as well as
the load of the queues, at the cost of a slightly increased delay.
Another interesting protocol for chain-type LWSN is CMAC-T [13]. It is based
on tokens and is implemented for monitoring agriculture crops’ environment. The
protocol combines proactive operation with stationary distribution time slot allo-
cation and defines two types of frames (2 bytes each, with fixed length). The first
type, ‘‘beacon frames,’’ is designed for synchronizing neighbouring nodes and
assigning channel permissions. The first byte in each frame carries token infor-
mation while the second the number of nodes in the network. Tokens can be dif-
ferent during different periods. Each node, besides transmitting its own data, has to
re-transmit data from other nodes. So, the length of the data frame varies from node
to node. The data frame includes also the node’s ID and alarm information. Alarm
information is one bit of data indicating if a node has low power level.
In CMAC-T, synchronization is realized by using beacon frames sent by the
sink. When a node comes out of sleep state, it randomly receives one of these
beacon frames with time and token information. Based on this information each
node determines its communication authority, which allows it to complete syn-
chronization and data transmission. In case the node does not get communication
authority it will go back to sleep. This mechanism allows avoiding data collision
and reduces the power consumption. The synchronization and communication process
of CMAC-T is shown in Figure 10.7.
Period j, token
is N-j+1
Transmitting time and
idle time ratio 1
Tqj = t + 1
Sink node’s idle time/for
adjacent nodes to send data
t
Buffer time
Beacon
frame
1
Other nodes delay
(M-k)t1 + t
Node N-j delays
(M-k1)t1 + t
Node N-j delays
(M-k2)t1 + t
t
Beacon
frame
M
Beacon
frame
k2
Beacon
frame
k1
Beacon
frame
1
t1
Figure 10.7
Synchronization and communication process of CMAC-T
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
243

According to the authors, the CMAC-T, applied in a greenhouse scenario, has
met the requirements for high reliability and low-power consumption.
An interesting contention free MAC protocol called wireless wire (WiWi) is
presented in [14]. It is based on synchronous multi-hop transmission and resembles
directional scheduled medium access control (DiS-MAC) in the way it avoids
interference between simultaneous transmissions by alternating the transmissions
of nodes next to each other. WiWi also provides bidirectional communication using
a single RF channel, which is much simpler than using a directional antenna.
WiWi provides synchronous communication with fixed size packets using a
staggered transmission schedule. Data flows downstream – from the end node
(head of the chain) towards the sink (called tail). Each node resynchronizes its
clock at the start of a coming downstream packet. Once a node is synchronized with
the downstream flow, it sticks to a fixed pattern of activities: receive-transmit-idle-
transmit-receive-idle (R-T-I-T-R-I) no matter what its actual location in the chain
is. The upstream (from the sink, towards the en node) data is sent using the same
principle. Thus, for each node there are four time slots between the time it receives
a packet and the time it has to forward the packet, which helps evade collisions
(shown in Figure 10.8). Interestingly, WiWi nodes do not require explicit addres-
sing because there is only one receiving node within the range of transmission (i.e.
for a given packet that is the next hop node).
The authors state that WiWi provides deterministic and predictable latency and
throughput in both directions, but it is not optimized from energy consumption
point of view.
tm
n
n + 1
n + 2
n + 3
n + 4
Nodes
Tup
Rup
Tup
Rup
Rdown
Rdown
Rdown
Tdown
Tdown
Tdown
Tdown
Rup
Tup
Tdown
Rdown
Rdown Tdown
Rup
Tup
Rup
Rdown Tdown
Tup
Tup
Rup
Rdown Tdown
Tup
Tup
Downstream
packets
Upstream
packets
Rdown
tm+1
tm+2
tm+3
tm+4
tm+5
tm+6
tm+7
tm+8
tm+9
tm+10 Time (slots)
Figure 10.8
Bidirectional staggered transmission
244
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

The long-chain MAC (LC-MAC) protocol presented in [17] is a duty cycle-
based protocol which relies on advance booking and burst transmissions to reduce
the end-to-end latency without increasing energy consumption. First, location
detection is carried out during which a node detects its neighbour relay nodes. The
relay node with a single neighbour sets itself as an endpoint of the long chain. Such
an end node is noted Rn and is shown in Figure 10.9(a). This end node Rn sends a
location detect package (LDP) with its address to its neighbour node. In its turn, the
second node upon receiving the LDP will add its own address into the packet and
forward it to the next node. Thus, by the time the packet gets to the sink it will
contain the addresses of all the nodes. The sink creates an address tables and sends
it with an LDP back along the same route shown in Figure 10.9(b), which allows all
the nodes to get their location information.
At the end of the first stage, every node has clear location information
regarding the chain. During the second stage, the so-called ‘‘super SYNC message
passing’’ (SSYNC) is carried out. It is based on a staggered wakeup schedule
Rn–1
R2
(a)
(b)
R1
Sink
LDP
Time
Rn
Rn–1
R2
R1
Sink
l1
l2
ln
l
ln–1
Figure 10.9
Topology and distance detection mechanism of LC-MAC:
(a) topological graph; (b) distance detection
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
245

(SWS). The SWS for every node is calculated depending on the node’s location, so
the operation does not require RTS or CTS. When every node follows the SWS to
transmit SSYNC messages collisions are automatically avoided. SSYNC relay
action is shown in Figure 10.10.
Each SSYNC message passing actually includes two events: a registration
form (RF) part and an information transmission (IT) part. The IT part contains a
sleep schedule and address information. The RF part is divided into n subsections,
where each subsection has p bits for registering how many packets will be sent.
Once the end node is determined, the length of this SSYNC message is determined
and stays constant. Any node upon receiving an SSYNC message will update it and
relay it along towards the sink. Once the second stage is completed, every node
knows how many data packets belong to each node. Following this, every node
can calculate the time when it has to wake up and relay/transmit data packets, thus
creating a staggered wakeup schedule and the so-called ‘‘burst transmission’’. The
SSYNC frame structure and an example of burst transmission are shown in
Figure 10.11.
Using simulation, the authors compare LC-MAC with S-MAC and S-MAC
(adaptive listening) [31]. The results show that specifically for long-chain networks
LC-MAC decreases latency with more than 99%, decreases energy consumption
and achieves better throughput for heavy traffic.
DiS-MAC protocol, suggested in [18], proposes a collision-free communica-
tion discipline between synchronized sensor nodes of an LWSN. It is based on the
advantages of directional antennas – elimination of interference, higher gains,
spatial reuse, longer transmission ranges and collisions by pointing the radio beam
R2
R1
Rn–1
Rn
LISTEN
Trelay
SSYNC
S
S
Y
NC
S
S
Y
NC
S
S
Y
NC
S
S
Y
NC
S
S
Y
NC
S
S
Y
NC
Figure 10.10
SSYNC relay action of LC-MAC
246
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

in a specific desired direction. The test-bed for the protocol is a highway mon-
itoring application. In DiS-MAC, each node has one transceiver and a directional
antenna system which directs a single beam in a particular direction ensuring high
gain, while at the same time much less gain is created in the back lobe
(Figure 10.12).
Rn
Time
schedule
addr info.
2
1
0
0
R1
Rn–2
Rn–1
Rn
t0
TX_DATA
DATAn1
Listen
Listen
TX_ACK
Listen
Listen
Listen
DATAn1
DATAn2
DATAn-11
DATAn1
DATAn2
DATAn-11
DATAn2
R1
Figure 10.11
SSYNC framework and burst transmission with staggered wakeup
Phase II
(T2)
1
2
3
4
2n–1
2n
Sink
2n
2n–1
4
3
2
1
Phase I
(T1)
Figure 10.12
DiS-MAC topology and operation
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
247

The operation of DiS-MAC involves phase 1 (when nodes with numbers 2n–1
carry out their transmissions) and phase 2 (when nodes with numbers 2n carry out
their transmissions) (see Figure 10.12). The duration of the two phases is equal, that
is, T1 ¼ T2 ¼ T (Figure 10.13). Thus, a full cycle (scheduling cycle) lasts for 2T and
during that time all nodes in an orderly manner have a chance to transmit their
packets. The timing structure of DiS-MAC is shown in Figure 10.13.
Compared to contention-based protocols DiS-MAC does not use RTS/CTS
packets and avoids collisions and problems like the ‘‘hidden terminal problem’’ by
using directional antennas. Furthermore, there is no control packet overhead. In
addition, per hop latency is minimized since there is no backoff and it can be
approximately evaluated based on the cycle duration 2T. The authors have carried
out simulations related to the following three scenarios: (1) when only the first node
is a source, (2) when all nodes are producing packets and (3) packets originate from
all nodes and they are sent to the sink with probability q. The simulation results
show that the protocol is stable and links between the nodes are reliable. However,
large payloads result in increased error rate and thus a degraded performance.
Regarding this issue, the authors suggest that channel coding and data fragmenta-
tion techniques be extensively used in the case of large packet transmissions.
The authors of [19] suggest a real-time MAC protocol under realistic
assumptions. They consider the case when sensor nodes are randomly deployed
along a line. The goal is to design a communication system guaranteeing that alarm
messages are able to reach their destination before a predefined deadline. Four
phases are defined: initialization, switching phase, protected mode and unprotected
mode. During the first phase (initialization) nodes are organized into cells so that
all nodes of a given cell can communicate with all nodes of the two adjacent cells.
During this phase, the sink node sends a CC(i) message to create cell i. All nodes
receiving this message transmit another CC message according to a timer called
backoffinitialization proportional to their distance to the sender. The farthest node will
transmit first. During the backoff time, each node counts how many CC messages it
has received, records the time when it received the last CC message as well as the
number of the last created cell. Upon sending a CC message, a node starts a
timerlast to determine whether it is the last one in the line. If the timer expires before
the node receives a new message, it knows it is the last node, and sends an END
message (Figure 10.14). The END message informs the sink node that the
Time
Phase_II
T2 = T
Allowed transmission for
NODE_ID = 2n
Scheduling cycle
Allowed transmission for
NODE_ID = 2n–1
Phase_I
T1 = T
Figure 10.13
Timing structure of DiS-MAC
248
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

initialization phase has ended. After this phase finishes each node will know the
number of the cell it belongs to (‘‘I’’), and its position inside the cell (‘‘R’’). Also,
it is also assumed that each node should have information about its absolute
position (‘‘A’’).
After the initialization phase, the protocol defines that run time starts during
which alarm messages are transmitted towards the sink in the so-called ‘‘unpro-
tected mode’’. It operates with min transmission delay but does not follow the
‘‘cell-based organization’’. Its operation is illustrated in Figure 10.15. If a collision
occurs while in ‘‘unprotected mode’’ the network switches to ‘‘protected mode’’,
which guarantees collision-free operation but with longer delays with an upper
limit as shown in Figure 10.16. This mode exploits the ‘‘cell-based organization’’
described in Figure 10.14. The main idea behind it is to reserve, by using signalling
messages, five cells ahead of the sending node (in the direction of the sink) before
sending the alarm message. Once the reservation is completed, a cell cannot gen-
erate new alarm message causing collision. So, thus after the reservation, an
ALARM message (of any size) is transmitted in unprotected mode.
Considering the ‘‘unprotected mode’’ the authors point out that it is optimal in
terms of transmission times and the protocol allows that switching back to unpro-
tected mode to be determined by the sink. This decision is based on the arrival rate
of alarm messages: when there are few alarms, the network is considered to be ‘‘not
CC(1)
1
2
3
4
5
6
CC(2)
CC(3)
CC(4)
CC(5)
END
END
END
END
Figure 10.14
Cell creation mechanism
Effective range
maxrange
Figure 10.15
Unprotected mode
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
249

congested’’ so switching back to unprotected mode should not raise immediate
collisions. Physically, switching is realized by using a jamming message, JAM.
Each node transmits the so-called ‘‘JAM message’’ either when it hears another
‘‘JAM message’’ or when it detects a collision. Based on simulation the authors
quantify the speed of the protocol and their results show that this combination of
approaches (protected and unprotected mode) provides very good performance,
concluding that it is specifically attractive for real-time LWSNs. Despite its origi-
nal approach and proven effectiveness this protocol is quite complicated to realize
and specifically mandates very good synchronization which in many cases is a
considerable hurdle.
Another contention-based duty cycle protocol is multi-frame-transmission
MAC (MFT-MAC) suggested in [34]. To increase energy efficiency and reduce
delay this protocol uses a special control frame ‘‘PION’’. It conveys information
about how many DATA frames are waiting to be transmitted to the next node, thus
optimizing the transmission process. In a single duty cycle MFT-MAC allows for
multiple frames to be sent over several hops, reducing energy consumption without
unnecessary increasing the delay. This protocol is quite suitable for data collection
applications with chain topology where sensor nodes transmit their data to the sink
over many hops. There are three periods in a single cycle: SYNC, DATA and
SLEEP. Nodes synchronize their clocks with the required precision in the SYNC
period. In the DATA period, the source node contends with its neighbours and sets
up a forwarding path, along which data is then transmitted to the sink during the
SLEEP period. Interestingly enough, the SLEEP period is the actual data trans-
mission period. It is named like this because all nodes are in SLEEP state, and only
the next hop node should wake up according to the schedule created during the
DATA period. The control frame PION is similar to the RTS/CTS mechanism
and solves the hidden terminal problem. PION includes all fields of RTS/CTS and
the final destination address, the hop count and the number of multi frames. In the
SLEEP period the nodes wake up at some specific time in order to receive the
multi-frames and then go back to sleep after transmitting their own data frames plus
the ones received from the upstream neighbours. The number of DATA frames to
be transmitted in the SLEEP period is determined using the number of PIONs
transmitted in the DATA period. If the number of nodes in the chain is greater than
the number of PIONs, the transmission should be continued in the next cycle. The
operation of MFT-MAC is shown in Figure 10.17.
ACK
ACK
ACK
i-5
RES(5)
RES(4)
RES(3)
RES(2)
RES(1)
i-4
i-3
i-2
i-1
i
Figure 10.16
Protected mode
250
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

The authors compare the MFT-MAC with DW-MAC [35] and R-MAC [36]
protocols which use an adaptive duty cycle. Results show that MFT-MAC is
superior to the DW-MAC and R-MAC in regard to average power consumption, the
average end-to-end delay and throughput.
The so-called ‘‘adaptive coordinated MAC based on dynamic power manage-
ment’’ protocol (AC-MAC/DPM) [37] focuses on reducing the number of trans-
ceiver state switching. It guarantees low delay, high throughput and reduced energy
consumption for large traffic loads. To increase the effectiveness of switching the
transceiver between sleep and idle state, AC-MAC/DPM uses the Dynamic Power
Management mechanism described in [38]. The basic principle of the protocol is to
control the value of Ti which is the duration between transition to sleep state and
active state. State transition latency is shown in Figure 10.18.
The protocol also calculates a so-called value Ri reflecting the number of new
duty cycles required depending on the sensor’s traffic load. The traffic load is
determined based on the number of packets waiting in a queue at the MAC layer.
Once a node i determines its Ri value it uses the RTS/CTS mechanism to announce
it to the neighbouring nodes. After receiving the RTS/CTS packet, all nodes within
SLEEP
SLEEP
SLEEP
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
SLEEP
SLEEP
SLEEP
TIME
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
ACK
SIFS
ACK
ACK
SIFS
DATA
DATA
DATA
DATA
DATA
DATA
DATA
SIFS
DATA
DATA
CW
DIFS
SIFS
PION
PION
PION
PION
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
PION
PION
PION
PION
SYNC
Node 0
Node 1
Node 2
Node 3
Node 4
Figure 10.17
MFT-MAC operation
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
251

one-hop from either the transmitter or the receiver may follow the same duty cycle
for the current period. One node can announce only a single Ri value within one
period. The algorithm for deciding the number of chances of communications
within one duty cycle is shown in Figure 10.19.
The authors compare AC-MAC/DPM with S-MAC and analyse the end-to-end
delay in a multi-hop linear topology. Simulation results show that for high traffic
load AC-MAC/DPM performs better than S-MAC in terms of delay and energy
consumption.
E
Sm
Sn
T2
T1
Ti
Pm
Pn
T
Tdk
Tuk
Figure 10.18
State transition latency and power
Map
Ri = f(Ni)
Always be
awake in one
basic duty cycle
NO
YES
Ri < Ri_max ?
Ri chances of
communications
within on basic
duty cycle
Figure 10.19
Algorithm for determining the number of communication
opportunities in a basic duty cycle
252
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

A very recent, simple but effective MAC protocol is proposed in [39], called
LINE-MAC. The protocol operation is based on the idea of adaptive duty cycling
and low-power listening (LPL), which was previously suggested in AREA-MAC
[40]. It achieves high PDR and low delay, while requiring only minimal energy
consumption by introducing the consecutive transmission of variable number of
data packets. This is a very important issue since in a network with linear topology
nodes closer to the sink accumulate more packets to relay. Nodes alternate between
sleep and awake states with adaptive durations. When a given node Ni wants to
send data, it first transmits several very short preambles. If its 1-hop neighbour
node (‘‘first forwarding node’’) Ni–1 receives the preamble, it sends back a preACK
to Ni to confirm that it is ready to receive an incoming data packet. If a 2-hop-
neighbor (i.e. ‘‘second forwarding node’’) of Ni, Ni–2 wakes up while Ni–1 is
sending preACK to Ni or is receiving data from Ni, it will go back to sleep
immediately because there is no packet destined to Ni–2. Ni–1 will have to forward
the packet towards the sink so it, in its turn, will start sending preambles to its next
hop downstream neighbour. Since Ni–2 might be in sleep mode, Ni–1 has to wait
until its next scheduled wakeup time and/or keep sending preambles, which is a
waste of energy (Figure 10.20) and also results in increased delay. To overcome
this, the authors of LINE-MAC suggest the following three actions:
1.
Immediately upon receiving a broadcasted preamble, a node has to transmit a
preACK packet. Waiting for the data it starts a timer, and if the timer expires
before any data comes the node assumes that a collision has occurred. Gen-
erally, it will have to enter a state of ‘‘constant length short sleep’’ but in
LINE-MAC the node enters a ‘‘random length sleep’’ period. Thus, at the
next step, the preACK collision will be avoided since one node will wake up
earlier and will be the first to receive the next preamble. (Figure 10.21) The
other node, which will wake up later, will find the channel busy and will enter
long sleep.
2.
AREA-MAC assumes that transmitting a max of two consecutive data packets
by each node is sufficient to ensure fairness and avoid unnecessary collisions
without increasing the delay. However, a major problem in linear networks is
the so-called ‘‘relay burden problem’’, where nodes in the proximity of the
sink have to forward more and more packets. This leads to higher-energy
consumption and extremely long delays. Since the limit of ‘‘two consecutive
packets’’ is insufficient for the nodes in the vicinity of the sink, the authors of
LINE-MAC propose to adjust that number depending on the traffic conditions.
This can be done by dynamically adjusting and transmitting the packetLimit
parameter.
3.
‘‘Overhearing packets’’ is a major source of energy waste in WSNs. AREA-
MAC assumes that not only data packets but also any of the packets, including
preACK and preambles, can be overheard [41]. This is obviously a source of
energy waste. However, LINE-MAC takes advantage of this overhearing pro-
cess. The address information in the preACK packet can be used to determine
whether a given node will be the next intended hop for the coming data. If it is,
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
253

Node 7
Node 6
Node 5
Node 4
Collision
Wake up
Preamble packet
Node ID
WAIT_FOR_ACK Duration
Wake
up 
WAIT_FOR_DATA
WAIT_FOR_DATA
WAIT_FOR_ACK Duration
Random sleep
Random
sleep
Wake up
LONG SLEEP
LONG SLEEP
Time
ACK received but Preamble not, go to LONG Sleep
LONG SLEEP
Wake up
Empty buffer
DATA
DATA
W
W
A
C
K
Check interval
A
C
K
A
C
K
Figure 10.20
Transmission of excessive preambles and increasing latency of an LWSN

Node ID
Node 3
Wake up
Preamble packet
Wake
up
A
C
K
WAIT_FOR_ACK Duration
Check interval
DATA
LONG SLEEP
Empty buffer
LONG SLEEP
FORWARD
Time
DATA
Wake up
Random sleep
Random
sleep
Collision
A
C
K
Wake up
Node 1
Node 2
WAIT_FOR_DATA
WAIT_FOR_DATA
A
C
K
A
C
K
W
Figure 10.21
Nodes enter random period sleep mode after WAIT_FOR_DATA timer expires

the overhearing node starts a timer and enters only a short sleep until the data
transmission is completed (see Figure 10.22) and wakes up to receive the next
preamble. Thus, overhearing preACK helps reduce end-to-end latency and also
restricts the transmission of unnecessary preambles. If based on the over-
hearing packet a node determines that it is not the next hop in the direction of
the sink, it enters a state of long sleep. Thus, transmission of packets in a
direction away from the sink is also prevented.
For this mechanism to operate properly, it is very important that the over-
hearing node also knows how long the current transmission will be so it can set
up its wakeup timer accordingly. No strict synchronization is required since
there will be at least several preACKs sent. That is why, in a way similar to the
NAV vector, the authors suggest that each preACK packet should contain
information about how many packets are currently being sent. This value
depends on the data packets waiting in the queue and the packetLimit. So, as
can be seen in Figure 10.23, there is a mechanism for the adjacent nodes to
tune up their wakeup schedule without too much extra work.
The above suggested additional measures result in an adaptive and more
reliable communication in LWSN. The whole algorithm of LINE-MAC is pre-
sented in Figure 10.24. Utilizing the information from overheard ACK packets
and explicitly transmitting the number of consecutive data packets to be sent
within the preambles greatly improves the latency and reduces the energy waste.
Specifically, for the nodes in the vicinity of the sink, the packets that have to be
sent one after the other are quite large. On the other hand, the suggested rando-
mized back-off mechanism for preACK packets prevents collisions for broadcast-
style communication.
The authors compare the suggested protocol LINE-MAC with AREA-MAC
and S-MAC. Three major parameters are considered: energy consumption,
throughput and delay. Specifically, the comparison between AREA-MAC and
LINE-MAC is quite interesting because it even though both protocols share the
same general operational principles, the changes suggested in LINE-MAC make it
much more efficient for linear topologies in terms of throughput and delay as well
as energy consumption. Comparative results are presented in Figures 10.25–10.27.
Furthermore, LINE-MAC is also compared with S-MAC as one of the most
popular MAC layer protocols for WSN. Two specific scenarios of practical
interest are studied. The first one, named ‘‘N1 scenario’’, considers the case all
nodes generate packets (with the data they sense) and relay packets from their
upward neighbours. Nodes transmit only to their downward 1-hop neighbours.
The second one, named ‘‘N1N2 scenario’’, considers the case when all nodes
generate packets and relay packets, and can send them downwards (towards the
sink) both to 1-hop and to 2-hop neighbours. The results show that LINE-MAC
outperforms in light and medium traffic conditions in terms of packet delivery
ratio and energy efficiency and also is much better in terms of end-to-end latency
(Figures 10.28, 10.29 and Table 10.1).
256
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Node 7
Node ID
Node 6
Collision
ACK received, Sleep until the end of current DATA transfer
Wake up
Wake
up
Check interval
DATA
LONG SLEEP
LONG SLEEP
Random sleep
Random
sleep
Wake up
DATA
DATA
LONG SLEEP
FORWARD
Time
DATA
A
C
K
A
C
K
A
C
K
A
C
K
SLEEP
W
V
Wake up
Empty buffer
WAIT_FOR_ACK Duration
Preamble packet
Node 5
Node 4
WAIT_FOR_DATA
WAIT_FOR_DATA
Figure 10.22
Nodes consider both preamble and preACK packets to decide whether to enter long sleep

Node ID
Node 3
Node 4
Node 2
Node 1
Wake
up
DATA
Wake
up
Wake
up
V
Wake up
Preamble packet
WAIT_FOR_ACK Duration
Packets_to_Sent = 2
Packets_Left = 2
Packets_Left = 1
DATA
DATA
SLEEP
Random sleep
Wait_For_DATA
Wait_For_DATA
LONG SLEEP
Random
sleep
W
SLEEP
DATA
Wake up
DATA
Time
DATA
DATA
DATA
A
C
K
A
C
K
A
C
K
V
A
C
K
A
C
K
A
C
K
A
C
K
A
C
K
Figure 10.23
Sleep wakeup schedule based on preamble and preACK packets

16_node
36_Node
64_Node
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
AREA-MAC (N0)
Area-MAC (N1)
Number of nodes
99
95
97
85
70
50
96
65
50
25
Packet delivery ratio (%)
Area-MAC (N1&N2)
LINE-MAC
Figure 10.25
Comparison of packet delivery rates (LINE-MAC vs. AREA-MAC)
LONG
sleep
YES
QUEUE > 0 ?
NO
NO
QUEUE > 0 ?
NO
ACK ?
YES
NO
YES
For me ?
YES
SEND ACK with
num of data pkts
to be received
SRC_ID == (SELF_ID
+1⏐SELF_ID + 2) ?
Sleep until the
current
transfer
Random
SHORT sleep
Forward
DATA packets
Send ACK
Decrease pkts to
be received by
“1”
Send preamble
with num of
remaining data
pkts
COUNTER >=
BURST_COUNT
YES
SHORT sleep
NO
NO
ACK Received ?
YES
NO
COUNTER <=
PKT_LIMIT ?
YES
YES
SEND DATA
More
DATA ?
NO
NO
ACK
RECEIVED
?
More
DATA ?
YES
YES
Receive
DATA ?
NO
YES
NO
NO
SHORT sleep
NO
Preamble ?
WAKE_UP
YES
YES
NO
Is channel clear ?
LONG sleep
Figure 10.24
Algorithm of LINE-MAC
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
259

0
300 ms
6600 ms
19500 ms
50
100
150
200
250
Time
AREA-MAC
LINE-MAC
Application level latency in ms
Number of packets
Figure 10.27
Latency comparison (LINE-MAC vs. S-MAC)
0
Node ID
Energy consumption
AREA-MAC
LINE-MAC
Consumed energy (joules)
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
20
40
60
80
100
120
Figure 10.26
Network energy efficiency (LINE-MAC vs. S-MAC)
260
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

0.24
0.22
0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
1s
3s
5s
7s
Interarrival time [s]
LINE-MAC
S-MAC
N1,LINEMAC
N1,SMAC
N1N2,SMAC
N1N2,LINEMAC
Consumed energy per packet
[Joules/pkt]
10s
15s
20s
Figure 10.28
Consumed energy per packet comparison for scenarios N1 and
N1N2
Table 10.1
Table of PDR comparison for scenarios N1 and N1N2
1s
179960
Number
of
generated
packets
Number of
received
packets
Number of
received
packets
Scenario N1
SCENARIO N1N2
Interarrival
time
33832
LINEMAC
LINEMAC
12168
SMAC
SMAC
PDR
for
LINEMAC
PDR
for
LINEMAC
PDR
for
SMAC
PDR
for
SMAC
18.80%
6.76%
46443
10628
25.81%
5.91%
15.45%
24.44%
33.25%
46.45%
67.72%
89.16%
72.70%
94.09%
94.14%
93.93%
93.94%
93.60%
9264
8788
8544
8342
8099
7989
43591
33834
24195
16869
11235
8387
17.17%
24.27%
31.89%
42.19%
50.47%
62.76%
65.05%
89.92%
91.42%
91.88%
91.86%
92.10%
10293
8726
8197
7578
6036
5623
39002
32335
23494
16502
10986
8252
59960
35960
25700
17960
11960
8960
3s
5s
7s
10s
15s
20s
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Smac N1
LineMac N1
LineMac N1N2
Smac N1N2
Interarrival time = 10 s
CDF of latency
25
30
35
40
Figure 10.29
Latency histogram for 10 s interarrival time
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
261

10.4
Open research issues
In this chapter, so far we have presented the most important information related to a
newly emerging group of specific WSNs, known as the LWSN. Different MAC layer
protocols were discussed in great detail because in WSN they are the most important
element in controlling the performance and lifetime of the network as a whole. These
application-specific protocols, developed in the last decade, tend to optimize one or
two of the most important parameters – the network throughput and end-to-end
delay. However, in the light of the new trends of smart environments and assisted
living environments, these networks become only small stones hidden deep in the
foundation of an enormously complex and interconnected cyber-physical world.
That is why, from this new point of view not only the optimization of the network
lifetime and performance is important. A major issue becomes the interoperability
with other ICT systems, with different ICT infrastructures and applications. From
here on, the knowledge of the specifics of WSN and their operation has to be suitably
integrated in these future developments. A major technological challenge is to
overcome the undesirable dissociation between technologies and service infra-
structures [42]. Another major concern is that separated and independent commercial
approaches lead to an unmanageable and unsustainable ocean of systems and market
islands so the establishment of suitable platforms and standards is required to over-
come the increasing market fragmentation. This will allow us to make not only the
specific building elements of the complex systems highly effective, but make the
systems as a whole more efficient, scalable and suitable for supporting new gen-
erations of services and applications that are not even though of today.
10.5
Conclusion
In recent years, the world has observed an incredible upsurge of information and
communication technologies, which have become the nervous system of our
society and economy. A quickly unfolding trend of more and more specialized
WSNs for different applications has created a totally new perspective of how we
look at them: from networks for strictly academic or limited-use applications they
have become a staple of the modern ICT infrastructure especially when M2M
communications, smart cities and assisted living environments are considered. The
unified ICT platform of the future must be suitable to ‘‘model, measure, optimize,
control, and monitor complex interdependent systems of dense urban life’’ [42,43].
As one of the major underlying enabling technologies, the WSN will continue to
play an important role. In this chapter, we discussed a very specific group of
WSN – the ones with linear topology, called LWSNs. More specifically we have
focused on the medium access protocols as the key element in optimizing network
performance in terms of throughput and latency. A detailed discussion of the most
recently suggested protocols has been presented which will allow the reader to
achieve a better understanding of one of the major building blocks of the modern
complex cyber-physical systems.
262
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

References
[1]
Jawhar I., Mohamed N., Agrawal D.P. ‘Linear wireless sensor networks:
Classification and applications’. Journal of Network and Computer Appli-
cations. 2011, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1671–82
[2]
Kim S., Pakzad S., Culler D.E., et al. ‘Health monitoring of civil infra-
structures using wireless sensor networks’. Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional
Conference
on
Information
Processing
in
Sensor
Networks;
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, April 2007 (ACM Press), pp. 254–63
[3]
Stoianov I., Nachman L., Madden S., Tokmouline T. ‘PIPENET: A wireless
sensor network for pipeline monitoring’. ACM International Symposium on
Information Processing in Sensor Networks; Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA, April 2007 (ACM Press), pp. 264–73
[4]
Pan M.S., Fang H.W., Liu Y.C., Tseng Y.C. ‘Address assignment and
routing schemes for zigbee-based long-thin wireless sensor networks’. IEEE
Vehicular Technology Conference; Singapore, May 2008, pp. 173–77
[5]
Zimmerling M., Dargie W., Reason J.M. ‘Localized power-aware routing in
linear wireless sensor networks’. Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International
Conference on Context-Awareness for Self-Managing Systems; New York,
2008, pp. 24–33
[6]
Nan W., Qingfeng M., Bin Z., Tong L., Quinghai M. ‘Research on linear
wireless sensor networks used for online monitoring of rolling bearing in
freight train’. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2011, vol. 305, no. 1,
id. 012024, pp. 10
[7]
Shafiullah G.M., Azad, S.A., Ali A.B.M.S. ‘Energy-efficient wireless MAC
protocols for railway monitoring applications’. IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems. 2013, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 649–59
[8]
Li M., Liu Y. ‘Underground coal mine monitoring with wireless sensor
networks’. ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks. 2009, vol. 5, no. 2,
article id. 10, pp. 1–29
[9]
Kumar A., Singh K., Bhattacharya D. ‘Coal mining safety monitoring using
WSN’. International Journal of Scientific Engineering and Technology.
2013, vol. 2, no.10, pp. 979–81.
[10]
Mohamed N., Jawhar I., Al-Jaroodi J., Zhang L. ‘Sensor network archi-
tectures for monitoring underwater pipelines’. Sensors. 2011, vol. 11, no. 11,
pp. 10738–64
[11]
Xiao Y. Underwater (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2010), p.16
[12]
Xiao Y., Peng M., Gibson J., Xie G.G., Du D.Z., Vasilakos A.V. ‘Tight
performance bounds of multihop fair access for MAC protocols in wireless
sensor networks and underwater sensor networks’. IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing. 2012, vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 1538–54
[13]
Sun T., Yan X., Yan Y. ‘A chain-type wireless sensor network in greenhouse
agriculture’. Journal of Computers. 2013, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 2366–73
[14]
Caneva D., Montessoro P. ‘A synchronous and deterministic MAC protocol
for wireless communications on linear topologies’. International Journal of
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
263

Communications, Network and System Sciences. 2010, vol. 3, no. 12,
pp. 925–33
[15]
Lee H.B., Kwon K.H., Park L.J., Chung T.Y., Wu Q. ‘A lightweight lap time
measurement system for alpine ski sport using a TDMA-based linear wire-
less sensor network’. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks.
2012, vol. 8, no. 2, article id. 674380, pp. 1–15
[16]
Lin T., Rivano H., Moue¨l F.L. ‘How to choose the relevant MAC protocol
for wireless smart parking urban networks’. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM
Symposium on Performance Evaluation of Wireless Ad Hoc Sensor & Ubi-
quitous Networks; New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 1–8
[17]
Fang C., Liu H., Qian L. ‘LC-MAC: An efficient MAC protocol for the long-
chain wireless sensor networks’. International Conference on Communica-
tions and Mobile Computing; Qingdao, China, 2011, pp. 495–500
[18]
Karveli T., Voulgaris K., Ghavami M., Aghvami A.H. ‘A collision-free
scheduling scheme for sensor networks arranged in linear topologies and
using directional antennas’. Proceedings of the 2nd International Con-
ference on Sensor Technologies and Applications; Cap Esterel, France,
2008, pp. 18–22
[19]
Watteyne T., Augt’e-Blum I., Ubt’eda S. ‘Dual-mode real-time Mac proto-
col for wireless sensor networks: A validation/simulation approach’. Inter-
national Conference on Integrated Internet Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks;
Nice, France, 2006, article id. 2, pp. 1–10
[20]
Salvadori F., Gehrke C.S., Oliveira A.C.D., Campos M.D., Sausen P.S.
‘Smart grid infrastructure using a hybrid network architecture’. IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid. 2013, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1630–39
[21]
Henry K.J., Stinson D.R. ‘Resilient aggregation in simple linear sensor net-
works’. Cryptology ePrint Archive. IACR 2014. p. 288
[22]
Bischoff R., Wattenhofer R. ‘Analyzing connectivity-based multi-hop ad-hoc
positioning’. Proceedings of the Second IEEE Annual Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications; Orlando, FL, USA, 2004, pp. 165–74
[23]
Lotker Z., Albeniz M.M., Perennes S. ‘Range-free ranking in sensor net-
works and its applications to localization’. Ad-Hoc, Mobile, and Wireless
Networks. 2004, vol. 3158, pp. 158–71
[24]
Sumithra S., Aruldos Albert Victoire T. ‘An energy efficient linear chain-
based clustering routing protocol for wireless sensor networks’. Journal of
Theoretical and Applied Information Technology. May 2014, vol. 63, no. 3,
pp. 654–64
[25]
Chen C.W., Wang Y. ‘Chain-type wireless sensor network for monitoring
long range infrastructures: Architecture and protocols’. International Jour-
nal of Distributed Sensor Networks. 2008, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 287–314
[26]
Sanli H.O., Simha R. ‘A joint design approach for communication schedule
and layout of wireless sensor networks’. Proceedings of International Con-
ference on Wireless Networks; Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2005
[27]
Mohamed N., Al-Jaroodi J., Jawhar I. ‘Modeling the performance of faulty
linear wireless sensor networks’. International Journal of Distributed Sensor
Networks. 2014, vol. 10, no. 7, article id. 835473, pp. 1–12
264
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[28]
Mohamed N., Al-Jaroodi J., Jawhar I. ‘A cost-effective design for combining
sensing robots and fixed sensors for fault-tolerant linear wireless sensor
networks’. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks. 2014,
vol. 20, article id. 659356, pp. 1–11
[29]
Noori M., Ardakani M. ‘Characterizing the traffic distribution in linear
wireless sensor networks’. IEEE Communications Letters. 2008, vol. 12,
no. 8, pp. 554–56
[30]
He B., Li G. ‘PUAR: Performance and usage aware routing algorithm for
long and linear wireless sensor networks’. International Journal of Dis-
tributed Sensor Networks. 2014, vol. 2014, article id. 464963, pp. 1–13
[31]
Ye W., Heidemann J., Estrin D. ‘Medium access control with coordinated
adaptive sleeping for wireless sensor networks’. IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking. June 2004, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 493–506
[32]
ANSI/IEEE Standard 802.11. ‘Part 11: Wireless LAN medium access con-
trol (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) specifications’. R2003, 1999.
[33]
ANSI/IEEE Standard 802.15.4. ‘Part 15.4: Wireless medium access control
(MAC) and physical layer (PHY) specifications for low-rate wireless per-
sonal area networks (WPANs)’. R2006, 2006.
[34]
Lee E.J., Jwa J.W., Kim H.S. ‘MFT-MAC: A duty-cycle MAC protocol
using multiframe transmission for wireless sensor networks’. International
Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks. 2013, vol. 2013, article id. 858765,
pp. 1–6
[35]
Sun Y., Du S., Gurewitz O., Johnson D.B. ‘DW-MAC: A low latency,
energy efficient demand-wakeup MAC protocol for wireless sensor net-
works’. Proceedings of the 9th ACM International Symposium on Mobile
Ad Hoc Networking and Computing; Hong Kong, China, 2008, pp. 53–62
[36]
Du S., Saha A.K., Johnson D.B. ‘RMAC: A routing-enhanced duty-cycle
MAC protocol for wireless sensor networks’. Proceedings of the 26th IEEE
International Conference on Computer Communications; Barcelona, Spain,
2007, pp. 1478–86
[37]
Li F., Li Y., Zhao W., Chen Q., Tang W. ‘An adaptive coordinated MAC
protocol based on dynamic power management for wireless sensor net-
works’. Proceedings of the 2006 International conference on Wireless
Communications
and Mobile
Computing; Vancouver, Canada, 2006,
pp. 1073–78
[38]
Sinha A., Chandrakasan A. ‘Dynamic power management in wireless
sensor networks’. IEEE Design & Test of Computers. 2001, vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 62–74
[39]
Sokullu R., Demir E. ‘Investigating energy efficiency and timeliness for
linear wireless sensor networks’. Procedia Computer Science. 2014, vol. 37,
pp. 24–31
[40]
Kumar P., Gu¨nes¸ M., Mushtaq Q., Blywis B. ‘A real time and energy efficient
MAC protocol for wireless sensor networks’. International Journal of Ultra
Wideband Communications and Systems. 2009, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 128–42
[41]
Bouajjani A., Fauconnier H. ‘Networked Systems – Third International
Conference’. NETYS 2015. Agadir, Morocco, May 13–15, 2015, Revised
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
265

Selected Papers. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer 2015 Cham
Heidelberg, ISBN 978-3-319-26849-1
[42]
Herna´ndez-Mun˜oz J.M., Vercher J.B., Mun˜oz L., et al. ‘Smart cities at the
forefront of the future Internet’. Future Internet Assembly. 2011, vol. 6656,
pp. 447–62
[43]
Simonov M. ‘Future Internet applications relevant for smart cities, an ICT
application area example: smart & proactive energy management’. Open
Innovation by FI-enabled Services. Brussels, 15 January (2010)
Further reading
[1]
Mohamed N., Al-Jaroodi J., Jawhar I. ‘Modeling the performance of faulty
linear wireless sensor networks’. International Journal of Distributed Sensor
Networks. 2014, vol. 10, no. 7, article id. 835473, pp. 1–12
[2]
Jawhar I., Ammar M., Zhang S., Wu J., Mohamed N. ‘Ferry-based linear
wireless sensor networks’. Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Global Commu-
nications Conference; Atlanta, GA, USA, 2013, pp. 304–09
List of abbreviations
ACK
Acknowledgement
AC-MAC
Adaptive coordinated medium access control
CMAC-T
Chain type medium access control based on token
CSMA/CA
Carrier sense multiple access/collision avoidance
CTS
Clear to send
DDN
Data dissemination nodes
DIFS
Distributed coordination function inter-frame space
DiS-MAC
Directional scheduled medium access control
DPM
Dynamic power management
DRN
Data relay nodes
DW-MAC
Demand wakeup medium access control
FFD
Full function device
FIFO
First in first out
ICT
Information and communication technology
ID
Identification
IEEE
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
JAM
Jamming message
LC-MAC
Long-chain medium access control
LDP
Location detect packet
LINE-MAC
Linear medium access control
LPL
Low-power listening
266
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

LT-WSN
Long thin wireless sensor network
LWSN
Linear wireless sensor networks
M2M
Machine to machine
MFT-MAC
Multi-frame transmission medium access control
NCC
Network Control Centre
OSI
Open systems interconnection
PDR
Packet delivery ratio
PION
Pioneer control frame
PSN
Parking sensor network
R-MAC
Routing-enhanced duty cycled medium access control
RTS
Ready to send
SIFS
Short inter-frame duration
S-MAC
Sensor medium access control
SSYNC
Super synchronization
SWS
Staggered wakeup schedule
SYNC
Synchronization
WiWi
Wireless wire
WSN
Wireless sensor network
Glossary
Ambient assisted living
An information and communication technology
which supports and supplies the necessity of elderly
people in order to sustain their daily lives.
Ambient intelligence
The collection of some interrelated and compatible
electronic devices that provides a smart environment
to the users.
Beacon
Special control packet which gives notice and carries
some useful information to the other nodes in the
network it belongs to.
Hidden terminal problem
It is a well-known problem which states a commu-
nication constraint in a simple three-node network.
Internet
Electronic communication network that connects
computer systems in different locations in the world.
Low-power listening
A method which is used for decreasing energy con-
sumption in a wireless network by putting the nodes
in a low-power consuming mode.
M2M communication
A communication technology which provides an
opportunity for wired or wireless communication to
electronic devices without any human intervention.
Network Control Centre
A unit which monitors some large networks, carrier
backbones, satellite systems as well as the Internet.
Linear wireless sensor networks and protocols
267

Packet delivery ratio
The ratio of data packets that are successfully
received by the receiver node to the number of
packets that have been sent out by the sender node.
Protocol
A set of rules which state the interaction of com-
municating nodes in a network.
Sensor
A tiny device which senses its surroundings and
produces a data about the sensing phenomena.
Topology
The arrangement of communication devices and its
connecting lines in a network.
Wireless sensor network
A network of large number of battery-limited sensor
nodes that come together in order to monitor physi-
cal phenomena.
ZigBee
High-level communication protocol standard that is
used to create personal area networks with small,
low-power electronic devices.
Biographies
Radosveta I. Sokullu received her Ph.D. in Telecommunications in 1992 from the
Technical University Sofia and in 2000 she joined Ege University as an Assistant
Professor. She became head of Telecommunications Studies Branch in 2004.
Currently Radosveta Sokullu is an Associate Professor at the same department and
also head of the Wireless Communications Lab. Her current research covers dif-
ferent wireless communication networks and protocols (IEEE 802.15.4, Bluetooth,
Wireless Sensor Networks, Cellular Networks) with a focus on MAC layer and
PHY layer protocol design, resource sharing, resource allocation, IoT and machine-
to-machine communications. She participated in FP 7 CRUISE project as a leader
of the Turkish partners and has led a number of projects sponsored by the National
Research Council in Turkey (TUBITAK), by the Ministry of Industry (SANTEZ)
in cooperation with large electronic companies in Turkey as well as numerous
projects sponsored by the University Research Fund. Radosveta Sokullu is a
member of the International Federation of University Women (IAUW), an IEEE
Member and a consultant of the Student IEEE Branch at the Department of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineering.
Eren Demir received the BEng degree in Electronics and Communication Engi-
neering from the University of C¸ ankaya, Ankara, Turkey, in 2008. He won a
scholarship from the Higher Education Committee of Turkey in 2011 and joined
the academic personnel training programme. Within the scope of that programme,
he started to work as a research assistant and received his MSc degree in Electrical
and Electronics Engineering from the University of Ege, I˙zmir, Turkey, in 2014. He
is currently a third-year Ph.D. student and still working as a research assistant with
particular interests in wireless sensor networks, Internet of Things and ambient
assisted living.
268
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Chapter 11
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical
systems
Belgacem Ben Hedia1, Chokri Mraidha1, Etienne Hamelin1,
and Sara Tucci-Piergiovanni1
Abstract
There are several ‘‘disconnects’’ which need to be addressed to provide effective
means for engineering cyber-physical systems (CPS). One of them is how to con-
struct an optimized application starting from high-level specifications taking into
account exacerbated interactions with the physical environment and in the same
time addressing new paradigms like mixed criticality, and distributed multi/many-
cores platforms. We introduce in this chapter a new methodology called model-
compilation for CPS. This methodology introduces new concepts and process
that can be seen as a specification that tool editors and CPS application developers
can integrate (instantiate) in their tool chain or development process.
11.1
Introduction
One need that became apparent on the development of cyber-physical systems
(CPS) is to reduce the gap between high-level modelling tools (e.g. Simulink for
control and Modelica for physical modelling) aiming at describing functional,
behaviours, structure and the actual software implementation on the target
platform.
In ‘‘CyPhERS’’ project report for instance we read:
the principal barrier to developing the field of Cyber-Physical Systems
(CPS) is the lack of a theory and of application best practice that com-
prehend cyber and physical resources in a single unified framework. There
are several ‘‘disconnects’’ which need to be addressed to provide effective
means for engineering CPS [1].
1CEA LIST, France

Given the new CPS design challenges [2–4], the CPS domain needs to move
forward from traditional approaches [3], where transition from model to software
relies either on fully manual rewriting (a highly error-prone activity) or on code
generation tools that can only perform a simple, non-optimized transformation,
hard to fine-tune to a given platform architecture. Usually, these tools do not
address distributed multi/many-cores platforms. Only a few tentative researches
aim at generating correct-by-design multitask code from high-level modelling
languages, for example, [5], which addresses the modular generation of multi-rate
solvers for Modelica models, and [6], which focuses on reliability aspects but in a
scope limited to rapid application prototyping.
In our opinion, before designing a software architecture (SwArch) and subse-
quently before generating an optimized source code, the following questions need
to be answered:
●
How to generate optimized SwArch and source code well suited for a given
target platform?
●
How to integrate the specificity of a given execution platform model (hardware
(HW) platform, communication and runtime support, mix-criticality) during
this process, especially with distributed multi/many-cores platforms?
●
How to construct the CPS software application architecture that will take into
account the structural elements available in the high-level model?
●
How to construct a CPS process application that satisfies all requirements
described in the high-level model, especially mixed degree of dependability for
different functions and data through all construction steps, without systematic
a posteriori verification and validation methods. In other words, how to make a
correct-by-construction design?
To sum up, we need to construct an approach or methodology that allows the
integration of existing tools and techniques and that meets two main concerns:
1.
Design space exploration and optimization of SwArch for CPS applications.
2.
Correct-by-construction design method for CPS applications, from high-level
model to binary code deployed on an execution platform.
This chapter aims to present the first rationale of this process ‘‘methodology’’
and defines key concepts in order to develop an emerging domain of research and
technology that we call model-compilation: this term denotes the semi-automated,
multi-criteria optimized synthesis of dependable and efficient software imple-
mentations distributed on a network of multi/many-cores embedded computers,
from abstract system-level models (including multi-physics hybrid control models).
Integrated into a model-driven systems development methodology, the model-
compilation methodology will help system, control, software and safety engineers
work together to generate a software implementation respecting all their concerns
at once, in a holistic, iterative and de-verticalized way. By automating the optimi-
zation and trade-offs selection during the SwArch creation, the model-compilation
methodology will also enable much faster development cycles from concept to
realization and validation, up to rapid prototyping of complex, safety-critical
270
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

applications and hence reduce the development costs and enhance the qualities of
CPS in many industrial domains.
The model-compilation methodology can then be seen as a specification that
tool editors and developers or CPS application design and development teams can
integrate (instantiate) in their tool chain or adopt as a development process in goal
to construct their CPS application.
The ambient assisted living (AAL) environments and enhanced living envir-
onments (ELE) are very varied; for example, the assistance to elderly people
(medical, smart home), but increasingly more and more critical real-time systems
such as automotive, avionics or railway systems. This is particularly evident with
automated vehicle functions which are seen as assistance to the driver. Examples
are shuttle buses and autonomous luggage racks, which will be increasingly
deployed in areas like airports, railway stations or shopping centres, to assist the
travellers in their travels. These autonomous vehicles will drive not only in a closed
environment but rather in an open environment with a permanent contact and
interaction with people. In this chapter we consider the autonomous vehicle as use-
case to illustrate the challenges, but approach can be generalized to all CPS
applications including AAL and ELE.
Throughout this chapter we will illustrate the model-compilation methodology
concepts on a use-case (Figure 11.1).
This chapter will be organized around the following parts:
●
Section 11.2 will introduce the new challenges of SwArch for CPS applications
in terms of design space exploration and optimization.
●
Section 11.3 will detail the model-compilation methodology and how to inte-
grate its different steps into existing tool chains or adopt it as a development
process.
●
Section 11.4 will present how the model-compilation methodology answers the
challenges expressed in Section 11.2 and its applicability on a use-case (e.g.
Figure 11.1).
GPS
V2V com
Camera
Front radar
HMI
Braking pedal
Brakes
Cruise control &
collision avoidance
Motor
Figure 11.1
Adaptive cruise control and collision avoidance system
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
271

●
Section 11.5 will give an overview of related works in the state of the art and
practice.
●
Section 11.6 will present some conclusions and perspectives.
11.2
CPS challenges
The challenge of implementing a CPS, as many engineering challenges, can be
described in the form of an optimization problem. Some parameters of this opti-
mization problem will be specific to one application domain; however, many
parameters can be seen as generic problems only to be weighted differently among
use-cases. The optimization problem can be written in the form of
Minsys CostðsysÞ
FeasibleðsysÞ

In other words, ‘‘find a system implementation (sys) which minimizes the cost
function, such that the system is feasible’’. In a traditional mathematical optimi-
zation formulation, the Cost() function has as output a single scalar value, whereas
the Feasible function is a vector of several feasibility constraints of the form
FeasibileiðsysÞ  0
The CostðÞ and FeasibleðÞ functions are specific for each CPS problem; how-
ever, they are built using generic building blocks, with estimations/weights specific
to the problem. Within the Cost function, most CPS domains will enlist the aspects
of the system that should be minimized or optimized:
●
Cost aspects (accounted positive, to be minimized):
*
Recurring or per-unit costs: for example, most hardware costs, cabling
requirement, devices.
*
Non-recurring costs: for example, specific HW and software (SW) engi-
neering and development costs, certification costs.
*
System usage costs: for example, power consumption, maintenance costs.
●
Quality and performance aspects (accounted positive, to be maximized):
*
Functional performance of the implemented functionality.
*
Reliability of components.
At this point it is important to note that, since the output of Cost function is a
scalar evaluation of a proposed system implementation, a weight must be given to
all cost components enlisted earlier: this weight distribution will drive the resolu-
tion of necessary trade-offs between performance and cost aspects (e.g. a ‘‘low-
cost’’ vs. ‘‘premium’’ strategies). Within the feasibility function many CPS
domains will enlist all their domain-specific engineering constraints:
●
System minimal viability requirement:
Performance  required
ðthreshold for functionality to be grantedÞ
272
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

●
System resource constraints:
SW memory usage  HW memory available
SW proc: & comm: usage  HW capability

●
Certification/qualification constraints:
Evaluated safety level  required level
The canonical method for minimizing CostðsysÞ such that FeasibleðsysÞ is
satisfied is to explore the domain of feasible system implementations sys, while
keeping a track of the best one. Most optimization solvers choose smart strategies
to avoid exploring the whole feasible domain, through backtracking and iteration,
and split the optimization process into several successive approximations.
The theoretical difficulty is that an accurate cost/performance and feasibility
evaluation can only be performed on a concrete system implementation, which
makes this optimization-driven engineering method just useless. Moreover, the
engineering time spent on finding the optimum of this problem is also part of the
non-recurring cost valuation and may become crucial when time-to-market is a
stringent requirement.
It thus becomes necessary to perform ‘‘approximate’’ cost and feasibility
evaluations. However, an implementation optimal with regard to those approx-
imations may consequently not be optimal to the exact cost and feasibility eva-
luation, should it be performed. It becomes useless looking for an optimal solution;
one should rather look for an implementation ‘‘good enough’’ with regard to esti-
mated cost/feasibility. Moreover, estimations can be performed at intermediate
steps in the design process, that is, during phases in which the system imple-
mentation is only partially known or specified: on system design models. These
estimations should however be checked again a posteriori on the concrete system,
once implemented. A large effort is dedicated, in the CPS community, to devel-
oping tools and design patterns that help design more robust and simple model-
based approximations of certain system costs/feasibility evaluations.
As an intermediate conclusion, we assume that CPS systems design is an
optimization process, where design constraints and costs are rarely well specified
and hard to evaluate accurately, and in which we only look for good-enough, but
practical, implementations.
One classical way to speed up approximate optimization problems is to parti-
tion variables into mostly orthogonal sets. An example is usually to split up CPS
design into separate dimensions, for example, with one team exploring the HW
trade-offs (against estimated SW requirements), and another team exploring the
SW implementation choices. However, recent evolution in the CPS industry shows
that cross-domain optimizations are highly demanded:
●
Embedded systems design used to involve both hardware and software engi-
neers to explore cross-domain trade-offs for higher-performance control and
communication systems.
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
273

●
Mechatronics systems design used to mix previous embedded systems teams
with mechanical engineers to explore tighter system integration.
●
Now CPS implies to cooperate with multi-physics modelling, instrumentation
and control engineers, for flexible, distributed systems interacting with humans
and physical systems.
The whole model-compilation challenge relies in
●
identifying how much of the approximate-optimization problem solving can be
assisted by automatic computer reasoning;
●
defining cross-domain interfaces that allow control, software and hardware
engineers cooperate on coherent models, to allow for multi-domain trade-off
selection; and
●
setting-up practical tools through which multi-domain experts can cooperate
with computer-aided design choices in order to develop feasible, good-enough
system implementations.
We call this process model-compilation as a tribute to the software compilation
process, in which a high(er)-level language is automatically transformed into a
lower-level (assembly, then binary) implementation, through a roughly optimizing
compilation process.
When compilers were introduced, an assembly expert could certainly write a
fine-tuned, high-performance implementation of a given algorithm, it would take so
much time that the system performance drawback of using a compiled language
is undoubtedly outweighed by the productivity of the software engineer. Today
assembly is used only in very specific situations, and the performance drawback is
moreover significantly reduced thanks to compiler and high-level languages
improvements. We expect similarly that model-driven engineering will take over,
thanks to general adoption of both model-driven engineering and stepwise
improvements in the implementations generated by model-compilers, so that within
a couple decades most of a CPS’s implementation will be semi-automatically
generated and CPS software engineers only have to implement specific aspects
such as low-level glue between HW and the generated SW part.
The model-compilation process can be seen as a multi-domain toolbox that
enables control engineers, embedded software architects and hardware designers
share their domain-specific requirements and iterate on multi-domain trade-offs.
The control engineer in particular expects to
●
express the CPS’s functionality, often in the form of a block chain involving
sensing, filtering and prediction, communication and actuation;
●
validate system functionality, stability, robustness and reactivity in various
scenarios, usually through model-in-the-loop (MiL) simulations involving
interconnecting the controller model with a model of the physical plant under
control; and
●
assess, at each iteration of the domain-space exploration process, that a given
software/hardware implementation is functionally correct w.r.t. the original
control model, for example, through semantically correct-by-construction
software generation, or MiL or software-in-the-loop validation.
274
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

The hardware engineer expects to
●
define a hardware architecture made of electronic control units (ECU) inter-
connected through networks, each node having specific computing structure
(e.g. a specific system on chip (SoC) with single/multi/many-core architecture),
and specific limitations (e.g. memory/computing/bandwidth resource);
●
perform preliminary safety assessment of the effects of common HW failure
modes; and
●
negotiate HW/SW trade-offs with SW engineer, for example, upgrade a CPU
computing power, or downgrade SW functionality.
The software architect expects to
●
assess SwArchs, at several abstraction levels (functional component, task,
runnable or source-code block), for feasibility, performance and safety metrics;
●
explore SwArchs with computer assistance towards a nearly optimal choice;
●
automatically generate a correct source code implementation of the chosen
SwArch that suits a specific real-time operating system (RTOS) application
programming interface (API) and, if necessary, rewrite only the performance-
critical part of it; and
●
iterate quickly with hardware or control engineers on SW/control or SW/HW
trade-offs.
11.3
Model-compilation methodology and approach
In order to best present the complete end-to-end approach and how it is integrated
within a model-driven development process, this section highlights the application
of the model-compilation methodology on an adaptive cruise control and collision
avoidance system. This system is sketched by Figure 11.1.
Figure 11.2 gives an overview of the model-compilation process. Like a third-
generation programming language compiler, the model-compiler is composed by a
front-end, middle-end and back-end parts.
11.3.1
Front-end: from multiple heterogeneous high-level models
The system is first designed as a conceptual systems architecture, using a general
purpose or domain-specific architecture modelling tool, where main system con-
stituents and their relations are identified as illustrated on the following unified
modelling language (UML) diagram. The cruise control and collision avoidance
system is composed of a set of sensors, actuators as well as a human–machine
interface (HMI) and a controller (Figure 11.3).
At this level, a first safety analysis and risk assessment can be conducted to
estimate the level of risk associated with specific items (elements of the archi-
tecture). Since we are considering an automotive use-case, for risk assessment we
will use the concepts coming from the functional safety standard for automotive
equipment, the ISO26262 standard. Accordingly to ISO26262, the risk level is
specified through an automotive safety integrity level (ASIL). A safety goal is then
defined for each hazardous event identified (e.g. ‘‘when the brake pedal is pushed, a
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
275

Binary Code
011001100110
010111111000
001111111000
3rd generation
Language compiler
Analysis (a posteriori)
for try-and-error
synthesis or used during
coorect-by-design
synthesis
Source Code
Code
generation
SwArch
Safety & Timing
Analysis
Back annotation
of properties
mesured at
run-time
SwArch synthesis (
correct-by-design
or try-and-error
Import from
SysArch
export to
SysArch
SimModel
Safety
Analysis
Model Compiler
PfArch
SysArch
Figure 11.2
Global model-compilation methodology
<<sensors>>
Sensors
<<HMI>>
HMI
<<Controller>>
Controller
Cruise control and collision avoidance
<<Actuators>>
Actuators
Figure 11.3
Conceptual systems architecture
276
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

braking torque must be applied to the wheels’’) as well as a set of essential safety
requirements.
11.3.1.1
SysArch: systems architecture model
The component-based design is then detailed as an abstract data flow diagram,
illustrated in Figure 11.4. This diagram is usually hierarchic for sake of repre-
sentation and understanding. This diagram will later be referred to as the functional
architecture or systems architecture: in brief SysArch.
This SysArch can efficiently be used to perform several design activities
relevant at the systems abstraction level, as required by the ISO26262 standard.
This activity includes the definition of functional safety requirements and their
allocation to this preliminary functional architecture. At this phase the system
hazard analysis is conducted to study the propagation of failures across the
SysArch. A preliminary safety assessment is conducted as well through fault tree
generation and qualitative analysis (FTA), failure mode effects analysis (FMEA)
and common cause analysis. These methods aim at analysing fault propagation
through the system and help in the definition of safety goals and ASIL criticality
level. For instance, a functional chain that supports an ASIL C safety goal should
rely on functional blocks assigned a criticality of ASIL C or higher.
This functional SysArch model can also be used for the specification of timing
requirements. Some chains of functions can be identified and used to define global
end-to-end deadlines (e.g. ‘‘latency from brake pedal signal acquisition to the
corresponding brakes actuation should always be under 10 ms’’).
11.3.1.2
SimModel: the simulation model
Then, for the control engineering team to work out the regulation principles, the
data flow model is turned into a SimModel that will be used in particular to design
and validate the controller regulation parameters and assess their stability and
robustness. This simulation is built from the same architecture, except that it
includes a simulation of the environment (e.g. of the vehicle dynamics). The
SimModel is specified in a multi-physics modelling language (Figure 11.5).
Some blocks of the original systems diagram have been abstracted away:
mainly the controller’s interfaces to the external world are replaced with simulation
stubs. For instance, some sensor blocks have been replaced by input signals that
connect to external signal scenarios (e.g. a list of cruise control set speeds, brake
pedal positions, etc., at given simulation time instants). Some other blocks (like
actuators and sensors) are replaced with transparent connections to signals from/to
the vehicle dynamics simulation or a simulation of the sensor or actuator’s inter-
nals. The ‘‘HMI’’ and ‘‘parameter selection’’ blocks are also abstracted away by the
‘‘cruise control mode and set speed’’ input signal block because these blocks
represent a graphical user interface and menu handling functions, therefore are not
suitable for multi-physics simulation.
Although the final software implementation of the whole cruise control and
collision avoidance system will be realized by purely discrete computations, at this
point both the vehicle dynamics and the controller may be specified with either
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
277

Inertial
sensors
Wheel
odometers
Signal
acquisition
Signal
acquisition
Signal
acquisition
Signal
acquisition
Brake signal
filtering
Accel signal
filtering
Throttle
actuation
Adaptive cruise
control
Brake
actuation
Brake
actuator
Motor
throttle
Inertial signal
filtering
Vehicle state
estimation
Wheel signal
filtering
Signal
acquisition
Human-machine
interface
Parameters
selection
Radar signal
filtering
Collision
risk prediction
Emergency
braking decisi
Accel pedal
Brake pedal
Front radar
Touch
screen
Vehicle driver
Touch
Distance to next
vehicle
Braking
command
Acceleration
command
Estimated
vehicle state
Physical environment
Wheel rotation
Vehicle position
Throttle position
Brake force
Cruise control
acceleration command
Emergency braking
command
Collision
avoidance mode
Cruise control mode
and set speed
<<controller>>
Controller
<<sensors>>
Sensors
<<actuators>>
Actuators
<<HMI>>
HMI
Estimated risk
Brake
pedal force
Brake
pedal force
Figure 11.4
SysArch: systems architecture model

Cruise control
mode & set speed
Collision avoidance mode
Position of vehicle ahead
Braking command
Acceleration command
Inertial sensors
signals
Wheel
odometers
signal
Simulation of vehicle dynamics
Vehicle position
Simulated radar
distance signal
Distance to
vehicle ahead
Filtering
Filtering
Filtering
Filtering
Filtering
Vehicle state
estimation
Collision
risk prediction
Emergency
braking decision
Adaptive cruise
control
Brake
actuation
Throttle
actuation
Braking
command
Acceleration
command
Estimated
vehicle state
Throttle position
Cruise control
acceleration
command
Emergency braking
command
Collision
avoidance
mode
Cruise control mode
and set speed
Estimated risk
Brake force
Figure 11.5
SimModel: simulation model

discrete or continuous (i.e. time-differential) equations. Typically, the ‘‘vehicle state
estimation’’ block in the controller will integrate differential equations. Many para-
meters evaluated during this simulation will be used to drive the model-compilation.
11.3.1.3
PfArch: the platform architecture
In parallel to the SimModel activity, a hardware platform model, here named
PfArch, is defined. It can be represented by a graph of interconnected computing,
communication, sensing/actuating resources as illustrated in Figure 11.6.
Each computation resource should be annotated with its own specific resource
constraints, for example, CPU speed, RAM and ROM memory limits, hardware
peripherals available, maximum criticality allowed (i.e. ASIL qualification level);
similarly, buses may be annotated with a bandwidth or any other required by later
feasibility analyses.
In many cases, it can be allowed to change this architecture to some extent in
order to meet the needs of the final software implementation. In this case, some
production rules may be defined, together with an associated cost value, that allow
the computer-assisted optimization to create a new PfArch from the initial one if
the application does not meet the constraints of the initial PfArch (e.g. ‘‘another
ECU can be added on a bus, at some cost; a bus can be replaced with one with
higher capacity, at some cost, etc.’’).
11.3.2
Middle-end: model-compilation into SwArch
The middle-end part is at the heart of the model-compilation approach and lies in
the optimized and efficient synthesis, from a SysArch model, of a SwArch mapped
onto the PfArch, that simultaneously satisfies safety, timing, resources and beha-
viour requirements. The model-compilation is implemented by a combination of
CAN LS
HMI ECU
Touch screen
Motor controller
Motor throttle actuator
Brake actuator
Wheel controller
Brake pedal sensor
Accel pedal sensor
Radar sensor
Inertial sensors
Body controller
CAN HS
Wheel odometer
128kbit/s
CPU: OLEA 600MHz
Mem: Ram 256Mo Rom 1Go
CPU: OLEA 600MHz
Mem: Ram 1Mo Rom 256ko
CPU: OLEA 300MHz
Mem: Ram 16ko Rom 128ko
CPU: OLEA 300MHz
Mem: Ram 1Mo Rom 256ko
1Mbit/s
Figure 11.6
PfArch: platform architecture
280
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

optimization algorithms and heuristics for transforming, in an optimized manner, a
system-level model into a software implementation mapped onto a PfArch model:
1.
Optimization algorithms aim at finding a solution correct-by-construction, that
is, the transformation itself is proven to guarantee that the SwArch produced
respects all the constraints related to timing, safety, behaviour, resources, etc.
Such an approach, called multi-staged optimization approach for multi-objective
optimization, has been already investigated in our previous works [7,8].
The approach was able to find correct solutions with respect to a wide range of
constraints including causality and schedulability, while identifying design
trade-offs. Note that producing correct solutions means that the analysis sup-
posed to verify correctness is included in the optimization algorithm as a set of
constraints.
2.
Heuristics fall in a trial-and-error paradigm: Here the SwArch obtained with
the heuristics must be analysed a posteriori (i) to establish if all the constraints
are respected and (ii) if the required trade-offs are met. Heuristics will be
applied whenever the overall complexity of the problem hinders the applica-
tion of deterministic optimization algorithms. One example of efficient trial-
and-error strategy is to use coarse estimates of parameters to produce several
nearly optimal feasible solutions (e.g. use only a coarse estimate of CPU uti-
lization factor for task creation step), then apply fine-grain analysis only to
those few solutions (e.g. validate schedulability with a detailed period and
worst-case execution time analysis).
For the automated transformation to be possible, either as correct-by-construction
generation or as analysis-driven trial-and-error, all concerns must be first for-
malized and quantified. Some requirements will be quantified as quantitative
relationships that must be verified, whereas some other requirements will be
defined as the maximization of some quantified objective. To enable multi-concern
trade-offs, a single objective (usually a weighted sum of all sub-objectives) shall be
defined. Different weights could be selected depending on the application [9–11]
aimed to integrate the specificity of an execution paradigm (RTOS) during the
model-compilation process by integrating some characteristics of the execution
platform when the SwArch is generated (Figure 11.7). Since then, the generation
process became more accurate as it now integrates information about the paradigm
of the execution platform.
It should be noted that both optimization algorithms and heuristics accept some
degree of parameter uncertainty. For instance, worst-case execution time estimates
could be extracted from in situ measures (when reusing a function or task), or safe
over-approximations (when using static analysis tools on the actual software), or
only coarse estimates when the function has not yet been implemented/generated.
11.3.2.1
SwArch: software architecture intermediate representation
Concretely at the end of the model-compilation process, all functional blocks from
the SysArch model are transformed into some software code mapped onto one
or several tasks or runnables, each allocated to a CPU, and all data or events
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
281

Preexisting
Throttle actuation
Vehicle state estimation
Risk prediction
Braking decision
Radar signal filtering
Brake actuation control
Odometry signal filtering
Inertial signal filtering
Brake signal filtering
Accel signal filtering
2 tasks
4 tasks
2 tasks
Filtered odometry
Brake force command
Preexisting & reuse
Other tasks
Touch screen control
Pedals
Signal task
Risk management
Brake control
Odometry
Ethernet bus
Body controller
RTOS w. partitioning (ASIL D)
State estimation
RTOS w. partitioning (ASIL D)
Parameters
Injection control
Throttle control
Motor controller
RTOS (ASIL C)
RTOS (ASIL A)
HMI ECU
HMI → Body
Body → Motor
Body → Wheel
Wheel → Body
Wheel controller
Ethernet bus
GUI control
Parameters selection
6 tasks
Cruise control parameters
Set speed
Collision avoidance mode
Accel command
Figure 11.7
SwArch: software architecture output

(the edges of the SysArch diagram) are mapped to variables or inter-task commu-
nication messages or to bus messages; all tasks and signals have scheduling para-
meters assigned in such a way that on each computation unit all tasks are
schedulable, messages are schedulable on each bus, all end-to-end latency con-
straints are met, no CPU resource is exhausted, items of different criticality levels
are separated and monitored by safety elements qualified at the appropriate criti-
cality level, etc. Several reports may be produced together with the SwArch, for
instance, a schedulability report for each CPU, an analysis of end-to-end latency
constraints, a safety analysis at the SwArch level demonstrating the respect of
criticality-related constraints, etc.
In the following illustration, functions of different criticality levels are
mapped onto tasks. Tasks of different ASIL levels are separated either physically
or in software by a SEooC RTOS providing sufficient partitioning mechanisms.
A first work addressing the co-simulation of the SimModel and SwArch is pro-
vided in [12].
11.3.3
Back-end: transformation into concrete target platforms
A rather simple model-to-code transformation back-end translates the SwArch
model, into a set of files that actually implement in a software language, for
example, C, all these tasks, and properly configure each CPU and RTOS instance.
A first work [9–11] was carried out to integrate a generic services of an execution
paradigm (RTOS) during a model-compilation process and integrate some infor-
mation about execution plate-form in the generated SwArch, with the intention of
making easier the back-end stage. The back-end of the model-compilation process
then relies on off-the-shelf C compilers to generate the binary file that will be
loaded on each ECU. This translation back-end is specific to the RTOS since it
relies on the specific RTOS API and services for the use of temporal control flow
and inter-task messaging for instance. For some blocks of the SysArch where only a
wrapper/placeholder was given in the SimModel, an empty task or runnable is
generated together with the inter-task communication infrastructure, so that it still
remains easy to manually add the manual implementation part. The wrapper and
placeholder method facilitates the integration of existing tasks into the model-
compilation process.
11.3.4
Design iterations
For each artefact of the SwArch model (task, runnable, message, etc.), a traceability
annotation ensures that a straightforward link identifies the SysArch functional
block or signal it was generated from and the design constraints that apply.
When the generated code is run on the actual platform properly instrumented,
it is possible to measure relevant metrics at actual runtime: for instance, measure
actual execution times with real-time tracing/debugging tools. These runtime
metrics can then, thanks to the traceability feature, be retro-annotated onto the
SwArch model, then on the SysArch model. In many cases these actual metrics are
much more accurate than the estimations given at first (if any) and can be used to
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
283

perform another run of the model-compilation for a more optimized or more
accurate synthesis. This iterative design approach also allows an expert engineer to
identify on actual execution abnormalities, violations of unexpressed or soft
requirements, bottlenecks, sources of possible optimizations unseen before, etc. In
this case, the engineer can annotate the SysArch model with different constraints
that drive some steps of the model-compilation towards his preferred solution,
applying the model-compilation process again.
11.4
Model-compilation methodology assessment
Here we address the question whether, and how far, the challenges defined in
Sections 11.1 and 11.2 can be resolved by implementing the approach illustrated in
Section 11.3.
11.4.1
Applicability of model-compilation approach
The model-compilation methodology would be applied by first implementing all
(semi-)automated analysis and optimization algorithms into already-existing tools,
and then applying the development method to realistic use-cases.
1.
Integration/implementation by existing tools. To effectively support the model-
compilation process, analysis/optimization plug-ins and model transformations
must be integrated to existing model-based development (MBD) tools:
●
A set of model analysis/optimization techniques will refine different
aspects of the SwArch model. Most MBD tools allow to define specific
languages and therefore support the SwArch models; moreover, they
support plug-ins and extensions mechanisms, within which feasibility,
performance evaluation and optimization techniques can be implemented.
Our previous works [7–11,13,14] address different analysis and optimi-
zation techniques as a proof of concept of this methodology.
●
The development process defined here certainly needs to rely on several
engineering tools; therefore, some bridges are required to support a
seamless workflow along several iterations of individual steps of the
model-compilation methodology. This generic toolbox can then be tai-
lored by each engineering team into a product-specific development
method, in which eventually a set of process guidelines can also be
enforced through tool usage rules. Each process step should moreover
be formalized with a set of hypotheses and guarantees, so that it could
be eventually possible to verify the overall coherency of each specific
workflow at this point will be further detailed in forthcoming publications.
2.
Realistic use-case application. The illustrative use-case detailed in Sec-
tion 11.3 proves that the approach is applicable, through several analysis and
transformation steps, on a virtual use-case representative of a realistic, non-
trivial, industrial system.
284
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

11.4.2
Productivity enhancements
The CPS development productivity will be illustrated on three main axes:
1.
(Semi-)automation of individual steps. Several tasks are automated or computer-
aided, especially those most labour-intensive, with low systems-engineering
added value, or most error-prone. Common MBD tools usually generate hardly
readable source code in only one iteration, are poor at engineer interaction,
with limited (if any) analysis or user-guided optimization facilities.
2.
Overall workflow acceleration. With model-compilation, the CPS develop-
ment workflow enables an exploration and optimization of SwArch. This
allows to quickly evaluate several configurations of the software before
choosing which one to apply for the final source code generation. Existing
tools generally generate code that is poorly structured; therefore, adaptation to
a specific execution platform (RTOS) or HW platform is very costly. Archi-
tectural exploration is subsequently only manual and very long. Within the
model-compilation methodology, all necessary information for the SwArch
exploration phase is integrated, so that exploration steps are quickly iterated.
3.
Early feasibility assessment. The feasibility and cost/performance evaluations
performed at different phases during architecture exploration allow to early
focus only on feasible alternatives.
11.5
Related works
This section presents the current state of the art of some research areas relevant for
CPS development, which in our opinion need further consideration.
11.5.1
Model-based methodologies for safety and timing
Considering the whole body of work on development methodologies for systems and
software is of course unfeasible. Nevertheless, we are interested in giving an over-
view particularly focused on safety, timing and methodological management based
on the use of modelling languages, which narrows the scope of this literary review.
Methodologies for safety management have been mainly proposed by Kelly
and his group [15–18]. These methodologies focus on how to build a safety case
both at system and software level. Safety case patterns are proposed to ease this
task [18]; however, these approaches propose only an abstract methodology, that is,
they are not focusing on the use of either particular language (e.g. SysML, UML,
etc.) or models. This lack of concretization also implies a lack of methodology
automation. A model-based approach has been proposed in the FP7 MAENAD
project, where the GMP pattern methodology developed in TIMMO and TIMMO-
2-USE projects has been instantiated on EAST-ADL models. This concretization
allowed the automation of some safety activities, such as FMEA and static and
temporal FTA; still the automation support is partial with respect to the whole
safety management, and safety case patterns were not integrated.
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
285

On the timing side, while a vast number of model-based approaches have been
proposed for performance prediction [19], methodologies enabling analysis of
timing constraints are more recent and are gaining a growing interest with the
increasing complexity of embedded real-time systems [20,21]. A UML-based
methodology based on the Y-chart principle has been proposed [18] which then
envisages the use of mapping algorithms (model-compilation) but not specifically
focusing on timing analysis. A UML-based methodology for the analysis of
objected-oriented models but without proposing an automated mapping step has
also been proposed [22]. Mraidha et al. [14] proposed a MARTE-based metho-
dology based on a scenario-based mapping and enabling schedulability analysis of
mono-processor systems.
Note that the only methodological attempt we are aware of about the integra-
tion of safety and timing has been pursued in TIMMO and TIMMO-2-USE projects
with the GMP pattern methodology. However, this methodology is very general
and does not specify how safety and timing management interact during the
development process; this specification is left to the system engineer. New meth-
odologies proposing a tighter integration of safety and timing activities throughout
the development processes are needed to better support the development of CPS
with mixed-critical constraints.
11.5.2
Model-compilation
In the development of CPS, abstraction levels must be used to manage complexity
[23]. Industrial standards (like the automotive AUTOSAR [24] and the model-
driven architecture from the OMG [23]) and academic frameworks (including the
platform-based design [25]) recommend system development along the lines of the
Y-chart approach [26]: a functional model representing the system functions and
the signals exchanged among them (model often represented by Simulink-like
models) is deployed onto an execution platform model consisting of nodes, buses,
tasks and messages. Throughout this chapter we call model-compilation the
refinement of a functional model in its ‘‘execution counterpart’’: functions con-
cretized by software modules (code) deployed across software (middleware, OS,
etc.) and hardware (CPUs, memories, buffers, etc.) execution architectures, mostly
distributed (as for CPS). Correctness of model-compilation implies that this func-
tional execution counterpart must respect timing and safety constraint when run-
ning in the target platform.
On this topic, the current state of the art has been developed by two rather
separated communities: the formal methods community focusing on functional
model scheduling [27–30] (with implicit assumption about a deployment on uni-
processor platforms) and the real-time community focusing on allocation and sche-
duling of tasks models (with a large use of optimization and design exploration
techniques), leaving the function-to-software transformation to the designer [31–35].
Providing a holistic optimization approach for model-compilation, that is,
optimization applied to the deployment of a functional model over a multi-processors
architecture (multi-core and/or distributed). In this direction, recent works, such as
286
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Mehiaoui et al. [7] and Wozniak et al. [8] proposed a two-staged multi-objective
optimization techniques able to output schedulable solutions for functions to be
deployed in a distributed architecture. These approaches must be extended to
specifically address safety constraints and mixed-criticality. Another important
research topic about model-compilation concerns model transformations for
MATLAB Simulink models. While semantics preserving translations of
Simulink models into tasks exist for discrete models, the translation of continuous
blocks is an open research issue.
11.5.3
Physical modelling
Historically, physical modelling and discrete control have mostly been treated as
separate engineering activities. However, over the years, due to an increasing
demand in tools covering a wider range of product lifecycle, the need for more
integrated approaches has emerged [36].
Today, industrial applications of physical modelling are handled by tools
providing informal semantic models mostly inspired from results in the field of
continuous system simulation. Discrete aspects, despite being essential even in pure
physical applications, are generally poorly supported by modelling tools, some-
times leading to important issues as soon as discrete aspects have to tightly interact
with continuous ones [37–39].
Currently, tools essentially resort to their own semantic models, believed to be
compatible with the operational requirements of some emerging standards such as
Modelica [40] and FMI [41]. ‘‘High-level’’ proposals such as Modelica, VHDL-
AMS and Verilog-AMS, and ‘‘low-level’’ proposals such as FMI attempt to provide
a common basis for different users using different tools to describe models in such
a way that tool interoperability and model exchange are hopefully possible. How-
ever, to the best of our knowledge, none of these proposals currently attempts to
fully formalize the operational semantics required to reach the desired portability of
hybrid models, especially their continuous-time part [39]. This means that a sound
operational semantics for physical models is yet to be defined so that models
coming from various sources (so including physical models) have to be combined
in a sound way.
On the other hand, the situation is more comfortable in pure discrete-time
applications since many semantically sound approaches have been proposed over
the years to cope with them, one of the most prominent among them being the
synchronous approach. Many tools targeting embedded applications (among which
CEA’s tools) support a form of synchronous approach. This approach allows one to
reason about logical timing properties of models at a high level of abstraction, even
before target code has actually been generated. This makes the synchronous level
of abstraction an attractive ‘‘common denominator’’ for models that need to be
checked for semantic compatibility and for qualification for embedded purposes.
However, no tool allows physical models to be rigorously transformed into this
intermediate form currently [39], which clearly constitutes an important challenge
to be addressed.
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
287

11.6
Conclusion
CPS are present in several domains and application of our daily life including AAL
and ELEs. In this chapter, we have defined a roadmap for a method of development
for CPS, to address the new challenges of rapidly designing multi-viewpoint opti-
mized implementations, which we call model-compilation. The proposed approach
addresses two main concerns: design-space exploration and optimization of an
SwArch, and correct-by-design construction from high-level models to source code
and binary for a given execution platform. The model-compilation methodology
can then be seen as a general specification that tool editors and CPS design teams
can integrate (instantiate) in their tool chain, or adopt as a development process.
Some aspects of this roadmap are deemed feasible through previous work and
publications [7–11,13,14] by the authors, but some other aspects need to be further
investigated to confirm that the whole model-compilation approach can be effi-
ciently implemented in industrial practice.
References
[1]
CyPhERS. Cyber-physical European roadmap & strategy. Available online:
http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/document.cfm?doc_id=10077 [Accessed
29 August 2017], 2014.
[2]
Edward A. Lee. Cyber physical systems: Design challenges. Technical
Report UCB/EECS-2008-8, EECS Department, University of California,
Berkeley, January 2008.
[3]
S.K. Khaitan and J.D. McCalley. Design techniques and applications of
cyberphysical systems: A survey. Systems Journal, IEEE, 9(2):350–365, 2015.
[4]
Paulo Tabuada. Cyber-physical systems: Position paper. In NSF Workshop
on Cyber-Physical Systems, 2006.
[5]
Bernhard Thiele, Martin Otter, and Sven Erik Mattsson. Modular multi-rate
and multi-method real-time simulation. In Hubertus Tummescheit and Karl-
Erik A˚ rze´n, editors, 10th Int. Modelica Conference, Lund, Sweden, May
2014.
[6]
Jia Huang, Simon Barner, Andreas Raabe, Christian Buckl, and Alois Knoll.
A framework for reliability-aware embedded system design on multiprocessor
platforms. Microprocessors and Microsystems, 38(6):539–551, 2014.
[7]
Asma Mehiaoui, Ernest Wozniak, Sara Tucci-Piergiovanni, et al. A two-step
optimization technique for functions placement, partitioning, and priority
assignment in distributed systems. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 48(5):121–132,
2013.
[8]
Ernest Wozniak, Asma Mehiaoui, Chokri Mraidha, Sara Tucci Piergiovanni,
and Sebastien Gerard. An optimization approach for the synthesis of
AUTOSAR architectures. In Carla Seatzu, editor, Proceedings of 2013 IEEE
18th Conference on Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation, ETFA
2013, Cagliari, Italy, September 10–13, 2013, pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2013.
288
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[9]
Hela Guesmi, Belgacem Ben Hedia, Simon Bliudze, Saddek Bensalem, and
Jacques Combaz. Towards time-triggered component-based system models.
In The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
(ICSEA), Barcelone, Spain, 2015.
[10]
Hela Guesmi, Belgacem Ben Hedia, Simon Bliudze, and Saddek Bensalem.
Externalisation of time-triggered communication system in bip high level
models. JRWRTC 2014, p. 41, 2014.
[11]
Hela Guesmi, Belgacem Ben Hedia, Simon Bliudze, Mathieu Jan, and
Saddek Bensalem. Towards correct transformation: From high-level models
to time-triggered implementations. In RTAS, Work-in-Progress and Demo
Proceeding, p. 13, Vienna, Austria, April 2016.
[12]
Matteo Morelli, Yasmina Seddik, Marco Di Natale, Chokri Mraidha, and
Sara Tucci-Piergiovanni. Simulation-driven optimization of real-time con-
trol tasks. In Proceedings of International Conference on Embedded Soft-
ware and Systems (ICESS), New York, NY, 2015.
[13]
B. Ben Hedia and E. Hamelin. Model to embedded real-time embedded code
transformation, ITEA2 OPENPROD Project, CEA final report – LIST/
DACLE/12-0898/S-EH, Saclay, France, 2012.
[14]
Chokri Mraidha, Sara Tucci-Piergiovanni, and Sebastien Gerard. Optimum:
A marte-based methodology for schedulability analysis at early design
stages. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, 36(1):1–8, 2011.
[15]
Richard Hawkins, Tim Kelly, John Knight, and Patrick Graydon. A new
approach to creating clear safety arguments. In Advances in systems safety,
pp. 3–23. Springer, London, 2011.
[16]
Mark A Sujan, Floor Koornneef, Nick Chozos, Simone Pozzi, and Tim
Kelly. Safety cases for medical devices and health information technology:
Involving health-care organisations in the assurance of safety. Health
Informatics Journal, 19(3):165–182, 2013.
[17]
Richard Hawkins, Ibrahim Habli, and Tim Kelly. Principled construction of
software safety cases. In SAFECOMP 2013-Workshop SASSUR (Next Gen-
eration of System Assurance Approaches for Safety-Critical Systems) of the
32nd International Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability and Security,
2013.
[18]
Richard Hawkins, Kester Clegg, Rob Alexander, and Tim Kelly. Using a
software safety argument pattern catalogue: Two case studies. In Computer
Safety, Reliability, and Security, pp. 185–198. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2011.
[19]
Jack E Matson, Bruce E Barrett, and Joseph M Mellichamp. Software
development cost estimation using function points. Software Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on, 20(4):275–287, 1994.
[20]
Rong Chen, Marco Sgroi, Luciano Lavagno, Grant Martin, Alberto Sangiovanni-
Vincentelli, and Jan Rabaey. Uml and platform-based design. In UML for
Real, pp. 107–126. Springer, Boston, MA, 2003.
[21]
Cesare Bartolini, Antonia Bertolino, Guglielmo De Angelis, and Giuseppe
Lipari. A uml profile and a methodology for real-time systems design. In
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
289

Software Engineering and Advanced Applications, 2006. SEAA’06. 32nd
EUROMICRO Conference on, pp. 108–117. IEEE, Cavtat, Dubrovnik,
Croatia, 2006.
[22]
Dongxi Jin and David C Levy. An approach to schedulability analysis of
uml-based real-time systems design. In Proceedings of the 3rd international
workshop on Software and performance, pp. 243–250. ACM, Rome, Italy,
2002.
[23]
Stefan Kugele, Wolfgang Haberl, Michael Tautschnig, and Martin Wechs.
Optimizing automatic deployment using non-functional requirement anno-
tations. In Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Verification and
Validation, pp. 400–414. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
[24]
Autosar 4.0 specifications. http://www.autosar.org/ [Accessed 29 August 2017].
[25]
Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli and Grant Martin. Platform-based design
and software design methodology for embedded systems. IEEE Design &
Test of Computers, (6):23–33, 2001.
[26]
Bart Kienhuis, Ed F Deprettere, Pieter Van Der Wolf, and Kees Vissers.
A methodology to design programmable embedded systems. In Embedded
Processor Design Challenges, pp. 18–37. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002.
[27]
Roberto Lublinerman and Stavros Tripakis. Modular code generation from
triggered and timed block diagrams. In Real-Time and Embedded Technol-
ogy and Applications Symposium, 2008. RTAS’08. IEEE, St. Louis, MO,
pp. 147–158. IEEE, 2008.
[28]
Paul Caspi, Adrian Curic, Aude Maignan, Christos Sofronis, Stavros Tripa-
kis, and Peter Niebert. From Simulink to scade/lustre to TTA: A layered
approach for distributed embedded applications. In ACM Sigplan Notices,
volume 38, pp. 153–162. ACM, San Diego, CA, 2003.
[29]
Marc Pouzet and Pascal Raymond. Modular static scheduling of synchro-
nous data-flow networks. Design Automation for Embedded Systems,
14(3):165–192, 2010.
[30]
Thomas M. Parks and Edward Lee. Non-preemptive real-time scheduling of
dataflow systems. In Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1995.
ICASSP-95., 1995 International Conference on, volume 5, pp. 3235–3238.
IEEE, Detroit, MI, 1995.
[31]
Arne Hamann, Razvan Racu, and Rolf Ernst. Formal methods for auto-
motive platform analysis and optimization. In Proc. Future Trends in
Automotive Electronics and Tool Integration Workshop (DATE Conference),
Munich. Citeseer, 2006.
[32]
Traian Pop, Paul Pop, Petru Eles, and Zebo Peng. Analysis and optimisation
of hierarchically scheduled multiprocessor embedded systems. International
Journal of Parallel Programming, 36(1):37–67, 2008.
[33]
Cagkan Erbas. System-Level Modelling and Design Space Exploration for
Multiprocessor Embedded System-On-Chip Architectures, volume 132.
Amsterdam University Press, 2007.
[34]
Alexander Metzner and Christian Herde. RTSAT – An optimal and efficient
approach to the task allocation problem in distributed architectures. In
290
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Real-Time Systems Symposium, 2006. RTSS’06. 27th IEEE International,
pp. 147–158. IEEE, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2006.
[35]
Werner Damm, Alexander Metzner, Friedrich Eisenbrand, Gennady Shmo-
nin, Reinhard Wilhelm, and Sebastian Winkel. Mapping task-graphs on
distributed ECU networks: Efficient algorithms for feasibility and optim-
ality. In Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications,
2006. Proceedings. 12th IEEE International Conference on, pp. 87–90.
IEEE, Sydney, Qld., 2006.
[36]
Vincent Berthoux Se´bastien Furic Loı¨c Wagner and LMS Imagine SA.
Statecharts as a means to control plant models in LMS Imagine. Lab
AMESIM.
[37]
Se´bastien Furic and LMS Imagine. Enforcing reliability of discrete-time
models in modelica. In Proceedings of the 8th International Modelica
Conference, Dresden, Germany, 2011.
[38]
Albert Benveniste, Timothy Bourke, Benoit Caillaud, and Marc Pouzet.
Non-standard semantics of hybrid systems modelers. Journal of Computer
and System Sciences, 78(3):877–910, 2012.
[39]
Simon Bliudze and Se´bastien Furic. An operational semantics for hybrid
systems involving behavioral abstraction. In Proceedings of the 10th Inter-
national ModelicaConference, number EPFL-CONF-199085, pp. 693–706.
Linko¨ping University Electronic Press, Linko¨pings universitet, 2014.
[40]
Modelica. http://www.modelica.org [Accessed 29 August 2017].
[41]
Fmi standars. http://www.fmi-standard.org [Accessed 29 August 2017].
Biographies
Dr. Belgacem Ben Hedia holds an engineering degree in computer science from
The Faculty of Science, Mathematics, Physics and Natural of Tunis-El Manar
University. He received his Ph.D. in Computer Science from INSA-Lyon. Since
2010 he is a research engineer in CEA LIST. His expertise covers modelling and
validation of real-time systems. Currently, he works on the design of real-time
applications for the PharOS real-time executive, correct-by-construction code
generation and verification of real-time applications. He has served in the program
committee of several international conferences and workshops dedicated to real-
time applications. He was co-general chair of RTNS 2014 and program co-chair of
VECoS 2015.
Dr. Chokri Mraidha is a researcher at the Laboratory of Model Driven Engi-
neering for Embedded Systems of the CEA LIST institute in France. He got a
master degree in distributed computing in 2001, a Ph.D. in Computer Science in
2005 and a ‘‘Habilitation a` Diriger les Recherches’’ in 2015. His research and
development interests include dependable real-time and embedded systems model-
driven development, modelling languages design, instrumentation and control
architectures design, optimized software real-time architecture synthesis and
Model-compilation challenges for cyber-physical systems
291

model-compilation. He is involved in UML-based OMG standards for design of
real systems like SysML and MARTE and the AUTOSAR standard for automotive.
He is working in European and French research projects developing model-based
approaches for design and verification of architectures for critical real-time systems
for automotive, railway, aerospace and nuclear power plants.
Etienne Hamelin holds an engineering degree from Ecole Polytechnique and
Telecom Paristech. After a couple of experiences developing models and embed-
ded software for submarine navigation and space robotics applications, he worked
as project officer and expert in the domain of embedded software for the French
Ministry of Industry, then joined the CEA LIST in 2011, where he now works as a
research engineer and project manager, and focuses on model-driven development
methodologies and code generation support for real-time safety-critical applica-
tions, and on multicore and distributed extensions to the PharOS real-time operat-
ing system for automotive power train applications. Since 2015 it has become the
head on the L3S laboratory.
Dr. Sara Tucci-Piergiovanni is research coordinator at the CEA LIST’s Depart-
ment of System and Software Engineering. She received her M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in Computer Engineering from the Sapienza University of Rome, respec-
tively, in 2002 and 2006. Her master’s thesis was awarded in 2002 with the national
prize for the best ICT master thesis in ICT from Confederation of Italian Industry.
At Sapienza, she held a lecturer position teaching a course on distributed systems
till 2008. Since her master degree, she publishes regularly in peer-reviewed sci-
entific forums and journals in the areas of distributed, real-time, mission critical
systems and software. She serves regularly as reviewer in international journals, as
PC member in international conferences and she is part of the Factory of the Future
scientific committee at the French National Agency for Research (ANR). She is
also involved in numerous research and industrial projects developing model-
driven engineering approaches and tools for the automotive domain, among these
projects she led the tooling workpackage in the EC-funded MAENAD project. In
the context of the French initiative ‘‘Industrie du Futur’’, she is also coordinating
activities of the regional platform FactoryLab (topic group Digital Factory).
292
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Chapter 12
Health monitoring using WBAN: topology
design, routing and thermal issues
Ghufran Ahmed1, Saif Ul Islam1, Maham Shahid1,
Azfar Shakeel1, Najmun Nisa1, Najmul Hassan2,
Numera M.I. Shahid1, Zaheer Ul Hussain Sani1,
and Hilal Jan1
Abstract
The developments that shaped the twenty/twenty-first century with respect to
wireless technologies have had a great influence on quality of life, where wireless
body area networks (WBANs)  implantable sensor nodes, more specifically, have
recently emerged as a successful initiative for monitoring health remotely, and
thus a research challenge. Two concerns that need addressing here are heat dis-
sipation which causes damage to surrounding tissues, and introduction of relay
nodes to increase network lifetime, but on the other hand may cause health
hazards. There arises a need to find an efficient network topology design to
overcome the above-mentioned concerns. This chapter discusses in detail WBAN,
its applications, related technologies, energy-aware topology design, efficient
relay node placement methods and, last but not least, energy-efficient and thermal-
aware routing techniques.
12.1
Introduction
The term Internet of things (IoT) is formally defined as [1,2]:
the network of physical objects that contain embedded technology to
communicate and sense or interact with their internal states or the external
environment.
1Department of Computer Science, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Pakistan
2Department of Electrical Engineering, Capital University of Science and Technology, Pakistan

With the advent of IoT, technologies and broadband Internet becoming widely
available, it is now possible that human bodies can connect to the Internet and
remain connected. This in turn makes vital signs and other clinical parameters
accessible remotely or without human intervention.
Chee et al. [3] define wireless body area networks (WBANs) as a set of
wearable sensor nodes placed inside or around the human body for monitoring
human body’s vital functions and its surrounding environment. It is now
possible with miniaturized low-power sensor nodes developed keeping in
mind the health safety standards. A WBAN may contain either wearable or
implantable sensor nodes. Wearable sensor nodes are listed in Table 12.1 while
Table 12.2 shows implanted sensor nodes. A typical architecture of WBAN is
presented in Figure 12.1.
WBAN is a multilayered architecture that comprises of [5]
1.
a small network deployed inside or around a body;
2.
a gateway or sink that acts as a bridge between outside world and the human body;
3.
a wide area network (WAN) that connects the sink to different databases
placed at remote locations in hospitals, for example, accident and emergency
centers, walk-in centers, etc.; and
4.
an application layer software that is used to extract data from databases.
Table 12.1
Wearable sensors [4]
Wearable sensor
Description
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Working of heart over a period of time
Electromyography (EMG)
Electrical activity of skeletal muscle
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Electrical activity of brain
Pulse oximeter
Level of oxygen in blood/oxygen saturation
Glucose sensor
Level of glucose in blood
Movement sensor
(accelerometer)
Magnitude and direction of linear, rotational and
gravitational acceleration
Table 12.2
Implantable sensors [4]
Implantable sensor
Description
Pacemaker
Controls abnormal heart rhythms
Cochlear implants
Replaces the function of the damaged inner ear
Implantable cardioverter
defibrillators (ICD)
Used to treat irregular heartbeats (arrhythmia)
Wireless capsule endoscope
Visualization of difficult to approach areas –
gastrointestinal tract
Electronic pill
Capable of disease detection, abnormalities and drug
delivery mechanism
Retina implant
Restoration of vision in patients with retinal degenera-
tion
294
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Factors such as energy efficiency, reliability, robustness, scalability, interoper-
ability, self-organization, security and mobility support should be considered to
design any WBAN system. While the above-mentioned factors are important,
parameters such as form factor and weight of the body sensors, management of
energy and physical layer protocols should be considered to enhance lifetime of a
network, keeping specific absorption rate (SAR) minimum, and achieve a high data
rate for real-time data transmission. In order to incorporate privacy and security, the
design of WBANs need to be strong and robust enough to prevent any kind of
malicious access that might compromise the integrity of data. Quality-of-service
(QoS) as error-free communication among the nodes is required in WBAN to
achieve the above-mentioned factors.
The IEEE 802.15.6 standard describes physical and media access control
(MAC) layer issues such as wireless bands to use, antenna design, electromagnetic
(EM) coupling, SAR rate and strategies for MAC layer issues, for example,
scheduled carrier sense multiple access/collision detection (CSMA/CD) or time
division multiple access schemes for low-power listening devices.
12.1.1
Applications
WBAN provides great potential for numerous applications which translate to
any kind of body activity that requires monitoring and afterwards control of the
subject can be an application for WBAN. The list of applications is extensive and
may include health, emergency services, personal, sports, military, etc., however,
it is not limited to the mentioned list.
Considering WBAN applications in health industry, Figure 12.2 illustrates the
most common sensors in use and their locations on the body [6]. A general phy-
sician usually records real-time vital signs of a patient such as temperature, pulse
rate, etc., along with other readings for muscular movements, activity of the heart,
Sink
GPRS
WLAN/
Bluetooth
Internet
Doctor
Home
Nursing
station
Laboratory
Sensor nodes (SN)
Figure 12.1
WBAN architecture
Health monitoring using WBAN
295

blood oxygen levels and electrical impulses generated in brain which might not be
humanly possible. This opens up new possibilities in medical research for finding
new strategies for management of various diseases through early detection, mon-
itoring and precise control of the patient’s treatment by raising alarms whenever a
specified threshold value of data is reached, for example, ECG signals which can
show a possible heart failure. Such stream of data can be gathered, analyzed, and
transmitted in order to take corrective measures with minimal waste of time and
advantages of using WBAN. The values gathered might not only be real time, but
are cost effective as compared to traditional methods of monitoring. However, it
should be kept in mind that requirements of bandwidth directly depend upon the
type of application. Figure 12.3 describes bandwidth requirement and data rate for
WBAN medical applications.
Different types of application help determine which sensor is more appropriate
to use, for example, recording sleep pattern for the treatment of sleep disorders,
calculating the allergic agents count in the air for early intimation to asthma
patients, all require wearable sensors. Similarly, for management of diabetes,
implantable sensor nodes can be used which automate the induction of medicine
into patient’s blood stream at predetermined times, and with precise quantity.
Implantable sensors can also help in early detection of cancer cells, reduced risk of
EEG
Hearing aid
cochlear implant
Motion sensor
Blood pump
ECG
Blood oxygen
Sink
Pressure sensor
Positioning
Insulin injection
Glucose
Lactic acid
Artificial knee
Figure 12.2
Location of sensors [6]
296
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

cardiovascular diseases and heart attack, also known as myocardial infarction [7].
The use of implantable sensors nodes is not limited to the above but can be seen in
use in military where, fatigue level of soldiers can be monitored using body sen-
sors, or identity and location of firefighters and policemen in the field. WBANs can
also help in training of athletes by measuring pressure on certain body areas to
avoid motion injuries, and in assessing the improvement in an athlete’s perfor-
mance. The sensors can complement biometric parameters for user identification
and authentication by integrating emotional and behavioral data with finger prints,
iris, voice and facial patterns, thus giving us a multimodal biometric method for
user authentication [7]. It can be envisioned that WBAN technologies will sig-
nificantly change the way we live through impacting various domains of life in
multiple ways and by bringing improvement in the quality of life.
ECG
• Data rate
• Bandwidth
• Accuracy
• 288 Kbps
• 100–1000 Hz
• 12 bits
• Data rate
• Bandwidth
• Accuracy
• 320 Kbps
• 0–10000 Hz
• 16 bits
• Data rate
• Bandwidth
• Accuracy
• 43.2 Kbps
• 0–150 Hz
• 12 bits
• Data rate
• Bandwidth
• Accuracy
• 16 bps
• 0–1 Hz
• 8 bits
• Data rate
• Bandwidth
• Accuracy
• 1.6 Kbps
• 0–50 Hz
• 16 bits
• Data rate
• Bandwidth
• Accuracy
• 120 bps
• 0–1 Hz
• 8 bits
• Data rate
• Bandwidth
• Accuracy
• 35 Kbps
• 0–500 Hz
• 12 bits
EMG
EEG
Blood
saturation
Glucose
monitoring
Temperature
Movement
sensor
Figure 12.3
Bandwidth requirements and data rates for WBAN in medical
applications
Health monitoring using WBAN
297

12.1.2
WBAN wireless technologies
With self-accelerating needs in wireless technologies, transforming society along
the way, researchers have developed keen interest toward WBANs [8]. WBANs
have been identified as the most cost-effective and accurate wireless networking
technology for real-time health monitoring systems [9].
Different wireless technologies have been in use in WBAN applications which
can be categorized in terms of data rate, channel capacity, frequency band, cover-
age area, power consumption, transmission power, reliability, security and privacy
[10] as shown in Figure 12.4. Some commonly used wireless technologies being
used to develop small-scale wireless sensor networks are Bluetooth, ZigBee and
6LoWPAN. In order to connect sensor nodes with each other, technologies can
work on short transmission range (approximately 10 m) with low data rates or use
Wi-Fi devices for high data rates for long-range communications [7,9]. In case of
high data rate requirements, ultra wide band (UWB) and wireless local area net-
work (WLAN) can also be used; however, due to increased power consumption,
these can rarely be seen in use in WBAN applications [11].
At present, low-power consumption is the most important challenge as seen in
WBAN technologies; sensor devices normally are seen using high energy while
communicating with other devices. A significant amount of energy can be saved by
Zigbee (IEEE 802.15.4)
2.4 GHz
Up to 250 Kbps
CSMA
30~100 m
Star topology
RFID
860~960 MHz
10~100 Kbps
Slotted-ALOHA,
Binary tree
1~100
P2P
UMTS
2100 MHz
42 Kbps
WCDMA
Home area
Cellular/3G
Bluetooth (IEEE
802.15.1)
2.4 GHz
1-2 Mbps
TDMA
100 m
Star, scatternet
UWB (IEEE 802.15.1)
3-10 GHz
850 Kbps
ALOHA
2 m
Star topology
WiMax (IEEE 802.11.6)
2.3, 2.5 and 3.5 GHz
75 Mbps
Request/grant
15 km
Star, tree, P2P topology
WLAN (802.11b/g)
2.4 GHz
>11 Mbps
OFDMA, CMSA/CA
0-100 m
Mesh/Ad hoc topology
WBAN technologies
Figure 12.4
Comparison of WBAN technologies
298
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

decreasing the energy consumption in data processing, reception and transmission
processes [10]. Batteries are the main component that provide power to WBAN
devices; therefore, this allows sensors to remain in working condition over longer
periods of time without requiring replacement or recharge [10]. Data integrity is an
important parameter in patient monitoring systems because integrity of data ensures
that the real-time data of patients has been successfully collected from the sensor
devices and instantly, thereby making it available to health-care data centers in real
time. Figure 12.5 shows the advantages, disadvantages and applications of WBAN
technologies in use.
• Advantages
• Disadvantages
• Applications
• Low-cost, ultra-low power consumption, easy installation
• Short range, low data rate
• Sensor networks
• Advantages
• Disadvantages
• Applications
• Flexibility and robustness
• Low QoS
• Wi-Fi, Internet
• Advantages
• Disadvantages
• Applications
• High data rate and faster deployment
• Broadband Internet connectivity
• LoS required, effected by weather
• Advantages
• Disadvantages
• Applications
• High data rate, power consumption
• Wi-Fi, Internet
• Low QoS
• Advantages
• Disadvantages
• Applications
• Small/low-cost devices
• PANs, Medical devices
• Only for short range
• Advantages
• Advantages
• Disadvantages
• Disadvantages
• Applications
• Applications
• High data rate
• Non line of sight, reusable, secure reading, easy data transmission
• Asset management and tracking
• High cost, low data rate & operational life, limited coverage of passive RFID
• Wi-Fi, Infrared, Bluetooth
• Handover problems
WLAN (IEEE
802.11b/g)
Zigbee
WiMax
(IEEE802.11,16)
UWB
(IEEE802.15.6)
Bluetooth
(IEEE802.15.1)
UMTS
RFID
Figure 12.5
Advantages, disadvantages and applications of WBAN technologies [7]
Health monitoring using WBAN
299

12.1.3
WBAN infrastructure
In the health-care industry many applications of WBAN are in use which con-
tinuously monitor the patient’s condition in real time by using sensor networks.
With the advancements in wireless technologies, radio frequency (RF) signals play
a vital role with respect to safety, cost and efficiency [11].
WBAN normally works on two bands for data transmission: wireless medical
telemetry service (WMTS) and medical implant communications service (MICS).
WMTS, which is the most recommended band, has little interference from nearby
sources; however, MICS is dedicated to implant communication only and works
between the 402 and 405 MHz band.
12.1.4
Energy efficiency
In modern wireless communication there are number of portable devices which are
very small in size having low battery power; there are also many applications which
require real-time communications. Such applications have to send and receive
frequent and up-to-date information, thereby consuming more energy. Although in
the near past great improvement has been observed in the field of communication
hardware but battery performance rate regarding available power per unit size is not
up to the mark. Small size of devices allows the use of smaller size batteries, which
reduces the functionality of wireless devices, but being energy efficient, more work
can be performed with the same amount of power.
12.1.5
Approaches to achieve energy efficiency
Some of the approaches being used to achieve energy efficiency in wireless
environment are described next.
12.1.5.1
Active/sleep mode
There are many scenarios in wireless networks where nodes are deployed to receive
discrete data, therefore, not requiring peak performance most of the time. In such
cases, it is quite useless to utilize high battery power continuously because data
transmission occurs for a short amount of time in the form of bursts; nodes can
therefore be set to be on active/sleep mode for saving battery power [12]. Nodes
are therefore usually designed to send most of the data during the active mode and
small amounts during the sleep mode.
12.1.5.2
Cognitive radio
Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is reduced by interference from surroundings which in
return raises the noise level in the channels, and to cater we have to use higher
power to transmit signals over the channels having high interference, which in turn
causes interference in other signals. Similarly, cognitive radios intelligently detect
both busy and free communication channels. They also instantaneously move into
free channels (interference free or less interfered channels), saving significant
power to achieve higher SNR. Higher speeds can be achieved by increasing SNR.
This results in sending same size of data in short period of time, which in turn leads
to power saving [13].
300
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

12.1.5.3
Directional antenna
In isotropic antennas, signals are equally transmitted in every direction (broadcast),
hence consuming more power for transmitting signals in a particular direction, and
in order to reduce transmission power, we need directional antennas [14]. They can
be used for broadcasting signals; however, isotropic antennas are energy inefficient
as compared to directional antennas. Most applications require unicast messages
instead of broadcast messages. In such cases, significant amount of power can be
saved by using directional antennas; in parallel, it also increases the communication
range. Use of directional antennas also increases the SNR, which improves the
reliability in communication, hence we need fewer number of retransmissions
which also remarkably saves energy (used in retransmission).
12.1.5.4
Energy harvesting
There are many applications which require a wireless device to produce energy for
itself, known as energy harvesting, especially in rural areas where power supply
lines are not available or for those devices which are unattendant and their battery
replacement is not possible. There are many ways for a wireless node to produce/
gather energy including solar energy, RF, thermal, wind energy, etc. All the men-
tioned sources of energy are environment friendly. Energy harvesting is commonly
used in WSNs because it is difficult to provide energy from direct sources of power.
It is the only reliable way to extend the battery life of an unattendant wireless
nodes. Significant improvements have been made in the field of RF energy due to
its ease of storage and convergence. There are some standard protocols which use
one or more sources for energy harvesting, for example, wireless regional area
network [15].
12.1.5.5
High transmission speed
Less time is required to transmit same amount of data on a wireless link while
transmitting at higher transmission speed. Therefore, in active/sleep mode a node
has more time to be in sleep state. Many algorithms use higher speed as a remedy
for energy inefficiency. Higher transmission speeds can be achieved through
appropriate modulation, intelligent selection of channels or many other means. For
instance, in orthogonal frequency division multiplexing, a frequency band is divi-
ded into many orthogonal small frequency bands which can enhance the data rate
because of less inter-symbol interference.
12.2
Energy-aware topology design
Recently WBANs have emerged as effective and significant network technology in
many domains. In health-care and medical applications, the use of WBANs has
made substantial improvements in monitoring patient’s health remotely, thus
improving quality of life as well. Modern developments in sensor nodes and other
communication technologies have opened new opportunities for researchers to
propose and design new WBAN systems for health-care applications [16,17].
Health monitoring using WBAN
301

WBAN systems are made up of low-cost, energy-constrained sensor nodes.
Usually these nodes are deployed on body or implanted inside human body. The
nodes sense various physiological measurements and transmit to the central
node known as body node coordinator or sink which may be a personal device/
computer placed near or on human body for further processing. The body sensor
nodes are battery operated and are surgically placed inside the body. Due to
the nature of WBAN in medical application, the size of nodes is kept small to
avoid any discomfort or health risk to the patient [18]. Hence, the size of bat-
tery needs to be small as well. It is not practical to replace the sensor nodes
when they completely consume their energy as it may lead to health hazards.
In general, energy is mostly consumed during data transmission [19]. To
enhance network lifetime, significant research to achieve energy efficiency has
been conducted in WSNs but these methods are inadequate for WBANs due to
their nature of application especially in medical field [17]. While designing
topology for WBANs, managing energy consumption to increase network life-
time is very crucial. Based on these factors, single-hop or multi-hop topologies
are used [7].
All sensor nodes send data directly to the sink in single hop topology. Due to
the nature of WBAN in medical applications, the node density is sparse, that is,
nodes are limited in number and placed at predefined locations inside human body
[17,20]. The nodes which are farther away from sink have to increase their signal
power to transmit data [21]. As battery size is limited in these nodes, they die out
quickly and cannot be easily replaced. To maintain network connectivity for longer
times, single-hop topology is not always the best option.
In multi-hop topology, data is transmitted to sink via multi-hops [7]. The
nodes which are farther do not directly send their data to the sink, that is, data is
transmitted to the node which is closer to them. As a result, the nodes near to the
sink perform all the relaying of data from other nodes along with their own data
which results in high energy consumption of these nodes [20]. Some methods
have been proposed to perform multi-hop communication. In [22], the protocol
forms a tree structure where every child node transmits data to its parent node.
Hence, the sink receives the data through hop-by-hop communication. In this
scenario, the energy of parent nodes located near to the sink depletes rapidly
and thus, die out quickly. In [23], authors proposed a cluster-based technique
where sensor nodes form a cluster based on several factors like residual energy,
node coordinates and distance to the sink, etc. A cluster head is assigned in
each cluster that collects the data from other sensor nodes of the cluster, com-
pressing the data and forwarding it to the sink. These cluster heads consume
more energy than other nodes due to the nature of their functionality. To main-
tain network connectivity, cluster head is periodically changed to balance energy
consumption.
In order to increase network lifetime, Braem et al. [24] proposed the use of
special nodes known as relay nodes. The function of these nodes is to handle
data traffic relaying without performing any sensing themselves as shown in
302
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Figure 12.6. Through the use of relay nodes, significant decrease in energy con-
sumption of sensor nodes has been observed [20,25] as compared to single-hop and
simple multi-hop transmissions. Primarily, there are two benefits of using relay
nodes [16]:
1.
Human body tissues are protected from senor node’s heating and radiations
effects.
2.
It decreases the energy utilization of overall network.
The deployment of nodes in WBAN is a very important factor that has a direct
impact on the lifetime of network. Sensor nodes should be placed carefully on or
inside the body in order to perform real-time health monitoring keeping in mind the
safety standards [26]. As the dimension of network is small in WBAN, the quantity
of relay nodes cannot be large [20]. In such a case, only distant nodes will send
their data through these relay nodes. Multi-hop transmission is performed by using
relay nodes. This reduces the energy consumption of other nodes as they are only
responsible for one hop communication with the nearest relay node [20], which
leads to improved network lifetime. More improvements regarding energy effi-
ciency can be made by applying energy balancing technique on relay nodes as well.
S
S
R
S
Sink
Sink
Sink
Sensor
Relay
R
R
S
Figure 12.6
Single hop versus multi-hop
Health monitoring using WBAN
303

If relay node’s energy reaches a threshold, an alternative path can be set up using
some other node as relay, thus balancing energy throughout the network.
12.2.1
Optimization of relay nodes placement
Relay nodes accumulate information from sensor nodes and forward it to the sink.
It also aids in easier maintenance of the network, that is, due to decrease in energy
consumption, the replacement of implantable sensor nodes (which require surgery)
can also be limited. In WBAN, energy efficiency is one of the key challenges.
Effective node placement makes the network more energy efficient [27]. In WSNs,
extensive research has been done related to the node placement. However, these
techniques are inadequate for WBANs due to its nature of application in medical
sector. References [27,28] show that node placement significantly prolongs net-
work lifetime by improving energy efficiency by 46%.
In WBAN, nodes are strictly placed around or inside the human body as
required by certain medical applications and cannot be changed. Few research
works have considered the topology design to improve energy consumption. The
quantity and location of relay nodes are predetermined and network installation has
not been considered at all [20,24]. In WBAN, where node density is sparse,
installing too many relay nodes is not practical and may increase energy con-
sumption causing heat dissipation which leads to tissue damage.
To achieve energy efficiency, the problem of identifying the optimal number
of relay nodes and their placement has been discussed in [17]. The topology design
problem has been addressed through linear programming which takes into account
energy issues and minimizes the network installation cost. This technique also
optimally assigns sensor nodes to relay nodes. Optimal placement of the nodes will
lead to effective routing of data which maximizes energy efficiency of the network.
Each sensor node assigns order to relay node on the basis of wireless signal
strength. If the potential relay node can establish a direct link to the sink, then that
node is made relay node. Rather than fixing the positions of nodes, this model plans
the topology where optimal relay nodes are selected for forwarding the data to sink.
The quantity and organizations of relay nodes influence the longevity in
WBAN and its optimization may facilitate in minimizing the energy consumption
of wireless sensor and relay nodes [17]. Placement of relay nodes is a sensitive
issue in WBAN architecture since its optimization not only exploit the lifetime of
WBAN but also contribute in reduction of network installation cost [17].
12.3
SAR analysis
SAR or specific energy absorption rate represents the amount of energy absorbed
by a body when exposed to RF. SAR is given by
SAR ¼ sjE2j
r
(12.1)
304
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

where s is tissue’s electrical conductivity, E represents electric field caused by
radiation and r is density of tissue [29]. SAR is calculated in W/kg.
If rate of absorption exceeds a specific threshold value, it significantly raises
the temperature of body. Sensitive body tissues are vulnerable to heat and radiation;
when these tissues are exposed to heat or radiation, it may result in malfunctioning
of body organ. Therefore, researchers have been considering SAR factor while
developing WBAN systems [30]. In order to minimize SAR, it is necessary that a
path should not be used for longer and continuous period of time; instead traffic
load should be distributed evenly among all available paths to prevent the high
value of SAR. A significant work has been done addressing SAR in thermal-aware
routing protocols [31].
12.3.1
Using low transmission power level to reduce SAR
In WBAN, nodes are either implanted inside the human body or placed around the
body to measure critical and vital signs. This information which may reflect dif-
ferent abnormalities in the body is then transmitted to remote health-care center
through wireless technology. The data is propagated in the form of EM waves
which may be harmful to patients depending upon the intensity of radiations and
duration of exposure. It is, therefore, advisable to limit these radiations in order to
maintain health and safety of patients. One of the techniques to reduce SAR is
transmission power control. This is extremely important in case of implanted sen-
sor nodes placed inside the human body to avoid extra heat dissipation which may
damage sensitive tissues and cause harm to patients. Generally, nodes in WBAN
are close to each other and use of high transmission power level is not required.
Using low transmission power levels result in less energy consumption as well as
reducing SAR. Thus, it is very important to have a check on output power of
transmitting nodes to avoid SAR values exceeding standard thresholds.
12.3.2
Impact of frequency band on SAR values
As discussed earlier, heat dissipation due to EM radiations may damage tissues in
human body. In order to avoid internal tissues damage, standard specific absorption
ratio is maintained to a safe level in order to keep heating effect within threshold
limits. The mean value of SAR for the whole body is 0.08 W/kg for 100 kHz to
10 GHz frequency band, whereas this value becomes 2 W/kg for head and 4 W/kg
for arms and legs. The SAR value decreases when the transmitting node is away
from the absorbing body. The absorption rate is significantly dependent on
the frequency band; for instance, a phone using the 900 MHz frequency penetrates
4 cm into the body; on the other hand, a phone using higher frequency band
penetrates approximately 2–3 cm [32].
12.3.3
Impact of high SAR on human body
Moreover, it is a fact that a human body consists of 70% water molecules; there-
fore, very significant energy absorption is observed in tissues having lots of water
like brain, muscle, skin and blood. Since a significant part of human body
Health monitoring using WBAN
305

comprises of water molecules, the exposure to RF signals can result in an increase
in temperature in body tissues. Increase in SAR may cause many serious health-
related problems like malfunctioning of muscles, heating up of tissues, headache,
DNA integrity and disturbed sperm motility [33,34].
12.4
Energy efficient and SAR-aware routing
Sensor nodes used in WBAN have limited energy and computational capabilities.
Moreover, heat dissipation from these sensor nodes may result in tissue damage.
Hence, designing energy-efficient and thermal-aware routing protocols is critical in
WBAN. In the following sections, energy-efficient and SAR-aware routing [11] is
discussed.
12.4.1
Energy-efficient routing
The routing mechanism which can effectively send and receive data between any
arbitrary source and distention by using less power is termed as energy-efficient
routing (EER). The factors which are important to consider while proposing and
designing any EER algorithm are known as energy-efficient decision factors.
Some of these factors are shown in Figure 12.7 and are described in the fol-
lowing subsections.
12.4.1.1
Energy-efficient decision factors
Transmission distance: Transmission distance is one of the key parameters which
can be used as a decision factor while selecting an appropriate route in wireless
networks. With respect to the energy efficiency, more power is required if the
distance between two transmitting nodes is large. So, in EER schemes avoid the
routes which have larger average distance between transmitting nodes.
Residual energy: Residual energy of a sensor node is the actual power that a
node possess. It is the most important parameter in any type of wireless network.
Residual energy of a node also helps to calculate overall energy of a path or even a
whole network. It is not only important for energy-efficient algorithms but is also
required in devising load balancing protocols.
Transmission
distance
Residual energy
Event detection
Energy-efficient
decision factor
Local awareness
Heterogeneous
nodes
Figure 12.7
Important factors for proposing and designing an energy-efficient
routing algorithm
306
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Event detection: Event detection is an important aspect of WSN and WBAN.
The more events are detected, the more energy is consumed by a sensor node.
Therefore, nodes are deployed intelligently in the busy area of the network. Fur-
thermore, load balancing protocols are adopted to avoid energy depletion problem
of those nodes which continuously detect the events and are involved in data
communication.
Location awareness: Currently, almost all the wireless networks deployed on
ad hoc basis are location aware and this characteristic is mandatory in many pro-
tocols. Real-time applications are common in different types of networks including
WSN and WBAN. Location awareness is very common and helpful in such
applications. It is also very important in route selection in different routing algo-
rithms and load balancing techniques.
Heterogeneous nodes: In most WSN applications, nodes are of same type and
capabilities, hence building a homogeneous network. In WBAN, heterogeneous
nodes are used to form a network. In heterogeneous network, residual energy of
certain nodes may differ from residual energy of nodes in the rest of the network.
Therefore, heterogeneous nodes should be carefully managed to form a good EER
algorithm.
12.4.1.2
Energy-efficient routing
As discussed in previous sections, routing requirements of WBAN greatly differ
from WSN due to a number of factors [35]. As sensor nodes are implanted in the
body, the restrictive environment of WBAN does not allow large number of nodes.
The node size is also small that leads to smaller battery sizes. The WBAN pro-
tocols need to be thermal aware as well as excessive loss of energy will heat up the
sensor nodes which is harmful for the human body. Special consideration is nee-
ded while designing routing protocols for WBAN keeping in mind the following
objectives:
1.
Energy consumption should be minimal as replacement of energy source for
sensor nodes is not feasible.
2.
Energy utilization should be uniform among all nodes, that is, if one node is
consuming more energy, it becomes a hotspot and increase in temperature will
lead to health risk.
3.
Data delivery should be reliable as loss in data packets will lead to retrans-
mission of data which in terms consumes energy.
There are two types of communication: single hop and multi-hop. If the dis-
tance between sensor nodes and sink is large, then single hop is not the best option
as energy consumption is greater in these nodes. In multi-hop, the nodes closer to
sink becomes hotspot as they relay all the data from other nodes. Some authors
have combined both methods to improve energy efficiency, that is, if the distance
with the sink is shorter, then the data is sent directly, otherwise multi-hop com-
munication is used [36]. The advantage of this approach is that it ensures homo-
genous utilization of energy by all nodes, thus preventing some nodes from
becoming hotspot.
Health monitoring using WBAN
307

In [35,37], the nodes are categorized into body nodes, relay nodes (only for
forwarding) and sink nodes. First, all nodes scan the strength of receiving signal
from neighboring devices and store the id, location and residual energy of these
nodes in its memory. In this way, every node becomes literate about its neighboring
nodes. When sink is in range, data is sent directly by the node. If the distance to
sink is greater than certain threshold, then some other node is selected as a for-
warder. The sensor node calculates a cost function of other nodes based on para-
meters like residual energy and distance. The one with least value will be selected
as forwarder.
Reference [38] applies the approach of dividing nodes into clusters and
assigning cluster heads to them. The cluster heads are selected by calculating cost
function value based on residual energy and initial energy. The one with high cost
function value is likely to be selected as cluster head. The sensor nodes calculate
their distance to nearest cluster heads and will assign themselves to that cluster. The
data sent by these sensor nodes is aggregated by the cluster head and forwarded to
the sink. The cluster heads are changed by going through same procedure till the
death of last node. The nodes which are near to the sink will send their data
directly. This approach increases stability in terms of network lifetime as energy
consumption among all nodes is uniform which prevents the nodes which relay data
from depleting their energy quickly.
12.4.2
SAR-aware routing
SAR or specific energy absorption rate represents amount of energy absorbed by a
human body when exposed to RF and is given in (12.1).
If rate of absorption exceeds a specific threshold, it significantly raises the
temperature of body. Body tissues are vulnerable to heat and radiation; when these
tissues are exposed to heat or radiation, body organ may malfunction in the con-
sequences. Therefore, researchers must consider SAR factor while proposing
routing algorithms in WBAN. To minimize SAR, it is necessary that busy path
should not be used for longer and continuous periods of time; instead traffic load
should be distributed evenly among all available paths to prevent high SAR.
Recently significant work has been done addressing SAR and thermal aware
routing protocols [29,39].
In WBANs, the antenna plays a pivotal role in data transmission within the
body and thus requires significant attention in research regarding possible health
risk [40]. Temperature-aware routing is investigated in [29] where sensor nodes
avoid high-temperature zones by declaring them as hotspots. It then attempts to
establish alternative route to send data to other the sink. In [41], the temperature of
node is changed to graph weights. The node chooses least temperature routes with
minimum distance to the sink using shortest path algorithms in graph theory.
Reference [42] proposed an optimization algorithm that discovers optimal place-
ment of relay nodes so that sensor nodes can transmit data through them with
lowest SAR. The method divides the human body into several parts and assigns
different values to these parts to study the impact of SAR. The nodes are assigned a
308
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

value depending on the position with respect to the sink location. Based on these
values, the nodes become relay nodes and forward data to the sink. This scheme
reduces the distance between the nodes which requires less power to transmit. The
result is not only reduction in negative influence of EMF radiations but also
increases network lifetime.
12.5
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have provided an overview of topology design, energy effi-
ciency and thermal issues in WBAN. The aim is to provide the underlying details of
WBAN for enhanced living environment that supports true ambient assisted living.
For this purpose, major WBAN applications have been presented. Moreover,
wearable and implantable nodes that are used in such applications have been listed.
One aspect that has been noticed is that WBAN requirements are different from
terrestrial WSN due to which communication standards and wireless technologies
used in WSN are not feasible in WBAN. Possible wireless technologies for WBAN
are also discussed in detail. Energy becomes more critical factor when we consider
WBAN due to the sensitive nature of medical applications. Different methods to
achieve energy efficiency in WBAN have been discussed. In WBAN, relay nodes
are used to forward data from biosensors toward sink. The proper placement of
relay node is a challenging problem. This is due to the reason that an effective
topology design results in an improved network lifetime. SAR is another important
issue in WBAN, especially in the case of implantable nodes. High values of SAR
may cause tissue damage. In addition, routing of data traffic in an energy-efficient
manner is a challenging task in WBAN. This joint problem of energy-efficient and
SAR-aware data routing, along with relay node placement, is also investigated.
References
[1]
Rivera, J., and R. Van der Meulen. ‘‘Gartner’s 2014 hype cycle for emerging
technologies maps the journey to digital business.’’ Connecticut, EEUU:
Gartner Group (2014).
[2]
X. Caron, R. Bosua, S. B. Maynard, and A. Ahmad, ‘‘The internet of things
(IoT) and its impact on individual privacy: an Australian perspective,’’
Computer Law & Security Review, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–15, 2016.
[3]
C. K. Ho, T. S. See, and M. R. Yuce, ‘‘An ultra-wideband wireless body area
network: evaluation in static and dynamic channel conditions,’’ Sensors and
Actuators A: Physical, vol. 180, pp. 137–147, 2012.
[4]
M. Yuce, J. Khan, Wireless Body Area Networks: Technology Imple-
mentation and Applications, Pan Stanford Publishing, 2011.
[5]
L. Filipe, F. Fdez-Riverola, N. Costa, and A. Pereira, ‘‘Wireless body area
networks for healthcare applications: protocol stack review,’’ International
Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 2015, p. 1, 2015.
Health monitoring using WBAN
309

[6]
B. Latre´, B. Braem, I. Moerman, C. Blondia, and P. Demeester, ‘‘A survey
on wireless body area networks,’’ Wireless Networks, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–18,
2011.
[7]
S. Movassaghi, M. Abolhasan, J. Lipman, D. Smith, and A. Jamalipour,
‘‘Wireless body area networks: A survey,’’ IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1658–1686, 2014.
[8]
H. Cao, V. Leung, C. Chow, and H. Chan, ‘‘Enabling technologies for
wireless body area networks: a survey and outlook,’’ vol. 47, no. 12. IEEE,
2009, pp. 84–93.
[9]
Hayajneh, Thaier, Ghada Almashaqbeh, Sana Ullah, and Athanasios V.
Vasilakos. ‘‘A survey of wireless technologies coexistence in WBAN: ana-
lysis and open research issues.’’ Wireless Networks 20, no. 8 (2014): 2165–
2199.
[10]
Ghamari, Mohammad, Balazs Janko, R. Simon Sherratt, William Harwin,
Robert Piechockic, and Cinna Soltanpur. ‘‘A survey on wireless body area
networks for ehealthcare systems in residential environments.’’ Sensors 16,
no. 6 (2016): 831.
[11]
S. Ullah, H. Higgins, B. Braem, et al., ‘‘A comprehensive survey of wireless
body area networks,’’ Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 1065–
1094, 2012.
[12]
R. Jurdak, A. G. Ruzzelli, and G. M. O’Hare, ‘‘Radio sleep mode optimi-
zation in wireless sensor networks,’’ IEEE Transactions on Mobile Com-
puting, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 955–968, 2010.
[13]
J. Mao, G. Xie, J. Gao, and Y. Liu, ‘‘Energy efficiency optimization for
OFDM-based cognitive radio systems: a water-filling factor aided search
method,’’ IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 12, no. 5,
pp. 2366–2375, 2013.
[14]
T. Rault, A. Bouabdallah, and Y. Challal, ‘‘Energy efficiency in wireless
sensor networks: a top-down survey,’’ Computer Networks, vol. 67, pp. 104–
122, 2014.
[15]
J. Xu and R. Zhang, ‘‘Throughput optimal policies for energy harvesting
wireless transmitters with non-ideal circuit power,’’ IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 322–332, 2014.
[16]
Elias, Jocelyne. ‘‘Optimal design of energy-efficient and cost-effective
wireless body area networks.’’ Ad Hoc Networks 13 (2014): 560–574.
[17]
Elias, Jocelyne, and Ahmed Mehaoua. ‘‘Energy-aware topology design for
wireless body area networks.’’ In 2012 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), Ottawa, ON, Canada, pp. 3409–3410. IEEE, 2012.
[18]
Barakah, Deena M., and Muhammad Ammad-uddin. ‘‘A survey of chal-
lenges and applications of wireless body area network (WBAN) and role of a
virtual doctor server in existing architecture.’’ In 2012 Third International
Conference on, Intelligent Systems, Modelling and Simulation (ISMS), Kota
Kinabalu, Malaysia, pp. 214–219. IEEE, 2012.
[19]
R. C. Chepkwony, J. O. Gwendo, and P. K. Kemei, ‘‘Energy efficient model
for deploying wireless body area networks using multi-hop network
310
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

topology,’’
International
Journal
of
Wireless
and
Mobile
Networks
(IJWMN), vol. 7, no. 5, 2015.
[20]
Ehyaie, Aida, Massoud Hashemi, and Pejman Khadivi. ‘‘Using relay net-
work to increase life time in wireless body area sensor networks.’’ In IEEE
International Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia
Networks & Workshops, 2009, WoWMoM 2009, Kos, Greece, pp. 1–6.
IEEE, 2009.
[21]
P. T. Hiep and N. H. Hoang, ‘‘Maximizing throughput of cluster-based
WBAN with IEEE 802.15. 6CSMA/CA,’’ International Journal of Multi-
media and Ubiquitous Engineering, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 391–402, 2014.
[22]
Latre, Benoit, Bart Braem, Ingrid Moerman, Chris Blondia, Elisabeth Reu-
sens, Wout Joseph, and Piet Demeester. ‘‘A low-delay protocol for multihop
wireless body area networks.’’ In Fourth Annual International Conference
on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking & Services, 2007, Mobi-
Quitous 2007, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2007.
[23]
Moh, Melody, Benjamin Jack Culpepper, Lan Dung, Teng-Sheng Moh,
Takeo Hamada, and Ching-Fong Su.‘‘On data gathering protocols for
in-body biomedical sensor networks.’’ In Global Telecommunications
Conference, 2005. GLOBECOM’05, St. Louis, MO, USA. IEEE, vol. 5,
pp. 6–pp. IEEE, 2005.
[24]
Braem, Bart, Benoit Latre, Ingrid Moerman, Chris Blondia, Elisabeth Reu-
sens, Wout Joseph, Luc Martens, and Piet Demeester.‘‘The need for coop-
eration and relaying in short-range high path loss sensor networks.’’ In
International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications, 2007.
SensorComm 2007, St. Louis, MO, USA, pp. 566–571. IEEE, 2007.
[25]
Reusens, Elisabeth, Wout Joseph, Benoıˆt Latre´, Bart Braem, Gu¨nter Ver-
meeren, Emmeric Tanghe, Luc Martens, Ingrid Moerman, and Chris Blon-
dia. ‘‘Characterization of on-body communication channel and energy
efficient topology design for wireless body area networks.’’ IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Technology in Biomedicine 13, no. 6 (2009): 933–945.
[26]
Suwansin, W., P. Phasukkit, C. Pintavirooj, and A. Sanpanich. ‘‘Analysis of
heat transfer and specific absorption rate of electromagnetic field in human
body at 915 MHz and 2.45 GHz with 3D finite element method.’’ In Bio-
medical Engineering International Conference (BMEiani, Thailand, pp. 1–4.
IEEE, 2012.
[27]
M. T. I. ul Huque, K. S. Munasinghe, and A. Jamalipour, ‘‘Body node
coordinator placement algorithms for wireless body area networks,’’ IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 94–102, 2015.
[28]
Y. Song, B. Wang, Z. Shi, K. R. Pattipati, and S. Gupta, ‘‘Distributed
algorithms for energy-efficient even self-deployment in mobile sensor net-
works,’’ IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1035–
1047, 2014.
[29]
Tang, Qinghui, Naveen Tummala, Sandeep KS Gupta, and Loren Schwie-
bert. ‘‘TARA: thermal-aware routing algorithm for implanted sensor net-
works.’’ Lecture notes in computer science 3560 (2005): 206–217.
Health monitoring using WBAN
311

[30]
S. Islam, G. Ahmed, M. Shahid, N. Hassan, M. Riaz, H. Jan, and A. Shakeel,
‘‘Implanted wireless body area networks: energy management, specific
absorption rate and safety aspects,’’ Ambient Assisted Living and Enhanced
Living Environments: Principles, Technologies and Control, p. 17, 2016.
[31]
M. Effatparvar, M. Dehghan, and A. M. Rahmani, ‘‘A comprehensive survey
of energy-aware routing protocols in wireless body area sensor networks,’’
Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 40, no. 9, p. 201, 2016.
[32]
Bilstrup, Katrin. ‘‘A preliminary study of wireless body area networks’’,
Technical Report, Halmstad University, School of Information Science,
Computer and Electrical Engineering (IDE), Halmstad Embedded and
Intelligent Systems Research (EIS), 2008.
[33]
M. Iqbal-Faruque, N. Aisyah-Husni, M. Ikbal-Hossain, M. Tariqul-Islam,
and N. Misran, ‘‘Effects of mobile phone radiation onto human head with
variation of holding cheek and tilt positions,’’ Journal of Applied Research
and Technology, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 871–876, 2014.
[34]
R. Aitken, L. Bennetts, D. Sawyer, A. Wiklendt, and B. King, ‘‘Impact of
radio frequency electromagnetic radiation on DNA integrity in the male
germline,’’ International Journal of Andrology, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 171–179,
2005.
[35]
Sriyanjana Adhikary, Sankhayan Choudhury, and Samiran Chattopadhyay.
2016. A new routing protocol for WBAN to enhance energy consumption
and network lifetime. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Distributed Computing and Networking (ICDCN ’16). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, Article 40, 6 pages.
[36]
N. Javaid, Z. Abbas, M. Fareed, Z. Khan, and N. Alrajeh, ‘‘M-attempt: a new
energy-efficient routing protocol for wireless body area sensor networks,’’
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 19, pp. 224–231, 2013.
[37]
S. Talha, R. Ahmad, and A. K. Kiani, ‘‘Priority based energy aware (PEA)
routing protocol for WBANs,’’ in Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC
Fall), 2015 IEEE 82nd. IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–5.
[38]
D. Sethi and P. P. Bhattacharya, ‘‘A study on energy efficient and reliable
data transfer (EERDT) protocol for WBAN,’’ in Computational Intelligence &
Communication Technology (CICT), 2016 Second International Conference
on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 254–258.
[39]
Monowar, Muhammad Mostafa, and Fuad Bajaber. ‘‘On designing thermal-
aware localized QoS routing protocol for in-vivo sensor nodes in wireless
body area networks.’’ Sensors 15, no. 6 (2015): 14016–14044.
[40]
J. Wang, E. Lim, M. Leach, Z. Wang, K. Man, and Y. Huang, ‘‘Two
methods of SAR measurement for wearable electronic devices,’’ in Pro-
ceedings of the International MultiConference of Engineers and Computer
Scientists, vol. 2, 2016.
[41]
D. Takahashi, Y. Xiao, F. Hu, J. Chen, and Y. Sun, ‘‘Temperature-aware
routing for telemedicine applications in embedded biomedical sensor net-
works,’’ EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking,
vol. 2008, p. 26, 2008.
312
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[42]
T.-Y. Wu and C.-H. Lin, ‘‘Low-SAR path discovery by particle swarm
optimization algorithm in wireless body area networks,’’ IEEE Sensors
Journal, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 928–936, 2015.
Biographies
Ghufran Ahmed has been serving as Assistant Professor at the Department of
Computer Science, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad,
Pakistan, since 2013. He received PostDoc in 2015 from the Department of Com-
puter Science and Digital Technology, Faculty of Engineering and Environment,
Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK. He has received Ph.D. in
2013 from the Department of Computer Science, Capital University of Science and
Technology, Islamabad (former Muhammad Ali Jinnah University). His area of
research is wireless sensor networks and wireless body area networks. He started
Ph.D. in 2006 from the Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, GIK Insti-
tute, Topi, Swabi, KPK. He also worked as a visiting scholar at the CReWMaN
Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at
Arlington, in 20082009.
Saif Ul Islam received his Ph.D. in Computer Science at the University Toulouse
III Paul Sabatier, France, in 2015. Previously, he did his Master by Research in
Computer Science from University of Limoges, France. He is Assistant Professor at
the Department of Computer Science, COMSATS Institute of Information Tech-
nology, Islamabad, Pakistan. He is currently leading the FLP-CS Network Research
Group at COMSATS in collaboration with CERN Switzerland. He has been part of
the European Union-funded research projects during his Ph.D. His research inter-
ests include wireless body area networks, underwater wireless sensor networks,
resource and energy management in large-scale distributed systems.
Maham Shahid received B.S. and M.S. in Computer Sciences from COMSATS
University, Islamabad, Pakistan. She is currently a lecturer in COMSATS. Her
research interests include wireless sensor networks and body area networks.
Azfar Shakeel has been working in COMSATS Institute of Information Technol-
ogy, Computer Sciences Department, as Assistant Professor. He did MS-IT from
NUST SEECS in 2011, MBA from IIUI in 1997, and MCS from Arid Agriculture
University in 2001. His research interests include computer security, application of
cellular automata and wireless sensor networks.
Najmun Nisa is currently serving as Lecturer in COMSATS Institute of Informa-
tion Technology, Islamabad. She completed her master’s in Software Engineering.
She has almost 11 years of experience. She has developed international and
national projects like Web applications, Android and iOS apps. She has two con-
ference publications and two book chapters.
Health monitoring using WBAN
313

Najmul Hassan did his M.S. in Computer Sciences from the Capital University of
Science and Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2010. He is currently pursuing his
Ph.D. research in air-to-ground communications in the Department of Electrical
Engineering, Capital University of Science and Technology, Islamabad. His
research areas are wireless sensor networks, ground-to-air and air-to-ground com-
munication, handover in airborne Internet and wireless body area networks.
Numera M.I. Shahid is an instructor at COMSATS Institute of Information
Technology, Computer Sciences Department, with over 15 years of experience. She
has taught undergraduate and graduate classes, supervised numerous undergraduate
final year projects and also has international work experience under her belt. She
has worked on a project for UNESCO presented in France, developed national
curricula for graphics and motion graphics for TVET program and played a key
role in establishing CIIT as a partner university in an Erasmus Mundus Program.
Numera got her early and high school graduation from Saudi Arabia. She joined
CIIT for Bachelors in Computer Science and completed her master’s in Advanced
Computing Systems from LBUS, Romania, as a Erasmus Mundus awardee.
Zaheer Ul Hussain Sani is working as a Lecturer in COMSATS Institute of
Information Technology, Islamabad. He has a master’s degree in Computer Science
from Lulea˚ University of Technology, Sweden. He has worked as a software
engineer/researcher for almost 3 years on different R&D Projects in Sweden. His
research interests are ambient intelligence and pervasive computing. He has inter-
ests in software development and supervised numerous award winning under-
graduate projects in the area of augmented reality.
Hilal Jan received her M.S. degree in Software Engineering from Bahria Uni-
versity Islamabad. Currently, she is working as Lecturer in Computer Science
Department at COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad,
Pakistan. Her research interests include wireless sensor networks and wireless body
area networks.
314
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Chapter 13
Wearable health care: technology evolution,
algorithms and needs
Raluca Maria Aileni1, Sever Pasca1, Carlos Alberto
Valderrama2, and Rodica Strungaru1
Abstract
Wearable technology (wearable gadgets) means electronics that can be worn on the
body using an invasive (implants) or non-invasive (external accessories) method.
Both invasive and non-invasive wearable devices share the mobility, power
autonomy and wireless connectivity required for the continuous exchange,
recording and analysis of data over the Internet of Things (IoT). Indeed, the
wearable technology is linked to ubiquitous/pervasive computing on wearable
computers. In this context, the digital revolution and the continued growth of
mobile networks have played a crucial role in the development of the wearable
technology. Some wearable technologies, such as Bluetooth headsets, smart
watches and web-enabled glasses, allow people to access data over Wi-Fi networks.
Beyond home automation and monitoring, software companies are already devel-
oping applications for a wide range of end users, covering areas such as health and
sports. Wearable technologies mean new opportunities in businesses development
for new markets and data analytics. Personal data management, privacy by design
in the IoT era and cloud computing virtualization will guide how companies will
use the data collected from wearable devices.
13.1
Introduction
The wearable technology has many definitions [1] that converge, according to
INVESTOPEDIA [1], towards an electronics that can be worn on the body,
accessories or clothing parts. According to the Cambridge Dictionary, wearable
technologies are things that can be worn (clothes or glasses) and contain computer
technologies capable of being connected to the Internet [2]. Wearable devices
1Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunication and Information Technology, Politehnica University of
Bucharest, Romania
2Faculty of Engineering, University of Mons, Belgium

(wearable gargets), invasive (implants) or non-invasive (external accessories or
clothing attachments), have in common the mobility, autonomy and wireless con-
nectivity needed to exchange, record and analyse data via Internet applications.
In many cases, wearable devices are associated with smart clothing, but wearable
devices are not clothing. The piece of clothing serves only as the wearable device
holder. The Oxford Dictionary defines wearable devices as a computer or other
electronic device, small and light enough to be worn or carried on one’s body [3].
Such intelligent electronic systems-on-chip generally consist of a set of micro-
controllers, sensors, actuators and communication components.
The digital revolution and the advent of mobile networks have played a crucial
role in the development of the wearable technology. Today’s wearable technolo-
gies, such as Bluetooth headsets, smart watches or smart goggles, enable people to
access data on Wi-Fi networks [1]. Wearable technologies mean new opportunities
in businesses development for new markets and data analytics. Indeed, this ubi-
quitous and pervasive wearable computing already extends the spectrum of appli-
cation domains such as home automation or surveillance to health care, education
and sports. In this context, personal data management, privacy by design in the
Internet of Things (IoT) era and cloud computing virtualization are key factors
that will determine how data collected from wearable devices could be used or
shared.
13.2
Wearable technology evolution
From the scientific or industrial revolution to the digital revolution, the evolution of
wearable technologies has undergone a dramatic transformation thanks to scientific
discoveries and user expectations.
Smart wearable devices incorporate sensors, actuators and micro-electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS) to collect and analyse information needed for activ-
ities such as sport, wellness, health, safety, surveillance or automation. However,
the wearable technology has a history of over 700 years and its evolution can be
followed on the Internet as INFOPGRAPHIC [4]. The most important innovations
in wearable technologies is presented in Table 13.1.
Today, wearable technologies refer to the integration of smart electronic
devices with different roles and locations in the human body:
●
Smart wearables can be head worn, such as Google Glass Ubiquitous computer
(augmented reality – Google Glass, virtual reality – 3D VR glass). Google
Glass uses Google applications, such as Google Now, Google Maps, Googleþ
and Gmail. Many companies developed others apps for facial recognition,
exercise, photo manipulation, translation, sharing, news and social networks
such as Facebook and Twitter.
●
Smart wearable devices can be worn on the wrist (smart watch Samsung [26],
smart band Huawei [27], smart bracelet [28] and smart ring MOTA [29]).
●
Smart wearable devices can be worn in shoes to map pressure and analyse gait
(GPS SmartSole – Figure 13.1(a); Sennopro app – Figure 13.1(b)).
316
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Table 13.1
Wearable technologies evolution
Year
Wearable device type
1510
Eyeglass is known as the first wearable device
implemented with convex lens technology [5,6].
Source: Municipality of
Bergen op Zoom, Netherlands
1510
In 1510 was developed the first wearable mechanical watch, named Nuremberg
Egg, by Peter Henlein. This clock with a cylindrical shape can work for 40 h [7].
1600
The smart rings history began in the seventeenth century, during the Qing dynasty
(1644–1911), when an Abacus Ring, with seven rods and seven beads on each
rod, was developed to help traders to make a quick computation [8].
1849
In the nineteenth century was invented the first hat with a ventilation device, the
Bonafide ventilating hat, to avoid the negative aspects generated by perspiration
and hair oil [9].
1907
In 1907, Julius Neubronner invented the aerial
photography technique called Pigeon photogra-
phy. Neubronner attached with several belts his
Pigeon Camera to homing pigeons to capture
aerial photographs of their flight [10].
Pigeon Camera [10]
1961
The first wearable computer to predict the roulette, Roulette Shoes, was developed
in 1961 [11].
1963
In 1963, Hugo Gernsback invented TV Glasses, providing a tiny screen for each
eye to display stereoscopic images. According to IEEE Spectrum, TV Glasses
weighed about 140 g and were based on small cathode-ray tubes that ran on
low-voltage currents from tiny batteries [12].
1977
By respecting the trend in 1975, associate a
calculator to any electronics, the first watch with
a calculator was the Pulsar Calculator Watch,
manufactured by Time Computer Inc. of
Lancaster, Pennsylvania, USA.
© Nigel Tout
www.vintagecalculators.com
(Continues)
Wearable health care
317

Table 13.1
(Continued)
Year
Wearable device type
1979
Sony Walkman, the first wearable music player containing a cassette (a magnetic
tape), was developed in 1979 by Sony [13].
1984
The first wearable gaming device, the NELSONIC space attackers’ watch, was
developed in 1984. Users could use two buttons to play the Space Invaders
game.
1989
Private Eye [14], a head-worn display, was
developed by Reflection Technology [Reflection
Tech]. The display was a 720  280 pixels
monochrome (red) monitor in a 3.5"  1.5" 
1.25" package.
Private Eye Display from
Reflection Technology (1989)
© Tavenner Hall
1990
In 1990, Sports Illustrated [15] developed the Sneaker Phone, a sports shoe
featuring a (wired) phone.
2000
LEVIS ICD jacket and Philips phone [16]. In 2000,
Philips Electronics NV and U.S. apparel maker
Levi Strauss & Co. developed a ringing jacket
with integrated electronics.
Image courtesy of Philips
Design Eindhoven
2002
The first Bluetooth headset, the Nokia HDW-1 [17],
was developed based on the Nokia’s proprietary
LPRF chipset.
© Microsoft Corporation
2006
A fitness tracker, the Nikeþ iPod [18], for time, distance and calories monitoring,
with a wireless system built into the Nikeþ footwear, was developed to easily
communicate with an iPod Nano and the Nike website.
2008
The FITBIT Classic [19], a wristband allowing users to follow the steps taken,
calories burned, activity intensity or sleep, was developed in 2008.
2013
In 2013 Google developed the Google Glass [20] which was a smartphone with
display glasses. There have been concerns about the user’s privacy and
headaches have been reported from prolonged use of the product.
2014
In 2014, the Adidas MiCoach Fit Smart bracelet [21] was developed to monitor
fitness among other activities. These bracelets allow users to follow heart rate,
walking speed, sleep patterns and UV exposure.
2014
Solar-powered Tommy Hilfiger jacket [22], a garment with solar panels integrated
to obtain a wearable charger for gadgets.
2015
By 2015, Apple developed the Apple Watch [23]. This watch allows users to
monitor their physical state, control TV and use entertainment applications.
(Continues)
318
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

●
Smart wearable can be worn throughout the body as exoskeleton [32,33] for
wearer assistance in movements with changes affecting the centre of gravity
(Figure 13.2). The exoskeleton can supplement 20% of natural power. This
device helps individuals with complete paralysis or weak forearm strength. It
helps patients learn how to step properly, to stand or move weights. The
exoskeleton provides a daily mobility, helps to walk upright and give access to
areas and buildings that, unfortunately, do not have ramps. The device facil-
itates to perform tasks such as cooking, certain workbench activities or
reaching objects in high places. The exoskeleton increases independence,
which is a crucial and the most important factor. The robotic exoskeleton can
return the movement towards the hips and knees of the wearer with small
motors attached to standard orthotics. Wearers can control the movement of
each leg and walk up to the speed of 1.1 miles per hour by pushing buttons
embedded in a pair of crutches. The robotic exoskeleton is powered by a
Table 13.1
(Continued)
Year
Wearable device type
2015
The RINGLY [24], a smart ring connected to a
phone via Bluetooth, is an extension of the
smartphone that alerts or notifies users via
vibrations or light displays.
© 2017 RINGLY
2015–
2016
Oculus Rift & 3D VR Glass [25] are virtual reality tools that allow users to enter
virtual reality games.
(a)
(b)
Figure 13.1
Smart wearable for foot analysis. (a) Smart GPS tracking device
based on GPS antenna, cellular board and battery [30]  GTX Corp.
(b) Sennopro app for gait analysis [31], Sennotech Co. Ltd.
Source: sennotech.com
Wearable health care
319

backpack battery capable of feeding the exoskeleton for 8 h. An app can be
used to track the patient’s walking data.
●
A smart strap for heart rate monitoring, such as the Garmin strap [34], Amp-
Strip or FitLinxx [35], can be bonded and worn throughout the day. Smart
belts such as BIOPAC (Figure 13.3(a, b)) also provide respiration rhythm
recordings [36].
Figure 13.2
Robotic exoskeleton Ekso Bionic GT [33].  Ekso Bionics
(a)
(b)
Figure 13.3
Belt for respiration rhythm recording BIOPAC [36].  BIOPAC. (a)
BIOPAC manikin testing in laboratory; (b) BIOPAC human testing
320
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Wearable technologies are also electronic products that can be worn inside the
human body as invasive electronic devices, for example, the pacemaker (Fig-
ure 13.4) with an autonomous power source based on vibrational energy harvesting
(piezo-MEMS energy harvester) [37–39].
Wearable devices can be integrated into clothing or worn as an accessory
(smartphones), for example:
●
Hexoskin (Figure 13.5): A Bluetooth shirt monitoring physical activities
(pedometer-3D axis accelerometer), heart rate and breathing rate (Carre´
Technologies Inc., Canada) [40a,40b].
●
Polo Tech shirt (Ralph Lauren & OMsignal, Canada) to monitor heart rate,
breathing rate, calories and physical activities (a 3D axis accelerometer) [41].
●
hWearTM (HealthWatch Ltd., Israel and MedTech Edge, Australia): A revo-
lutionary digital heart-sensing garment incorporating textile-interwoven elec-
trodes for a continuous monitoring with hospital-quality (15-lead ECGs,
electrocardiogram representation of the heart’s electrical activity recorded
from electrodes on the body surface) [42].
●
WEMU: A smart clothing system and a companion app for epilepsy detection
(Bioserenity, France) [43].
●
Smart shirt LOBIN: A physiological monitoring device with integrated ECG,
accelerometer and thermometer (Figure 13.6).
Wearable technology involves mobility, autonomy and Internet connectivity
(allowing data exchange between Internet applications and devices). The most
promising of wearable devices is the wireless patch for health monitoring. The goal
Figure 13.4
Pacemaker Medtronic, reproduced with permission of Medtronic,
Inc.  Medtronic Inc
Wearable health care
321

of the wearable patch is to increase the mobility and comfort of patients while using
the cloud for data storage and analysis. The patch is a complete platform that, in
addition to be wireless, can be used for heart rate, respiration rhythm, ECG, glucose
and activity monitoring [45]. The TempTraq wearable patch (Figure 13.7) is a 24-h
smart thermometer that senses, records and sends temperature warnings from a
child to a mobile device [46a]. There is also an ultra-thin wearable device capable
of transmitting data while being powered wirelessly via near-field communication
transmissions. Technological advances in electronics, such as the Graphene Field-
Effect Transistors embedded on a Scotch tape (Figure 13.8) [46b], will allow a new
approach of flexible electronics.
Researchers at Northwestern University have developed a wearable wireless
platform with integrated electronics for sweat analysis allowing patients to monitor
health without using a blood sample [47]. Another application, based on sweat
analysis by wearable microfluidic sensors, measures the alcohol level with a tem-
porary tattoo connected by a magnet to a flexible electronic circuit board
(a)
(b)
Integrated
heart
sensors
Integrated
activity
sensors
Integrated
respiration
sensors
View your data
Analyse your data
Figure 13.5
Hexoskin – Bluetooth shirt for physical activities monitoring
(pedometer-3D axis accelerometer), heart rate and breathing rate
( Carre´ Technologies Inc., Canada) [40a,40b]. (a) Shirt for
monitoring physical and physiological activity [40a]; (b) operating
principle [40b]
322
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Figure 13.6
Smart shirt with sensors (ECG, accelerometer, thermometer) and a
Wearable Data Acquisition Device (WDAD) for physiological
monitoring (LOBIN Project) [44] (under Creative Commons
Attribution licence)
Figure 13.7
A battery-free stretchable electronics (a temporary tattoo), powered
wirelessly by a smartphone, to help monitor health [46a].  The
authors, 2016, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science (distributed under a
Creative Commons Attribution Non-commercial License 4.0 (CC BY-
NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/)
Wearable health care
323

(Figure 13.9). When stuck to the skin, the device induces sweating, electro-
chemically detects the alcohol level and sends the data via Bluetooth to a mobile
device [48].
13.3
Healthcare perspectives for wearable devices
The interest in wearable technologies arises from control and monitoring needs in
the medical or fitness fields [49]. The integration of a microfluidic lab-on-chip into
a wearable device offers great potential for healthcare applications (monitoring,
bio- and chemical analysis). Microfluidic manufacturing techniques can be oriented
towards the fabrication of flexible microfluidic wearable structures of electrically
conductive elements embedded on soft and stretchable materials. These flexible
microfluidic wearable technologies can be used for biomedical sensing applica-
tions, such as IN-SITU sweat metabolites analysis, vital signs monitoring and gait
Figure 13.8
Graphene Field-Effect Transistors fabricated on the Scotch tape
[46b].  2015 Nature Publishing Group (under a Creative Commons
CC-BY licence)
Figure 13.9
Wearable microfluidic patch connected to a flexible electronic circuit
board [48]  2016, American Chemical Society
324
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

analysis [50]. In the future, wearable microfluidics will be used in active drug-
delivery patches, sensing and control by soft-robotics, and even artificial
implantable organs.
13.4
Algorithms dedicated to wearable technologies
Wearable devices require algorithms dedicated to the classification and analysis of
data sets collected from wearable sensors. From the hardware point of view, the
algorithms executed on the wearable device must be optimized to meet the memory
capacity, processing power and communication constraints (Figure 13.10).
The learning machine, pattern recognition method and neural networks will
provide data analysis, pattern recognition of different diseases and predictive
modelling. Google’s prediction algorithms such as Android Wear, Apple Watch,
Microsoft Health with Intelligence Engine and Atlas Wearable combine machine
learning algorithms and biometric data patterns recognition to improve health and
fitness performance. However, wearable devices, just like IoTs, generate an enor-
mous amount of data. The solution for managing this data volume is to use artificial
intelligence, such as machine learning algorithms that teach computers to make
predictions based on training data.
The wearable medical technology uses machine learning methods and algo-
rithms based on statistical methods applied in biomedicine (parametric and non-
parametric null hypothesis testing, linear and logistic regression, discriminant
analysis, principal components, factor analysis and cluster analysis) [51]. The
learning machine extends these algorithms to process a high volume of non-linear
wearable-sensor data. There are some studies on the use of the learning machine for
wearable sensors to monitor diseases such as Parkinson [51–53] and Huntington [54].
The wearable sensor can be defined as a function f(t) with values in the range [a,b].
Wearable requirements
(memory, 
processing speed, 
power, 
data exchange)
Sensors and peripherals
Signal processing
Monitoring application
Performance evaluation and optimization
Figure 13.10
Four-level wearable algorithms design
Wearable health care
325

Signals from sensors are continuous and should be sampled by using a discrete time
sampling frequency Fs according to the sampling interval T (13.1) [55].
Fe ¼ 1=T
(13.1)
To illustrate the use of wearable sensors, limitations and requirements, we will
present case studies of wearable devices developed to monitor:
●
temperature and humidity,
●
skin conductance and chemical composition of moisture and
●
human activities.
13.4.1
Case 1: wearable sensors for body temperature monitoring
Wearable devices for human body temperature monitoring are semiconductor-
based resistors that change its resistivity according to the applied temperature.
Fluctuations in body temperature depend on metabolic processes and heat absorp-
tion/dissipation in the external environment. The hypothalamus (Figure 13.11), the
human body temperature control system, reacts like an adjustable thermostat that
attempts to maintain the temperature in the range of 36.2–37.4 C. The human body
responds to the environment when parameters such as humidity or temperature
vary, and to internal variations in the human body caused by diseases such as
hypothermia, hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia [55,56].
The human body temperature (TB) may be measured using
●
invasive methods based on thermocouples, thermistors or polymer optical fibre
macro-bend sensors that evaluate tissue temperature [55,56]; and
●
non-invasive methods based on thermometers, infrared thermography or sen-
sors measuring skin temperature [55,56].
The control system of the human body, the hypothalamus [55], reacts by ordering
to increase or decrease the temperature to maintain the body temperature constant
according to the following processes:
●
The hypothalamus activates the heat production mechanism (thermogenesis)
when the body temperature (TB) is too low (TB < 36.2 C).
 
Peripheral
receptors
Hypothalamus
Central receptors
Thermogenesis
Thermolysis
Heat conservation
Mechanisms
Central Control Unit
Receivers
Figure 13.11
Human control system for heat regulation [56]
326
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

●
The hypothalamus activates the heat reduction mechanism (thermolysis) when
the body temperature (TB) is too high (TB > 37.4 C).
●
The hypothalamus activates the mechanism to preserve heat (heat conserva-
tion) when the human body temperature (TB) is low (TB < 36.8 C).
The temperature of the human body is transferred through the tissues. To
explain these transfers, the following mathematical models have been developed
[55,56]:
●
the Pennes model,
●
the model developed by T.E. Cooper and G.J. Trezek and
●
the Zhu vascular model.
The Pennes model (1948) is based on the effects of the blood flow. The starting
assumptions are as follows:
●
Heat transfers are made through the layers of the human body (tissue)
(Figure 13.12).
●
The source of heat is isotropic.
●
The heat transfer is proportional to the blood flow rate and the difference
between body and local tissue temperatures.
The Pennes mathematical model is used to calculate the steady state of temperature
distribution in the human arm to describe the influence of the blood flow on the
tissue temperature. The Pennes model is based on parameters such as tissue density,
tissue heat, tissue temperature, tissue thermal conductivity, arterial blood tem-
perature, metabolic heat, blood density and the rate of blood perfusion as described
by the bio-heat Equation (13.2):
rtiCti
@Tti
@Tt
¼ rktirTti þ rblCblWbl Tart  Tti
ð
Þ þ qm
(13.2)
Bone
Muscle
Fat
Derm
Epidermis
Skin surface
Figure 13.12
Human body layers for heat transfer [56]
Wearable health care
327

where @Tti
@t ¼ rate of temperature variation; rti ¼ tissue density; Cti ¼ specific heat
of tissue; Tti ¼ temperature of tissue; kti ¼ thermal conductivity of tissue; Tart ¼
temperature of arterial blood; qm ¼ metabolic heat; rbl ¼ blood density; Cbl ¼
temperature of arterial blood and Wbl ¼ perfusion rate of blood.
The tissues of the human body that influence the skin temperature are depicted
in Figure 13.12.
The model developed by T.E. Cooper and G.J. Trezek begins with the fol-
lowing assumptions:
●
There is a strong dependence between metabolic processes and heat
production.
●
The thermal conductivity of the tissue k is calculated based on the tissue
density r according to its composition (13.3)
k ¼ r  103ð0:628 fwater þ 0:117 fproteins þ 0:231 flipidesÞ
W=m-K
½

(13.3)
In this model, the specific heat of the tissues (Cp) depends on the fractions (f ) of
the components (water, protein and lipids) (13.4):
Cp ¼ 4200 fwater þ 1090 fproteins þ 2300 flipides
J=kg-K
½

(13.4)
where the tissue density r is influenced by the fractions of the components
(13.5):
r ¼
1
fwater
1000 þ fproteins
1540 þ flipides
815
kg=m3
(13.5)
The Zhu model is a vascular model of heat transfer across tissues considering that
the blood vessels are covered by tissue.
A common smart wearable device for monitoring bio signals (temperature and
humidity) is based on a platform integrating analogue/digital sensors, micro-
controllers and communication devices. To use analogue sensors in a software
application, the analogue signals are converted to digital ones using an analogue-to-
digital converter [55,56] (Figure 13.13). The incoming signals (temperature and
humidity values) are generally de-noised by applying a filter that eliminates resi-
dual values (Figure 13.14).
To eliminate the residual values and thus obtain correct ones, the signal
obtained from the analogue temperature sensor was de-noised by applying a filter
(Figure 13.14).
In Figure 13.15, the sampling frequency fs [Hz] of the input signals (13.6) is
represented to show the different repeating patterns. Since the temperature values
do not fluctuate per second or per minute, it is also important to have readings at
optimum frequencies in order to preserve the battery power of the portable device.
The disadvantages of using a unique sampling frequency are that the results do
not always show significant variations in some physiological parameters and that
328
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

many values are repetitive. One solution is to adjust the sampling frequency to the
physiological parameter characteristics and to reduce the interval by deleting
identical repetitive values (Figures 13.16–13.18), as in the Hadoop MapReduce
framework [55] for sensors logs.
In Figure 13.16, the patient data sources represent the patient database, the
sensor logs represent the numerical values collected from biomedical sensors. Hive
is used for data management, WEB server log analysis and complex query execu-
tion. Hadoop can handle huge volumes of sensor data and IoT sensors. Indeed, in
the case of very large populations (about 1000 patients or more), the speed of
medical decision-making is important, in this case data parallel processing will
become necessary [56]. Biomedical data is stored in a public cloud and the,
Process
Thermoregulation
Physical size
Analogical signal
Digital signal
Computer
Virtualization
Signal
conditioning
A/D
conversion
Temperature
Humidity
Transducers
Figure 13.13
Thermoregulation process view and sensors monitoring [56]
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
20
40
60
Original and de-noised signals
De-noised signal
Original signal
80
100
120
100
80
60
40
20
Figure 13.14
De-noising of the temperature signal (the original signal in light
grey and the filtered one in dark grey)
Wearable health care
329

0
Temperature
Input and output signals
fs = 10 Hz
fs = 2 Hz
fs = 1 Hz
fs = 0.6 Hz
fs = 0.5 Hz
24
26
28
30
32
Voltage
5
Time
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
5.4
5.2
5.6
5.8
6
Figure 13.15
Discretization of the continuous signal (input – voltage signal,
output – temperature signal) as a function of the sampling
frequency fs
Hortonworks Data platform
Data source
Load
Refine
Visualization
Load
Apache Sqoop
(data transfer)
Hive, Pig
Map Reduce
Use
-.xsl file
-graphic
visualiza-
tion
Hive
Batch
Interactive
HCatalog
Apache Ambari
Data
Processing
Apache Flume
(collect, aggregate,
move)
Patients
Sensors
logs
Figure 13.16
Hadoop MapReduce platform for medical sensors [56]. It uses two
data sources: patients and sensors registers. The sensed values are
refined according to the characteristics of the sensor log (data
processing) and the MapReduce process collects the critical values
330
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

discretized and de-noised, continuous signals are mapped using the Hadoop
MapReduce (Figures 13.16–13.18) to obtain the values corresponding to the critical
event patterns (Figure 13.17) [56].
MapReduce is a programming model for data processing using mapping and
reduction methods. It can reduce the interval of solutions by removing repetitive
values. The raw sensors logs (records), collected in the Hadoop Distributed
File System, are obtained by using Apache Flume (service to collect, aggregate
and move large amount of sensor data). The HCatalog is a table storage manager
that allows users to store data and publish data analyses. HCatalog provides read
and write interfaces to MapReduce.
13.4.2
Case 2: wearable sensors for human skin conductance
response
In the case of patient monitoring, the skin conductance and the moisture chemical
composition can offer a lot of information about the pathology and disease
behaviour. According to the MIT, the GSR (skin-conductance response or electro-
dermal response) is the phenomenon that the skin momentarily becomes a better
conductor of electricity when an external or internal stimuli is physiologically
awakening. Indeed, the sympathetic skin response is a potential generated by the
sweat glands of the skin.
Input list
Mapping function
Output list
Figure 13.17
Mapping function for the input list (digital values of the sensors)
and output list (critical value from sensor parameters) [56]. The
values are selected according to reference parameters
Mapper
Reducer
Writer
Output data
Sensors
Input data
Figure 13.18
MapReduce for biomedical sensors [56]. The map process involves
aligning the sensed values (input data) with the reference
parameters; on this basis, the reduction step will follow with the
reduction of the amount of critical data (output data)
Wearable health care
331

The bioelectric conductivity of the skin can be monitored by measuring the
galvanic skin response and reflecting the change of bioelectric properties. The
conductivity that depends on multiple parameters such as the degree of stress or
the disease is directly related to the amount of moisture in the skin. The skin
moisture is also affected by the mechanism of heat dissipation from the body sur-
face to the environment [56,57]. This is a complex, multi-parameter system that can
misrepresent the interpretation of measured values. In order to clearly identify the
causes, data mining multivariate analysis (a K-means clustering technique) was
used for the conductance analysis of the skin on the Exosomatic method [56,57].
The K-means method (Figure 13.19) is based on a partitioning algorithm where
each cluster is represented by its epicentre. After random assignments during
initialization, the local optimal values of the sensors can be found and only
important values associated with the centroid cluster will be selected.
13.4.3
Case 3: wearable sensors for human activity monitoring
The human activity recognition (HAR) can be carried out using wearable sensors
(accelerometers [58], gyroscopes) or cameras (Kinect) allowing the detection of
events, such as the walking and fall of a person. Scientific papers refer to HAR as a
monitoring activity with potential use for daily living activity or health care
[59,60]. HAR software applications combined to wearable (gyroscope, accel-
erometers) or external (Kinect) sensors can follow the human behaviour, especially
static and dynamic postures. HAR may need wearable medical sensors (such as
pulse or heart rate meter) and combine its information with others, including those
mentioned earlier (temperature, skin moisture, accelerometers and gyroscopes)
when it comes to health care, fitness and even elderly assistance (regular home
help, for instance, prevention or detection of falls).
Skin moisture values
[population]
First partition
(allocation of values to K initial clusters)
Order sensor values
(assign items to the appropriate cluster 
centroid)
Repeat step 2 until there is no need for 
reassignments
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Figure 13.19
K-means procedure for skin moisture monitoring with wearable
sensors [56]
332
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

HAR algorithms are based on machine learning, such as the Random Forest
classifier (which can achieve good results with classification accuracy up to 94%),
incremental learning [61], supervised (based on hidden Markov models [62], naive
Bayes networks, decision trees [63], K-nearest neighbours [62,64] or support vector
machines [62,63]) and unsupervised learning algorithms [65]. An important
application of HAR using incremental learning algorithms is robotics. The self-
learning of autonomous robots will offer new possibilities for developing the
cognition of the robot [66,67], necessary for the creation of robotic companions.
Considering the possibility of having several wearable wireless sensors, some stu-
dies refer to a distributed recognition framework for classifying continuous human
actions using a low-bandwidth wearable motion sensor network, called distributed
sparsity classifier [58]. This algorithm classifies human actions using a default
training set.
In this context, we propose a HAR model (Figure 13.20) for wearable remote
sensors based on a learning machine algorithm for local classification (selection
and ordering of human actions according to predetermined rules) assisted by cloud
reference sets and applications. The role of the machine learning algorithm is to
optimally and automatically recognize human actions (e.g. walking or falling) from
complex selection rules and data sets. Local classification means collecting
patients’ actions after having selected and ordered the sensed data according to
predetermined training sets and rules.
Sensors
(accelerometers, gyroscopes)
Signal conditioning
Amplifier
Band pass filter
Notch filter
AD
Microcontroller
Analog signal
Digital signal
Bluetooth
A/D conversion
Aggregators
Learning machine
Classification
Private cloud
Anonymization
Public cloud
Wireless
communication
Figure 13.20
Wearable device model for HAR (note that wireless communication
using Bluetooth is shown as an example). Learning and
classification machines can be local or cloud based according
to the training/classification data set used
Wearable health care
333

Remote wearable sensing combined with local processing will be expanded
into cloud operations in the future. After anonymization (transformation by gen-
eralization with k-anonymity or differential privacy models), the collected data can
be used for data analytics in the public cloud. This cloud extension will have to be
carefully studied since the advantage of sharing training and reference sets can be
detrimental regarding the privacy of personal data or the intellectual property
rights.
13.5
Wearable: user needs and expectations
Thanks to IoT technologies, it is now possible to envision HAR architectures
interacting with wearable wireless sensors. The current generation is captivated by
the cloud and smartphone applications supporting daily activities. Thanks to the
number of sensors already available in smartphones and other smart appliances,
today’s users have the means to monitor and quantify physical activities. Powerful
algorithms even offer activity recognition (facial recognition or posture detection).
However, according to the study of Deborah Bothun, the interest is centred on
wearable devices such as the fitness bracelet and smart watches [68] and less for
smart glasses or clothes (Figure 13.21).
Opportunities for the wearable technology still exist, starting with domestic
animal’s surveillance (location tracking and vital signs), children (location tracking
and physiological monitoring) and elderly people activities. Indeed, this evolution
will generate future demands, especially among the elderly. Indeed, the lifespan
increases as well as the importance of age-related diseases. Thus, wearable sensors
will be needed not only to monitor activity or vital signs (elderly care or home
surveillance to prevent falls and accidents), but also to help outdoors (e.g. seniors
with Alzheimer’s disease).
In the future, user expectations and needs will contribute to the development of
high-performance, safe and useful wearable products. From a vendor’s perspective
wearable devices should incorporate six technical features: user friendliness,
usability, accuracy, portability, security, safety and privacy. However, technical
and aesthetic characteristics of wearable devices are also important for end users.
Indeed, user expectations for wearable devices are
12 % Smart clothing
45 % Fitness band
27 % Smart watch
15 % Smart glasses
14 % Smart video/photo device
Figure 13.21
Users’ interest in wearable smart appliances
334
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

●
comfortable wearable devices;
●
easy-to-wear and user-friendly interfaces (GUI, menu and controls);
●
being small and to not disturb the comfort sensation when wearing such a
device;
●
battery life;
●
user-friendly automatic wireless connection;
●
have data privacy in order to not disclose sensitive data (e.g. postal code,
name, place, age, sex, social security number);
●
safety devices with built-in safety measure;
●
be washable and hydrophobic; and
●
exposure to lower radiation (mobile phones and digital wireless systems
produce electromagnetic radiation in the microwave range, 450–2700 MHz)
[69].
13.6
Future wearable challenges
According to IMS in 2016, the value of wearable devices sold was $6 billion [70]
and market preferences were for products in the health, medical, fitness and well-
ness sectors. Wearable devices capable of tracking and sending biomedical data are
continuous glucose meters from Abbott & Medtronic and activity monitors from
Fitbit, Adidas, Nike, Garmin, Polar and Suunto [70].
According to the Statistica report, the global market for wearable devices
increased by 172% in 2015, with Fitbit as the market leader. Fitbit, Apple and Co.
delivered 28.8 million in 2014 and 78.1 million wearable devices in 2015 [71].
According to ABI Research forecasts, about 80 million wearable wireless fitness
sensors have been shipped in 2016 and 170 million for fitness and health should
be shipped by 2017 [72]. Studies conducted by IHM Mems & Sensors predict
that in 2019 the number of shipped wearable devices will reach 470 million of
units [73].
The wearable devices ecosystem contains many companies that already
develop software or components for wearable devices. The IDTechEx marketing
report shows that these wearable devices are electronics products designed to be
worn on the person. In this report, they predict that the market growth will be 10%
per year to more than $40 billion in 2018, but then accelerate to 23% to more than
$100 billion by 2023, before slowing to 11% to reach more than $150 billion by
2026 [74] (Figure 13.22). The overall wearable technology will focus on smart
watches, fitness trackers, smart goggles, smart clothing, medical devices and ear-
phones, hearing aids and basic electronic watches.
Technically speaking, the main concerns regarding wearable sensors and
associated technology are related to the required processing power, energy con-
sumption, data congestion and data privacy. Smart algorithms must be lightweight
to avoid outsourcing processing on more powerful machines and thus increase
energy consumption in data exchange. As with patch wearable sensors, devices
must be cheap, small, without or with limited power consumption, allowing them to
Wearable health care
335

remain in operation for several days or even years. Thus, future wearable tech-
nologies will have to overcome eight major challenges:
●
low-power, low-speed wireless communication;
●
lightweight processing algorithms;
●
low-energy consumption, energy-harvesting devices or passive sensors;
●
data analysis processes;
●
security and privacy of IoT data;
●
safety features (exploits security vulnerabilities can lead to physical security;
●
better multi-hook processing infrastructure; and
●
lower costs.
The market value of the produced data can give rise to multiple privacy and
safety issues. Indeed, according to report produced by Capgemini [75], the top four
challenges facing life insurance companies to use wearable devices are
●
legal and privacy,
●
data management,
●
better infrastructure for a huge amount of data (storage and transfer) and
●
reduce costly upfront costs.
By taking advantage of the IOT era, continuous monitoring offers advantages
to application areas other than home automation. Wearable devices connected to
IoT will allow patients and medical staff
2015
0.0
20.0
40.0
60.0
80.0
100.0
Total number of units/billions
Total revenue/USD billions
120.0
140.0
160.0
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
Total revenue (USD/billions)
Total units sold/billions
10%
23%
9%
Figure 13.22
IDTechEx report for wearable market dynamics [74].  IDTechEx,
report ‘‘Wearable Technology 2016–2026’’ (www.IDTechEx.com/
wearable)
336
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

●
continuous monitoring of physiological parameters at home,
●
improve medical assistance and
●
improve knowledge of diseases.
Wearable medical monitoring is important for high-risk factor patients
(elderly, people with disabilities or children). However, future wearable devices
should minimize
●
security risks (regarding medical devices used for monitoring and connected
through IoT: unauthorized access to personal data) and
●
privacy risks (collection of sensitive personal information).
Moreover, the use of wearable sensors in everyday activities could lead to
serious safety issues due to their small size and the limited processing power
available, which prevents encryption and security measures [76,77].
13.7
Conclusions
Biomedical signal analysis is very important for monitoring the behaviour of dis-
eases in chronic patients (diabetes, cardiovascular disease, Parkinson’s disease,
Alzheimer’s disease) or health conditions in sports activities. However, as indicated
in the case studies, multiple data sources are required to efficiently provide accurate
information or to identify particular patterns. Data from wearable medical sensors,
such as temperature, must be correlated with cardiovascular surveillance to provide
a true picture of the causes and effects of certain diseases [56].
The human body should also be considered in providing models based on
measurable parameters that help predict or identify critical behaviours. For exam-
ple, the skin humidity allows the body to set the optimum temperature for diseases
or environmental conditions. This is a measurable parameter and several models
can be proposed to represent the regulation mechanism. In this context, the Hadoop
framework [56] was also presented as a solution to virtualization and data analysis
for predictive modelling of health.
Some considerations regarding data analysis and classification and prediction
methods follow:
●
For the analysis and modelling of data, machine learning algorithms (decision
tree, Bayesian techniques and multivariate analysis, clustering methods, e.g.
K-means [55]) are often used.
●
Multivariate analysis reduces the time required for data classification and
analysis.
●
Using clustering methods, the parameters are grouped into classes, which
facilitates the development of search and prediction models.
●
The advantages of using the K-means clustering method are the method is sim-
ple, understandable and the elements are automatically assigned to the clusters.
●
The disadvantages of the K-means method are it stops at a local optimum and
is sensitive to outliers.
Wearable health care
337

Wearable technologies mean new opportunities in businesses development for
new markets and data analytics. Personal data management, privacy by design in
the IoT era and cloud computing virtualization will guide how companies will use the
data collected from wearable devices. Thanks to IoT technologies, it is now possible to
envision HAR architectures interacting with wearable wireless sensors. The current
generation is captivated by the cloud and smartphone applications supporting daily
activities. Thanks to the number of sensors already available in smartphones and other
smart appliances, today’s users have the means to monitor and quantify physical
activities. In the future, user expectations and needs will contribute to the development
of high-performance, safe and useful wearable products.
Acknowledgements
The Authors would like to acknowledge the IC1303 COST Action AAPELE in
stimulating and supporting the topics presented in this chapter.
References
[1]
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/w/wearable-technology.asp#ixzz4RqrRs
GPA [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[2]
http://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/wearable [accessed 16 Dec
2016]
[3]
https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/wearable [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[4]
http://www.visualcapitalist.com/the-history-of-wearable-technology [acces-
sed 19 Dec 2016]
[5]
http://www.antiquespectacles.com/rivet_spectacles/actual/actual.htm
[acces-
sed 19 Dec 2016]
[6]
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/470415123555257496/ [accessed 16 Dec 2016]
[7]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Henlein_Taschenuhr.jpg [accessed 19 Dec
2016]
[8]
http://fashionablygeek.com/jewelry/the-nerdiest-ring-of-the-17th-century
[accessed 16 Dec 2016]
[9]
http://www.ernestjournal.co.uk/blog/2015/4/1/ventilating-hat [accessed 19
Dec 2016]
[10]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pigeon_photography [accessed 18 Dec 2016]
[11]
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/book/the-encyclopedia-of-
human-computer-interaction-2nd-ed/wearable-computing [accessed 19
Dec 2016]
[12]
http://spectrum.ieee.org/geek-life/history/the-man-who-invented-vr-goggles-
50-years-too-soon [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[13]
https://www.extremetech.com/computing/110543-the-rise-and-fall-of-the-
sony-empire [accessed 16 Dec 2016]
[14]
http://wcc.gatech.edu/exhibition [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
338
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

[15]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shoe_phone#/media/File:Sneakerphone.
PNG [accessed 6 Jan 2017]
[16]
http://www.vhmdesignfutures.com/project/192 [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[17]
https://blogs.windows.com/devices/2012/02/03/all-ears-a-pictorial-history-of-
bluetooth-headsets-part-1/#lDw57QcxhlV8rhFy.97 [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[18]
Carter D. M., Money Games – Profiting from the Convergence of Sports
and Entertainment, Stanford University Press, USA, 2011; pp. 135–138.
[19]
http://oktrackme.com/fitness-tracking/fitbit [accessed 16 Dec 2016]
[20]
http://www.nowhereelse.fr/lunettes-google-glass-support-verres-correcteurs-
91809 [accessed 18 Dec 2016]
[21]
http://urbanwearables.technology/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Adidas-
MiCoach-Fit-Smart-fitness-tracker.jpg [accessed 20 Mar 2017]
[22]
http://www.ecouterre.com/tommy-hilfigers-solar-powered-jacket-will-charge-
your-phone-on-the-go/tommy-hilfiger-solar-panel-jacket-5 [accessed 19 Dec
2016]
[23]
http://applenapps.com/feature/expect-apple-2015-apple-watch#.WHwLNx
FEirQ [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[24]
https://ringly.com [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[25]
https://www3.oculus.com/en-us/rift [accessed 14 Dec 2016]
[26]
http://www.samsung.com/us/mobile/wearables/smartwatches/samsung-gear-
s-at-t-charcoal-black-sm-r750azkaatt [accessed 10 Dec 2016]
[27]
http://www.banggood.com/SH01-Bluetooth-4_0-Pedometer-Sleep-Monitor
ing-Calorie-Counter-Smart-Watch-p-988300.html [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[28]
http://consumer.huawei.com/en/wearables/talkband-b2/index.htm [accessed
19 Dec 2016]
[29]
https://www.mota.com/doi-smart-ring [accessed 10 Dec 2016]
[30]
http://www.gpssmartsole.com/gps-smart-sole.php [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[31]
http://sennostore.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/smart-insole.png [acces-
sed 20 Dec 2016]
[32]
http://www.idigitaltimes.com/robot-exoskeletons-are-more-military-iron-
man-suits-456490 [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[33]
https://www.insiderfinancial.com/ekso-bionics-holdings-inc-otcmktsekso-
presents-ahead-of-near-term-catalysts/116224/ [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[34]
http://sportolympe.com/produit/garmin-ceinture-cardiaque-hrm3-premium
[accessed 14 Dec 2016]
[35]
https://iq.intel.co.uk/wearables-smart-clothes-hearables-sleepables-stickies
[accessed 18 Dec 2016]
[36]
https://www.biopac.com/knowledge-base/respiration-recording
[accessed
20 Dec 2016]
[37]
http://www.smart-memphis.eu [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[38]
https://healthmanagement.org/c/imaging/news/medtronic-launches-advisa-
mri-pacemaker-system [accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[39]
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/007369.htm [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[40a]
http://www.legeeksportif.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/cloud.png [acces-
sed 19 Dec 2016]
Wearable health care
339

[40b]
https://cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/0284/7802/files/Hexoskin-Indiegogo-Page-
Images-Data_aab86c55-9ed2-4f64-b0b5-a9e5ff2a707f_grande.jpg?v¼14696
68976 [accessed 18 Dec 2016]
[41]
http://www.ecouterre.com/ralph-laurens-biometric-sensing-polo-tech-shirt-
now-on-sale/ralph-lauren-smart-polo-tech-shirt-6 [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[42]
http://medtechedge.com [accessed 14 Dec 2016]
[43]
http://www.iphoneness.com/cool-finds/wemu-smart-clothing [accessed 16
Dec 2016]
[44]
Custodio V., Herrera F. J., Lo´pez G. and Moreno J. I., ‘A review on
architectures and communications technologies for wearable health-mon-
itoring systems’, Sensors Journal, 2012; vol. 12, issue 10: pp. 13927–
13928.
[45]
http://www.nxp.com/applications/solutions-for-the-iot-and-adas/smart-con
nected-solutions-for-the-iot/smart-cities-in-the-age-of-iot/healthcare-medical/
wearable-wireless-healthcare-patch: WEARABLE-WIRELESS-PATCH
[accessed 19 Dec 2016]
[46a]
Kim J., Salvatore G. A., Araki H., et al., ‘Battery-free, stretchable opto-
electronic systems for wireless optical characterization of the skin’, Science
Advances, 2016; vol. 2, no. 8: pp. 3–4.
[46b]
Chung Y., Kim H. H., Lee S., et al., ‘Ubiquitous Graphene Electronics on
Scotch Tape’, 2015; Nature Publishing Group, Scientific Reports 5, Article
number 12575: pp. 2.
[47]
Koh A., Kang D., Xue Y., et al., ‘A soft, skin-mounted microfluidic device
captures microliter volumes of sweat and quantitatively measures bio-
chemical markers by colorimetric analysis’, Science Translational Medi-
cine, 2016; vol. 8, issue 366: pp. 366ra165.
[48]
Kim J., Jeerapan K. J., Imani S., et al., ‘Noninvasive alcohol monitoring
using a wearable tattoo-based iontophoretic-biosensing system’, ACS
Sensors, 2016; vol. 1, issue 8: pp. 1011–1019.
[49]
https://www.digitalpulse.pwc.com.au/infographic-wearable-health/ [acces-
sed 18 Dec 2016]
[50]
Yeo J. C., LIM K., Lim C. T., ‘Emergence of microfluidic wearable tech-
nologies’, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Lab Chip Journal, 2016;
vol. 16, issue 21: pp. 4082–4090.
[51]
Kubota K. J., Chen J. A., Little M. A., ‘Machine learning for large-scale
wearable sensor data in Parkinson’s disease: concepts, promises, pitfalls,
and futures’, Movement Disorders Journal, 2016; vol. 31, issue 9:
pp. 1314–1326.
[52]
Zhan A., Little M. A., Harris D. A., et al., ‘High frequency remote mon-
itoring of Parkinson’s disease via smartphone: platform overview and
medication response detection’, CoRR Journal, 2016; vol. abs/1601.00960:
pp. 1–12.
[53]
Silva de Lima A. L., Hahn T., de Vries N. M. et al., ‘Large-scale wearable
sensor deployment in Parkinson’s patients: the Parkinson @Home Study
340
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Protocol’, Ed. Eysenbach G., JMIR Research Protocols Journal, 2016; vol. 5,
issue 3: e172.
[54]
Andrzejewski K. L., Dowling A. V., Stamler D., et al., ‘Wearable sensors
in Huntington disease: a pilot study journal of Huntington’s disease’, 2016;
vol. 5, issue 2: pp. 199–206.
[55]
Aileni R. M., Pasca S., Strungaru R., ‘Big data predictive analytics for bio-
heat transfer modelling’, ROLCG 2016 Conference Proceedings, 2016;
Bucharest, Romania
[56]
Aileni R. M., ‘Theoretical and experimental contributions to the monitoring
of vital parameters by using intelligent control systems based on sensors
integrated and Cloud Computing service’, Doctoral Thesis supervised by
Prof. Strungaru R.
[57]
Aileni R. M., Valderrama A. C., Pasca S., Strungaru R., ‘Sympathetic skin
response analysis using exosomatic method, biomedical sensors and clus-
tering technique’, International Conference Proceedings ROLCG, 2016;
Bucharest, Romania
[58]
Yang A. Y., Jafari R., Sastry S. S., Bajcsy R., ‘Distributed recognition of
human actions using wearable motion sensor networks’, Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Smart Environments, 2009; vol. 1, issue 2: pp. 103–115.
[59]
Jiang W., Yin Z., ‘Human activity recognition using wearable sensors by
deep convolutional neural networks’, Proceedings of the 23rd ACM inter-
national conference on Multimedia, Brisbane, Australia, 2015; Series
MM’15: pp. 1307–1310.
[60]
Setiawan F., Prabono A. G., ‘Online human action recognition framework based
on wearable sensors’, Korean Computer Congress, At Jeju, South Korea, 2016.
[61]
Casale P., Pujol O., Radeva P., ‘Human activity recognition from accel-
erometer data using a wearable device’, Pattern Recognition and Image
Analysis: 5th Iberian Conference Proceedings, IbPRIA 2011; Springer
Berlin Heidelberg Publisher: pp. 289–296.
[62]
Lester J., Choudhury T., Borriello G., ‘A practical approach to recognizing
physical activities’, Pervasive Computing: 4th International Conference,
Dublin, Ireland, PERVASIVE 2006; Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1–16.
[63]
Ravi N., Dandekar N., Mysore P., Littman M., ‘Activity recognition from
accelerometer data’, Proceedings of the 17th Conference on Innovative
Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 2005; Vol. 3, Series IAAI’05:
pp. 1541–1546.
[64]
Brezmes T., Gorricho J. L., Cotrina J., ‘Activity recognition from accel-
erometer data on a mobile phone’, Proceedings of the 10th International
Work-Conference on Artificial Neural Networks: Part II: Distributed Com-
puting, Artificial Intelligence, Bioinformatics, Soft Computing, and Ambient
Assisted Living, Salamanca, Spain, 2009; Series IWANN ’09: pp. 796–799.
[65]
Wilde A. G., ‘An overview of human activity detection technologies for
pervasive systems’, Seminar paper, Master in Informatics, DIUF – Department
of Informatics University of Fribourg, Switzerland.
Wearable health care
341

[66]
Roggen D., Magnenat S., Waibel M., Troster G., ‘Designing and sharing
activity recognition systems across platforms: methods from wearable
computing’, IEEE RAM Journal, 2013; Special issue towards a www for
robots: pp. 1–10.
[67]
Shenga W., Dua J., Chenga Q., et al., ‘Robot semantic mapping through
human activity recognition: a wearable sensing and computing approach’,
Robotics and Autonomous Systems Journal, 2015; vol. 68: pp. 47–58.
[68]
http://www.recode.net/sponsored/12360190/we-have-seen-the-future-and-it-
is-wearable-infographic [accessed 18 Dec 2016]
[69]
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs193/en [accessed 16 Dec 2016]
[70]
http://www.mobihealthnews.com/18194/report-wearable-devices-a-6b-market-
by-2016 [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[71]
https://www.statista.com/chartoftheday/Wearable%20Technology [accessed
20 Dec 2016]
[72]
http://www.mobihealthnews.com/29532/abi-90m-wearable-devices-to-ship-
in-2014 [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[73]
Nissila¨ S., Bouchaud J., Boustany M., MEMS & Sensors for Wearables
Report, 2014; IHS Technology.
[74]
http://www.idtechex.com/research/reports/wearable-technology-2016-2026-
000483.asp [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[75]
https://www.capgemini.com/sites/default/files/resource/image/wearable_
devices_ig.jpg [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[76]
https://www.wearable-technologies.com/2014/02/wearable-technologies-
news-roundup-january [accessed 20 Dec 2016]
[77]
Garcia N., Sousa P., Trindade I., Rui M., Lucas J., ‘Smart clothing for
health-care’, in Telemedicine and E-Health Services, Policies and Applica-
tions: Advancements and Developments in Telemedicine, Rodrigues J.,
De la Torre Dı´az I., and Sainz de Abajo B. (Editors), IGI Global,
DOI:
10.4018/978-1-46660-888-7,
ISBN13:
9781466608887,
ISBN10:
1466608889, EISBN13: 9781466608894 (March 2012).
Biographies
Raluca Maria Aileni is Ph.D. Eng., has obtained in 2012 the Ph.D. degree in
Industrial Engineering at Technical University ‘‘Gheorghe Asachi’’ of Iasi. She is a
Ph.D. student at Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunication and Information
Technology, Politehnica University of Bucharest. She graduated Faculty of Textile
Leather and Industrial Engineering Management and Faculty of Computer Science.
In 2010 during her Ph.D., she obtained a research fellowship for doctoral studies at
ENSAIT – Lille University of Science and Technology, France, where she spe-
cialized in 3D modelling and simulation for textiles, using the Kawabata system,
2D-3D Design Concept for the design and simulation of technical textile articles.
In 2015, she obtained the Excellence Fellowship Grant for doctoral studies in
Belgium, Mons University.
342
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Sever Pasca is Director of Department of Applied Electronics and Information
Engineering, in Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunication and Information
Technology, Politehnica University of Bucharest. He is Doctor of Engineering in
Electronic and Telecommunications, Medical Informatics.
Prof. Dr. Eng. Sever Pasca designed and built 56 systems, programs, devices
and appliances for various contracts, within the framework of research projects in
collaboration or for self-endowment. He is the main designer of the only Chemilu-
minometer made in the Eastern Bloc (The Eastern Bloc was the former communist
states of Central and Eastern Europe). He has an important contribution in designing,
building and homologation of the prototype and of the fabrication of the complex
Stimulator for anaesthesia through electro-acupuncture, a device with two brevets.
Carlos Alberto Valderrama is Director of the Department of Electronics and
Microelectronics at the Polytechnic Faculty of the University of Mons in Belgium
since 2004. He obtained, in 1998, the Ph.D. degree in Microelectronics at the INPG
in Grenoble, France, the M.Sc. degree from the Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro (UFRJ-COPPE) in 1993 and electrical-electronics engineer graduated from
the National University of Cordoba (UNC), Argentina, in 1989. He was visiting
professor at two Brazilian universities, at the Federal University of Pernambuco
(UFPE) in 2004 and at the Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN) in
1998. Between 1999 and 2004, he was leading the Hardware-Flow team in CoWare
NV. (today acquired by Synopsys), Belgium. In 2009, he was responsible for the
creation of the spinoff Nsilition (http://www.nsilition.com/) resulting from
the IPfundry project funded by the Walloon Region. His primary research interests
include wireless communication, EDA and system level design of reconfigurable
embedded architectures. He has participated in more than 15 national and inter-
national research projects from the development of 4G chips to next-generation
tracking devices and software architectures for the IoT, satellite and multicore
industry, collaborating with partners such as Alcatel, STMicroelectronics, NXP and
Thales. He serves as technical reviewer and committee member of multiple jour-
nals and international conferences. His research activity is supported by more than
150 publications on international conferences, more than 10 books chapters and
more than 30 scientific journals. He is IEEE senior member since 2006.
Rodica Strungaru is Ph.D. coordinator and founder of Medical Electronics and
initiator of the first laboratory for biomedical research at ‘‘Politehnica’’ University
of Bucharest – Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and Information
Technology in Romania, 1973. Univ. Prof. Ph.D. Rodica Strungaru is an author of
the first book on Medical Electronics in Romania and invited professor at
Universitaet der Bundeswehr Muenchen, Institut fuer Physik, Medizinische Elek-
tronik Abteilung, between 1992 and 1993. She is coordinator of two Erasmus
(Socrates) agreements, with Technical University Eindhoven, The Netherlands, and
Universitaet der Bundeswehr, Munich, Germany.
Research and teaching areas are medical electronics and informatics, neural
networks, signal processing, and feature extraction and pattern recognition.
Wearable health care
343

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 14
Intelligent system for after-stroke home
rehabilitation
Nirvana Popescu1, Marian-Silviu Poboroniuc2, Decebal
Popescu1, D˘anut¸ Irimia2, and Alexandru Valer Grigoras¸3
Abstract
Rehabilitation robotics has become increasingly interested for the research com-
munity and addresses the study of different robotic systems having as the main goal
to restore the human functions for those people that suffers a stroke or a cere-
brovascular accident (CVA). In this case, the motor control is affected and also the
patient’s independent living. Many researchers studied different ways to recover
functional motor skills and they demonstrated that repetitive training may be
necessary to modify neural organization and to help patients in restoring a part of
their functions.
In this context, the chapter presents the design of an intelligent haptic robotic
glove prototype for the rehabilitation of the patients that have suffered a CVA. The
control system for a rehabilitation hand exoskeleton is presented and different
approaches are discussed. The performance of the control system is demonstrated
not only by the simulation, but also by a set of patients from the Rehabilitation
Hospital of Ias¸i (Romania). The main goal of the proposed system is to help the
patient to make a lot of rehabilitation exercises by themselves, at home.
14.1
Introduction
Nowadays, the cerebrovascular accidents (CVAs) represent a major cause of
functional disabilities in adults and cause death in most of the cases worldwide.
A CVA occurs when a blood clot blocks a blood vessel, making it impossible to
vascularize a brain area. If this happens, in just a few minutes, the nerve cells from
that specific brain area are affected and the part of the body which is controlled by
them loses its functionality [1]. That is why many researchers in rehabilitation
1Computer Science Department, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania
2‘‘Gheorghe Asachi’’ Technical University of Ias¸i, Romania
3‘‘Grigore T. Popa’’ Medicine and Pharmacy University of Ias¸i, Romania

robotics make efforts in offering scientific solutions that combines robotics,
mechatronics and medical rehabilitation. They address the research, development
and implementation of complex robotic systems that have as main goal repairing
the functional damages made by the stroke. The independent living of the patients
that have suffered a stroke or a CVA is completely lost since the motor skills are
affected. In the recent scientific literature, there are many studies showing that
intensive and repetitive training may be necessary to recover motor functionalities
by modifying the neural organization. On the other hand, there were several opi-
nions in the literature claiming that the repetitive training is not very efficient [2]
and other papers proved that there are some reduced improvements [3]. Despite of
these contradictory results, there are authors that certified the improvement of the
arm movement ability [4] due to the repetitive training.
The current healthcare system provides rehabilitation sessions after CVA in the
intensive care hospitals. Also, many techniques for evaluation of hand function-
ality, structure, physiological properties and characteristics have been developed,
the scientific community specialized on rehabilitation being aware of the impor-
tance of finding new solutions for after stroke upper limb rehabilitation. In this
context, neurorehabilitation by means of robotic therapy seems to be a promising
way that can offer better results than the conventional therapy [5]. Some research
advances [6–8] emphasized useful approaches of kinematic structures that try to
reproduce the human hand kinematics.
The upper limb training based on robotic systems can improve the function-
ality of an affected arm and most of the activities of a patient who had suffered a
stroke [9–12]. Varalta et al. have also investigated these aspects in [13]. They used
a rehabilitation glove system from Gloreha which provides fingers mobilization in
a solution controlled by the computer. The glove has some incorporated artificial
tendons that determine the fingers’ movements. The solution also provides a real-
time 3D animation on a computer monitor such that the patient can see each
movement of his hand on a monitor. They proved that the rehabilitation process
could be augmented by visualizing the movements, training in this way not only the
fingers’ motion but also the attention and the coordination.
The efficiency and feasibility of the hand rehabilitation based on a robotic
solution have been investigated by Vanoglio et al. [14]. In their studies, the authors
recruited a group of 27 hemiplegic stroke patients, dividing them randomly in a
target group and a control one. The first group received robotic-assisted hand
therapy and the second one was trained in a conventional rehabilitation way. The
results emphasized the feasibility of using a robotic glove for rehabilitation training
even if the recovery difference between the two groups were not significant.
The goal is challenging for all these projects because the human fingers and
hands are complex and used constantly. Many of the research efforts went to
developing active hand orthoses that significantly help in the daily after stroke
rehabilitation training and determining hand functions’ restauration [15]. To reduce
the control complexity and to ensure safety, some of the proposed solutions for
orthoses and training gloves use mechanical compliances such as underactuated
linkage or low-stiffness materials and structures [16]. The basic idea is to get a soft
346
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

glove, a more comfortable one and even from a material similar to the human skin,
if possible.
In the last years the neurofeedback seems to be the key in rehabilitation field
since it can facilitate neuroplasticity. A robust neurofeedback can be obtained by a
well-balanced control between a rehabilitation robotic systems and functional
electrical stimulation (FES). Thus, the movements of the affected hand can be
induced and the patients can easier make certain flexion or extension exercises.
FES is a technique that produces contraction to paralysed muscles determining a
functional reaction of the affected hand. In our recent research, we proved that the
combination of robotic rehabilitative systems and FES has an impressive impact
on the recovery persons that suffered a stroke [17,18]. The systems which
provide electrical stimulation to induce proper movements of the hand are called
neuroprostheses.
This chapter presents the concepts, design, control details and experiments of
a low-cost intelligent haptic robotic glove (IHRG) for the rehabilitation of the
patients that have suffered a CVA. All the results in different stages have been
shared to the scientific community interested in medical and engineering rehabili-
tation intelligent devices, but this chapter is a complete overview of the conceptual
findings and of the experimental results.
The IHRG looks like a glove that supports the activities of an affected hand
by using a control architecture for different rehabilitation exercises as flexion and
extension of fingers or grasping an object. IHRG is a medical device that com-
pensates a part of the lost functionality of the hand working in parallel to it. It is
easy to use and can be a helpful friend at home.
The IHRG system addresses a large range of patients with various functionality
problems. That is why different architectures of this system are presented in this
chapter. One of the solutions designed for the IHRG system addresses the patients
that can talk and the stroke did not affect their vocal capacity of pronouncing
words. In this particular case, the control design of the rehabilitation system regards
the voice recognition-based implementation that offers the facility of live interac-
tion between the system and the patient. The implementation is made based on
Arduino Mega 2560 which is a hardware platform that controls some actuators that
will support the patient to make different movements of the fingers like open or
close. The voice recognition algorithm is implemented by a Raspberry Pi hardware
platform. The patient should use a microphone in order to send vocal commands to
the rehabilitation system, being able to select to repeat only one exercise or to
follow a predefined programmed set of specific exercises.
A major contribution consists of using observers for this type of rehabilitation
system. All the analysed papers, some of them being included in the state of the art
of this work, have used velocity sensors for performance evaluation. Instead, we
used velocity observers and force observers for doing this [19].
Another novel approach of our system combines the robotic glove and the FES
technology. The originality of this approach consists in the perfect balance between
the haptic glove that coordinates the fingers’ movements and the electrical stimuli that
generate the muscle contraction. The IHRG system allows patients to move the
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
347

hand affected by stroke almost as good as the healthy hand. Detecting the patient’s
intention to move the affected hand, the rehabilitation exercises are performed
carefully and efficiently. The system has been experimented on healthy persons and
also patients affected by stroke.
This chapter is organized in six sections. Section 14.2 deals with the design
of development of the IHRG structure. Section 14.3 focuses on a voice control
approach. In this case, the solution addresses the patients that can talk and the
stroke did not affect their vocal capacity of pronouncing words. Thus, a voice
recognition-based implementation is presented, this approach offering the facility
of live interaction between the system and the patient. In this way, different med-
ical exercises can be performed by themselves or being helped by a family member
in a friendly environment as at home. Section 14.4 presents a predefined recovery
exercises system for home use. In order to help the patients to follow a complete
after-stoke recovery program, another approach of the IHRG system combines the
robotic glove and the FES technology. This hybrid system is described in Sec-
tion 14.5. A lot of experimental results are discussed here and a complete statistical
analysis is introduced. Finally, Section 14.6 emphasizes the main conclusions of
this chapter and the importance of having a friendly and useful system that helps
the patient to perform a complete rehabilitation training at home.
14.2
Design and development of the IHRG structure
The hand functions were analysed by many researchers, the main studied compo-
nents being the upper hand, the wrist, all four fingers and the thumb. In order to
implement movements like flexion and extension, abduction and adduction, dif-
ferent parameters had to be considered. The amplitudes of the movements, their
direction and orientation with respect with some axes or planes became important
elements that have been carefully studied. The hand articulations model can be seen
in Figure 14.1 and provides the support for developing the proposed IHRG
architecture.
One of the solutions was to emulate the phalanges of the fingers by means of a
set of articulated elements, assembled together in a cascade, covering the func-
tionality of the fingers and holding up the actuation system. This is the reason why
the four-bar mechanism was used as a first option, followed by the tendons
mechanism approach. Both of them have been analysed and implemented in order
to discover their advantages and the drawbacks. In an architecture based on tendons
mechanism, three rotation joints were serially used to emulate the three phalanges
of the finger. They worked like a cascade since each joint determines the movement
of the previous one by means of a tendon cable. To each joint, a pulleys system was
associated. Then a four-bar mechanism was studied and applied for the movements
of each finger considering that one movement is realized by the gradually defor-
mations of the four-bar mechanisms associated with each phalanx of the fingers.
The whole architecture of the entire structure and of one finger exoskeleton can be
found in Figure 14.1.
348
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

The control architecture was developed considering that the control is realized
starting from the first active joint. For the rest of the passive joints, the associated
bar system works and performs the movements. The distribution of forces on the
phalanges of one fingers can be observed in Figure 14.1. The involved parameters
of the system are ai, bi, ci for each phalanx of li length. Also, the rotation of each
finger phalanx is described by the angles q1, q2, q3. F1, F2, F3 are control forces that
act on the external environment. They are applied in d1, d2, d3 which are the contact
points on a finger. Ta is the active torque applied on the first joint of the finger.
14.3
Voice control approach
In this section, the solution designed for the IHRG system addresses the patients
that can talk and the stroke did not affect their vocal capacity of pronouncing
words. In this particular case, the control design of the rehabilitation system regards
the voice recognition-based implementation that offers the facility of live interac-
tion between the system and the patient.
14.3.1
Hardware and software design
The design of IHRG in the case of voice control approach is made based on
Arduino Mega 2560. The movement of the glove’s actuators is performed by this
b1
F1
F2 Y3
a1
P2 = P3
P1
P4 = P5
P6 = P7
P8
II
I
III
IV
a2
l3
l2
d2
b3
d3
a3
c2
O1
Ta
d1
b2
O2
O3
Y1
θ1
θ2(t)
θ3(t)
θ4(t)
θ1(t)
θ2
θ3
F3
Y2
c1
l1
Figure 14.1
Hand joints model and a virtual four-bar architecture for the
exoskeleton design
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
349

hardware board for exercises like open or close of the fingers. Also, the design uses
the Raspberry Pi hardware platform to realize the steps of the voice recognition
algorithm. The patient has to use a microphone in order to send commands to the
rehabilitation system and to select and run the program for a set of rehabilitation
exercises in a specific period of time. This time, the glove is created by a thin
textile in order to assure comfort to the patient when performing the exercises.
Another reason for choosing a thin textile regards the fact that this type of glove
should be an appropriate infrastructure for a considerable set sensors and wires. The
wires have an important role when the patient make exercises as flexion or exten-
sion of fingers, but in parallel to this action, the sensors calculate the resistance
force produced by the affected hand of the patient in real time.
The action time of every engine is correlated to the force applied for every
finger. In order to control gently the movements of the affected hand, this force has
to be balanced with the reaction acquired from the patient. Nylon threads connect
the top of the fingers with the small engines. To complete movements like open
flexion and extension of fingers, these five actuators accomplish an important task.
All the approaches of the IHRG system discussed in this chapter take into account
the feedback from the patient. It is an important aspect since a real-time evaluation
of this feedback influences the operations the system, leaving them to be partially
or completely fulfilled. The values registered for the reaction forces determine the
operation time of the engines. For the same reason, every finger of the robotic glove
has a bending sensor.
In the case in which the patient takes fragile objects, some additional force
sensors are added to the glove. They are inserted on the top of every finger and they
determine the moment in which actuators stop functioning. From the power
autonomy point of view, we found out experimentally that for one day of high
intensive use of the glove, two-cell LiPo battery (7.4 V) and 1000 mAh battery are
adequate.
For these experiments, the implementation was based on Arduino Mega 2560
platform. There were many advantages for using it since this hardware board has ports
for pulse-width modulation signals useful to be transmitted to the actuators, ports for
reading the signals achieved by the bending and force sensors, serial lines useful for
wireless communication between haptic glove and the speech recognition system
and also it has busses for the communication with the light-emitting diode (LCD).
The current program with the exercise set can be read from this LCD. Also, the
patient can see there the values of some forces. The communication between
the haptic robotic glove and control module was realized wirelessly by two xBee
modules. Different conversions have been done and some adaptors had to be
included since the xBee modules work at 3.3 V and the Arduino board works at 5 V.
The speech recognition module is realized by a Raspberry Pi board that
receives vocal commands, recognizes the implemented commands and sends them
wirelessly to the rehabilitation glove. On the USB port of the Raspberry Pi board,
a microphone and a soundboard were connected to complete the design of the voice
recognition-based approach. Figure 14.2 presents the entire configuration of the
control system. The software includes the Julius HTK voice recognition engine.
350
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

For automatically speech recognition, the Pexpect module was used. The control
application was developed in Python. The vocabulary that will be further used to
control the IHRG system was established. The working strategy consists of finding
a phonetic form for all the implemented commands. The resulted file will be further
divided into the corresponding phonemes.
The sound unit is represented by these phonemes. Julius engine provides the
lexicon file useful in getting the phonemes. The CMU dictionary (Carnegie Mellon
University Pronouncing Dictionary) has also been used to verify them. Rules
definitions for the grammar are a distinct step, the result being a file consisting of
subsets of possible sentences. For acquiring the exact description of the required
language, the Backus–Naur form of the grammars is applied. Then the results are
converted to a Julius format. Now, the acoustic models correlate to Julius HTK.
A configuration file used by Julius is defined and some samples are created and
processed further by HTK. After the Julius application is started, the previous
defined vocabulary is used and a score reflecting the recognition process accuracy
is got for every word. A Viterbi score is also obtained.
Pexpect is a Python module having the main aim the connection to Julius
engine. In this way, the generated output is obtained. Two types of filters are
applied. The first one processes the output got in the previous step, identifying a
sequence. Thus, a score is obtained for it. Then, based on the scores, the second
filter is recommended to be applied. Finally, the value respecting all the specifi-
cations is further processed by the rehabilitation system.
The control algorithm regards the identification of a command given by a
patient followed by a translation code command that activates the sensors of IHRG.
The codification is done according to the values obtained from the bending and the
Digital
port
Serial
I2C
Power
ARDUINO MEGA
2560 V3
Arduino Mega 2560
Input 5V
GND
SCL
SDA
RX
TX
PWM
LCD
xBee
Servo
engine 1
Servo
engine 5
Analog
port
Force sensor 5
Force sensor 1
Bending sensor 1
Bending sensor 5
Analog
port
Figure 14.2
Control system of IHRG using Arduino
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
351

force sensors. The bending sensors can get values from 0 to 9, where 9 means the
maximum bending like a close hand and 0 represents the standby position. The
force sensors get values from 0 to 4, where 0 represents just a soft contact with an
object. Six values will be sent as a string in a form like code #999994 in the case a
of a strong grab exercise.
There are a number of seven commands implemented and learnt by Julius as it
can be seen in Table 14.1, along with their codes.
14.3.2
Experiments with vocal commands
All the commands described earlier have been tested such that the patient can
repeat exercises like open the hand, close it, try to grab an object, point towards an
object or simply wave. Figure 14.3 shows the implemented model. It was experi-
mentally observed that the noise influences the recognition process. So, depending
Table 14.1
Codes for each implemented
command of the IHRG system
Action
Code
Wave
444440
Grab
555552
Soft grab
333331
Strong grab
999994
Point
909990
Open
000000
Close
777770
Figure 14.3
Experiments with the implemented vocal-based model
352
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

on its intensity, the recognition process can be very good or the whole process can
decrease a lot.
There are a few ways to improve the precision and accuracy of the results.
One can be done by changing the recorded values. Another one is by modifying the
Viterbi score. The third one regards the way in which the acoustic model is trained.
Also, if the same IHRG system is used by many patients, we have to create an
acoustic model for the entire set of patients, so a good solution is that each patient
involved in the rehabilitation training to offer his own audio input. The experiments
have been made on a set of 15 patients so far and the results were very good.
14.4
Predefined recovery exercises system for home use
In order to help the patients to follow a complete after-stoke recovery program, the
IHRG system comes with a set of predefined rehabilitation exercises. The progress
of the rehabilitation program can be encountered because the IHRG system toge-
ther with recovery exercises system take into account the force of the patient when
controlling his movements. This force is measured and involved into the whole
control process. Two functionalities should be mentioned regarding the system.
One is useful when the whole system works independently and there is no con-
nection to any computer. In this case it runs a fixed set of pre-programmed reha-
bilitation exercises. The second functionality regards a graphical interface that can
be used by the patients. From here they can personalize their own set of rehabili-
tation exercises, working more a specific movement of the one finger or the whole
hand. The control algorithm includes the automatically fingers’ flexion and
extension performed by the actuators and the software.
The system is very friendly to use at home, with a minimum of training. The
patient must put the glove and starts it. The predefined rehabilitation set of exer-
cises was created with a medical specialist in after-stroke rehabilitation, but from
the moment the IHRG system is used, you can do it by yourself, alone, eliminating
the cases when the therapist is unavailable or expensive.
Seven different exercises have been programmed, followed by a complex one
that gathers all of them. When starting it, the system will follow the complete set of
exercises but if the patient needs to repeat only one, like extension of the index
finger, the graphical interface indicates the way this specific exercise starts. The
predefined exercises are
●
SEPARATE_SLOW is an exercise that determines all the fingers to be bent one
by one with low speed; after that the exercise runs the reverse process, helping
in the extension of each finger.
●
SEPARATE_FAST was designed like SEPARATE_SLOW but at an increased
speed.
●
ALL_TOGETHER exercise
makes
all
fingers to flex and
then
relax
simultaneously.
●
THUMB_SLOW is a delicate and important exercise that involves the thumb.
Grasping movement cannot be completed without the implication of the thumb
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
353

so the glove application runs twice thumb flexion and extension at a reduced
speed.
●
THUMB_FAST is useful when the previous exercise becomes easy to follow
and the patient can increase the speed of running it.
●
THUMB_ANOTHER was created when training thumb flexion and extension
together with another finger from the rest of four.
●
PISTOL regards bending the fingers II–IV and stretching the index. In this
particular exercise, the thumb flex and relax twice imitating the movements of
using a pistol. It is a very good exercise for coordinating the movements of the
whole hand even if it seems to be like a childish game.
The parameters measured by the rehabilitation glove’s sensors are emphasized
on the graphical representation (Figure 14.4). For each finger, the bending degrees
for each finger are shown graphically, the patient being aware of all the improve-
ments of his movements from a day to another. The patient can also save a training
history of his rehabilitation program because all these data are saved and can be
used later to compare the progress.
The experiments have shown that using this complete system consisting of the
intelligent rehabilitation haptic glove and the predefined recovery set of exercises,
the whole recovery process has been hurried with at least 15%. Because it can be
used at home, without a therapist next to the patient, the time dedicated to reha-
bilitation training increased and so the results did, making the patient to feel closer
to a normal life like the one before stroke.
14.5
Hybrid FES-robotic glove approach
In order to help the patients to follow a complete after-stoke recovery program, the
IHRG system couples a robotic glove and the FES technology. The originality of
this approach consists in the perfect balance between the haptic glove that coor-
dinates the fingers’ movements and the electrical stimuli that generate the muscle
contraction. The IHRG system allows patients to move the hand affected by stroke
almost as good as the healthy hand. Also, the system can detect the patient’s
intention to move the affected hand and based on that it can trigger a hand opening
and closing exercise. Many experiments have been done on healthy persons and
also on patients that suffered a CVA. The tests were done within clinical environ-
ment, but it can be wearable at home and easy to work with.
14.5.1
Hybrid system description
The hybrid system consists of two parts. The first one is represented by a left-side
leather glove with attached metal tendons for achieving the movements of fingers.
The second part is represented by another glove put on the healthy hand that has
five bending sensors attached to it (Figure 14.5).
All the movements of this glove can be copied by the left-side robotic glove
from the affected hand. The electrical stimulus, provided by a MOTIONSTIM8
354
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

Manual
command
Separate
slow
Separate
fast
All
together
Thumb
slow
Thumb
fast
Thumb +
another
Pistol like
Data
Finger 0
250
Pressure
sensor
Bend
sensor
400
300
200
100
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Bending sensor
390
0
0
0
0
Data to file
265
Finger 1
Finger 2
Finger 3
Finger 4
Exercises
Complete exercise
1
0
Right
hand
2
3
4
Fingers
commands
0
1
2
3
4
235
257
260
Figure 14.4
Graphical interface of the IHRG system when using the predefined rehabilitation exercises program

neurostimulator, is applied on the interosseous muscles and on the hand extensors.
In this way a proper hand opening movement is induced (Figure 14.6). Two types
of exercises can be realized by the hybrid system. Besides the exercise that copies
the movements of the healthy hand, the second one detects the patient’s intention
to move the affected hand. For this reason, a bending sensor was attached to the
middle finger of the robotic glove and it triggers a predefined set of movements.
The electrical stimulation intensity and all the movements of the hand
reflecting the after-stroke rehabilitation exercises are controlled by the software of
the hybrid IHRG system which was developed in MATLAB and Simulink. The
performance of each patient following the exercises program can be recorded by
the same software. The range and stimulation pulse widths and currents are also
monitored and controlled as system parameters.
Figure 14.7 shows the components and the connections of the hybrid
IHRG system. The linear servomotors actuators are controlled by the Arduino
Figure 14.6
An opening movement improved by the electrical stimuli
Figure 14.5
(a) Haptic glove for the affected hand; (b) sensorial glove for the
healthy hand
356
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

microcontroller. Its role is also of reading and converting to digital all the signals
that come from the bending sensors of both gloves.
When the patients have the intention to make a move with the affected hand,
the glove makes a movement specific to flexion or extension of fingers due to the
bending sensor placed on the middle finger of the active glove. Figure 14.8 presents
this scenario when this sensor scans for the patient’s intention to move the hand.
The bigger spikes are numbered. The biggest value got from the sensor output
exceeds the threshold and triggers the movement set and predefined into the IHRG
system. The threshold line is also emphasized and it was calculated as 80% of the
MotionStim 8
MATLAB
Active
glove
Sensorial
glove
serial data
5V
VCC
OUT
GND
10kΩ
12 v
PWM signal
actuator feedback
–5V
Figure 14.7
Hardware components and connections of the hybrid IHRG system
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2
3
4
Time [s]
Sensor output [V]
Threshold
5
6
7
8
9
Figure 14.8
Bending sensor detects the patient’s intention to move the hand
affected by stroke
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
357

mean of the precious detected highest values, when performing the calibration
phase.
In the case of an exercise in which the movements of the healthy hand are
copied by the glove put on the affected one, the output values of the bending
sensors coming from the sensorial glove are shown in Figure 14.9. Some problems
can arise here regarding the responding time of the actuators. When a movement is
performed by the sensorial glove in 1 or 1.5 s, the response of the actuated glove
takes almost 7 s. However, this hybrid system addresses after-stroke rehabilitation
so the reaction speed does not have to be high. In most of the rehabilitation sce-
narios it is really advisable to make the movements slowly.
14.5.2
Experimental results
The tests have been started within a clinical environment under the careful super-
vision of the medics, after receiving the approval from the ethical commission.
The feedback from the bending sensors and the FES channels pulse widths is
presented in Figure 14.10. The recorded time is of 100 s and the healthy hand
realizes a movement that is copied by the affected one. The variation values are
easy to be observed. The delay of the response did not appear anymore since the
flexion and relaxing rehabilitation exercises made by the healthy hand is performed
in the same time with the affected one. The lines denoted as Finger 1 and Finger 2
from the upper plot represent the FES channels 1 and 2. The Finger 3 line
emphasizes the position of the middle finger of the affected hand, being represented
in %. Thus 0% represents a full extension of the finger. The same signification with
Finger 2
1
1
2
3
4
5
0
1.5
2
Time [s]
Sensor output [V]
2.5
3
Finger 1
Finger 3
Finger 4
Finger 5
Figure 14.9
Output values of the bending sensors of the sensorial glove from the
healthy hand while performing rehabilitation exercises (flexion–
extension)
358
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

the flexion degrees representation in % can be found in the lower plot where the
lines show the recorded signals from all five fingers of the healthy hand.
Any exercise from the predefined rehabilitation set takes into account the
intension to move the affected hand. As it can be observed in Figure 14.11, during a
period of 60 s, the functional electrical stimuli pulse width on channels 1 and 2
increases proportionally with the fingers extension level of the affected hand.
The circled areas on the plot emphasize the moments when the patient intends
to move the fingers. The time recorded to make a complete extension–flexion
exercise is between 5 and 6 s. Then the hybrid IHRG system waits for another
5
FES PW Ch2
FES PW Ch1
10
15
1
2
3
20
25
30
Time [s]
35
40
45
50
55
60
0
FES PW Ch1
FES PW Ch2
Robotic glove fingers position
Robotic glove fingers position [%], FES PW [us]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Robotic glove
fingers position
Figure 14.11
Feedback values of the bending sensors and FES channels in the
case in which the predefined rehabilitation exercises set takes into
account the intension to move the affected hand
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Time [s]
Healthy hand position [%]
Affected hand position [%]
FES  PW[us] 
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Little finger
Ring finger
Middle finger
Index finger
Thumb
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Time [s]
FES PW Ch1
FES PW Ch2
Hand position
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
0
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
20
40
60
80
100
Index finger
Thumb
Little finger
Hand position
FES PW Ch1
FES PW Ch2
Affected hand
Healthy hand
Middle finger
Ring finger
Figure 14.10
Feedback of the bending sensors during copying a movement of the
healthy hand and the FES channels pulse widths
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
359

patient’s intention to move the fingers. For a perfect balance between this inten-
tions to move the hand and the FES values, a calibration phase is necessary such
that the stimulation parameters to support efficiently the induced movement. Thus
the maximum value for CH1 was chosen as 256 ms with 9 mA current and the
maximum value for CH2 was 305 ms with 10 mA current. The stimulation current
was maintained constant while inducing the movements with FES, but the signal
pulse width was modulated.
Figure 14.12 shows the IHRG system worn by a patient, the succession of
images presenting some rehabilitation exercises and the way in which the affected
hand covered with the hybrid robotic system copies the movements of the healthy
one. The signals recorded by the sensorial glove during six repeated finger flexion–
extension exercises are shown in Figure 14.13. It cannot be observed any pertur-
bation of the signals transmitted by the sensorial glove. All the persons that have
tested the prototype were confident when affirming that the hand controlled by the
active IHRG glove copied with high fidelity the movements of the sensorial glove.
Also, they were pleased by the encountered rehabilitation progress.
14.5.3
Statistical analysis
In order to improve our study and to realize a statistical analysis, we conducted a
clinical randomized controlled study. For this purpose, two groups of patients were
used: a control group which underwent conventional rehabilitation therapy and an
Figure 14.12
Patient realizing finger flexion–extension exercises with the IHRG
system. The affected hand covered with the hybrid robotic system
copies the movements of the healthy one
360
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

experimental group that underwent the therapy helped by the hybrid IHRG system.
A set of 12 sessions were administrated for the group that used the IHRG system,
each of them lasting 45 min with a total of 9 h for each patient. Conventional
therapy totalized 10 sessions, each one lasting 1 h.
The patients chosen for these groups were suffered a left hemiparesis or a
single ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke. Also, they had between 1 and 6 months
post stroke, so this unfortunate episode did not happen a long time ago.
For the functional setup, the FES pads were placed on the arm’s skin of
the patient in the proper places and electrical stimulation is set at the right level.
The patient was sited and relaxed. The robotic glove was put on the affected hand
for each patient and the sensorial glove on the healthy one (Figure 14.14). Then the
patients were instructed to flex and extend the fingers from the right hands so that
00
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0.5
1
Thumb
00
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0.5
1
Index finger
00
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0.5
1
Middle finger
00
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0.5
1
Ring finger
00
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0.5
1
Pinky finger
Time [s]
Figure 14.13
Signals recorded by the sensorial glove when repeating six finger
flexion–extension exercises
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
361

the robotic glove copies the movements. For an entire operational cycle, the time
encounters almost 20 s since the actuators need 7 s for a full opening task.
In total, there were 12 women and 4 men divided into the experimental group
(3 men and 7 women) and the control one (1 man and 5 women). There was not any
significant difference between the mean age of women (m ¼ 61.78) and the mean
age of men (m ¼ 66.16).
For the statistical analysis, the Fugl–Meyer Assessment (FMA) scale was
designed to evaluate different parameters like the motor function, balance, sensa-
tions and joint functions in hemiplegic/hemiparetic stroke survivors. Also the box
and blocks test (BBT) was used to measure the outcome and dexterity, especially
for the grasping rehabilitation exercise. The statistics also used the Stroke Impact
Scale (SIS) which is a specific questionnaire for stroke patients regarding hand
function, range of motion, force or memory. Of course, for our study, the hand
function was relevant. Wilcoxon test is a non-parametrical one useful for the
comparisons of functional outcome measures before and after therapy for each
group. It is a necessary test due to the non-normal distributions of the indicators and
the small size of the samples.
The characteristic values for motor and functional indictors are presented in
Tables 14.2 and 14.3. These values were measured at the beginning of the therapy,
Figure 14.14
Hybrid IHRG system during the clinical experiments
362
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

at the middle of the period (after the sixth session) and also immediately after
therapy for both groups.
The perception of the therapy scale was applied at the end of the robotic
therapy for the patients in the experimental group. They were asked to evaluate the
physical and emotional comfort level during the sessions. We used a Likert-type
scale answer from: 0 ¼ I felt very uncomfortable, 1 ¼ I felt uncomfortable, 2 ¼ I
felt a little uncomfortable, 3 ¼ I felt almost comfortable, 4 ¼ I felt comfortable,
5 ¼ I felt very comfortable. Moreover, experimental group patients were asked to
indicate how useful they think that the robotic therapy was for them. A four-answer
levels scale was used: 0 ¼ absolutely useless, 1 ¼ a little useful, 2 ¼ useful enough,
3 ¼ very useful. The results can be seen in Figure 14.15.
Table 14.3
Results of the experimental group before (b), at the middle (m) of the
period and after (a) the rehabilitation therapy
BBT
FMA
IB
SIS
b
m
a
b
m
a
b
m
a
b
m
a
1
13
18
18
51
52
54
20
20
20
12
15
15
2
8
7
8
23
28
28
20
20
20
11
12
12
3
0
1
1
10
10
10
17
17
17
5
5
5
4
1
0
0
12
14
14
19
19
19
6
6
6
5
15
–
–
35
–
–
19
–
–
7
–
–
6
1
–
–
6
–
–
12
–
–
5
–
–
Notes: BBT, box and blocks test; FMA, Fugl–Meyer Assessment; IB, index Barthel; SIS, stroke impact
scale
Table 14.2
Results of the control group before (b), at the middle (m) of the period
and after (a) the rehabilitation therapy
BBT
FMA
IB
SIS
b
m
a
b
m
a
b
m
a
b
m
a
1
1
6
7
23
23
25
17
17
17
5
5
5
2
10
12
13
32
32
42
5
5
5
5
5
5
3
59
61
61
63
63
64
20
20
20
14
14
15
4
14
25
23
53
62
63
18
18
18
9
14
14
5
44
45
44
65
66
66
20
20
20
18
18
18
6
8
8
8
29
29
29
20
20
20
11
11
11
7
48
48
48
61
61
61
20
20
20
18
18
18
8
45
50
48
58
64
64
20
20
20
14
16
17
9
2
2
2
27
27
27
19
19
19
5
5
5
10
27
27
27
57
57
57
19
19
19
18
18
18
Notes: BBT, box and blocks test; FMA, Fugl–Meyer Assessment; IB, index Barthel; SIS, Stroke Impact
Scale
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
363

14.6
Conclusion
This chapter presents the concepts, design, control details and experiments of a
low-cost IHRG for the rehabilitation of the patients that have suffered a CVA. As
result, the patients lose the range of motion and only with the help of the rehabi-
litation therapy they have the chance of making again a part of the lost motorial
functions and getting again the possibility of an independent living. In the recent
scientific literature, there are many studies showing that intensive and repetitive
training may be necessary to recover motor functionalities by modifying the neural
organization.
As described in this chapter, the IHRG system looks like a glove that supports
the activities of an affected hand by using a control architecture for different
rehabilitation exercises as flexion and extension of fingers or grasping an object.
Different approaches of the after-stroke rehabilitation robotic glove have been
presented, emphasizing the fact that for any patient it will be more comfortable to
make medical exercises in his own home. One approach proposes a solution that
addresses the patients that can talk and the stroke did not affect their vocal capacity
of pronouncing words. In this particular case, the control design of the rehabilita-
tion system regards the voice recognition based implementation that offers the
facility of live interaction between the system and the patient. All the commands
have been tested such that the patient can repeat exercises like open the hand, close
it, try to grab an object, point towards an object or simply wave.
The other approach regards a hybrid IHRG system for the patients that follow a
complete after-stoke recovery program. In this case the solution combines a haptic
glove and the FES technology. It was designed a perfect balance between the haptic
glove that coordinates the fingers’ movements and the electrical stimuli that gen-
erate the muscle contraction. The system has been tested on healthy persons and on
0
I felt very
comfortable
I felt
comfortable
I felt almost
comfortable
1
2
Very useful
7.00
Useful enough
6.00
2
6
5
3
4
5
Number of cases
(a)
(b)
6
7
Figure 14.15
Repartition of the patients from the experimental group based on
(a) the comfort sensation felt during the robot-assisted therapy;
(b) their perception regarding the usefulness of the robot-assisted
therapy
364
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

stroke patients within clinical environment, but it can be wearable at home being
easy to work with.
Regarding future work, we will also analyse the possibility to implement a
brain–computer interface (BCI) based on electroencephalography that can be used
to control the hybrid IHRG by means of motor imagery. The BCI should detect the
intention to move of the patient, providing online feedback to the user. In this way,
the feedback can be used for as triggering a complete set of predefined motion
tasks.
References
[1]
Grebenstein, G., 2010. ‘A Method for Hand Kinematic Designers’, ICABB,
Venice, Italy, 2010
[2]
French, B., Thomas, L., Leathley, M., et al., ‘Does repetitive task training
improve functional activity after stroke? A Cochrane systematic review and
meta-analysis’. J. Rehabil. Med. 42: 9–14, 2010
[3]
Barbay, S., Guggenmos, D.J., Nishibe, M., Nudo, R.J., ‘Motor representa-
tions in the intact hemisphere of the rat are reduced after repetitive training
of the impaired forelimb’. Neurorehabil. Neural Rep. 27: 381–384, 2013
[4]
Housman, S.J., Scott, K.M., Reinkensmeyer, D.J., ‘A randomized controlled
trial of gravity-supported, computer-enhanced arm exercise for individuals
with severe hemiparesis’. Neurorehabil. Neural Rep. 23: 505–514, 2009
[5]
Kitago, T., Goldsmith, J., Harran, M., et al., ‘Robotic therapy for chronic
stroke: general recovery of impairment or improved task-specific skill?
J. Neurophysiol. 114(3): 1885–1894, 2015. doi: 10.1152/jn.00336.2015
[6]
Biagiotti, L., Lotti, F., Melchiorri, C., Vassura, G., How Far Is the Human
Hand? A Review on Anthropomorphic Robotic End-effectors, DEIS – DIEM,
University of Bologna, 2009
[7]
Brokaw, E.B., Black, I., Holley, R., Lum, P., ‘Hand spring operated move-
ment enhancer (HandSome): A portable passive hand exoskeleton for stroke
rehabilitation’, IEEE Trans on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Eng
vol. 19, no. 4, August, pp. 391–398, 2011
[8]
Atzori M., Gijsberts M., Castelini C., et al., ‘Electromyography data for non-
invasive naturally-controlled robotic hand prostheses’, Nat. J., Scientific
data 1, 2014. doi:10.1038/sdata.2014.53
[9]
Mehrholz J., Ha¨drich A., Platz T., Kugler J., Pohl M., ‘Electromechanical
and robot-assisted arm training for improving generic activities of daily
living, arm function, and arm muscle strength after stroke’, Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 6: CD006876, 2012
[10]
Kwakkel G., Kollen B.J., Krebs H.I., ‘Effects of robot-assisted therapy on
upper limb recovery after stroke: a systematic review’, Neurorehabil. Neural
Rep. 22: 111–121, 2008. doi: 10.1177/1545968307305457
[11]
Stein J., ‘Robotics in rehabilitation: technology as destiny’, Am J. Phys.
Med. Rehabil. 91: S199–S203, 2012
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
365

[12]
Chang W.H., Kim Y.H., ‘Robot-assisted therapy in stroke rehabilitation’,
Journal of Stroke, 15(3): 174–181, 2013
[13]
Varalta V., Picelli A., Fonte C., Montemezii G., La Marchina E., Smania N.,
‘Effects of contralesional robot-assisted hand training in patients with uni-
lateral spatial neglect following stroke: a case series study’, J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil, 11: 160, 2014
[14]
Vanoglio F., Bernocchi P., Mule C., et al., ‘Feasibility and efficacy of a
robotic device for hand rehabilitation in hemiplegic stroke patients: a ran-
domized pilot controlled study’, J. Clin. Rehabil., 31(3): 351–360, 2017.
doi: 10.1177/0269215516642606
[15]
Heo P., Gu G.M., Lee S., Rhee K., Kim J., ‘Current hand exoskeleton
technologies for rehabilitation and assistive engineering’, Int. J. Precis. Eng.
Man., 13(5): 807–824, 2012
[16]
Yap H.K., Lim J.H., Nasrallah F., Low, F.Z., Goh J.C., Yeow R.C., ‘MRC-
glove: a fMRI compatible soft robotic glove for hand rehabilitation appli-
cation’, Proceedings of IEEE ICORR, Singapore, pp. 735–740, 2015
[17]
Ignat B., Duca A, Bohotin V., Poboroniuc M., Popescu C.D., ‘The effect of a
short functional electrical stimulation training programme on gait para-
meters in chronic stroke survivors’, Romanian J. Neur. 9(1):21–27, 2009.
ISSN: 1843-0783
[18]
Hartopanu S., Poboroniuc M., Serea F., Irimia D.C., Livint G., ‘New issues
on FES and robotic glove device to improve the hand rehabilitation in stroke
patients’, in Acta Electrotehnica, vol. 56(3): 123–127, 2015, ISSN 1841-
3323, in Proc. of 6th Int. Conf. on Modern Power System, 18–21 May 2015
[19]
Popescu, N., Popescu, D., Ivanescu, M., Popescu, D., Vladu, C., Vladu, I.,
‘Force observer-based control for a rehabilitation hand exoskeleton system’,
Proc. of Asian Control Conference (ASCC2013), pp. 1–6, Istanbul, Turkey,
2013
Biographies
Nirvana Popescu is Habilitated Professor at Computer Science Department in
University Politehnica of Bucharest. In 2003, she completed Ph.D. in Computer
Science, after B.Eng. and M.Sc., in the same domain. Her main research interests
are intelligent systems, fuzzy logic and control, neural networks, cognitive and
autonomous robots, rehabilitation medical devices and reconfigurable computers.
She is the author of 6 books and more than 80 scientific papers published at
prestigious conferences and journals. At UPB, she is the leader of the Lab. for
‘Reconfigurable high-confidence medical devices’. She was involved in projects
related to neuro-fuzzy diagnosis of EKG, EEG and EMG (receiving MEDINFO
award) and neuroprostheses design and control.
Marian-Silviu Poboroniuc is Habilitated Professor for Robotics & Neuro-
prostheses at Technical University of Iasi, Faculty of Electrical Engineering. His
366
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

current research interests involve mobile robots control algorithms, human motion
analysis and synthesis, neuroprosthetics, biomechanics, brain–computer interfaces
and rehabilitation robotics (e.g. NOVAFES 267/2014-Innovative garments with
embedded electrodes for functional electrical stimulation-based rehabilitation,
IHRG 150/2012 – an intelligent haptic robot glove for the patients suffering a
CVA). He is actively involved in several national and international research pro-
jects, of which most are related to neuroprostheses design and control, BCI and to
increasing the pool of qualified Electrical and Information Engineering graduates
across Europe (e.g. SALEIE EU project).
Decebal Popescu is a Professor at University Politehnica of Bucharest, Computer
Science Department. He received his B.Eng. in 1998 at UPB, Computer Science
Department, followed by M.Sc. at the same department. In 2003, he completed
Ph.D. in Computer Science at UPB. His main research interests are fuzzy logic
intelligent circuits, eHealth, neural networks, embedded systems and reconfigur-
able computers. He had important collaborations with University of Hamburg and
University of Bielefeld in the field of control algorithms and fuzzy model imple-
mentations for complex systems. He was involved in many important projects with
Fraunhofer Institute, Berlin, being the leader of the research groups that success-
fully finalized projects on systems’ interoperability, high-performance computing
for medical models and on technological control and integration of intelligent
materials and structures.
D˘anut¸ Irimia is an Assistant Professor of Robotics and System Theory at Tech-
nical University of Iasi. His current research interests include mobile robotics
control algorithms, neuroprosthetics, human–machine interfaces and rehabilitation
robotics. Since 2012 he is also a research collaborator of g.tec medical engineering
GmbH focusing on biomedical signal processing and brain–computer interfaces for
post-stroke rehabilitation.
Alexandru-Valer Grigoras¸ is a neurologist and Ph.D. student in Neurology at
‘‘Gr. T. Popa’’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iasi. His current research
interests involve modern rehabilitation therapies for stroke patients, rehabilitation
robotics and virtual reality systems.
Intelligent system for after-stroke home rehabilitation
367

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
accelerometer 57, 61, 147, 185–6
acceptability of technologies 93–5
access network (AN) technologies
106, 210
accuracy and reliability 63, 67
‘active ageing’ 86, 105
‘active shaping’ 27–8
active/sleep mode 300–1
adaptive coordinated MAC based on
dynamic power management
protocol (AC-MAC/DPM) 251
adaptive cruise control and collision
avoidance system 271, 275
adaptive duty cycling 253
adaptive intelligent agents 162
AdhereTech 15
aesthetics 66–7
affective computing (AC) mapping
implementation 216–20
after-stroke home rehabilitation,
intelligent system for 345
design and development of IHRG
structure 348–9
hybrid FES-robotic glove approach
354
experimental results 358–60
hybrid system description 354–8
statistical analysis 360–3
predefined recovery exercises
system for home use 353–4
voice control approach 349
experiments with vocal
commands 352–3
hardware and software design
349–52
ageing of the population 84
airflow sensors, characteristics for
191–3
ALIAS robot 219
alpha waves 138–9
ambient assisted living (AAL) 6, 50,
202, 208, 271
rational and affective functions of
218
ambient assisted living (AAL) and
enhanced living environment
(ELE) service scenarios 7–14,
101
customized ELE ICT services
120–2
end-user groups 108–10
further research directions 122
living lab architecture 106–8
scenarios 114–20
from single user and single sensor to
the cloud and back 110–14
state of the art 103–5
ambient assisted living as a service
(AALaaS) 10, 103–4, 109, 209
ambient assisted living as a service
(AALaaS)/enhanced living
environment as a service
(ELEaaS) platforms 208
AAL/ELE laboratory and home
implementation 223
affective computing mapping
implementation 216–20
further research plan 224
generic architecture 210–12, 216
KIOLA
dashboard, for clinical experts
221

platform implementation 220
system architecture 220
main functions 213–14
performed at dust, dew, fog and
cloud levels 215
traffic flows 215
ambient intelligence 6, 32, 51, 155,
209
American College of Critical Care
Medicine 4
American Society of
Anaesthesiologists 4
anaesthesia machine, block diagram
of 189
anaesthesia system, purpose of 191
‘anamnesis of the homes’ 26
application programming interfaces
(APIs) 222
Arduino Mega 2560 347, 349–51
AREA-MAC 253, 256
assistive technologies 65, 91
Aurama display 62
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) 7
automotive safety integrity level
(ASIL) 275
autonomic nervous system (ANS) 10,
133
autonomy 28–9, 67
need for 37
psychological 29
basic psychological need (BPN) 28, 31
basic sensor nodes (BSNs) 239
basic switches, characteristics for 198
battery-free stretchable electronics
323
beacon frames 142, 144, 243
beta waves 138–9
bidirectional activity-aware system
64–5
bidirectional deployment 62
bidirectional staggered transmission
244
big data 211
big data healthcare system 161
agent-based system for personalized
searching 167–70
applied subjective ontology
design of fuzzy and vague case-
based ontology 174–5
fuzzification process in case-
based ontology 174
storing knowledge in fuzzy
ontology of proposed semantic
system 174
big data in personalized search of
uncertain and vague
information 165
quality of data 166
speed and timeliness of data 166
value and demand in-depth
analysis 165
variety and heterogeneity of data
165
volume and size of data 166
customized profile, building 172–4
fuzzy logic and probability 163–5
intelligent agents’ advantages and
characteristics 162–3
metrics for evaluating quality of
returned results from search
system 178
process of reasoning 175–8
rule-based and case-based
reasoning 166–7
bioinformatics 2
BIOPAC 320
bio robots 105
blood analysers flow cytometry 192
Bluetooth 106, 141, 143–4, 199–200
Bluetooth low energy (BLE) 200
board mount pressure (BMP) sensors,
characteristics for 194, 199
body area network (BAN) 140
BodyGuardian Remote Monitoring
System 6
body temperature monitoring,
wearable sensors for 326–31
box and blocks test (BBT) 362
brain–computer interface (BCI) 365
370
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

brainwaves 138–9
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) 14
burst transmission 246–7
cameras 58
CardioNet M COT 141
carrier sense multiple access/collision
avoidance (CSMA/CA) 241–2
case-based ontology 171, 175
design of 174–5
fuzzification process in 174
case-based reasoning 166–7
cell-based organization 249
cell creation mechanism 249
cerebrovascular accidents (CVAs) 14,
345–6, 364
chain type network 237
childhood place attachment 27
clinical trial, defined 3
close-in nodes 240
cloud computing 2, 212
CMAC-T 243–4
co-constructing stories technique 65
cocooning 36
Code Blue project 141, 151
cognitive niche 31–2
cognitive radio 300
collaborating intelligent agents 162
common cause analysis 277
competence, need for 37
computer-based patient-record
system 4
conceptual systems architecture
275–6
context-aware connectedness systems
8, 62–5
context-aware systems 51
for social connectedness 55–7
contextual inquiry 52
coordinated mobile agent 172
coordinator-based strict sensor/actuator
association 114
Cost() function 272
customized profile, building 172
user information, collecting 172
user profile, conceptual scheme of
173–4
cyber-physical systems (CPS) 13, 269
challenges 272–5
model-based methodologies for
safety and timing 285–6
model-compilation 286–7
model-compilation methodology
and approach 275
back-end: transformation into
concrete target platforms 283
design iterations 283–4
front-end: from multiple
heterogeneous high-level
models 275–80
middle-end: model-compilation
into SwArch 280–3
model-compilation methodology
assessment 284
applicability of model-
compilation approach 284
productivity enhancements 285
physical modelling 287
cynicism 67
Daily Activities Diarist 56
data dissemination nodes (DDNs) 239
DATA period 250
data records 2
data relay nodes (DRNs) 239
delta waves 138–9
‘design for our future selves’ 93
dialysis membrane, block diagram of
190
Digital Family Portrait 56, 63
‘digital immigrants’ 83
‘digital natives’ 83
digital outcasts 31
directional antenna 244, 246, 301
directional scheduled medium access
control (DiS-MAC) 244,
246–8
timing structure of 248
distributed artificial intelligence
(DAI) 162
Index
371

drug management 15
DW-MAC protocol 251
‘eco-cognitive’ smart environment 32
e-Health 1–2, 5, 14, 90
electrical stimulation intensity 356
electroencephalography (EEG) 138,
148, 365
electronic control units (ECU) 275
electronic data record storage and
management 1
electronic health record (EHR) 4
EHR system (EHRS) 4
electronic Pill jars 93
emission model 61
‘Emotional Map of the Home’
Interview protocol (EMHI)
25–8, 38
emotion-based AAL/ELE solutions 9
emotion recognition 147–8
END message 248
end-to-end (E2E) approach 104
end-to-end latency 240, 245, 256,
283
energy-aware topology design 301
optimization of relay nodes
placement 304
energy-efficient decision factors
306–7
energy-efficient routing 306–8
energy harvesting 301
enhanced living environment (ELE)
208, 271 see also ambient
assisted living (AAL) and
enhanced living environment
(ELE) service scenarios
ELE as a service (ELEaaS) 103–4
rational and affective functions of
218
enhanced living environment as a
service (ELEaaS) see ambient
assisted living as a service
(AALaaS)/enhanced living
environment as a service
(ELEaaS) platforms
ePrivacy Directive 2002/58/EC 14
ethics in information and
communication technologies
81
ethical issues at stake 88–90
generation effect 82
gerontechnology 83–5
identification of needs 90–3
need for acceptability 93–5
pitfalls to be avoided 85–8
EU-FP7-Project DOREMI 223
European ‘Ambient Assisted Living
Joint Programme’ 85
European Executive Board of the
Ambient Assisted Living
Association 90
European Telecommunications
Standards Institute (ETSI) 210
event detection 307
evolutionary biological theory 8, 21
exposed terminal problem 241
face-to-face care 39
face-to-face visit 5
failure mode effects analysis (FMEA)
277
fault tree generation and qualitative
analysis (FTA) 277
Feasible() function 272
feedback loops 32, 40
finger flexion–extension exercises
360–1
flow cytometry, block diagram of
191–2
F-measure 178
foot analysis, smart wearable for 319
force sensors, characteristics for 193
four-bar mechanism 348–9
four-level wearable algorithms design
325
Fugl–Meyer Assessment (FMA) scale
362
full-function device (FFD) 142, 239
functional ability and independent
living skills 54
372
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

functional electrical stimulation
(FES) 347
fuzzy logic and probability 163–5
galvanic skin response (GSR) 136,
138
gamma waves 138–9
generation effect 82
gerontechnology 82–90, 92, 95
‘getting up from/going to the bed’
scenario 114–15
global model-compilation
methodology 276
Google’s prediction algorithms 325
Graphene Field-Effect Transistors
322, 324
guilty feelings 67
gyroscope 61, 186
Hadoop MapReduce framework
329–31
Hall-effect magnetic position sensor
191, 199
Hall-effect sensor ICs, characteristics
for 197, 199
hand joints model 349
hand rehabilitation 346
haptic glove 347, 354, 356
HCatalog 331
health, defined 85
healthcare information, defined 2
healthcare perspectives for wearable
devices 324–5
Healthcare Solutions 6
health informatics 2–3
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPPA) 15
heterogeneous nodes 307
hexoskin 321–2
hexoskin smart shirts 141
hidden Markov models (HMMs) 9,
59–60
hidden terminal problem 241–2, 248,
250
high transmission speed 301
HMM-SVM model 60–2
home niches, ELE in 36
human activity monitoring, wearable
sensors for 332–4
human activity recognition (HAR)
51, 57–60, 64, 332
human body communications (HBC)
144
human body temperature control
system 326
human–computer interaction (HCI)
34–5
human niche construction
as a universal human phenomenon
22–4
human skin conductance response,
wearable sensors for 331–2
humidity sensors
199
characteristics for 197, 199
hWear
TM 321
hybrid FES-robotic glove approach
354
experimental results 358–60
hybrid system description 354–8
statistical analysis 360–3
hybrid IHRG system 356, 362
hardware components and
connections of 357
hyper-connected human generations 81
hypothalamus 326–7
idle listening mode 240
IDTechEx marketing report 335–6
IEEE 802.11 technology 144–5, 200
IEEE 802.15.6 technology
144, 200,
202, 295
IEEE 802.15.x standards 141–2
IEEE 802.xx standards 210
implantable sensors 294, 296–7
inclusive design 87, 93–4
independent support technologies,
development of 84
information and communication
technologies (ICT) services
5–7, 84, 102–3, 208–9
Index
373

information transmission (IT) part
246
infrared sensor 58, 192
Institute for Perception Social Presence
Questionnaire 55
Institute of Health Improvements 5
instrumental activities of daily living
(IADL) 54
intelligent agents 162–3
advantages and characteristics
162–3
intelligent haptic robotic glove
(IHRG), 14, 345, 347
design and development of 348–9
graphical interface of 355
intensive care units (ICU) monitoring
systems 3
interface agent 170
internalization 29–30
International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) 210
Internet of Things (IoT) 6, 143
defined 293
Intra BAN network 139–40
isoflurane 191
jamming message 250
Julius HTK voice recognition engine
350–1
kidney dialysis machines, sensors in
192
KIOLA platform 222
dashboard for clinical experts 221
platform implementation 220
system architecture 220
K-means method 332
lab-on-a-pill 12
‘landscape of care’ 34
lap time measurement wireless sensor
system 236
Lawton IADL scale 54–5
leaky register 242
leaky shift register model 242
least common ancestor (LCA) 177
Lifestyle and Health Management
System 208
light-emitting diode (LCD) 350
linear topology wireless sensor
network 237
linear wireless sensor networks
(LWSNs) 236–7
medium access control (MAC)
protocols for 241–61
network model 237–8
objectives and challenges of 240–1
one-dimensional LWSN 238
three-tier LWSN 240
variations of 238
chain tree 238–9
chain type 238
hierarchical 239–40
single line 238
LINE-MAC 253, 256
algorithm of 259
Local Area Network (LAN) 106
location awareness 307
location detect package (LDP) 245
loneliness as risk factor 50
long-chain MAC (LC-MAC) protocol
245
long thin wireless sensor network
(LT-WSN) 238
low-power listening (LPL) 253
Lumitouch lamp 57
machine-to-machine (M2M)
communications 13, 108, 235,
262
magnetic position sensors 191
characteristics for 197
MapReduce 331
MarkerClock 56
master devices 143
MATLAB 356
media access control (MAC) layer
295
medical implant communications
service (MICS) 300
medium access control (MAC)
protocols 13
374
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

for linear wireless sensor networks
241–61
meta-synthesis
93
micro-electro-mechanical systems
(MEMS) 185, 316
benefits of 186
sensor technology 187
microfluidic manufacturing
techniques 324
MIThril 141
mobile agents, advantages of 163
mobile Health (mHealth) 2
mobile phone and internet access
82
mobile setup 149–50
model-based development (MBD)
tools 284
model-compilation methodology 13,
271, 275–84
motivations 30, 92
multi-agent systems 162, 178
multidisciplinary gerontechnology
95
multi-frame-transmission MAC
(MFT-MAC) 250–1
Multiline LWSN 238
MuSAMA project 210
myocardial infarction 297
narrowband (NB) 144
National Commission on Informatics
and Liberty in France (CNIL)
87
natural-contact sensors 218
(N,d)-linear network 237
network control centre (NCC) 240
neuroprostheses 347
NICA robot 219
niche 8, 22–3
construction 22, 30–1
ELE as niche construction 31–4
home as 24–8
niche construction theory (NCT) 8, 21,
23–4
non-collaborating intelligent agents
162
OASIS project 6
on-demand service 67
one-dimensional network 237–8
ontology, applied subjective
design of fuzzy and vague case-
based ontology 174–5
fuzzification process in case-based
ontology 174
storing knowledge in fuzzy ontology
of proposed semantic system
174
OpenNotes patient engagement
project 15
Open System Interconnection (OSI)
Reference Model 210
operationalization 93–4
optical sensors 199
characteristics for 195, 199
‘out-of-home’ scenario 120
overhearing packets 253
oxygen concentrator 190–1
block diagram of 190
Pacemaker Medtronic 321
packet delivery rate (PDR) 241
packet delivery ratio 256
packetLimit parameter 253, 256
pairing 143
parameterization 109
parasympathetic nervous system
(PNS) 136
participatory design 39, 52–3
patient-centred health care 5
Pennes model 327
perceived relationship closeness 55
perceived social presence 55
personal digital assistants (PDAs) 201
personal health device
communications 1
personal health monitoring systems
11, 135, 151
physiological parameters and stress
135–9
short-range wireless network
technology 141
system architectures 139–41
Index
375

personalization of results, agent for
172
personalized searching, agent-based
system for 167
developed system, aims and tasks
of 168
personalized semantic search
system 168–72
personalized semantic search
system, conceptual model for
168–70
agent for personalization of results
172
agent for query manipulation 171
coordinated mobile agent 172
interface agent 170
user profile agent 170–1
personal living environment (PLE)
106, 108, 216
Persona project 6
person–environment relationship 22
person–environment transaction 25, 37
Pexpect module 351
PfArch 280
piconet
143
PIPS project 6
place attachment 25, 27
place identity 25
Polo Tech shirt 321
population ageing 50
position switches
199
preACK packet 253, 256–8
precision 178
predefined recovery exercises system
for home use 353–4
preliminary questions, asking 90
pressure sensors 58
characteristics for 194–195, 199
pressure switches, characteristics for
198
privacy 39, 65, 67, 92
protected mode 249–50
psychological autonomy 29
psychosocial processes
body-centred meaning 35
person-centred meaning 35
social-centred meaning 35
query manipulation, agent for 171
radio frequency (RF) module 184
Raspberry Pi hardware platform 347,
350
rational intelligent agents 163
real-time assessment of stress 11, 134
real-time monitoring systems 2
recall 178
receive-transmit-idle-transmit-receive-
idle (R-T-I-T-R-I) 244
reduced-function device (RFD) 142
registration form (RF) part 246
rehabilitation glove system 346
relatedness, need for 37–8
relay burden problem 240, 253
relevance to the frail elderly 67
remote information recording 38
remote sensing 105, 120
Representational state transfer
(REST) 222
request-to-send/clear-to-send (RTS/
CTS) mechanism 241, 250–1
research and development (R&D) of
systems 7, 31
residual energy of a sensor node 306
Rights and Responsibilities of Older
Persons of the International
Federation of Ageing 89
risks and emergencies 67
rituals 26–7, 67
R-MAC protocol 251
robotic exoskeleton 319–20
robotic rehabilitative systems 347
robots 105
rule-based reasoning 166–7
SAR-aware routing 306, 308–9
Satori project 87
scalpel, control of 186
scepticism 65
self-assessment manikin (SAM) 147
376
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

self-determination theory (SDT) 22
core concepts of 28–30
legacy of 28
self-regulation processes 26–7
semantics science 161
sensing technologies 58, 63, 70, 103
sensorial glove 356, 358, 360–1
sensor node 140, 184–92, 294, 302,
306–8
sensors, location of 296
SEooC RTOS 283
service parameterization 109
service scenarios 109
shift register 242–3
short-range wireless network
technology 141
Bluetooth 143–4
IEEE 802.11 144–5
IEEE 802.15.6 144
IEEE 802.15.x standards 141–2
ZigBee 142–3
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) 300
SimModel 277–80, 283
simple linear network 237
Simulink 269, 287, 356
single hop versus multi-hop
transmissions 303, 307
skin conductance level (SCL) 136
skin conductance response (SCR) 138
slave devices 143
SLEEP period 250
S-MAC 246, 252, 256
smart home 35, 57
smart monitoring of patients 1
smartphone 58, 64, 69, 334
smart pill 12, 15, 186
smart shirt LOBIN 321, 323
smart wearables 316, 319, 328
smart wearable sensors (SWS) 186
Snowglobe lamp 57
social connectedness, pervasive
sensing for 49
ambient assisted living (AAL) 50–1
case study evaluating the HMM-
SVM model 60–2
challenges 69
context-aware connectedness
systems 62–5
context-aware systems 55–7
experimental results 65
HAR-based activity displays
66–8
perceptions on context-aware
solutions 65–6
models for HAR 57–60
social isolation and loneliness as risk
factors 50
user-centred approach for designing
systems 52–5
SocialConnector monitors 208
social isolation 50
socially sustainable development 87
social niche construction 23
social support 50, 67
socioecological psychology 21, 30, 40
constructing ELE solutions in home
niches 36–9
ELE and home niches 34–6
ELE and niche construction
processes 34
ELE as niche construction 31–4
as a framework 22
home as a niche 24
lessons learnt with the Emotional
Map of the Home Interview
25–8
‘human niche construction’ 22–4
self-determination theory, see self-
determination theory (SDT)
socio-economic innovation 95
SOPRANO project 6
specific absorption rate (SAR) 295, 304
frequency band on SAR values 305
high SAR on human body 305–6
low transmission power level to
reduce 305
speech recognition module 350
staggered wakeup schedule (SWS)
245–6
stakeholders 52-3, 92
Index
377

standardization 86
state transition model 60
stationary setup 148–9, 153
storage area networks (SAN) 107
stress assessment and monitoring 11,
135, 148
Stress Level and Emotional State
Assessment Database
(SLADE) 152–3
stress-level monitoring, technological
support to 133
future technology in support of
153–5
state-of-the-art personal health
monitoring systems 135
physiological parameters and
stress 135–9
short-range wireless network
technology 141
system architectures 139–41
stress and emotion assessment 145
emotion recognition 147–8
stress assessment procedure 146–7
use cases 148
mobile setup 149–50
recent projects 151–2
SLADE application scenario
152–3
stationary setup 148–9
stress monitoring system 139, 141,
147, 151
Stroke Impact Scale (SIS) 362–3
Structured Query Language (SQL) 165
super SYNC message passing
(SSYNC) 245–7
support vector machine (SVM) 59–61
surrounding subsystems, systemic view
of 40
SwArch 270, 275, 281–3
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) 136
SYNC period 250
SysArch 277–8, 283
technological niche construction 23,
32, 37
telecare device 86
temperature/humidity sensors,
characteristics for 197, 199
TempTraq wearable patch 322
10-fold cross-validation technique 62,
147
tension reduction 67
therapeutic landscape concept 32
thermal sensors
characteristics for 196
geometry 199
theta waves 138–9
threshold-based classification
methods 59
traffic load 238, 251
transmission distance 306
TruTag Technologies 15
UCLA loneliness scale 55
ultra-wideband (UWB) 144
unified modelling language (UML)
diagram 275, 286
universal accessibility 93–4
universal design 93–4
unprotected mode 249–50
use-cases 105, 109
user-centred design process 52–5
user profile, conceptual scheme of
173–4
user profile agent 170–1
utilization of a network of N nodes
238
value of the nonconscious processes
67
VDI/VDEIT 90
‘vehicle state estimation’ block 280
vibration sensors 58
virtualization process 212
virtual machines (VM) 212
visual-based studies 56
voice control approach 349
experiments with vocal commands
352–3
hardware and software design 349–52
voice recognition-based
implementation 347–8, 364
378
Enhanced living environments: from models to technologies

wearable devices 218, 321
wearable health care 315–16
algorithms dedicated to 325
body temperature monitoring
326–31
human activity monitoring 332–4
human skin conductance
response 331–2
future wearable challenges 335–7
healthcare perspectives for 324–5
user needs and expectations 334–5
wearable technology evolution
316–24
wearable sensors 58, 64, 294, 325
for body temperature monitoring
326–31
for human activity monitoring 332–4
wearable technology 13
evolution 317–19
Web Ontology Language (OWL) 164
Weiser’s vision of ubiquitous
technology 66
WEMU 321
whereabouts clock 56
wide area network (WAN) 294
Wi-Fi router 110, 117, 144, 298
Wilcoxon test 362
wireless body area networks
(WBANs) 12, 140, 183, 293–4,
298, 301–2
advantages 299
applications 295–7, 299
architecture of 294–5
comparison of 298–9
disadvantages 299
energy-aware topology design 301
optimization of relay nodes
placement 304
energy efficiency 300
active/sleep mode 300
cognitive radio 300
directional antenna 301
energy harvesting 301
high transmission speed 301
energy-efficient decision factors
306–7
energy-efficient routing 307–8
infrastructure 300
main requirements of 200
SAR analysis 304
impact of frequency band on SAR
values 305
impact of high SAR on human
body 305–6
using low transmission power
level to reduce SAR 305
SAR-aware routing 308–9
sensor characteristics 192
sensor node 184–92
technologies 199
and wireless sensor network 183–4
wireless local area network (WLAN)
141
wireless medical telemetry service
(WMTS) 300
wireless personal area network
(WPAN) 110, 112, 116, 141
wireless sensor network (WSN)
12–13, 140, 184, 236
WSNs with linear topology
(LWSNs) 13
wireless wire (WiWi) 244
WorldVistA Computer Based Patient
Record System 4
wrist-worn sensors 58
WuXi PharmaTech 15
xBee modules 350
Zebra Technologies 6
Zhu model 328
ZigBee sensor nodes 238
ZigBee technology 142–3
and 802.15.4 200
Index
379


