Progress in IS
Jan vom Brocke
Alexander Simons    Editors 
Enterprise Content 
Management 
in Information 
Systems Research
Foundations, Methods and Cases

Progress in IS
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/10440

Jan vom Brocke
• Alexander Simons
Editors
Enterprise Content
Management in Information
Systems Research
Foundations, Methods and Cases
123

Editors
Jan vom Brocke
Alexander Simons
Institute of Information Systems
University of Liechtenstein
Vaduz
Liechtenstein
ISSN 2196-8705
ISSN 2196-8713
(electronic)
ISBN 978-3-642-39714-1
ISBN 978-3-642-39715-8
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8
Springer Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013947574
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief
excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the
purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the
work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of
the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must
always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the
Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Foreword
From 2005 to 2020, the digital universe will grow by a factor of 300, from 130 exabytes to
40,000 exabytes, or 40 trillion gigabytes (more than 5,200 gigabytes for every man,
woman, and child in 2020).
John Gantz and David Reinsel: ‘‘The Digital Universe in 2020’’
In today’s digital information age, rapid technological advancements allow us
to create, copy, and distribute information more quickly than ever before. Inno-
vations in information and communication technologies have brought us so many
conveniences that it is difﬁcult to imagine our lives without smart phones, tablets,
e-mails, instant messaging, social media, and the like.
However, while they are useful and often entertaining, these tools also have
their drawbacks. We have come to a point where we are highly dependent on the
Internet, where we are always reachable via various communication channels, and
where it is increasingly difﬁcult to keep pace with the many phone calls, e-mails,
instant messages, and tweets we receive every day. We have to back up so many
ﬁles—not just reports, spreadsheets, and charts, but also photos, music, and
videos—that we risk losing track of them, especially if we create and share
multiple versions of the same documents. Put simply, our technological capacities
to copy and distribute information are about to outgrow our personal abilities to
process it.
The ﬂood of digital information does not stop at the personal level; enterprises
also face challenges with the management of digital information. Hundreds or
thousands of employees create and share great quantities of information every day,
and because they do it in an economic context, they must do it as efﬁciently and
effectively as possible. Finding ways to ensure such efﬁciency and effectiveness is
not easy.
Among the many challenges of today’s enterprise information management are
reducing search times, maintaining information quality, and complying with
reporting obligations and standards. Many of these challenges are essentially old
problems in new guises; but because of the vast quantity of enterprise information,
they are more difﬁcult to deal with than ever.
Several software systems—most notably, document management systems and
(Web) content management systems—have been developed that can help com-
panies deal with these and related challenges. But these systems have typically
v

been implemented with limited scopes (e.g., for the support of single business
functions and processes), so they seldom address all of an organization’s infor-
mation assets. Perhaps this why increasing numbers of companies have imple-
mented ‘‘Enterprise Content Management’’ (ECM) systems for the management of
all forms of information, especially unstructured information.
Still, such implementations come with their own problems. Which content
objects are to be put under the control of the ECM system? Which processes are
affected by the implementation? How do they have to be changed? How should
outgrown technology be replaced? Research is challenged to support practitioners
in answering these questions.
The above questions show that ECM requires both technological and mana-
gerial capabilities, so it has been identiﬁed as a relevant ﬁeld of research from the
viewpoint of the academic discipline of Information Systems (IS). However, only
a few research articles have been dedicated to the study of ECM implementation in
the IS community. With this book we hope to contribute to establishing ECM as an
important subﬁeld of IS research.
This book could not have been published without the support of many people.
First, we thank the members of a competence center on ECM that we founded in
early 2008: Christian Buddendick, Jürgen Mussbacher, and Martin Petry (Hilti
AG); Erich Frick and Richard Senti (Hoval AG); René Derungs, Wolfgang Sch-
mied, and Urs Tschumper (Ivoclar Vivadent AG); Sven Lässer and Alex Luchs
(National Public Administration Liechtenstein); and Pierino Casagrande and Ste-
fan Novotny (ThyssenKrupp Presta AG). The experiences and insights they shared
with us were invaluable in our studies, and several chapters in this book draw from
their cooperation. We also thank the government of Liechtenstein for its ﬁnancial
support of the competence center initiative.
We are also grateful for the contributions of the researchers who accepted our
invitation to contribute their work to this book. We are especially pleased that Tero
Päivärinta, a pioneer in the area of ECM in IS research, provided the preface.
Tero’s work has inspired us and strongly inﬂuenced our research, for which we
also thank him.
Finally, we extend heartfelt thanks to Christian Rauscher from Springer, who
was a great help throughout the editing and publication process.
Vaduz, Liechtenstein
Jan vom Brocke
Alexander Simons
References
Gantz, J., & Reinsel, D. (2012). The digital universe in 2020: Big data, bigger digital shadows,
and biggest growth in the far east. International Data Corporation (IDC). Retrieved April 5,
2013, from http://www.emc.com/collateral/analyst-reports/idc-the-digital-universe-in-2020.
pdf
vi
Foreword

Preface: ECM—Still an Ugly Duckling?
Certainly he is not handsome, but he is a very good child, and swims as well as the others,
indeed rather better. I think he will grow like the others all in good time, and perhaps will
look smaller. He stayed so long in the egg-shell, that is the cause of the difference…
H. C. Andersen: The Ugly Duckling
In one of the earliest white papers on the subject of Enterprise Content Man-
agement (ECM), Telleen (1995) outlined how intranets require a new paradigm for
managing content in the enterprise. At the time Telleen wrote, all information to be
accessed through an intranet was also to be included in the enterprise-wide concept
of content management. Soon, the ECM concept gained ground in professional
information management societies (especially the Association for Information and
Image Management) and among prominent consulting ﬁrms, and practitioners
started to involve a few diverging foci and deﬁnitions of ECM. 7 years later,
Fowell (2002), McNay (2002), and Reimer (2002) introduced the concept in the
academic outlets (Rickenberg et al. 2012).
Now, 17 years after the ﬁrst practitioner cracks on the eggshell of the ECM
duckling and on the tenth anniversary of the ﬁrst academic swims with the other
ducks, the small community of ECM scholars continues to struggle, characterizing
the ﬁeld as immature and ambiguous (e.g., Grahlmann et al. 2012; Rickenberg
et al. 2012). It seems the ECM community, like H. C. Andersen’s ugly duckling,
still does not fully know ‘‘what the birds were called’’ or ‘‘whither they were
ﬂying,’’ although we all love a swan—an academic piece of ECM research—when
we see one.
Rickenberg et al. ’s (2012) literature search found only 68 relevant academic
ECM articles published in 2002–2012, and of those, only 7 appeared in recognized
information systems journals. Most top journals in the information systems ﬁeld
have yet to publish a single article on ECM. If we compare these ﬁgures on
academic attention to those of other types of enterprise systems, such as enterprise
resource planning (ERP), data warehousing, or customer relationship management
(CRM), the difference is striking. For example, a simple search of ‘‘enterprise
content management’’ by Google Scholar covering January 1 through August 23,
2012, resulted in 220 hits, while ‘‘enterprise resource planning,’’ ‘‘data ware-
housing,’’ and ‘‘customer relationship management’’ had 4,520, 3,060, and 5,040
hits, respectively. ECM also received little attention in the recent curriculum
vii

guidelines for academic information systems education (Topi et al. 2010); ‘‘con-
tent management’’ is brieﬂy mentioned under the knowledge area of enterprise
architecture, but the course suggestions that include data and information man-
agement, enterprise systems, and new technologies all ignore ECM. Is this scarcity
of academic attention in line with the practical importance of the ﬁeld?
A comparison of the ECM market with the ERP market reveals ECM’s prac-
tical importance. According to Forrester’s market analysis, the ERP market size
will grow from $45.5 billion in 2011 to $50.3 billion by 2015 (CBR 2011). In turn,
the Radicati Group estimated that the ECM market will reach $4.385 billion in
2012 and grow annually by 15 % during the next 4 years to $6.37 billion in 2015
(Radicati and Yamasaki 2012). Hence, the ECM market will be about 12 % of the
annual ERP market in 2015. If we look at the software-as-a-service (SaaS) market,
the picture changes remarkably. The SaaS market category ‘‘Content, Communi-
cations and Collaboration’’ is estimated to reach $3.954 billion in 2012, while the
ERP SaaS market is expected to be only $1.957 billion (Mertz et al. 2011).
Customer relationship management will still be larger than ECM in the SaaS
market in 2012 ($4.341 billion), but it will grow more slowly than ECM, ending
with a market size of $5.719 billion in 2015 (Mertz et al. 2011).
Based on this coarse reasoning, we can still state that ECM is something of an
‘‘ugly duckling’’ in academia, struggling to ﬁnd its natural ﬂock of swans with
which the ﬁeld could start to ﬂy on its own. Compared to the market, ECM may
have stayed in its egg and in the ﬂocks of established ducks and geese for too long,
focusing on the traditional ways of thinking about enterprise systems and software.
For example, if we make the blunt assumption that a ﬁeld’s market size reﬂects its
relevance and compare ECM to, for example, ERP, ECM should deserve at least
twice the amount of academic research as it receives today. If ECM joined the
swans ﬂying up the winds of the SaaS business, ECM (together with electronic
collaboration and communication) should be a key research topic! The ECM
academics should do their best to inﬂuence the older ducks of information systems
to update their education curricula, as we will need to educate more reﬂective
ECM professionals in the future.
This book is warmly welcomed as a remarkable contribution that gathers
together many, if not most, of the academic ECM ducklings that have pioneered
and struggled to form the identity of the ﬁeld. It provides one of the leaps that the
ﬁeld needs in its transformation from an unsure ugly duckling with a shaky identity
(and little room in the pond among more established ducks and geese) to a
beautiful swan. Let us ‘‘shake our feathers’’ and ‘‘stretch our slender necks.’’ It is
time to ﬂy.
Luleå, Sweden
Tero Päivärinta
viii
Preface

References
Andersen, H. C., & Robinson, H. (ill.). (1843/1913). Hans Andersen’s fairy tales: The ugly
duckling. London: Constable & Co.
Computer Business Review (CBR). (2011). ERP market to grow to $50.3bn in 2015: Forrester.
Retrieved May 6, 2011, from http://enterpriseapplications.cbronline.com/news/erp-market-to-
grow-to-503bn-in-2015-forrester-060511
Fowell, S. (2002). Bridging the gap between information resource design and enterprise content
management. In E.-P. Lim, S. Foo, C. Khoo, H. Chen, E. Fox, U. Shalini, & C. Thanos (Eds.),
Digital libraries: People, knowledge, and technology (Lecture Notes in Computer Science
2555, pp. 507–515). Berlin: Springer.
Grahlmann, K. R., Helms, R. W., Hilhorst, C., Brinkkemper, S., & van Amerongen, S. (2012).
Reviewing enterprise content management: A functional framework. European Journal of
Information Systems, 21(3), 268–286.
McNay, H. E. (2002). Enterprise content management: An overview. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Professional Communication Conference—Reﬂection on Communication (pp.
396–402). Portland, Oregon: IEEE.
Mertz, S. A., Eschinger, C., Eid, T., Pang, C., & Wurster, L. F. (2011). Forecast: Software as a
service, worldwide, 2010–2011. Gartner, June 22nd, 2011.
Radicati, S., & Yamasaki, T. (2012). Enterprise content management market, 2012–2016.
Executive summary. The Radicati Group, Palo Alto, CA. Retrieved December 12, 2012, from
http://www.radicati.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Enterprise-Content-Management-
Market-2012-2016-Executive-Summary.pdf
Reimer, J. A. (2002). Enterprise content management. Datenbank-Spektrum, 2(4), 17–22.
Rickenberg, T. A., Neumann, M., Hohler, B., & Breitner, M. H. (2012). Enterprise content
management: A literature review. In Proceedings of the 18th Americas Conference on
Information Systems. Seattle, WA: AIS.
Telleen, S. L. (1995). The IntraNet Architecture (TM): Managing information in the new
paradigm. White paper. Amdahl Corporation.
Topi, H., Valacich, J. S., Wright, R. T., Kaiser, K., Nunamaker, J. F. Jr., Sipior, J., & de Vreede,
G. J. (2010). IS 2010: Curriculum guidelines for undergraduate degree programs in
information systems. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 26(18),
359–428.
Preface
ix

Contents
Part I
Foundations and Trends
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research. . .
3
Alexander Simons and Jan vom Brocke
The Market for ECM Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Martin Böhn
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content
Management Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Laurent Wiltzius, Alexander Simons, Stefan Seidel
and Jan vom Brocke
Rhetorical Challenges and Concerns in Enterprise
Content Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Dave Clark
Cultural Values Matter: The Role of Organizational
Culture in ECM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
Theresa Schmiedel and Jan vom Brocke
Part II
Methods and Tools
Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management . . . . . . . .
91
Martin Smits and Ramon O’Callaghan
Critical Success Factors in Enterprise Content Management:
Toward a Framework for Readiness Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
Andrea Herbst, Alexander Simons, Jan vom Brocke
and René Derungs
xi

Content Management for Advisory Support Information Systems . . . .
125
Joachim Pfister and Gerhard Schwabe
Make or Buy? Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud
Computing on the Content Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
Ivo Gonzenbach, Christian Russ and Jan vom Brocke
Fostering Comparability in Content Management Using
Semantic Standardization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
Jörg Becker, Tobias Heide and Łukasz Lis
Part III
Examples and Cases
The Knowledge Garden and Content Management
at J. D. Edwards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
183
Judy E. Scott
Lessons Learned from Implementing Enterprise Content
Management at the National Public Administration
in Liechtenstein. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
199
Alexander Simons, Jan vom Brocke, Sven Lässer and Andrea Herbst
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management:
Two Swedish Municipalities as Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
217
Proscovia Svärd
Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content and Documents
in ECM Systems Design: Results from a Modeling
Project at Hoval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
237
Alexander Simons, Jan vom Brocke, Stefan Fleischer and Jörg Becker
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process
Transformation: The Case of an ECM-Driven Transformation
of Sales Processes at Hilti Corporation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
255
Jan vom Brocke, Christian Sonnenberg and Christian Buddendick
Author Biographies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
279
xii
Contents

Part I
Foundations and Trends

Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research
Alexander Simons and Jan vom Brocke
Abstract The growing interest in technologies that support the creation and
management of corporate materials—image brochures, marketing ﬂyers, sales
presentations, product catalogues, Web pages, and many more—can be attributed
to challenges that result from steadily increasing volumes of digital information
that impede an efﬁcient search for corporate documents and their maintenance and
reuse. Past Information Systems (IS) research has discussed a number of related
challenges in the areas of knowledge management, (Web) content management,
and document management. The latest development deals with the notion of
enterprise content management (ECM), an integrated approach to information
management that covers many of these and related concepts. ECM has received
considerable attention in practice, and several market research institutions and
consultancies expect increasing growth for the ECM market in the near future.
With its focus on the conﬂuence of organizational and technological issues, ECM
is a relevant topic for IS research. Notwithstanding its relevance to both academia
and practice, the concept of ECM has been largely ignored by the IS discipline and
can be characterized as bereft of theory. As a response, this chapter collects,
summarizes, and synthesizes ECM research from the IS discipline. With the help
of four perspectives researchers can take to explore the concept, it characterizes
and explains the concept of ECM and provides an overview and introduction to the
other chapters in this book.
A. Simons (&)  J. vom Brocke
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-Josef-Strasse 21,
9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein
e-mail: alexander.simons@uni.li
J. vom Brocke
e-mail: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_1,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
3

Introduction
Some two decades ago, Rutherford D. Rogers, a former Yale library director, said
‘‘we’re drowning in information and starving for knowledge’’ (as, e.g., quoted in
Miller 2007, p. 124). Today’s organizations face numerous challenges that are due
to the rapidly growing number of digital ﬁles they create and receive (Rockley
et al. 2003, pp. 8–12). As a result, knowledge workers are often unaware of
existing content, or they spend extensive time searching for it; then, after an often
fruitless search for information, they often re-create existing content, which results
in inconsistent versions of the same content. Finally, if people are unaware of
available content, unable to ﬁnd it, or unsure about its accuracy, they can hardly
work with it. This issue becomes crucial, as the majority of documents are typi-
cally not created from scratch but are built upon existing content that is spread
across the enterprise. Hence, the management of content at an enterprise-wide
level is a timely challenge for information and knowledge workers.
The concept of ECM has been discussed with increasing frequency by both
researchers and practitioners (e.g., Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 648). While pre-
vious approaches, such as document management, Web content management,
content management, and records management, focus on speciﬁc and typically
isolated aspects of managing digital information, ECM has emerged as the con-
solidation of these and further concepts (vom Brocke et al. 2010, p. 2), providing a
‘‘modern, integrated perspective on information management’’ (Päivärinta and
Munkvold 2005, p. 1). Thus, ECM reaches beyond single applications, business
areas, processes, and functions to capture all of an organization’s information
assets, regardless of type, format, granularity, or source (Smith and McKeen 2003,
p. 648). Examples include texts, ﬁgures, and data embedded in corporate docu-
ments like Web pages, records, e-mails, and reports.
The term ‘‘ECM’’ was introduced in 2001 by the Association for Information
and Image Management (AIIM) International (Blair 2004, p. 65), a non-proﬁt
community
of
professional
information
and
knowledge
workers
(http://
www.aiim.org). Gartner’s 2010 magic quadrant report forecasted that the market
for ECM software and services would grow more than 10 percent annually
between 2010 and 2014 (as cited in Roe 2010). With its focus on the conﬂuence of
people, content, technologies, and processes (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005,
p. 1274), ECM has been identiﬁed as a relevant subﬁeld of IS research (Tyrväinen
et al. 2006, p. 628). ECM is a socio-technical phenomenon the implementation of
which comes with several technological and organizational challenges (Munkvold
et al. 2006, pp. 75–77). At present, there are many consultancy companies and
vendor-focused textbooks on ECM (Nordheim and Päivärinta 2004, p. 1), and the
majority of decisions about ECM adoption are inﬂuenced by business-oriented
online magazines like KMWorld or AIIM E-Doc (Andersen 2007, p. 81).
Notwithstanding the increasing attention that ECM is receiving in industry,
only a few IS researchers have explored the concept (Tyrväinen et al. 2006,
p. 627). While there are long research traditions in related ﬁelds, including
4
A. Simons and J. vom Brocke

information
resource
management,
electronic
document
management,
and
knowledge management (Munkvold et al. 2006, pp. 86–93), ECM is an under-
researched IS domain that is bereft of theory (Nordheim and Päivärinta 2004, p. 1;
Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 1). There is little doubt that there is a gap
between ECM research and practice, and IS researchers are challenged to engage
in a ﬁeld that is increasingly ﬁnding its way into the industry. Against this
background, this chapter explores the meaning and boundaries of the ECM con-
cept from an IS perspective.
Overview of ECM Research in the IS Domain
The conceptualization of ECM presented in this chapter is grounded in a sys-
tematic literature search among more than one hundred of the most inﬂuential IS
journals (according to the consolidated list shared by the Association for Infor-
mation Systems) (AIS 2010) and three major IS conferences: the European Con-
ference on Information Systems (ECIS), the International Conference on
Information Systems (ICIS), and the Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS). The search within these publications was performed in January
2011, using eleven online databases and various journal and conference home
pages, including the AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), Business Source Premier
(EBSCOhost), IEEE Xplore, ProQuest, ScienceDirect, and SpringerLink (search
term: ‘‘enterprise content management’’). A backward search (i.e., a screening of
the articles’ references) (Webster and Watson 2002, p. xvi) was conducted to
identify additional publications on ECM that the keyword search did not produce.
This exercise led to only a small number of ECM-focused articles, suggesting that
the concept of ECM is seldom the subject of IS research. Some of the few retrieved
articles are summarized in the following (Table 1).
The analysis of these works suggests that ECM is highly relevant to the IS
community (Munkvold et al. 2006, pp. 92–93; Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 628), but
as a research ﬁeld, it is still in its infancy (Nordheim and Päivärinta 2006, p. 649).
Only a few IS studies approach the concept of ECM at the strategic level and/or
report on enterprise-wide content management initiatives (Munkvold et al. 2006,
p. 71; Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 1). Exceptions include case studies at J.D.
Edwards, a global provider of enterprise resource planning software and services
that was purchased by Oracle (http://www.oracle.com) in 2005 (Scott et al. 2004),
and Statoil (http://www.statoil.com), a large Norwegian oil and gas producer
(Munkvold et al. 2003, 2006; Nordheim and Päivärinta 2004, 2006; Päivärinta and
Munkvold 2005).
With regard to research approaches, the literature review makes apparent that
ECM research tends to be design-oriented and conceptual in nature (Nordheim and
Päivärinta 2004, p. 1; Nordheim and Päivärinta 2006, p. 648; Tyrväinen et al.
2006, p. 632). For example, the two studies by Chiu and Hung (2005) and Kwok
and Chiu (2004) on ﬁnancial ECM systems appear to be largely design-oriented,
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research
5

similar to the one by O’Callaghan and Smits (2005) on ECM strategy develop-
ment. In contrast, the research framework presented by Tyrväinen et al. (2006)
might be considered a conceptual contribution. There are only a few empirical
studies on ECM, and quantitative studies are notably absent from the literature
analyzed. In particular, the impact of ECM on individuals, groups, and organi-
zations has rarely been investigated empirically. The aforementioned Statoil case
narrative, for instance, covers only the initial phases of ECM implementation
(Nordheim and Päivärinta 2006, p. 654), so it does not provide ultimate answers to
how ECM systems inﬂuence organizational performance. ECM research also tends
Table 1 Selected research papers on ECM from IS
Reference
Contents
McNay (2002)
ECM overview; information model; content lifecycle (create, approve,
deliver, manage); ECM software and hardware issues; measurement
of ROI and TCO
Smith and McKeen
(2003)
Drivers and beneﬁts of ECM (e.g., reduced material costs, time savings,
branding); content stewardship (capture, organize, process,
maintain); ECM governance
Kwok and Chiu (2004)
Enterprise content model and system architecture for global system
integration and control ﬂow management in ﬁnancial ECM
Nordheim and
Päivärinta (2004)
Functional and non-functional customization challenges of ECM (e.g.,
integration, usability); framework for ECM customization concepts
Scott et al. (2004)
Lessons learned from implementing three approaches to knowledge
management at J.D. Edwards: Website community, intranet/
extranet, and content management
Chiu and Hung (2005)
Privacy and access control for internal control ﬂow management (e.g.,
editing, approving, and processing content) in ﬁnancial ECM
O’Callaghan and Smits
(2005)
ECM as an integrated approach to content management and document
management; ECM strategy development process (e.g., content
audits)
Päivärinta and
Munkvold (2005)
ECM issues, objectives, and components; ECM compared to
information resource management, knowledge management, and
document management
Munkvold et al. (2006)
ECM issues and challenges (e.g., change management, collaboration);
ECM compared to its reference areas (e.g., knowledge
management)
Nordheim and
Päivärinta (2006)
Strategic development and implementation process of ECM (e.g.,
strategy, feasibility study, solution scenarios, and pilot
implementation)
Scheepers (2006)
Framework for implementing information portals in large
organizations; user segmentation for improved planning of
implementation effort
Tyrväinen et al. (2006)
Research framework of ECM that distinguishes four perspectives:
content, processes, technologies, and the enterprise context
Chu et al. (2009)
Mechanisms for content abstraction and annotation; semantic-based
approach to content management; creation of meta-content as a
critical procedure of ECM
6
A. Simons and J. vom Brocke

to favor inductive rather than deductive research designs, and it is seldom
grounded in theory.
Theories used in ECM research include Damsgaard and Scheepers’ (2000,
pp. 136–137) four-phase adaptation of Nolan’s (1973, pp. 400–403; 1979, p. 117)
stage model (used by Scott et al. 2004, p. 38), the four meta-theoretical motors of
development and change in organizations by van de Ven and Poole (1995,
pp. 520–521) (used by Nordheim and Päivärinta 2006, p. 650), and Trumbly and
Arnold’s (1989, pp. 27–30) interpretation of the 4P marketing mix for manage-
ment information systems (used by Scheepers 2006, pp. 638–639).
The analysis of these papers also suggests that a common understanding of
ECM has yet to be established in IS research. Many authors either do not explain
their understanding of ECM or refer to Smith and McKeen’s (2003) early deﬁ-
nition of ECM as ‘‘the strategies, tools, processes and skills an organization needs
to manage all its information assets (regardless of type) over their lifecycle’’
(p. 648). Considering that Smith and McKeen’s (2003) deﬁnition of ECM served
only ‘‘present purposes’’ (p. 648) in order to ‘‘establish the scope of the issue’’
(p. 657), the following section explores the characteristics and boundaries of ECM.
The results presented are also grounded in ECM articles from related disciplines
(e.g., Technical Communication) and papers from ECM-related ﬁelds like
knowledge management, information resource management, document manage-
ment, records management, (Web) content management, and enterprise resource
planning.
Four Perspectives on ECM
Framework
Tyrväinen et al. (2006) present a framework that provides four perspectives on
ECM research: content, processes, technologies, and the enterprise context
(p. 628) (Fig. 1).
The research framework can be summarized as follows: The content perspec-
tive is at its core, as ‘‘in any piece of ECM research, the content perspective is
involved in some way’’ (Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 628). The technology per-
spective integrates ECM issues related to hardware, software, and standards. The
processes
enterprise context
content
technologies
Fig. 1 ECM research
framework (adapted from:
Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 628)
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research
7

process perspective involves both process development and deployment, where the
former mainly refers to the development of processes for implementing and
maintaining ECM systems and the latter primarily concerns the implementation of
the content lifecycle activities (Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 631). Finally, the enter-
prise perspective describes the context for ECM, so it concerns organizational,
social, and legal aspects in particular.
The framework in Fig. 1 suggests that ECM can be considered an enterprise-
wide approach that includes not only technologies but also content and processes.
Beginning with the enterprise context—that is, the scope and objectives of ECM—
the next section synthesizes existing research on ECM based on these perspectives.
Scope and Objectives
Most IS researchers describe ECM as an enterprise-wide approach to information
management. Munkvold et al. (2006), for example, write that ‘‘ECM represents
integrated enterprise-wide [italics added] management of the life cycles of all
forms of recorded information content and their metadata, organized according to
corporate taxonomies, and supported by appropriate technological and adminis-
trative infrastructures’’ (p. 92). However, such an enterprise-wide approach to
content management is seen as complementary to, rather than conﬂicting with, the
many works in the ﬁeld that primarily focus on content management initiatives and
projects at the group level (e.g., departments, functional areas). ECM can be
framed as an integrated concept that covers and aligns previously isolated efforts to
manage content and documents at the ﬁrm level.
It has also been suggested that ECM be viewed as a phenomenon that spans
organizational borders and applies to entire supply chains. Tyrväinen et al. (2003),
for example, say that ECM ‘‘focuses on the management of textual and multimedia
content across and between [italics added] enterprises’’ (p. 1). Pursuing an
enterprise-wide approach to managing content reaches beyond the still prevalent
short-term objectives of content management (e.g., ease of navigation, time sav-
ings) (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 649). Recent reports and studies on ECM
implementation projects mention very different objectives associated with ECM.
Päivärinta and Munkvold (2005) conclude their analysis of a huge set of ECM case
narratives shared by AIIM with the observation that ‘‘all in all, the emergence of
particular objectives varied greatly among the cases depending on the business
area or domain in which the enterprise was operating’’ (p. 3).
The many ECM objectives discussed in the academic literature can be divided
into external and internal objectives. Most authors in the ﬁeld identify regulative
pressures related to compliance as one of the major external ECM drivers
(Andersen 2007, p. 65). Other external drivers include: establishing a modern
image of the enterprise, enhancing the value of services and products for the
customer, improving external collaboration (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 2),
and promoting a company’s brand and culture by standardizing document layout
8
A. Simons and J. vom Brocke

and design (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 650). Internal ECM drivers include the
reduction of paper-based processes, better decision-making, more efﬁcient infor-
mation processing, improved competitive intelligence (Smith and McKeen 2003,
p. 650), enhanced internal collaboration, more meaningful knowledge work, and
better information quality (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 2). Risk mitigation
(Dilnutt 2006, p. 40) and increased efﬁciency in information distribution (Pullman
and Gu 2007, p. 2) have also been identiﬁed as important ECM objectives.
Content
The current ECM deﬁnition from AIIM refers to documents, information, and
content at the same time; it describes ECM as ‘‘the strategies, methods and tools
used to capture, manage, store, preserve, and deliver content and documents
related to organizational processes. ECM tools and strategies allow the manage-
ment of an organization’s unstructured information, wherever that information
exists [all italics added]’’ (Association for Information and Image Management
2011). Certainly, the conceptualization of ECM is not easy, as it remains unclear
what types of digital assets are within its scope. IS authors refer to the concept of
information in their ECM studies most frequently; speciﬁcally, they describe ECM
as an approach that concerns the management of all possible forms of information.
Smith and McKeen (2003), for example, write that ECM ‘‘is an integrated
approach to managing all of an organization’s information [italics added]’’
(p. 647). Therefore, it is not surprising that prior studies on ECM refer to very
different types of information assets, including Web pages, marketing materials,
reports, budgeting documents, images, technical drawings, presentations, e-mails,
templates, invoices, and audio and video ﬁles (e.g., Blair 2004, p. 65; Iverson and
Burkart 2007, p. 408; Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 4; Smith and McKeen
2003, p. 647; Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 627). However, some researchers also
emphasize that ECM pertains to more than informational assets as carriers of
organizational knowledge because it includes such digital goods as music ﬁles and
background images (Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 629). In addition, congruent with
AIIM’s ECM deﬁnition, ECM focuses on unstructured information. While there
are some exceptions (e.g., Chu et al. 2009, p. 2360; Nordheim and Päivärinta 2006,
p. 649; Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 7), most IS researchers write little about
structured data in their ECM studies. The framework for ECM strategy develop-
ment by O’Callaghan and Smits (2005), for example, refers primarily to
unstructured information (p. 1271), and John F. Mancini, the current president of
AIIM, explains that ‘‘90 % of the information that organizations must manage is
unstructured—information that does not neatly fall into the rows and columns of a
traditional database’’ (Mancini 2004, p. 2).
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research
9

Apart from information, authors frequently refer to content and documents in
their ECM studies, and they often use the notion of content to describe the sep-
aration of content from its presentation and structure (Clark 2007, p. 45) and to the
segmentation of documents into content components (O’Callaghan and Smits
2005, p. 1273). Such components of content (e.g., texts, graphics) can be
assembled in various containers (e.g., brochures, ﬂyers) of media and presenta-
tions, improving the speed in which these materials are created and ensuring their
consistency and timeliness (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005, p. 1272). However,
ECM pertains not only to single content components, but also to entire information
products, most notably documents. This distinction is expressed in the property of
granularity that deﬁnes the extent to which content is broken down into compo-
nents (Rockley et al. 2003, pp. 165–166). Tyrväinen et al. (2006) write ‘‘the early
content management solutions used either technically coarse content storage
granularity with very large content units (ﬁles, documents) or high granularity with
very small content units (data items in databases)’’ (p. 629). In this regard, the
concept of ECM exceeds earlier approaches by including digital goods of varying
levels of granularity, ranging from complete information products (e.g., docu-
ments) to the smallest components they contain (e.g., sections, paragraphs, or even
sentences) (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005, p. 1274). Accordingly, O’Callaghan and
Smits (2005) consider ECM the synopsis of both (Web) content management and
document management (p. 1273).
Processes
At least two main process categories can be distinguished: software-related pro-
cesses (including developing, implementing, and maintaining ECM systems) and
lifecycle-related processes (Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 631). This review focuses on
the latter category since the stages of the content lifecycle ‘‘change the content and
affect not only how it is used in the organization, but also possibly the way
organizations are able to operate’’ (Iverson and Burkart 2007, p. 411). Many
content lifecycle models are present in IS research (e.g., McNay 2002,
pp. 398–399; Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 4; Smith and McKeen 2003,
p. 651). ECM is commonly understood as covering all of the phases in the content
lifecycle, ranging from creation to deletion (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 648). The
Statoil case study by Munkvold et al. (2006), for example, ‘‘conﬁrms the impor-
tance of a holistic focus on content life cycle, from capture/creation to long-term
retention or deletion, as a core characteristic of ECM’’ (p. 85). Therefore, ECM
can be distinguished from related concepts, most of which tend to consider single
phases of the content lifecycle. For example, content management has traditionally
focused on content creation, document management has focused on storage and
retrieval processes, Web content management has focused on publishing
10
A. Simons and J. vom Brocke

processes, and records management has focused on document retention. At a very
basic level, the following lifecycle phases can be distinguished: creating and
capturing, storing and retrieving, editing and reviewing, and retaining and deleting
content (Fig. 2).
Creating and capturing content. At the outset, ECM includes the managerial
and technological capabilities required to create and capture content efﬁciently.
Content creation has evolved into a critical success factor for organizational
performance, as information managers are increasingly challenged to maintain the
consistency and timeliness of their information products at an enterprise-wide
level (Scott et al. 2004, pp. 37–38). The key to efﬁcient content creation is to
systematically reuse content (Rockley et al. 2003, pp. 23–42). O’Callaghan and
Smits (2005) consider content reuse a ‘‘paradigm shift,’’ thus emphasizing that
content producers, ‘‘rather than writ[ing] entire documents … create elements
(‘content objects’) that can be assembled in different ‘information products’ (e.g. a
brochure, a press release, a presentation), for a number of different ‘delivery
methods’ and audiences (‘target users’)’’ (p. 1272). Rockley et al. (2003) identify
the potential of reusing content as increased consistency of content, lower costs for
content production and maintenance, and rapid conﬁguration and translation of
content (pp. 25–26). Compared to creating and reusing content, capturing pertains
to collecting content from internal and external sources, a process that typically
requires scanning and imaging, ﬁle conversion, and standardized data forms
(Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 4).
Storing and retrieving content. Because of the huge amounts and various types
of content created and used in organizations, the volumes of which impede the
efﬁcient search for information, content storage and retrieval processes have been
identiﬁed as being key to any ECM strategy since, ‘‘clearly, content is useless if it
cannot be easily searched or navigated’’ (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 652).
Making content searchable at an enterprise-wide scale requires appropriate storage
pools (e.g., Intranet, team sites, and ﬁle servers) (Nordheim and Päivärinta 2006,
p. 657), well-deﬁned metadata, and a corporate taxonomy. In this context, meta-
data are ‘‘information about content’’ (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 653) that exist
beside the content and add context and semantics to it (O’Callaghan and Smits
2005, p. 1274). At Statoil, for example, a corporate taxonomy provided a basis for
d
e
l
e
t
e
r
e
t
a
i
n
&
e
d
i
t
d
e
l
i
v
e
r
&
s
t
o
r
e
r
e
t
r
i
e
v
e
&
c
a
p
t
u
r
e
c
r
e
a
t
e
&
Fig. 2 Content lifecycle
model
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research
11

end users to navigate through and search for content, to categorize user roles and
their responsibilities, to deﬁne and coordinate access rights, and to automatically
generate metadata (Munkvold et al. 2006, p. 81).
The relevance of corporate taxonomy development becomes apparent in the
diversity of strategies for information search and retrieval that typically exist in
different business areas, thus highlighting the integrative character of ECM
(Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 1). In many organizations, single business units
use isolated content management applications that are best suited to their indi-
vidual demands. Consequently, the integration of these isolated applications is at
the core of ECM in order to enable the efﬁcient exchange of content at the ﬁrm
level.
The IS literature highlights several other challenges related to content storage
and retrieval. Perhaps most noteworthy is the ECM security issues that Kwok and
Chiu (2004) and Chiu and Hung (2005) discuss. Here, important ECM drivers
include disaster recovery and protection of content against unauthorized access.
Digitization of paper archives and storage on secure ﬁle servers can preclude the
destruction of paper documents in case of water or ﬁre disasters (Grudman 2008,
p. 61), and ECM systems can signiﬁcantly support the implementation of
sophisticated
security
mechanisms
for
protecting
content
against
misuse
(Munkvold et al. 2006, p. 82).
Editing and delivering content. When content is edited, new versions are cre-
ated, so content editing processes concern version management in particular.
Munkvold et al. (2006) experienced a situation at Statoil in which ‘‘important
documents … were sometimes saved plainly in personal ﬁle folders after their
production and ﬁrst-hand delivery (typically through e-mail), despite the espoused
policy to utilize the shared document management systems’’ (p. 78). The conse-
quence of such behavior is a decreased ability to edit and update content. Modern
ECM suites provide shared and integrated ﬁle systems that can help to avoid these
and related issues.
Other activities related to the editing process are reviewing and translating
content, where the management of components, rather than complete documents,
is important (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005, p. 1272). Rockley et al. (2003), for
example, explain how memory translation systems can support the identiﬁcation of
content components that require revision in case the originally translated content is
edited (p. 322). Once content is reviewed and approved, it can be distributed
within an organization and published for external audiences. ECM systems can
support content publication processes by safeguarding a consistent and compliant
presentation, thus supporting the promotion of an organization’s brand and culture
for customers or other stakeholders (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 650). Again,
appropriate content reuse turns out to be important to ensure the consistency and
currency of published content—in this case not only regarding the information it
carries, but also in terms of appearance, thus conveying ‘‘a common look and feel
to corporate materials’’ (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 650).
Retaining and deleting content. ECM processes for content retention have
gained signiﬁcant attention in both research and practice. Smith and McKeen
12
A. Simons and J. vom Brocke

(2003), for example, point to the importance of ‘‘establishing principles and
standards for content retention and preservation and for its disposal’’ (p. 654).
Governments, customers, and suppliers create enormous pressure on organizations
to comply with various regulations and standards, so Andersen (2007) believes that
many authors see compliance as the biggest ECM driver (p. 65). Similarly, an
AIIM survey identiﬁed compliance as among the three most important business
challenges that drove ECM adoption in 2007 (as cited in Swartz 2007, p. 14). The
academic literature also indicates the relevance of processes for deleting content.
In their study of the Statoil case, for example, Munkvold et al. (2006) observe that
‘‘there were no embedded routines for retention of information in the production,
storage or archiving systems.… The ‘cleaning and deleting of information’ was
not highly prioritized among the employees’’ (p. 79).
Technologies
The integrative nature of the ECM concept refers not only to its scope (i.e.,
enterprise-wide), focus (i.e., all organizational information), and the activities
involved (i.e., all phases within the lifecycle), but also to the enabling and sup-
porting technologies. The notion of ECM emerged as an umbrella term for a large
number of different technologies and applications in the industry. The Real Story
Group (http://www.realstorygroup.com), for example, maintains a comprehensive
list of ECM vendors, from monolithic suites that promise to cover all types of
information across an organization to specialized systems that focus on particular
types of information, speciﬁc industries, or single business areas (Real Story
Group 2010).
Accordingly, the academic literature mentions several applications, technolo-
gies, components, and functionalities relevant to ECM. At a very general level,
these include systems for document and content management (O’Callaghan and
Smits 2005, pp. 1271–1274), collaboration (Blair 2004, p. 65), digital rights
management (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 6), workﬂow management (Smith
and McKeen 2003, p. 656), enterprise portals (Scheepers 2006, p. 635), Web
content management (Smith and McKeen 2003, pp. 650–651), and records man-
agement (Dilnutt 2006, p. 40), to name but a few. These and related technologies
enable and support the execution of all the activities in the content lifecycle.
Regarding the distribution of content, for example, Iverson and Burkart (2007)
distinguish electronic bulletin boards, e-mail and discussion lists, and Web portals
(p. 405).
Grahlmann et al. (2010) present a holistic architecture for ECM systems in
order to determine the functional scopes of the three ECM cases they studied
(p. 1183). Their approach goes beyond functionalities at the process level (e.g.,
collaboration, communication) to distinguish ECM components at the presentation
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research
13

level (e.g. intranet, extranet), the service level (e.g., imaging, e-mails), and the
infrastructure level (e.g., storage, library services), thus illustrating the variety of
components and functionalities that are typically part of modern ECM systems
(Fig. 3).
Summary and Outlook
In summary, ECM can be discriminated from related approaches, such as docu-
ment management or content management, in at least four ways. Through an
enterprise lens, ECM is an organization-wide approach that spans the boundaries
of single business functions, areas, processes, and applications. From a content
perspective, ECM covers the management of all forms of semi- and unstructured
information, regardless of type, format, source, or granularity. As for the process
dimension, ECM manages content over the entire lifecycle, from creation to
deletion. At the technological level, ECM software packages include several
established business applications, e.g., for document management, (Web) content
management, and records management. Table 2 summarizes the main results from
the literature review.
The results of the literature review conﬁrm that ECM can be understood as an
integrated approach to managing all of an organization’s digital assets over their
entire life cycle (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 648). ECM systems are monolithic
software suites that provide all the functionalities required for this management,
Business activity 
monitoring
Business 
intelligence
Case handling
support
Production
support
Digital
signatures
Ad-hoc 
support
Workflow management
Collaboration
Collaborative 
editing
Team 
communication
Project 
management
Analysis
Process
Presentation
Client application 
integration
Desktop 
application
Portal 
integration
Intranet
Extranet
Website
Mobile 
use
Services
Capturing
Imaging
Digital 
sources
Electronic
documents
Electronic
records
Digital
assets
Physical
records
E-mails
Web
content
Digital 
forms
Content
aggregation
Instant
messages
Component
content
Structured
data
Management
Publication
Individuals
Business
transactions
Broadcast
Print 
publications
Digital rights
management
Syndication
Infrastructure
Information
retrieval
Library 
services
Analog
storage
Auditing
support
Localization
Taxonomy
Repository
Enterprise application integration
Fig. 3 Functional scope of ECM systems (source Grahlmann et al. 2010, p. 1183)
14
A. Simons and J. vom Brocke

ranging from scanning documents to keeping records. This description is in line
with a statement that Connie Moore, Vice President at Forrester Research (http://
www.forrester.com), made in a roundtable discussion on ECM:
We use enterprise content management as an overarching term that describes a number of
different technologies that up until recently have been seen as discrete markets. It includes
document management, Web content management, records management, document
imaging and digital asset management, among other things. We shifted away from using the
term ‘‘content management,’’ because the term generally was used to refer to Web content
management only, and did not cover all the content in an enterprise. ECM encompasses all
of the unstructured content in an organization (as quoted in Lamont 2004).
Between the time that this literature review was conducted and when it was
published, a couple of ECM studies have been completed by IS researchers, and
among them are also literature reviews (e.g., Alalwan and Weistroffer 2012;
Grahlmann et al. 2011; Rickenberg et al. 2012). While we can see an increasing
publication activity in the ﬁeld, these reviews also show that a common concep-
tualization of ECM is still to be developed. Accordingly, it is hoped that this
chapter can inform future studies in the ﬁeld and support the establishment of
ECM as a distinct ﬁeld of IS research that is not only of high practical relevance
but also of theoretical value.
Table 2 Characterization of ECM
Perspective
Conclusions
Enterprise
The concept of ECM goes beyond applications at the group level (e.g.,
departments, functions) in that it integrates and aligns a multitude of
information management efforts at the ﬁrm level. ECM objectives, which are
both tactical and strategic in nature, go beyond the operative usage of digital
assets in an organization (e.g., promoting an organization’s brand, image, and
culture)
Content
As a function of granularity, ECM covers single components of content (e.g.,
texts, images) and complete information products (e.g., documents). Content,
which predominantly exists in an unstructured––or at least semi-structured––
form, can be informational as a carrier of knowledge (e.g., textual content) as
well as non-informational (e.g., multimedia content)
Processes
ECM covers the entirety of phases in the content lifecycle, including creating and
capturing content (e.g., content reuse, scanning and imaging), storing and
retrieving content (e.g., corporate taxonomy development, data security),
editing and delivering content (e.g., version management, translation and
reviews), and retaining and deleting content (e.g., compliance, preservation of
content)
Technologies ECM systems vary signiﬁcantly in terms of their size and scope, reaching from
monolithic suites that cover all types of information spread across an
organization to specialized systems that focus on speciﬁc types of information,
industries, or business areas; such systems integrate several related
technologies (e.g., document management, content management, and records
management)
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research
15

The Remainder of this Book
The following chapters in this book present foundations and tools of ECM and
application examples. Accordingly, the book is structured into three main parts.
Part A explains foundations of ECM on different levels, including an ECM soft-
ware overview on the market level, culture-related issues on the organizational
level, and issues of technology acceptance on the individual level. This part also
discusses the rhetorical challenges of ECM implementation. Part B presents
methods and tools of ECM implementation, including ECM strategy development
and content audits, readiness assessment, and content standardization. Part B
further discusses the role of ECM in cloud computing and advisory support.
Finally, Part C presents selected application examples of ECM, including case
studies of the enterprises Hilti, Hoval, and J.D. Edwards. This part also covers the
implementation of ECM in other contexts than the enterprise context, for example,
in public administrations.
Apart from this introduction, Part A includes four chapters, which are sum-
marized in Table 3. The table also shows which of the four perspectives on ECM
these chapters predominantly take.
The chapter ‘The Market for ECM Software’ by Martin Böhn characterizes the
ECM market as a ‘‘market of buzzwords’’ that features many different products
that can have very different meanings, including document management, records
management, and archiving. It presents different approaches to structuring the
ECM market and also highlights current trends and potential developments in the
future. The results are based on ten years of market research and consultancy in
the ﬁeld of ECM.
The chapter ‘Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management
Systems’ by Laurent Wiltzius, Alexander Simons, Stefan Seidel, and Jan vom
Brocke identiﬁes and explains twenty-two factors at different levels that inﬂuence
Table 3 Chapter overview Part A
Chapter Authors
Title
ECM
perspective
E T P C
1
Alexander Simons,
Jan vom Brocke
Enterprise content management in
Information Systems research
x
x
x x
2
Martin Böhn
The market for ECM software
x
3
Laurent Wiltzius, Alexander
Simons, Stefan Seidel,
Jan vom Brocke
Factors in the acceptance of enterprise
content management systems
x
x
x x
4
Dave Clark
Rhetorical challenges and concerns in
enterprise content management
x
x
5
Theresa Schmiedel, Jan vom
Brocke
Cultural values matter: the role of
organizational culture in ECM
x
(Enterprise: E, Technologies: T, Processes: P, Content: C)
16
A. Simons and J. vom Brocke

the success of ECM systems, reaching from information and communication and
top management support to corporate taxonomy development and metadata
management. The results draw from the academic literature and empirical data
collected in qualitative interviews with ECM practitioners.
The chapter ‘Rhetorical Challenges and Concerns in Enterprise Content
Management’ by Dave Clark discusses ECM from the viewpoint of technical
communication. The author discusses the role that ECM plays in the discipline and
highlights important rhetorical issues, including concerns about sales and imple-
mentation, issues with component-based writing, and new complexities for
training and development. The chapter concludes with an outlook on future work
in the ﬁeld.
The chapter ‘Cultural Values Matter: The Role of Organizational Culture in
ECM’ by Theresa Schmiedel and Jan vom Brocke analyzes the inﬂuence of ECM
on organizational culture, and vice versa. It identiﬁes and discusses the charac-
teristics of an organizational culture that is supportive of ECM, and presents ways
how to realize the same. The results are based on data collected in interviews and
group discussions with ten ECM experts from academia and practice.
Grounded in these foundations, Part B presents methods and tools for ECM
implementation (Table 4).
The chapter ‘Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management’ by
Martin Smits and Ramon O’Callaghan presents a conceptual framework for the
development of an ECM strategy. The authors explain that ECM can be under-
stood as the convergence of document management and content management and
discuss important phases of ECM strategy development, reaching from auditing
content to IT infrastructure investments. The framework has been tested for
applicability in a practical case.
Table 4 Chapter overview Part B
Chapter Authors
Title
ECM
perspective
E T P C
6
Martin Smits, Ramon
O’Callaghan
Strategy development for enterprise
content management
x
x
7
Andrea Herbst, Alexander
Simons, Jan vom Brocke,
René Derungs
Critical success factors in enterprise
content management: toward a
framework for readiness assessment
x
8
Joachim Pﬁster, Gerhard
Schwabe
Content management for advisory support
information systems
x
x
9
Ivo Gonzenbach, Christian
Russ, Jan vom Brocke
Make or buy? Factors that impact the
adoption of cloud computing on the
content level
x
10
Jörg Becker, Tobias Heide,
Łukasz Lis
Fostering comparability in content
management using semantic
standardization
x
(Enterprise: E, Technologies: T, Processes: P, Content: C)
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research
17

The chapter ‘Critical Success Factors in Enterprise Content Management:
Toward a Framework for Readiness Assessment’ by Andrea Herbst, Alexander
Simons, Jan vom Brocke, and René Derungs identiﬁes a set of critical success
factors for ECM, including change agent deployment and quick wins identiﬁca-
tion. On that basis, the authors present a framework that helps organizations to
assess their ECM readiness. Two illustrative examples highlight the practical
applicability of the proposed approach.
The chapter ‘Content Management for Advisory Support Information Systems’
by Joachim Pﬁster and Gerhard Schwabe discusses the role that ECM infra-
structures and technologies play in advisory processes. The authors explain which
types of content are typically required in advisory situations and propose an
architecture for ECM-based advisory support information systems. From the user,
information, and systems views, the chapter also discusses requirements that such
an architecture has to meet.
The chapter ‘Make or Buy? Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud
Computing on the Content Level’ by Ivo Gonzenbach, Christian Russ, and Jan
vom Brocke focuses on the role of cloud computing in ECM. Speciﬁcally, the
authors discuss what content should be managed in the cloud and what should not.
Because this is a make-or-buy decision, they use transaction cost theory as a
theoretical framework, so the chapter covers issues of speciﬁcity (e.g., standard-
ization of content), uncertainty (e.g., legal situation), and frequency (e.g., fre-
quency of usage).
The chapter ‘Fostering Comparability in Content Management Using Semantic
Standardization’ by Jörg Becker, Tobias Heide, and Łukasz Lis focuses on issues
of content consistency and comparability. It demonstrates semantic standardiza-
tion of content at the example of research portals and proposes a generic portal
structure for that purpose. This structure has to be customized to ﬁt speciﬁc
applications, and the authors use the design science research paradigm as an
example to demonstrate such a customization.
Part C presents selected examples and cases of ECM implementation (Table 5).
The chapter ‘The Knowledge Garden and Content Management at J.D. Edwards’
by Judy E. Scott summarizes and discusses the implementation of three ECM-
related initiatives at J.D. Edwards from 1995 to 2003. It explains the evolution of
the different technologies, and identiﬁes important lessons that J.D. Edwards
learned at different implementation stages, reaching from the reuse of technical
documentation to the development of an enterprise vision.
The
chapter
‘Lessons
Learned
from
Implementing
Enterprise
Content
Management at the National Public Administration in Liechtenstein’ by Alexan-
der Simons, Jan vom Brocke, Sven Lässer, and Andrea Herbst presents ﬁfteen
lessons learned from an ECM initiative in a public administration context, for
example, the deﬁnition of a transition strategy from paper to digital records. The
results are organized at the organizational and the departmental level and grounded
in qualitative data collected over a period of nineteen months.
The chapter ‘Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management: Two
Swedish Municipalities as Examples’ by Proscovia Svärd discusses the differences
18
A. Simons and J. vom Brocke

and similarities between ECM and records management. Based on different factors
like drivers and focus the author shows that the two approaches have much in
common but also differ in important ways. Case studies of two Swedish munici-
palities are used to discuss the results presented in the academic literature on this
matter.
The chapter ‘Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content and Documents in
ECM Systems Design: Results from a Modeling Project at Hoval’ by Alexander
Simons, Jan vom Brocke, Stefan Fleischer, and Jörg Becker presents a conceptual
modeling language for describing documents and their contents. The modeling
language facilitates description of how content is reused in different documents,
the creators and users of content, and the software systems involved. The practical
applicability of the proposed approach is demonstrated at the example of Hoval’s
spare parts catalogue.
Finally, the chapter ‘Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process
Transformation: The Case of an ECM-Driven Transformation of Sales Processes at
Hilti Corporation’ by Jan vom Brocke, Christian Sonnenberg, and Christian
Buddendick focuses on justifying and evaluating investments in ECM systems.
Using methods from capital budgeting the chapter shows how to assess the eco-
nomic value of ECM implementation. The usefulness of the method is demon-
strated for an ECM-driven process transformation at Hilti.
Table 5 Chapter overview Part C
Chapter Authors
Title
ECM
perspective
E T P C
11
Judy E. Scott
The knowledge garden and content
management at J.D. Edwards
x
x
x x
12
Alexander Simons, Jan vom
Brocke, Sven Lässer,
Andrea Herbst
Lessons learned from implementing
enterprise content management at the
National Public Administration in
Liechtenstein
x
x
x
13
Proscovia Svärd
Exploring two approaches to information
management: two Swedish
municipalities as examples
x
x
14
Alexander Simons, Jan vom
Brocke, Stefan Fleischer,
Jörg Becker
Conceptual modeling of electronic content
and documents in ECM systems
design: results from a modeling project
at Hoval
x
15
Jan vom Brocke, Christian
Sonnenberg, Christian
Buddendick
Justifying ECM investments with the
return on process transformation: the
case of an ECM-driven transformation
of sales processes at Hilti Corporation
x
x
(Enterprise: E, Technologies: T, Processes: P, Content: C)
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research
19

References
Alalwan, J. A., & Weistroffer, H. R. (2012). Enterprise content management research: A
comprehensive review. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 25(5), 441–461.
Andersen, R. (2007). The rhetoric of enterprise content management (ECM): Confronting the
assumptions driving ECM adoption and transforming technical communication. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 61–87.
Association for Information and Image Management. (2011). What is enterprise content
management (ECM)? Retrieved July 5, 2011, from http://www.aiim.org/What-is-ECM-
Enterprise-Content-Management
Association for Information Systems. (2010). MIS journal rankings. Retrieved July 10, 2010,
from http://ais.afﬁniscape.com/displaycommon.cfm?an=1&%20subarticlenbr=432
Blair, B. T. (2004). An enterprise content management primer. Information Management Journal,
38(5), 64–66.
Chiu, D. K. W., & Hung, P. C. K. (2005). Privacy and access control issues in ﬁnancial enterprise
content management. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Chu, H.-C., Chen, M.-Y., & Chen, Y.-M. (2009). A semantic-based approach to content abstraction
and annotation for content management. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(2), 2360–2376.
Clark, D. (2007). Content management and the separation of presentation and content. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 35–60.
Damsgaard, J., & Scheepers, R. (2000). Managing the crises in intranet implementation: A stage
model. Information Systems Journal, 10(2), 131–149.
Dilnutt, R. (2006). Surviving the information explosion. Engineering Management Journal,
16(1), 39–41.
Grahlmann, K. R., Helms, R. W., Hilhorst, C., Brinkkemper, S., & van Amerongen, S. (2011).
Reviewing enterprise content management: A functional framework. European Journal of
Information Systems, 21(3), 268–286.
Grahlmann, K. R., Hilhorst, C., van Amerongen, S., Helms, R., & Brinkkemper, S (2010).
Impacts of implementing enterprise content management systems. In Proceedings of the 18th
European Conference on Information Systems (pp. 1173–1187). Pretoria.
Grudman, R. (2008). Mapping an approach for successful content management. Information
Management Journal, 42(5), 60–64.
Iverson, J., & Burkart, P. (2007). Managing electronic documents and work ﬂows: Enterprise
content management at work in nonproﬁt organizations. Nonproﬁt Management and
Leadership, 17(4), 403–419.
Kwok, K. H. S., & Chiu, D. K. W. (2004). A web services implementation framework for
ﬁnancial enterprise content management. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Lamont, J. (2004). Roundtable discussion: Enterprise content management. KMWorld, 13(2).
Mancini, J. F. (2004). The emperor’s new clothes: The current state of information management
compliance. AIIM International. Retrieved July 11, 2011, from http://www.tasmea.com/pdf/
whitepapers/Industry_Watch_Compliance.pdf
McNay, H. E. (2002). Enterprise content management: An overview. In Proceedings of the
International Professional Communication Conference (pp. 396–402). Portland, OR.
Miller, T. (2007). ‘‘Drowning in information and starving for knowledge’’: 21st century scholarly
publishing. International Journal of Communication, 1, 123–135.
Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2003). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of Statoil. In Proceedings of the 11th European
Conference on Information Systems (pp. 1364–1383). Naples.
Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2006). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of Statoil. Scandinavian Journal of Information
Systems, 18(2), 69–100.
20
A. Simons and J. vom Brocke

Nolan, R. L. (1973). Managing the computer resource: A stage hypothesis. Communications of
the Association for Computing Machinery, 16(7), 399–405.
Nolan, R. L. (1979). Managing the crises in data processing. Harvard Business Review, 57(2),
115–126.
Nordheim, S., & Päivärinta, T. (2004). Customization of enterprise content management systems:
An exploratory case study. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Nordheim, S., & Päivärinta, T. (2006). Implementing enterprise content management: From
evolution through strategy to contradictions out-of-the-box. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 648–662.
O’Callaghan, R., & Smits, M. (2005). A strategy development process for enterprise content
management. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Information Systems
(pp. 1271–1282). Regensburg.
Päivärinta, T., & Munkvold, B. E. (2005). Enterprise content management: An integrated
perspective on information management. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Pullman, G., & Gu, B. (2007). Guest editors’ introduction: Rationalizing and rhetoricizing
content management. Technical Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 1–9.
Real Story Group. (2010). Document and Records Management (ECM) Vendors. Retrieved Oct 7,
2010, from http://www.realstorygroup.com/Research/Channel/ECM/Vendors
Rickenberg, T., Neumann, M., Hohler, B., & Breitner, M. (2012). Enterprise content
management: A literature review. In Proceedings of the 18th Americas Conference on
Information Systems. Seattle, WA.
Rockley, A., Kostur, P., & Manning, S. (2003). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content
strategy. Indianapolis, IN: New Riders.
Roe, D. (2010). ECM market fragments, while IBM, Microsoft, EMC lead Gartner’s magic
quadrant. Retrieved Dec 6, 2010, from http://www.cmswire.com/cms/enterprise-cms/ecm-
market-fragments-while-ibm-microsoft-emc-lead-gartners-magic-quadrant-009309.php
Scheepers, R. (2006). A conceptual framework for the implementation of enterprise information
portals in large organizations. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(6), 635–647.
Scott, J., Globe, A., & Schiffner, K. (2004). Jungles and gardens: The evolution of knowledge
management at J.D. Edwards. Management Information Systems Quarterly Executive, 3(1),
37–52.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(1), 647–659.
Swartz, N. (2007). Strategic ECM boosts proﬁts. Information Management Journal, 41(4), 14.
Trumbly, J. E., & Arnold, D. R. (1989). Internal marketing of a management information system.
Journal of Systems Management, 40(6), 26–30.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Guest editorial: Characterizing the
evolving research on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 627–634.
Tyrväinen, P., Salminen, A., & Päivärinta, T. (2003). Introduction to the enterprise content
management minitrack. In Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
van de Ven, A. H., & Poole, M. S. (1995). Explaining development and change in organizations.
Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 510–540.
vom Brocke, J., Seidel, S., & Simons, A. (2010). Bridging the gap between enterprise content
management and creativity: A research framework. In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI.
Webster, J., & Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a
literature review. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 26(2), xiii–xxiii.
Enterprise Content Management in Information Systems Research
21

The Market for ECM Software
Martin Böhn
Abstract The market for enterprise content management (ECM) systems is
difﬁcult to understand. ECM systems provide an information backbone for an
entire organization, but the areas of application and how the systems are used and
handled vary between enterprises. Technical standards and functional enhance-
ments have further blurred the borders between the software sections, and the
segmentation of the ECM market is complicated by the many different terms used.
This paper demonstrates a way to classify ECM software systems and highlights
substantial developments within the market. In an effort to enhance our under-
standing of how the term ‘‘ECM’’ is used today, this paper uses several approaches
to specify the ECM market’s segments. The focus points are the software offering/
vendor, the area of application, and the customers’ point of view. The evaluation is
based on 10 years of market analysis of ECM software in the BARC laboratory,
consulting customers in ECM projects, and doing market research on ECM
solutions. By providing detailed information on the segments of the ECM market
and market trends, this paper provides a theoretical approach to ECM market
analysis and some practical tools with which to evaluate software solutions for
their applicability in a speciﬁc project.
ECM: Market of Buzzwords
A fundamental problem for ECM is the lack of generally accepted, broadly used
terms. The name of a product seldom says much about its potential uses because
the same terms are often used to describe different kinds of software solutions with
particular areas of application, while highly similar solutions are given different
M. Böhn (&)
Head of Research and Consulting ECM, BARC GmbH, Würzburg, Germany
e-mail: mboehn@barc.de
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_2,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
23

names. Vendors try to differentiate themselves from their competitors by making
up new buzzwords in order to give their own portfolios the impression of being
unique and innovative. Thus, the problem of a lack of a common understanding is
increasing.
Some examples of terms with unclear meanings are:
• Document management (DM): DM is a small subsection of the common
American deﬁnition of ECM provided by AIIM (formerly the Association for
Information and Image Management, and now AIIM: The Enterprise Content
Management Association). In the German market, DM is usually used as a
synonym for ECM, covering much of its functionality (including process
management). Depending on where a software vendor has its headquarters, the
terms DM and ECM are used differently in the market.
• Records management (RM): This term is used to describe the management of
information within folder structures (used to organize content for ease of access)
or to characterize the long-term storage of content (including retention
management).
• Archive: While most users agree that archiving describes the long-term storage
of content, others associate archiving with the general safekeeping of content
against unlawful access or loss. The associated retention periods also differ; in
the public sector, an archive can imply permanent, ‘‘eternal’’ storage, while
documents kept for as long as 40 years still fall under ‘‘mid-term storage.’’
Commercial users use other storage terms.
As a result, prospective buyers and customers are unsettled and unsure of what
to make of ECM, and many projects are cancelled, postponed, or reduced to small
areas of application. Initiatives to implement ECM systems often fail from the start
when the project team cannot agree on the targets or the associated terms. It is
difﬁcult to estimate the potential of new ECM software since the functionality and
the achievable potential do not necessarily coincide with the names applied by the
software vendors. The foundation for a classiﬁcation of software as a segment of
the software market can be established only by evaluating the possible ﬁelds of
application, not by looking at buzzwords.
Approaches to Structuring the ECM Market
Market segments can be identiﬁed based on how the term ‘‘ECM’’ is used and on
the various software offerings. Segmentation can be done by looking at the
available functionality, the size of the vendor, or the focus of the offering. The
approaches to classiﬁcation can be combined in order to provide the speciﬁc
segments, which will be analyzed more closely in later sections of the chapter.
Using segmentation by functionality, the analysis of the market shows that
‘‘ECM’’ is used to describe software solutions that cover various areas of appli-
cation. The major software segments are:
24
M. Böhn

• ECM as process-oriented DM: This approach, which covers all sorts of content
along the information life-cycle, is the broadest approach.
• ECM as web content management (WCM): The focus of these solutions is on the
generation, administration, and publication of content for the intranet or internet.
• Adjoining market segments: The functionality provided by these solutions
supplements the classic ECM solutions. Vendor and customer projects usually
focus on these partial solutions, which have to be included into a broader ECM
strategy as a second step.
The segmentation by functionality is the most important and purposeful way to
classify ECM software and is the foundation of this paper.
Segmentation by size or geographical pervasiveness divides the market into
international, multinational, national, and regional software vendors. It is impor-
tant to know whether the product is offered in a speciﬁc market by the vendor itself
or by a partner and to know the partner’s qualiﬁcations. Partners’ understanding of
the basic conditions of a market and the particular circumstances of a class of
customers is usually better than that of the vendor, while the vendor often pos-
sesses a deeper technical knowledge and more experience in implementing, cus-
tomizing, and maintaining the product.
Even though size and geographical pervasiveness are often proposed as
requirements in software selection projects, they cannot be used to judge the
quality of service or the range of possible uses. Small and medium-sized vendors
can certainly offer high-quality software solutions, while some large vendors
weaken their position with vague product development, obscure product portfo-
lios, and cumbersome support.
Segmentation by focus concerns the area and scope of application, so it concerns
the target customer base. While some software vendors offer general, broad solutions
(suites), others specialize in certain functions, industries, or ranges of application.
This form of segmentation is complementary to segmentation by functionality.
There are some limits to how the market can be segmented. The market is
constantly in motion, with customer requirements changing and vendors trying to
penetrate new market segments. Big vendors in particular try to close functional
gaps through acquisitions (like Open Text and IBM have shown in recent years),
while small vendors often engage in strategic alliances to broaden their functional
offering or get into new markets. Many vendors also try to build a partner network
in order to gain access to a workforce and knowledge about a particular region or
line of business.
ECM as Process-Oriented Document Management
One has to examine the document lifecycle to understand the focus of these
solutions. The document lifecycle covers all tasks and functions concerned with
the capturing (creation or import), indexing, storing, searching, handling and
The Market for ECM Software
25

adaption, and distributing (collaboration, workﬂow, publishing), up and including
to the long-term archiving and ultimate destruction of documents (Munkvold et al.
2006). A matrix can be developed along this lifecycle to determine which docu-
ment sources (e.g., scanned paper, ofﬁce documents, e-mail) and document types
(e.g., contracts, invoices, meeting minutes, offers) are covered to what degree in
which business areas (department/entire enterprise/several enterprises generally or
speciﬁc to a line of business).
This matrix is completed by general aspects of information management like
user and rights management or compliance (Böhn 2007). The key elements of ECM
software used here are status-driven information management and workﬂow
functionalities. In recent years, the offering of collaboration functionalities has
increased to provide support for project-oriented, only slightly structured processes.
The development toward modern ECM started small, with the simple electronic
storage of content, and more and more functionality was added. The focus moved
away from storage to searching and then to the use of information. Business
process became the focal point—ﬁrst only small, sequential workﬂows, and then
complex processes and project support through collaboration. No longer were
single departments the goal of projects; the goal became the entire company,
which was emphasized in the ‘‘enterprise’’ of ECM. The next step is to support
more cross-company processes to connect customers and partners closely.
Within the ECM market are vendors based in other software segments that have
gradually expanded their products. Collaboration software vendors in particular try
to enhance their products with search, process management, and archiving.
Classiﬁcation by Area of Application
The market for ECM solutions that cover process-oriented DM is characterized by
vendors of software suites and specialists who provide a functionality or a service
that is not available from an ECM suite or that has higher quality, lower cost, or a
better customer experience (e.g., a better-suited interface). An overview of suites
and specialists is given in Fig. 1 using a slightly modiﬁed document lifecycle as a
structure.
ECM suites provide comprehensive solutions for the entire document lifecycle,
sometimes by (secretly) using third-party products to strengthen their product
offerings. Typical vendors of ECM suites in this segment are EMC Documentum,
IBM, Open Text on a global level, and Allgeier, Ceyoniq, COI, d.velop, Easy,
ELO, Fabasoft, H&S, iworxs, Optimal Systems, SAPERION, SER, and windream
on a multi-national level (Böhn et al. 2009a).
Specialists for lines of business have created for business sectors offerings that
include specialized functionality or pre-deﬁned document classes, folder struc-
tures, workﬂows, and user interfaces. In addition, these specialists usually provide
interfaces to the applications common in these industries. Typical markets are the
public sector, engineering, and the pharmaceutical industry.
26
M. Böhn

Aside from the technical and functional features of the software, these vendors
usually have the advantage of speaking their customers’ language, using the right
terms, and having a detailed knowledge of common problems in a particular ﬁeld.
Thus, they can address the prospective buyers effectively and provide a clear
picture of the uses and potential beneﬁts of their software.
Specialists in areas of application have created solutions that are only a part of
an overall ECM strategy. These specialists make up for the lack of general
functionality by providing specialized solutions that can be implemented quickly,
along with speciﬁc support offers and attractive pricing. Not all of these solutions
could be integrated into a comprehensive ECM scenario. Typical sub-markets are:
• Invoicing: Complete packages and specialized vendors for the capture, classi-
ﬁcation/extraction of invoice data and the distribution and checking are often
used by ECM suites as well (Schiklang et al. 2010).
• E-mail archiving: To relieve e-mail servers and comply with regulations, ven-
dors offer software and bundles of software and hardware (Gantner et al. 2008).
• Contract management, digital personnel ﬁle, etc.: Small vendors have created
specialized solutions for some minor scenarios. The available functionality to
capture, manage, and edit content is usually matched to the particular task, but
the ability of the solution to be expanded to other areas is limited.
While some specialists have developed new solutions, others have stripped
down existing ECM suites, used only certain modules, and added small parts.
Specialists for functions or technologies focus their development on clearly
deﬁned parts of the ECM spectrum. These systems are often used as enhancements
of ECM suites that offer improved functionality or usability (Böhn et al. 2009a).
These sub-segments include:
• (Enterprise) Search: These systems can include information sources in a com-
bined search and automatically index the content. Access management is highly
Document
lifecycle
Specialists for areas of application
Invoicing
Enterprise 
search
Web content 
management
Output 
management
Media asset 
management
E-mail 
response 
management
E-mail 
archiving
...
Capture
Index
Search
Manage
Adapt
Publish
Archive
Scan
OCR
Classification, extraction
Viewer
Digital signature
Storage
...
Technological / functional specialists
ECM suites
Fig. 1 ECM suites and specialists
The Market for ECM Software
27

important since most systems included in the search use individual access rights
that have to be incorporated when providing search results. There are specialists
for displaying search results and relationships between documents as well.
These correlations can be visualized, such as in semantic webs.
• Document distribution (collaboration, workﬂow): Here specialists provide
additional functionality to deﬁne, execute, administer, and monitor processes or
project environments. Other advantages can be in access management, rules
management, or integration into third-party applications.
• Display (viewer): The number of document formats that can be displayed and
the available functionality (comments, annotations, measurements, etc.) char-
acterize these systems.
• Archiving: Specialized solutions are available to access archive solutions and
manage multiple storage devices. These solutions allow logical content man-
agement to be abstracted from the physical storage and offer centralized access
and retention management.
• Digital signature: Almost all ECM solutions use specialized products to create
new digital signatures for documents and folders and to check existing digital
signatures. These vendors also provide functions to manage signatures and
expiration of the validity.
Most of the technical infrastructure of an ECM system is also provided by third-
party software; examples are databases and application servers.
Specialized software is available for certain business software, especially SAP
ERP, Lotus Notes, and Microsoft SharePoint. These (mostly smaller) vendors
integrate their software into these existing systems and thereby provide additional
ECM functionality, such as archiving and advanced search. Most of the projects
are done by companies that have deﬁned this business software as a strategic
product and where most of the employees use the product daily. Usually, several of
these offerings have to be combined in order to realize a comprehensive ECM
strategy, which makes the projects harder to manage.
Integrating ECM solutions into standardized applications and tools throughout
the content life cycle is a key requirement in creating a common information
platform and easy access to information (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005), thereby
offering signiﬁcant added value to the user.
With the exception of technical specialists, there is signiﬁcant competition
between specialists and ECM suites in all of these segments. The suite vendors try
to adapt their product and service offerings to bridge the gap between their
offerings and their customers’ needs. Much of the market development in recent
years has been the result of developing new solutions or ﬁnding additional partners
to improve their offering.
Many projects in many lines of business of many sizes have shown that, from a
customer point of view, who has developed what functionality is not as important
as who can provide training, technical support, and functional service. Therefore,
prime contractor-ship is usually a highly rated requirement in software selection
projects. During the evaluation, the contractor has to guarantee that he or she can
28
M. Böhn

provide answers to all questions concerning the selection, implementation, and
operation of the software so the contractor must either have extensive training in
the third-party products used or ensure quick access to appropriate experts.
The differences between best-of-breed (combinations of specialists) and suites
are often smaller than expected. Simply because a suite vendor can offer many
solutions from a common price list does not automatically imply that these
modules are truly integrated and can operate well together. Especially after
mergers, it often takes years to get to a common codebase and metadata model.
Here, as with the issue of terms and buzzwords, only a thorough functional
evaluation can be the grounds for a decision; words and phrases don’t mean much.
Classiﬁcation by Client or Access Type
Because most ECM suites offer similar levels of functionality, the philosophy for
handling documents becomes more important. Four segments can be identiﬁed
based on the user group’s requirements (Böhn 2008), as shown in Fig. 2.
• ECM as the leading application (the user’s front end): Here the ECM system
operates using a separate user interface (desktop or web client). Broad func-
tionality is usually available. The functional gap between desktop clients
(installed on the individual user’s computer) and web clients (running in a web
browser) has decreased in recent years as a result of technical developments like
AJAX. The target audience for this kind of application is users who spend the
majority of their working hours editing and managing documents and dealing
with associated tasks and processes. Ofﬂine clients can access content and tasks
without a connection to the content server. Mobile applications for use with
smartphones and tablets are also available.
ECM system as the leading application
Integration into virtual workspace
Integration into standard software
Integration into individual software
Thin web client ((D)HTML)
(Fat) Web client (ActiveX etc.)
 Desktop client
Offline client
JSR 168
Portal
Microsoft SharePoint
SAP Netweaver
COM-API
Java-API
Web services
ERP
Office
CRM
Windows Explorer
Mobile client
Fig. 2 ECM clients and access types
The Market for ECM Software
29

• Integration into existing standard software solutions: These integrations are
focused on users who only occasionally use ECM functionality or who use only
a few functions. By integrating the essential aspects of ECM into existing
applications, the user can remain within his or her realm of knowledge and
maintain his or her accustomed way of working. These users usually spend most
of their working hours using one type of software (e.g., an ERP (enterprise
resource planning) system, an e-mail solution, an ofﬁce program, or the Win-
dows Explorer), the necessary ECM functions are integrated into the existing
interface. For search, document display, and so on new windows usually appear
to display the content.
• Integration into individual solutions: Since interfaces are not available for all
existing software products and since many proprietary, self-developed software
solutions are used, linking these systems to the ECM software requires pro-
gramming. Through the technical developments of recent years (component-
oriented software based on Java or .Net languages; web services), it has become
easier to exchange information (metadata and documents, as well as tasks,
processes, and functions).
• Portals as virtual workplace: In this scenario, existing applications, including the
ECM system, are combined in a new interface. Data and functions from several
software systems are displayed in a common frame.
There is a trend in the ECM market to support a variety of ways to work with a
system. Where vendors used to force a certain philosophy on the user (the tech-
nology of the client as well as the usability of the interface), the increasing
competition has broadened offerings. Vendors have ﬁnally acknowledged that the
usability of an ECM system is central to potential users’ acceptance and that the
user groups within an enterprise differ.
ECM as Web Content Management
Systems for the creation, administration, and publication of content in a company’s
intranet or on the internet are summed up in the term ‘‘web content management’’
(Smith and McKeen 2003). Depending on how it is deﬁned, WCM is either a part
of a comprehensive ECM solution or a synonym for ECM. This unclear use of
terms is the result of many years of calling systems for managing web sites
‘‘content management’’ software. ‘‘Enterprise’’ wasn’t added to broaden the focus
(e.g., on scanned paper, ofﬁce documents, e-mails) but to point out that more
people and more information in the enterprise could be incorporated. Not only
technically skilled users but also employees from different operating departments
should be included in creating and editing content. Only a few vendors of ECM
suites offer real WCM functionality, usually using third-party products.
Modern WCM systems are characterized by the organizational separation of
tasks according to responsibility and the technical separation of content and
30
M. Böhn

structure (presentation). The range of activities at least distinguishes between
authors
(often
topic
experts
from
business
departments),
editors,
and
administrators.
Current developments toward the much-discussed web 2.0 have also changed
user demands and user behavior. There is an expectation for more dynamism, so
information offerings must be changed faster and users should have the opportu-
nity to keep informed automatically through subscriptions and messaging services
(e.g., RSS feeds). Another issue is the clear movement toward an interactive,
collaborative web where users participate in the creation and evaluation of content.
Wikis, blogs, and forums transfer the tasks of creating and evaluating content to
the user, while the platform provider, often simply another author or editor, pro-
vides technical services.
Related Market Segments
Based on the comprehensive deﬁnition of ECM, several functions should be part of
a widespread ECM philosophy. However, because of the speciﬁc functional and
technical aspects and nature of the corresponding projects, separate market seg-
ments have developed (like the WCM segment has). These segments are sometimes
referred to as ‘‘ECM’’ as well, but speciﬁc terms are used on occasion. The most
prominent are:
• Output management (OM): The term ‘‘Output management’’ in itself is not used
coherently. OM describes solutions to mass-produce documents while achieving
a maximum of personalization for the recipient, but the term is also used to
characterize solutions for managing large amounts of printing or distributing
content electronically. Most vendors have focused on one or the other of these
aspects of the term, but some products cover both areas (Böhn et al. 2009b).
• Media asset management (MAM): The management of multimedia data is
rudimentary in classic ECM systems; the metadata is used primarily to classify
the content. MAM systems can also make use of the information in pictures,
video, or audio ﬁles and can offer additional functionality like editors and
converters. Term and rights management have also been extended to improve
accounting, such as that with external agencies.
• E-mail response management (ERM): While the focus of e-mail management is
on the storage of e-mails and their combination with other content, ERM sup-
ports the ability to react to incoming messages. E-mails received are automat-
ically classiﬁed and answers are proposed using a knowledge base and templates
(Gantner et al. 2008).
Only a few vendors can offer solutions in these speciﬁc markets in addition to
general ECM functionality, and even these are usually not the result of a joint
development effort but of either acquisitions or efforts by business units. Both
vendors and customers usually choose to focus on a speciﬁc sub-segment so these
subsections will not be integrated into classic ECM solutions in the near future.
The Market for ECM Software
31

Market Trends
In the past few years, the development of software solutions and their accompa-
nying services have been driven by a range of factors. Sometimes vendors try to
deﬁne new areas of application or ways of working to win additional customers,
and sometimes customers provide the requirements for speciﬁc projects. Technical
developments have also shaped the market.
Vendor View
The core drivers from a vendor point of view are the design of solution packages
and mergers or partnerships. To obtain additional customers and to position
themselves against specialists, vendors of ECM suites have increased their focus
on building solution packages. This ‘‘ECM in a box’’ solution is used to reduce the
implementation effort and make it easier for potential customers to start ECM
projects. Large vendors in particular still have problems with the large market of
medium-sized enterprises, as they still need to deﬁne practicable packages–clearly
deﬁned functional modules, application areas, and process models for imple-
menting and operating ECM—for this market.
Mergers and acquisitions as well as strategic partnerships have increased many
vendors’ functional portfolios and manpower. Partner networks are used to dis-
tribute the software or support the individual projects, but they also inﬂuence
product development. In particular, usability enhancements and interfaces to third-
party systems are often the result of input from the partner channel.
The largest functional advancements have been made in collaboration and in
data analysis. With the impact of Microsoft SharePoint, some vendors have shifted
their development activities away from engineering new products and toward
integrations into SharePoint to cover the collaboration requirements. The analysis
of document content and content structures, as well as the control and supervision
of processes, have been business drivers of the combination of ECM and business
intelligence (BI) products. With business activity monitoring, real-time gover-
nance of workﬂows is available to facilitate the ability to react directly to delays
and other problems.
Customer View
ECM customers have become more ambitious concerning their projects and more
challenging for vendors. For some time now, the customers have increased the
pressure on vendors to provide business solutions and real support in daily work,
not just technical platforms (Andersen 2008). Capture, management, and search
32
M. Böhn

are seen as given while complex processes and a structured exchange of infor-
mation across enterprises have become the focus.
Process management is evolving from a simple transactional workﬂow to
complete user support through consultative information processing (Böhn 2009).
The systems are used not only to control a sequence of tasks (including business
rules management), but also to provide the user with additional information. An
additional requirement is for the systems to act proactively, such as by registering
and analyzing incoming documents and starting the appropriate processes or (at
least) informing an authorized user. Roles are assigned to users that characterize
them as processors or experts on certain topics, allowing the system to use steering
knowledge (assign tasks, identifying the next steps), support knowledge (provide
additional information to the user, such as examples, explanations, and corre-
sponding documents), and control knowledge (control completeness of processing,
checking for contradictions and plausibility of user input against other available
data). Users no longer have to keep rules or standard operating procedures in mind
since the system can automatically ensure compliance with these rules. The rules
can also be documented in the document history and in the workﬂow protocol. An
overview is given in Fig. 3.
In addition, the importance of the organizational aspects of ECM projects is
recognized more often than was once the case. Current projects focus not only on
the storage and management of content but also on the regulation of information
supply and information quality within the enterprise and with partners. Aspects of
ECM like quality management, document responsibility, and the deﬁnition of and
compliance with guidelines in the form of an ECM etiquette are highly signiﬁcant.
user
problem identification
(1) document type
(2) process selection
(3) starting point
proactivity
(1) classification
(2) information allocation
(3) process start
steering knowledge
(1) define next step
(2) automate
(3) narrow options
control knowledge
(1) completeness
(2) correctness
(3) plausibility
support knowledge
(1) help
(2) corresponding documents
(3) search in repository
guidelines
roles &
profiles
Start
End
system
Fig. 3 Advanced customer requirements: comprehensive process support
The Market for ECM Software
33

Technical Developments and Standards
The interoperability of systems has always been a key issue. With the work on the
interoperability standard CMIS (Content Management Interoperability Services), a
new approach has been developed to ensure that content can be exchanged
between repositories. The broader use of web services eases the task of combining
software solutions.
The new software standards of component-oriented solutions and service-
oriented architectures have forced vendors to re-engineer their software. This
process is far from ﬁnished, as some vendors made the transition a year or more
ago while others are still in development. However, just as standard databases have
displaced vendor-speciﬁc solutions, there is no alternative to change; the beneﬁts
of implementing, adapting, and interconnecting the software are so signiﬁcant that
refusal to change would result in a massive competitive disadvantage.
Open Source and ECM
Currently, only a few open-source projects can address a large section of ECM
functionality (e.g., Alfresco and Nuxeo). Projects are usually handled by partners
who offer consulting and support; since ECM projects have a great impact on
organizations, few initiatives are handled without external help. Open-source ECM
products usually require a large amount of customization and even additional
programming so expenses for external support or internal manpower are often
higher than they would be using commercial software. Smaller organizations
rarely use open-source ECM suites since considerable internal effort is required to
address the complexity of installing, adapting, and supporting the system.
Open-source alternatives are widely used for functional components. Examples
include full text databases (Apache Lucene) (web) application servers (JBoss,
Apache Tomcat), OCR (OCRopus) and components for WCM (TYPO 3). Vendors
of commercial software try to lower project costs by providing inexpensive or free
alternatives to commercial third-party software. Open-source software is also used
to close functional gaps, such as by providing basic WCM functionality through
integration with TYPO 3.
Future of the ECM Market
Reports regularly predict the demise of the ECM software segment based on
functional enhancements of large software platforms (most importantly, Microsoft
Windows, Microsoft SharePoint, Lotus Notes, and SAP Business Suite) or on the
fear that market consolidation could lead to only a handful of vendors. Reality has
shown the opposite to be true.
34
M. Böhn

While consolidation through mergers and acquisitions has been made on a
global level, regional markets have developed new competitors. By having speciﬁc
knowledge about a certain customer base and offering corresponding software and
services, these new vendors can hold their own against the larger competitors. In
addition, the functional enhancements of large software platforms have not
crowded out classic ECM vendors but have led to closer cooperation with new
business opportunities. Almost all large and medium-sized vendors have strategic
partnerships, especially with SAP and Microsoft. The platform vendors offer a
large customer base, and the ECM vendors provide additional functionality and
knowledge about the functional and organizational aspects of ECM projects.
The ECM business volume of large software vendors will grow, but since the
number of enterprises that use ECM software is increasing and the focus of current
installations is widening, the market is growing as a whole. There will be some
shifts in the market since basic content management functionality can be provided
by software platforms, and small products with little functionality can become
obsolete. With comprehensive ECM projects the classic ECM vendors still have
more to offer to the customer than these general solutions; in addition, specialists
can provide a technical advantage or improved customer focus with their products.
The ERP market has shown that there is a demand for more than ﬁve vendors
worldwide—there will not be a strong consolidation in the ECM market.
Summary
The market for ECM software is characterized by the technical maturity and the
high standard of functionality available. Therefore, customers’ software selection
is less focused on the plain functionality than on a clear ECM philosophy of ﬁtting
vendors and products to the requirements. The focus on customers and clearly
deﬁned solutions determines the level of success in the market. Vendors are facing
increasing pressure to provide a variety of user interfaces, support various ways of
working, and comply with technical standards.
There is still room for improvement in addressing the customers’ real problems.
The systems are becoming easier to use, such as by providing better workﬂow
deﬁnitions and graphical editors for user interfaces. However, the inconsistent use
of terms and approaches has slowed market development, as many customers
remain uncertain about the solutions and the beneﬁts, about how to deﬁne their
requirements, and about how to get the software that best ﬁts their needs and
budget.
From a customer point of view, the shift in their projects’ focus has increased in
importance as more companies have recognized the need for a clearly deﬁned
ECM strategy. This clarity helps companies get more beneﬁt out of existing
projects, which improves the return on investment and employee satisfaction. The
political aspect of ECM must not be underestimated, as ECM projects lead to
enduring changes in how they deal with documents, tasks, and responsibilities.
The Market for ECM Software
35

These changes must be communicated openly from the beginning to facilitate
change management.
ECM is an important topic for enterprises of all sizes and industries. The market
volume has not been fully exploited since many companies run no solutions or
only small, isolated ones. This has been conﬁrmed in the current economic crisis,
since ECM has been one of the few software markets to show growth (Karlstetter
2010). Therefore, ECM is an important subject for any company to consider, and it
provides a chance for the prospective project manager to develop an important
position for himself or herself in the company. The question concerning ECM isn’t
‘‘should we?’’ or ‘‘if we?’’; it’s ‘‘now, but how?’’
References
Andersen, R. (2008). The rhetoric of enterprise content management (ECM): Confronting the
assumptions driving ECM adoption and transforming technical communication. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 61–87.
Böhn, M. (2007). ECM-Markt: Ein Strukturierungsansatz. HMD: Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik,
44(258).
Böhn, M. (2008). Die Systeme müssen die Bearbeiter unterstützen. Marketing und Kommunikation,
10, 11–13.
Böhn, M. (2009). Bessere Prozesse durch ECM. IT Business, 4, 14–16.
Böhn, M., Gantner, M., & Schiklang, M. (2009a). Enterprise Content Management: Systeme
für Dokumentenmanagement und Archivierung im Vergleich (5th ed.). Munich: Oxygon.
Böhn, M., Schiklang, M., & Bergmann, S. (2009b). Output Management: Systeme für
Dokumentenaufbereitung und Drucksteuerung im Vergleich. Munich: Oxygon.
Gantner, M., Böhn, M., Schiklang, M., & Jones, R. (2008). E-Mail-Management: Systeme für
Verwaltung, Archivierung und Response Management im Vergleich. Munich: Oxygon.
Karlstetter, F. (2010). Steigende Nachfrage nach Business Intelligence und Content Management.
Retrieved December 22, 2010, from http://www.searchsoftware.de/branchen/allgemein/
articles/272634/
Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2006). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of Statoil. Scandinavian Journal of Information
Systems, 18(2), 69–100.
Päivärinta, T., & Munkvold, B. E. (2005). Enterprise content management: An integrated
perspective on information management. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Schiklang, M., Böhn, M., & Kümmel, A. (2010). Rechnungs- und Posteingangsbearbeitung—
Systeme für Input Management: Klassiﬁkation, Datenextraktion, Verteilung und Bearbeitung
im Vergleich (2nd ed.). Munich: Oxygon.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(1), 647–659.
36
M. Böhn

Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise
Content Management Systems
Laurent Wiltzius, Alexander Simons, Stefan Seidel
and Jan vom Brocke
Abstract This chapter investigates the factors that inﬂuence the acceptance of
enterprise content management (ECM) systems. Speciﬁcally, we identify and
explain twenty-two factors at the enterprise, process, technology, and content levels
that can inﬂuence ECM success. Our study builds on the technology acceptance
model (TAM), and the results are grounded in both a systematic review of the
literature on ECM, including related ﬁelds like document management and records
management, and an analysis of qualitative data collected from ﬁve organizations.
Practitioners can use the results in planning and conducting ECM programs, and the
results can also inform future Information Systems (IS) research on ECM acceptance
and contribute to the emergence of ECM as an important ﬁeld in IS research.
Introduction
‘‘Content, Content Everywhere’’ was the title of an InformationWeek article on the
challenges today’s organizations face because of the increasing ﬂood of digital
information (Conry-Murray 2008). These challenges include improving collabo-
ration processes, avoiding wastes of time and money in the management of
L. Wiltzius
Process Excellence Centre, Enovos International S.A., Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
e-mail: wiltzius.laurent@gmail.com
A. Simons  S. Seidel  J. vom Brocke (&)
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-Josef-Strasse 21,
9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein
e-mail: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li
A. Simons
e-mail: alexander.simons@uni.li
S. Seidel
e-mail: stefan.seidel@uni.li
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_3,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
37

information, fulﬁlling reporting obligations and standards, and ensuring informa-
tion quality (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005). The problem itself is not new; prior
IS research has discussed several approaches to solving the challenges that orig-
inate from the increasing digitization of information. While most of these
approaches tend to focus on speciﬁc and often isolated aspects of information
management, the notion of ECM is often used to refer to their consolidation, to an
integrated and modern perspective of information management (Munkvold et al.
2006; Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005; vom Brocke et al. 2010). ECM concerns the
‘‘integrated enterprise-wide management of the life cycles of all forms of recorded
information content and their metadata organized according to corporate taxono-
mies, and supported by appropriate technological and administrative infrastruc-
tures’’ (Munkvold et al. 2006, p. 69).
Notwithstanding the practical relevance of ECM, IS research has rarely
explored the elusive concept of ECM (Tyrväinen et al. 2006). Much of the IS
literature on ECM is design-oriented or conceptual in nature (Nordheim and
Päivärinta 2004, 2006); there are few empirical studies on ECM, and the area of
ECM is still bereft of theory (Pullman and Gu 2007). In particular, studies on end
users’ acceptance of ECM systems are lacking, information about which practi-
tioners need when planning and conducting ECM projects. As a response, this
chapter, grounded in a systematic review of the IS literature on ECM and quali-
tative interviews with representatives from ﬁve ECM-implementing organizations,
identiﬁes and explains factors that affect the success of ECM initiatives. TAM
provides a suitable theoretical lens for our investigation.
The chapter is structured as follows. Section ‘Background’ provides the
research background and introduces ECM and TAM. Section ‘Study Overview’
describes the research process and summarizes the literature review strategy and
the procedures for collecting and analyzing the interview data. Sections ‘Literature
Review Results’ and ‘Interview Results’ present the results from the literature
review and the qualitative interviews, which are subsequently discussed in
‘Discussion’. Section ‘Conclusion’ concludes the chapter with a summary and
discussion of research limitations.
Background
Enterprise Content Management
ECM relates to the ‘‘strategies, methods and tools used to capture, manage, store,
preserve, and deliver content and documents related to organizational processes.
ECM tools and strategies allow the management of an organization’s unstructured
information, wherever that information exists’’ (Association for Information and
Image Management 2011). To date, the concept of ECM has received only limited
attention from the IS discipline. Exceptions can be found in, for instance,
38
L. Wiltzius et al.

Tyrväinen et al. (2006), who examine the relevance of ECM for IS research, and in
Munkvold et al. (2006), who present a set of ECM-related challenges. Nordheim
and Päivärinta (2006) and Scott et al. (2004) present case studies on ECM
implementation projects at Statoil, a Norwegian oil company, and J.D. Edwards, a
global provider of enterprise resource planning and business-to-business software
and services. Smith and McKeen (2003) present the results from a focus group
session on ECM and deﬁne the concept as ‘‘the strategies, tools, processes and
skills an organization needs to manage all its information assets (regardless of
type) over their lifecycle’’ (p. 648). More recently, some literature reviews and
meta-analyses have also been completed, the results of which conﬁrm that the
number of academic publications on ECM is still very low (e.g., Alalwan and
Weistroffer 2012; Grahlmann et al. 2011; Rickenberg et al. 2012) and that no
consensus for a deﬁnition of ECM has yet emerged in IS research (Alalwan and
Weistroffer 2012; Grahlmann et al. 2011). In this chapter, ECM is understood as an
integrated approach to information management (Nordheim and Päivärinta 2006;
Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005) that covers and aligns a variety of related con-
cepts, such as document or content management, enterprise-wide. As such, the
notion of ECM refers to the management of all types of (but particularly
unstructured) information assets in an organization over their entire lifecycle, that
is, from creation to deletion.
In categorizing ECM success factors, the present study draws on an ECM
research framework presented by Tyrväinen et al. (2006) (Fig. 1).
The framework, designed to stimulate and guide future IS research on ECM,
proposes four dimensions as relevant for ECM: content, technology, processes,
and enterprise (compare Tyrväinen et al. 2006, pp. 628–631).
• Three views are distinguished with regard to content: the information view, the
user view, and the systems view. The information view concerns the identiﬁ-
cation, analysis, and representation of content and the use of appropriate
metadata. The user view addresses issues that include user identiﬁcation,
information needs, personalization, and content use (creation, maintenance,
distribution, etc.). The systems view concerns content processing and storage,
standards and formats, and the interoperability of systems.
• The technology perspective is closely related to the systems view. ECM systems
integrate not only a number of technologies, including hardware, software, and
standards, but also content and its users. As ECM systems operate in speciﬁc
organizational contexts, Tyrväinen et al. (2006) see the major focus of ECM
research as being on systems as opposed to technologies.
• The process perspective involves process development and deployment.
Whereas the process development refers primarily to the design of processes for
implementing and maintaining ECM systems, deployment primarily concerns
the implementation of content lifecycle activities.
• The enterprise perspective describes the context for ECM and concerns orga-
nizational, social, and legal aspects in particular.
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
39

The Technology Acceptance Model
Research on factors that inﬂuence the integration of IS and business has a long
track record, dating back to the 1970s (Legris et al. 2003). Davis’ (1986) TAM has
received considerable attention in the IS discipline. TAM, an adaptation of the
theory of reasoned action (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980; Fishbein and Ajzen 1975),
suggests two major constructs as inﬂuencing IS acceptance: perceived usefulness
and perceived ease of use (Davis 1986). Perceived usefulness can be understood as
‘‘the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would
enhance his or her job performance,’’ and perceived ease of use as ‘‘the degree to
which a person believes that using a particular system would be free of effort’’
(Davis 1989, p. 320). While perceived ease of use directly impacts perceived
usefulness (but not the reverse), the theory suggests that both constructs inﬂuence
the end users’ attitude toward using a system. This attitude is thought to affect
users’ behavioral intention to use the system, which impacts actual system use
(Fig. 2).
Notwithstanding its broad acceptance, TAM has been criticized for its sim-
plicity (e.g., Lee et al. 2003). For instance, Dennis says, ‘‘Imagine talking to a
manager and saying that to be adopted technology must be useful and easy to use. I
imagine the reaction would be ‘Duh! The more important questions are what
makes technology useful and easy to use’’’ (as cited in Lee et al. 2003, p. 766). In
this chapter, we aim to shed light on the antecedents of perceived usefulness and
perceived ease of use in the context of ECM adoption in order to provide prac-
titioners with a speciﬁc model that can help them understand why ECM adoptions
are successful or not.
Enterprise
Users
Information
Systems
Development
Deployment
Hardware
Software
Standards
...
Technology
Content
Processes
Fig. 1 ECM research
framework (Source
Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 628)
40
L. Wiltzius et al.

Study Overview
The research process is comprised of a systematic literature review and a quali-
tative study using interviews.
For the literature review, we systematically searched more than 100 of the most
signiﬁcant IS journals (according to the ranking by the Association for Information
Systems) for academic articles on ECM. While many of the ECM papers we
retrieved produced valuable and relevant results for our study, none focuses on
ECM acceptance, suggesting a research gap related to ECM adoption. Then we
extended our literature review to consider related ﬁelds, including knowledge
management, information resource management, electronic document manage-
ment, records management, content management, and enterprise resource plan-
ning. This exercise produced a long list of articles that applied TAM to the
acceptance of ECM-related technologies, allowing us to identify factors that affect
both perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use. We organized the factors
based on the four ECM perspectives of content, processes, technologies, and
enterprise.
Next, building upon the results of the literature review, we conducted quali-
tative interviews with individuals from ﬁve organizations that implement ECM
and that operate in diverse industries. The cases were selected based on their
similarities, especially because they shared a common understanding of ECM–
even though the scopes and objectives of their ECM programs differed: all ﬁve
organizations considered ECM an approach that pertains to the level of the
enterprise, includes all types of information, supports the management of all
lifecycle phases, and is of both managerial and technological nature. At the time
the interviews were conducted the characteristics of the case organizations were as
follows: Organization A, with almost 20,000 employees in more than 120 coun-
tries, provides products and services to customers in the construction and building-
maintenance industries. Its ECM project focused on issues related to the archiving
of content. Organization B, employing approximately 1,200 employees, provides
heating and ventilation technology to customers in more than ﬁfty countries. Its
ECM initiative aimed primarily at improving the efﬁciency and effectiveness of
content reuse. Organization C is an automotive supplier company that provides
Perceived
Ease of Use
Behavioural 
Intention to Use
Actual System 
Attitude Toward
Using
Perceived 
Usefulness
External 
Variables
Use
Fig. 2 TAM (Source Davis et al. 1989, p. 985)
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
41

steering systems for carmakers and employs around 4,500 employees in sixteen
locations worldwide. The main purpose of its ECM initiative was to improve the
efﬁciency of storage and retrieval processes that involve project-related docu-
ments. Organization D is a small governmental department that, as part of its
larger e-government strategy, implemented ECM to digitize paper archives, sup-
port workﬂows, and improve document exchange with other departments. With
more than 2,000 employees, Organization E delivers products and services to
dentists and dental technicians from more than 120 countries. Its ECM project
focused on the reuse of product-related content. Table 1 provides an overview of
these ﬁve companies.
One qualitative interview was conducted at each site, and the average length of
each interview was around one hour. The interviewees played key roles related to
information and document management, such as technical documentation and
information services, at the case organizations. Data collection took place from
June to August 2010, through semi-structured interviews organized around the
four perspectives of enterprise, processes, technology, and content. All interviews
were audio-taped and fully transcribed, and the transcripts were sent back to the
informants for approval.
The next sections present the acceptance factors identiﬁed through the literature
review and the qualitative interviews.
Literature Review Results
Factors at the Enterprise Level
In the IS literature, top management support, deﬁned purpose of ECM, information
and communication, and corporate culture are often considered as inﬂuencers of
end users’ acceptance of ECM-related systems (Table 2).
Table 1 Case organizations
Organization Business area
Size
Interviewee
ECM focus
A
Manufacturing
*20,000 ECM project
leader
Archiving, with additional
functionality planned
B
Public service
*25
ECM project
champion
Content exchange, storage, and
retrieval; abolish hard copy
archive
C
Heating and
ventilation
technology
[2,000
Technical
documentation
Content reuse
D
Automotive
supplier
*4,500
Business
processes
Content reuse and compliance
E
Dental
technology
[2,500
Information
services
Regulations and standards;
single-source publishing
42
L. Wiltzius et al.

Active top management support ensures the availability of required resources
and an alignment of the ECM project with strategic business goals (Bals et al.
2007; Scheepers 2006; Xu and Quaddus 2007). It is also key that senior executives
inform their staffs about the importance of ECM and, given the elusive character of
the concept (Smith and McKeen 2003), lead them by example (Xu and Quaddus
2007). Because what organizations strive to gain through implementing ECM
systems is sometimes not understood (vom Brocke et al. 2011b), a clearly deﬁned
purpose of ECM has been identiﬁed as another ECM success factor. Deﬁning the
purpose of ECM helps organizations to determine the triggers and goals of the
initiative, to justify ECM investments, and to encourage executive support (Bals
et al. 2007; Munkvold et al. 2006; Xu and Quaddus 2007). Bals et al. (2007), for
example, write that knowledge management initiatives ‘‘should have a clearly
deﬁned purpose and provide value for the business (either directly through mon-
etary gains/savings or indirectly through improvements in cycle times)’’ (p. 3).
This requirement likely also applies to the management of enterprise content.
Exemplary ECM objectives that have been identiﬁed include better internal and
external collaboration, value-added or new customer services and products,
improved content reliability and quality, and meaningful knowledge work
(Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005).
ECM objectives must be communicated properly, a requirement that the liter-
ature has conceptualized as the factor information and communication. Informa-
tion and communication refers to spreading the word about the initiative regularly,
thus supporting feedback processes among ECM developers and users as well as
the change management process itself (Bridges 2007; Downing 2006; Williams
Table 2 Acceptance factors at the enterprise level
Factor
Description
Selected references
Top management
support
Active support by senior
management
(e.g., leading
by example, funding)
Bals et al. (2007), Dhérent (2006),
Di Biagio and Ibiricu (2008),
Scheepers (2006),
Shaw and Edwards (2005),
Williams (2005),
Xu and Quaddus (2007)
Deﬁned purpose
of ECM
Deﬁning ECM objectives
and beneﬁts (e.g., search
times, compliance)
Amoako-Gyampah (2007),
Bals et al. (2007), Munkvold et al.
(2006), Xu and Quaddus (2007)
Information and
communication
Keeping users informed
e.g., user support,
maintenance)
Amoako-Gyampah and Salam (2004),
Bals et al. (2007), Downing (2006),
Grudman (2008), Remington
(2006),
Wager (2005), Watts (2005),
Williams (2005)
Corporate culture
Establishing an
ECM-friendly culture
(e.g., willingness
to share, trust)
Bals et al. (2007), Caldwell (2006),
Downing (2006), Hung et al. (2009),
Scheer (2007), Shaw and
Edwards (2005), Straub et al. (1997)
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
43

2005). Bals et al. (2007) write that appropriate levels of training, communication,
and support can positively inﬂuence end users’ acceptance of ECM systems (also
see Amoako-Gyampah and Salam 2004). When informing their staffs about ECM,
organizations must also consider their corporate culture. For example, if end users
perceive ECM initiatives as being dictated by management, they may resist the
project (Scheepers 2006). Finally, the adoption of ECM requires appropriate levels
of trust and willingness to share among the users, factors that are determined by
the corporate culture (Bals et al. 2007; Caldwell 2006; Hung et al. 2009).
Factors at the Process Level
At the process level, which relates to both the development and deployment of
ECM systems, the literature review revealed four factors that can affect end users’
perception of the usefulness and ease of use of ECM: involvement of end users,
user training, transition management, and prototyping (Table 3).
The involvement of end users in the development process allows organizations
to identify and consider their individual needs and to assess how they do business
(Slawsky 2007; Stevens 2006). Bridges (2007) writes, ‘‘Including users in the
evaluation process ensures a more meaningful product and its ultimate accep-
tance’’ (p. 31), and Downing (2006) highlights that representatives from a variety
of ranks and departments should participate in this process. Users can also serve as
change agents who spread the word about ECM and explain it to their colleagues,
which can improve their perception of the usefulness of the new system (Di Biagio
and Ibiricu 2008; Shaw and Edwards 2005).
Table 3 Acceptance factors at the process level
Factor
Description
Selected references
Involvement of
end users
Including the users in the ECM
development process
(e.g., change agents)
Bridges (2007), Di Biagio and Ibiricu
(2008), Downing (2006), Shaw and
Edwards (2005), Slawsky (2007),
Stevens (2006), Wager (2005)
User training
Educating the future users
of the ECM system
(e.g., IT skills)
Amoako-Gyampah and Salam (2004),
Bueno and Salmeron (2008), Dhérent
(2006), Downing (2006), Grudman
(2008), Maguire (2005), Remington
(2006), Smyth (2005), Williams (2005)
Transition
management
Replacement of the old system
with the new one
(e.g., ﬂexibility vs. control)
Di Biagio and Ibiricu (2008), Garrido
(2008), Nordheim and Päivärinta
(2006), Smyth (2005), Xu and Quaddus
(2007)
Prototyping
Prototyping the system
with the end users
(e.g., look and feel)
Bridges (2007), Di Biagio and Ibiricu
(2008), Nordheim and Päivärinta
(2004), Päivärinta and Munkvold
(2005), Remington (2006), Scheepers
(2006), Watts (2005)
44
L. Wiltzius et al.

Many IS authors consider user training to play a salient role in the adoption of
ECM-related systems (e.g., Dhérent 2006; Maguire 2005; Remington 2006; Smyth
2005), and organizations that implement ECM must ensure that employees can use
the new system (Johnston and Bowen 2005). Because of possible system exten-
sions and new employees, user training is an ongoing endeavor (Maguire 2005;
Scheer 2007). ECM also requires continuous development in the many capability
areas of both technological and organizational nature (Blair 2004; vom Brocke
et al. 2011a).
It is also likely that the implementation of a new ECM system requires orga-
nizations to replace their old content management system(s) with the new one.
Transition management aims to preserve content and to migrate it from the old into
the new system. The transition phase can be supported by, for instance, the parallel
use of the legacy system and the new system in order to ease the transitions for
users (Di Biagio and Ibiricu 2008; Garrido 2008; Smyth 2005; Xu and Quaddus
2007).
Finally, prototyping has been identiﬁed as another factor that can improve end
users’ acceptance of an ECM system (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005). Prototyping
can help users understand new opportunities that originate from ECM technolo-
gies, such as new practices around document management, content publication, or
website management.
Factors at the Technology Level
At least two major approaches to implementing ECM can be distinguished:
acquisition and customization of a single, large commercial ECM software
package and implementation and integration of several smaller content manage-
ment solutions across an organization. (See the market overview by the Real Story
Group 2010). Thus, approaches to ECM implementation can be distinguished
between functional customization and systems interoperability.
Nordheim and Päivärinta (2004) contend that functional customization, that is,
the adaptation of an ECM software package that matches a particular organiza-
tion’s requirements, refers to ECM system functionalities in terms of content
structuring, metadata modeling, taxonomy, and templates (categorized under the
notion of content model management); functionalities for managing user roles and
supporting the content lifecycle, such as content access, versioning, distribution,
and retention (categorized as content storage and delivery management); and
process support and automation. Systems interoperability can be deﬁned as ‘‘the
ability of two or more systems or components to exchange information and to use
the information that has been exchanged’’ (IEEE Computer Society 1991, p. 114).
Rockley et al. (2003) write, ‘‘Too often, content is created by authors working in
isolation from other authors within the organization,’’ a problem Rockley et al. call
the ‘‘content silo trap’’ (p. 5). In today’s organizations it is likely that content silos
occur between departments particularly because departments frequently use
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
45

isolated content management applications and very different approaches to storing
and retrieving content. Therefore, given the enterprise-wide scope of ECM, the
interoperability of existing document and content management systems appears to
be another success factor for ECM initiatives.
The study of the literature revealed two additional properties that ECM systems
must satisfy: simplicity and security (Table 4).
Päivärinta and Munkvold (2005) identify the development of ‘‘user-friendly,
intuitive, and integrated user interfaces to content management, seamlessly inte-
grated with ‘front-end’ content production and browsing solutions’’ (p. 6) as a core
challenge in ECM initiatives. Maguire (2005) suggests that organizations that
invest in records management choose a system that is ‘‘as simple as possible’’ (p.
156), and Downing (2006) considers simplicity—‘‘minimiz[ing] the number of
clicks and keystrokes needed to save or retrieve documents’’ (p. 45)—a core
acceptance factor in electronic document management. Simplicity can also reduce
the need for training and the duration of the transition phase while ensuring that
the system can be used by people with different types and levels of IT skills
(Johnston and Bowen 2005; Maguire 2005).
Finally, organizations that adopt ECM have to safeguard the security of ECM
systems by developing and implementing efﬁcient and effective access-control
mechanisms. Chiu and Hung (2005) study ﬁnancial ECM systems and understand
access control ‘‘as the mechanism by which users are permitted access to resources
according to the authentication of their identities and the associated privi-
leges authorization’’ (p. 1). However, the deﬁnition of appropriate privileges for
Table 4 Acceptance factors at the technology level
Factor
Description
Selected references
Functional customization
Adaptation of an ECM
software package (e.g.,
content retrieval)
Nordheim and Päivärinta (2004),
Nordheim and Päivärinta
(2006), Scheer (2007)
Systems interoperability
Ability of ECM-related
systems to exchange
content (e.g., content silos)
Grudman (2008), Nordheim and
Päivärinta (2004), Scheepers
(2006)
Simplicity
Designing the ECM system in
a user-friendly manner
(e.g., efﬁciency)
Bueno and Salmeron (2008),
Calisir and Calisir (2004),
Downing (2006), Johnston and
Bowen (2005), Maguire (2005),
Neumann (2007), O’Callaghan
and Smits (2005), Päivärinta and
Munkvold (2005), Scheepers
(2006)
Security
Assuring the conﬁdentiality,
integrity, and availability
of content (e.g., espionage)
Chiu and Hung (2005), Smith and
McKeen (2003), Stevens (2006),
Tyrväinen et al. (2006)
46
L. Wiltzius et al.

accessing content is not an easy task at the enterprise level, as security levels that
are too high can prevent employees from using the content they need efﬁciently
(vom Brocke et al. 2011b) and affect end users’ acceptance (Tyrväinen et al.
2006).
Factors at the Content Level
The literature review identiﬁed four factors that can inﬂuence the acceptance of
ECM end users at the content level: content audit and classiﬁcation, content
lifecycle implementation, corporate taxonomy development, and content tagging
(Table 5).
Content audit and classiﬁcation often serve as a foundation for the entire ECM
program (vom Brocke et al. 2011a). Because this factor includes analysis of
existing information behaviors and needs (Smith and McKeen 2003), the
involvement of the end user is important. O’Callaghan and Smits (2005) mention
several questions to be answered in a content audit, including questions related to
how much information is available, how many types of content there are, who
manages and owns which content, who uses what content, how content is reused
and repurposed, what content must be stored, in what form, and for how long, and
what systems are currently used for managing content (p. 1275). Appropriate
answers to these questions are central for successful content collection and man-
agement, and most of these answers can be related to the lifecycle of content. IS
Table 5 Acceptance factors at the content level
Factor
Description
Selected references
Content audit and
classiﬁcation
Analyzing content and its use
(e.g., users, systems, reuse)
Caldwell (2006), Dhérent (2006),
Jones (2008), O’Callaghan and
Smits (2005), Smith and
McKeen (2003), vom Brocke
et al. (2010, 2011a)
Content lifecycle
implementation
Supporting the content
lifecycle (e.g., creating and
distributing content)
Garrido (2008), Munkvold et al.
(2006), Päivärinta and
Munkvold (2005), Remington
(2006), Schaffel (2006), Smith
and McKeen (2003)
Corporate taxonomy
development
Categorizing content
hierarchically (e.g.,
browsing, indexing)
Bridges (2007), Calisir and Calisir
(2004), Garrido (2008),
Gilchrist (2001), Munkvold
et al. (2006), Slawsky (2007),
Watson et al. (2007)
Content tagging
Collecting and deﬁning
appropriate metadata (e.g.,
author, creation date)
Gilchrist (2001), Neumann (2007),
Scott et al. (2004), Slawsky
(2007), Smyth (2005), Sprehe
(2005)
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
47

research has offered many content lifecycle models. Päivärinta and Munkvold
(2005), for example, distinguish activities within the content lifecycle, including
capturing, creating, reviewing, editing, distributing, publishing, storing, archiving,
and deleting content. Munkvold et al. (2006) argue that the concept of ECM puts a
holistic focus on these phases compared to related approaches that tend to support
individual lifecycle activities, such as document management (storage and
retrieval), Web content management (publication), and records management
(retention) (vom Brocke et al. 2010). Accordingly, content lifecycle implementa-
tion requires organizations to implement ECM in a way that, from content creation
to deletion, best supports their employees in their daily work.
There are several approaches to searching for content, among them indexes,
tables of contents, and full-text searches (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005). Imple-
menting an efﬁcient approach to content retrieval often requires organizations to
enable their users to browse content efﬁciently (Garrido 2008; Watts 2005). The
classiﬁcation of content via indexes enables connections between content assets
(O’Callaghan and Smits 2005), and manual recommendations can further support
ECM end users in their endeavors to ﬁnd content (Gilchrist 2001; Slawsky 2007).
An alternative to indexing content are full text searches on the basis of keywords
(O’Callaghan and Smits 2005), the success of which is likely to inﬂuence end
users’ acceptance of ECM systems, which is why the selection and implementation
of appropriate search mechanisms plays a salient role in ECM adoption. The ﬁrst
step in making content searchable is to implement a corporate taxonomy that
categorizes content hierarchically and identiﬁes information and record sources
(Bridges 2007). Accordingly, Munkvold et al. (2006) identify corporate taxonomy
development as a contemporary ECM challenge. The main problem is that people
and departments develop and use very different taxonomies (O’Callaghan and
Smits 2005). Therefore, the development of a corporate taxonomy is an important
standardization and change management task because it imposes structure and
control over the creation and storage of documents (Garrido 2008). The devel-
opment of a corporate taxonomy can fulﬁll several purposes; in particular, it can
serve as the basis for automatic generation of metadata (Munkvold et al. 2006).
The deﬁnition and use of metadata—here: content tagging—has been identiﬁed
as another success factor of ECM implementation. In general, metadata can be
understood as information about content (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 653) that
adds meaning and semantics to content (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005). The
problem is that some metadata can be collected automatically (e.g., author, date,
title), while other metadata must be provided by the authors (e.g., summary,
purpose) (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005, p. 1281). Munkvold et al. (2006) distin-
guish two key challenges around the generation of metadata: a maximally auto-
mated generation of metadata and content creators’ awareness of its importance. It
can be expected that high levels of automatically collected metadata will positively
affect ECM acceptance.
In summary, for each of the four perspectives of ECM considered here, the
literature review revealed four ECM acceptance factors. The next section details
comments about these factors from the ﬁve interviewees.
48
L. Wiltzius et al.

Interview Results
Factors at the Enterprise Level
The interviewees supported the relevance of top management support, as the
following statement indicates1:
I believe it’s very important to get senior management to back the ECM project.
In particular, the interviews suggest that a lack of executive support can reduce
ECM initiatives to simple IT projects, thus neglecting the enterprise-wide scope of
ECM, involving processes, technology, and people. Still, gaining top management
support was considered a noteworthy challenge of ECM implementation, partic-
ularly because of the elusive character of the concept. For example, one inter-
viewee said,
Some ﬁfteen years ago we already envisioned an enterprise-wide content management
project. At that time, however, we set our sights far too high …. There was no appropriate
tool support available, and we were also not able to deﬁne the project scope clearly. It was
for these reasons that our top managers ﬁnally rejected the project proposal … and I think
they were right with that.
The interviewees considered the identiﬁcation of ECM objectives and beneﬁts
and their illustration on the basis of concrete business examples difﬁcult, as they
did the justiﬁcation of ECM investments. However, these are important precon-
ditions for gaining top management support and for ensuring the availability of
required personnel resources and funding. Regarding the deﬁnition of ECM
objectives, one interviewee said,
My experience is that it is very important to deﬁne and communicate the objectives of
ECM clearly because, otherwise, acceptance cannot be established among the workforce.
The interviewees also expressed that organizations must determine the purpose
of ECM and that it was important to explain to the users how the system will
improve their daily work, what beneﬁts ECM holds for the company, and what the
ECM objectives at the organizational and individual level are:
There are organizational ECM objectives on the one hand and individual ones on the
other. It is important to consider the latter sufﬁciently in order to avoid a low level of
acceptance by the end users.
The ECM initiatives differed signiﬁcantly at each of the case organizations,
reaching from supporting content retention and compliance to implementing sin-
gle-source publishing and content reuse. Therefore, it appears important for
organizations that adopt ECM to deﬁne the scope of ECM clearly; otherwise, it
1 Quotes were translated from German to English by the authors.
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
49

will be difﬁcult for the employees to understand what they can expect from ECM.
Interviewees deemed information and communication critical to ECM adoption:
Information and communication plays a central role in an ECM roll-out in, for example,
requirements engineering, testing, training, and implementation.
Interviewees said that it is important for organizations to keep their staffs
informed before and during the rollout. They considered the level of transparency
in communication critical, and identiﬁed approaches to informing employees,
among them presentations and company magazines. However, documentation was
also considered key to communicating project progress by, for example, pub-
lishing time schedules, protocols, and project descriptions or updates on the
Intranet.
During the interviews it became apparent that knowledge about the corporate
culture plays a salient role in the context of ECM implementation. Tampering with
work habits can cause employees unhappiness, which can then lead to resistance to
the new system. This resistance can affect single users to entire work units that
may have developed their own approaches to storing and retrieving content but are
now directed to use a corporate ECM system. Depending on the prevailing cor-
porate culture, it can also be necessary to invoke a change in the culture, as
interviewees mentioned that, even with a pronounced corporate culture, the rec-
ognition of local cultural differences is important. For example, one of the inter-
viewees said,
What we have to consider … is that national cultures are different from one another.
Interviewees also mentioned instances in which organizations need to provide
their local branches with ﬂexible content management systems to enable them to
compete in their markets. For instance, while a speciﬁc advertisement may be
appropriate for one market, it may not for another. The interviews suggest that the
implementation of appropriate information and communication mechanisms is
important in order to allow for cultural shifts and promote awareness of local
differences.
The respondents also mentioned that monitoring and evaluation is important for
ECM success because they can help in justifying ECM investments and main-
taining ECM systems.
Factors at the Process Level
The interviewees conﬁrmed that involvement of end users is a vital factor for ECM
acceptance, as it allows individual needs to be considered in the design of ECM
systems. The interviewees considered the selection of key users from various
departments, so-called ECM champions, important as they can facilitate com-
munication between their colleagues and the ECM project team (e.g., by for-
warding individual and departmental requirements and change requests to the
50
L. Wiltzius et al.

developers). More important, they serve as change agents who create enthusiasm
among their colleagues (e.g., by explaining the beneﬁts of the ECM initiative):
There are opinion leaders in every company, and we have to be able to engage them. If
these people are on our side, that’s half the battle.
Throughout the implementation, ECM champions can also help employees in
using the new system. Their involvement often results in constructive criticism and
system design improvements. Respondents also highlighted the role of user
training. Users need to be trained on how to apply the new ECM system, but they
must also understand the positive impacts the system can have on their job per-
formance. The interviewees also considered it important to ensure high-quality
training, as employees may otherwise lose their trust in the system and their
willingness to use it in their daily work.
User training should generally go beyond pre-implementation to provide
ongoing support for users. Notwithstanding the importance of user training,
however, the interviewees repeated the view that end users’ acceptance must be
established before the roll-out stage. While training is needed so users can get used
to the new system, the interviewees also conﬁrmed that a transition period in
which the old and the new system run in parallel is crucial. Transition management
allows the users to become familiar with the new system, recognize its beneﬁts,
and voluntarily switch to using it. Nonetheless, a ﬁnal date should be communi-
cated in order to create an incentive to become familiar with the new system
quickly. The respondents said that such parallel operation allows the system to be
adopted to departmental and local requirements and the content to be migrated
from the old system to the new one. Regarding the length of the transition period,
one of the interviewees observed,
Some employees will, of course, have their problems using the new ECM system, par-
ticularly at the beginning. At one time or another, however, you’ll have to shut off the old
system, which is why the transition phase is crucial.
The interviewees also approved the concept of prototyping as a way to present
and test the functionalities during the development phase. They indicated that
mockups and prototypes should be kept as simple as possible in order to avoid
presenting features that cannot be integrated into the ﬁnal product:
The presentation of mockups and screenshots that look promising but cannot be imple-
mented is very dangerous. We are better off with a black-and-white mockup and a colorful
later implementation instead of the reverse.
Finally, with regard to the process level, respondents highlighted the impor-
tance of process knowledge, arguing that a detailed understanding of existing
procedures and processes is a prerequisite to identifying room for improvement
and that it sets a baseline for the required functionalities of the new system. The
relevance of business process analysis (as it was conceptualized in the study)
found its expression in the following statement:
I believe there is a strong relationship between software, content, and business processes.
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
51

In addition, the interviewees considered project management to have an impact
on ECM success. For example, project delays and changes in the project team can
result in losses of both knowledge and conﬁdence in the project team.
I consider it very important to use project milestones early in a huge project like this.
These can not only illustrate project progress but also motivate employees …. The
composition of the core project team should preferably remain the same during the
implementation so learning from the experiences gained can be efﬁcient.
Factors at the Technology Level
The interviews supported the two major approaches to implementing ECM sys-
tems that were identiﬁed in the literature review, that is, customization of com-
prehensive ECM software packages and development and integration of smaller
content management solutions. With regard to functional customization, the in-
terviewees acknowledged that ECM systems feature many functions that are not
necessarily relevant to all employees and business units. One of the interviewees
described the dilemma that comes with the implementation and customization of
corporate ECM systems, explaining that, on the one hand, the implementation of
different content management solutions at the departmental level is likely to fulﬁll
their individual needs but also to result in inefﬁciencies on a global scale; on the
other hand, the implementation of a single ECM system at an enterprise level can
eliminate these inefﬁciencies, but it also requires the departments to give up their
freedom in terms of content storage and retrieval and to raise the costs for tech-
nical maintenance:
Departmental content management applications can, of course, be more customized than
enterprise-wide ECM systems …. In contrast, the wider the scope of an ECM software
package … the more users are restricted in their freedom to create and edit content.
With regard to content reuse, respondents pointed to the need for integrating
existing applications, so systems interoperability was conﬁrmed as another ECM
success factor. Many of the case organizations used various applications for
document and content management at a departmental level, so their integration
was considered a core task in implementing ECM. As one of the interviewees said,
The integration of existing applications is deﬁnitely a crucial success factor for ECM.
Interviewees suggested the use of project portfolios that can assist organizations
in planning and conducting ECM-related projects and said that the simplicity of an
ECM system is important for its success. Enabling intuitive use by designing the
system in accordance with existing usability standards is a core task in ECM
implementation.
52
L. Wiltzius et al.

Easy tasks must be easy to accomplish. It is important to support the user in a way that
prevents him or her from making mistakes. An ECM system has to be intuitive to the
users.
Finally, respondents emphasized the role of security. The stored data must still
be accessible decades later, independent of the format used, and appropriate
security settings (e.g., clearance, access rights) must ensure that users can access
only the content assets that correspond to their information needs (thus also
avoiding information ﬂooding):
Content security means that content must be available at any time, never get lost, and
always be traceable—even in thirty years.
It must be possible to implement an approach to content management that not only enables
employees to access content efﬁciently at an enterprise-wide scale but also ensures that
content access is restricted to those who have the required privileges.
The interviews also suggest that workﬂow support, which facilitates a process-
centric perspective on content management, plays an important role in ECM and
that the integration of collaboration tools into an ECM system is important. As to
collaboration, one of the interviewees said,
The faster people can access information and the more people can access it, the better it is.
Factors at the Content Level
The interviewees considered a thorough analysis of content an important pre-
condition for ECM adoption. Content auditing and classiﬁcation involve not only
the identiﬁcation of content assets but also an assessment of their usage (e.g.,
content users and owners). It is similarly important for organizations to identify the
systems in which content resides. Picking up on the digital information overload
that employees face every day, the respondents mentioned various types of content
(e.g., ofﬁce documents, audio and video ﬁles, and images):
What is important for us is to ﬁnd all the information assets captured in our company,
including Web sites, videos, reports, budget presentations, e-mails, ofﬁce documents, and
many more—actually, everything that ﬂies around.
Some of the interviewees also stated that, at the most basic level, auditing
content requires organizations to decide which content assets should be part of the
ECM system and which should not:
The decision of what digital assets to include in ECM is a fundamental one; not every
email is business-critical, for example.
While the interviewees considered identifying content users important, they
drew particular attention to the necessity of deﬁning responsibilities for content:
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
53

Establishing content ownership is critical to ECM success because, in our organization,
many people work on the same documents.
ECM implementation often affects the way business is done so it can shift work
tasks. For example, the deﬁnition of metadata requires additional efforts so it can
lower user acceptance:
Employees have to understand that it is worth the effort to store documents in a way that
facilitates their later retrieval, such as with the help of appropriate keywords and other
metadata.
In other words, some users will face more work (e.g., scanning documents),
while others are freed from work (e.g., ﬁling paper documents), and such workload
shifts can inﬂuence the success of ECM implementations. One respondent argued
that clear responsibilities for content can reduce the risk that employees will use
content as an instrument of power by not sharing it with their colleagues.
In addition, the interviewees saw content lifecycle implementation as inﬂu-
encing ECM success. Some of the informants considered an efﬁcient reuse of
content particularly important in ECM implementation:
The real work is creating document content for the ﬁrst time. Synergy effects can be
realized when these contents are later getting reused … and that’s what content man-
agement is essentially about.
However, content reuse requires that users can ﬁnd existing content, for
example, through the use of a search tool. Challenges that were mentioned with
regard to content search included response times and the quality of the search
results. Another way to retrieve content is browsing, an approach that requires
users to have a certain level of experience and to be familiar with the underlying
ﬁle structures. In this context, respondents further distinguished between associ-
ations and recommendations; while associations, which serve as links between
content objects, are automatically conducted based on existent metadata, recom-
mendations are made by the users themselves. Accordingly, the interviewees
deemed the selection and implementation of an appropriate set of search mecha-
nisms relevant for ECM success:
One of the biggest beneﬁts of ECM, I think, is efﬁcient content search on the basis of
metadata that can associate content objects with one another. Just one mouse click enables
you to browse all the relevant documents.
As IS literature has suggested, corporate taxonomy development plays a distinct
role in content search—for example, to support browsing and the generation of
metadata. The interviewees also deemed deﬁning corporate standards for content
handling relevant. Such standards describe, for example, what content is to be kept
in the ECM system and how it will be distributed within the company:
We conducted a survey among our market organizations in order to collect their content-
management requirements. The survey results provided us with a foundation for deﬁning
content standards—for example, regarding the storage of documents. Among others, these
standards described types of documents, required metadata, and some process scenarios.
54
L. Wiltzius et al.

Along this line, the use of predeﬁned storage structures and content templates
was suggested, as these can ensure consistency, establish maintenance cycles,
avoid redundancies, and reduce the workload for tagging the content with
keywords:
I think it can improve end users’ acceptance of ECM if they are provided with guidelines
on how to store content. This, however, depends on both the extent of the changes made
and the utility that the user ﬁnally experiences.
Content tagging, which the interviewees considered highly relevant, refers to
generating appropriate metadata for characterizing content objects in order to
allow other users to retrieve them later on. Respondents agreed that the use of
metadata must be mandatory in order to leverage ECM systems’ potential fully.
ECM systems should provide easy-to-use tagging mechanisms to facilitate the use
of metadata. There are several approaches to content tagging, such as automati-
cally generating metadata or suggesting it to content producers who can then
choose which metadata characterize a given content object best.
We capture much of the required metadata automatically—for example, with the help of
our ERP system.
Interviewees considered metadata especially important for content versioning,
which is of particular relevance in collaboration-intensive settings, where multiple
persons may work on the same ﬁle. Along with the ability to review what changes
were made, the interviewees considered automatically informing users about
updates a core ECM functionality. In this context, one interviewee said,
Version management is the supreme content management discipline.
The use of metadata can increase transparency in content creation and usage.
Some of the interviewees indicated that too much transparency can lead employees
to resist using the system, as they may feel supervised. We categorized this issue
as user tracking:
Not all of the new workﬂows will be enthusiastically welcomed. There is a certain risk that
ECM users become transparent.
Additional Factors
In summary, analysis of the interviews supports the relevance of the sixteen ECM
acceptance factors identiﬁed in the literature review and identiﬁes six additional
factors that organizations should consider when implementing ECM: monitoring/
evaluation (enterprise level), business process analysis and project management
(process level), collaboration and workﬂow support (technology level), and user
tracking (content level) (Table 6).
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
55

Discussion
In their critical literature review, Legris et al. (2003) identify three major short-
comings of prior TAM research. First, many of the studies that draw on TAM
involved students instead of business representatives (Legris et al. 2003). The
present study, which also builds on prior literature on ECM and related ﬁelds, is
grounded in information collected from interviews with project leaders or mem-
bers from ﬁve companies that implemented ECM initiatives. Second, Legris et al.
(2003) identify a lack of TAM studies on business process applications. The
present study considers the process perspective because ECM systems share
several components with BPM systems (e.g., workﬂow management) (Allen 2007;
Chambers 2007). Third, Legris et al. (2003) conclude that most IS research does
not measure actual use, but only self-reported use, which also holds true for the
present study.
All of the ECM acceptance factors that were identiﬁed in the literature review
were also supported by the interviewees. This parallelism may be explained by the
intimate relationship between ECM and its reference areas, such as document
management, records management, and content management. ECM builds upon
and extends many of these concepts (Munkvold et al. 2006; vom Brocke et al.
2010). In addition, the interviewees highlighted several important aspects of these
factors that organizations that adopt ECM must consider and produced a number of
factors that were not identiﬁed in the literature review: monitoring/evaluation,
business process analysis, project management, collaboration, workﬂow support,
and user tracking. While these additions may be due to the limited scope of the
review, their relevance may also be explained by the emergence of ECM as an
organizational phenomenon involving technological and content-related issues and
processes at the individual, group, and organizational levels (Munkvold et al.
2006; Nordheim and Päivärinta 2006; Tyrväinen et al. 2006). For example, factors
Table 6 Additional acceptance factors mentioned by the interviewees
Factor
Description
Level
Monitoring and evaluation Avoid redundancies and inconsistencies in
content (e.g., reviews, reuse)
Enterprise level
Business process analysis
Analyze business processes to identify content,
users, and systems
Process level
Project management
Avoid project delays and changes in the project
team (e.g., use milestones)
Process level
Collaboration
Support collaboration-intensive settings (e.g.,
versioning)
Technology level
Workﬂow support
Implement, support, and automate content-
intensive processes (e.g., content reviews)
Technology level
User tracking
Prevent content users from feeling supervised
(e.g., logs, metadata)
Content level
56
L. Wiltzius et al.

like collaboration and workﬂow support reﬂect the fact that enterprise content is
created, stored, edited, and applied in organizational work processes that often
involve multiple departments and work units. Similarly, monitoring/evaluation
becomes increasingly important, as content is used by many people, thus pro-
ducing challenges, such as redundancies and inconsistencies, that must be miti-
gated and/or avoided. The relevance of business process analysis and project
management shows that, in order to adopt ECM successfully, organizations must
leverage well-established management approaches that enable them to handle the
complexities of such organization-wide endeavors.
While many of the identiﬁed factors (e.g., top management support, informa-
tion and communication, user training) are likely to apply to a number of tech-
nologies, our analysis suggests that some can be considered ECM-speciﬁc. Such is
the case particularly for the ﬁve factors at the content level (content audit and
classiﬁcation, content lifecycle implementation, corporate taxonomy development,
content tagging, and user tracking), which were derived primarily from prior ECM
research and not from ECM-related literature (Table 5). Content auditing and
corporate taxonomy development reﬂect the enterprise-wide scope of ECM, which
exceeds the foci of its predecessors (Munkvold et al. 2006; Smith and McKeen
2003; Tyrväinen et al. 2006). The data suggest that thoroughly auditing content at
an enterprise level can easily prove a Sisyphean task, while developing an
enterprise-wide taxonomy for content management requires organizations to bal-
ance carefully between individual and organizational requirements. The identiﬁ-
cation of content lifecycle implementation, which aims at managing content
efﬁciently from cradle to grave, is in line with Munkvold et al. (2006), who also
suggest that ECM considers the entire content lifecycle. Compared to related
approaches that often focus on speciﬁc types of information, the management of
metadata becomes particularly relevant in the context of ECM, which includes all
of an organization’s digital information assets regardless of type, format, or source
(e.g., Smith and McKeen 2003; vom Brocke et al. 2010). Along this line, in their
study on ECM strategy development, O’Callaghan and Smits (2005) write,
‘‘Managing content is managing metadata’’ (p. 1274). Finally, the study suggests
that tracking the behavior of content users can cause reluctance because the users
may feel supervised. Hence, organizations that adopt ECM in order to gain control
over the creation and use of content (Andersen 2007, p. 65) should also pay
attention to possible negative consequences.
In summary, we ﬁnd that all acceptance factors from related ﬁelds of research are
supported in the qualitative research, which also identiﬁes additional ECM-speciﬁc
factors. Therefore, ECM can be considered an umbrella term for a number of related
approaches but also a concept that confronts organizations with unique implemen-
tation challenges. This observation is in line with Päivärinta and Munkvold (2005),
who observe, ‘‘ECM can be regarded as a modern perspective on information
management that integrates the major issues covered in [document management,
knowledge management, and information resource management], while also going
beyond their individual and collective scopes’’ (p. 1). We locate these unique
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
57

challenges primarily at the content level, which supports the idea that content plays a
salient role in any ECM-related research endeavor (Tyrväinen et al. 2006).
Conclusion
Grounded in a systematic review of the IS literature and an analysis of qualitative
data collected in interviews with representatives from ﬁve organizations that have
adopted ECM, this chapter presents and discusses twenty-two factors that can
affect end users’ perceptions of the usefulness and ease of use of ECM systems.
While all of the factors that were derived from the review of ECM-related liter-
atures were supported by the interview data, the interviewees provided additional
factors that can impact ECM success. Therefore, our ﬁndings support ECM as an
approach that integrates many issues of related ﬁelds of research (e.g., document
management, knowledge management, information management) and that offers
new and unique opportunities for IS researchers.
Many of the identiﬁed factors are likely to apply to a number of technologies
(e.g., user training), but some can be considered ECM-speciﬁc (e.g., corporate
taxonomy development). As such, the chapter can contribute to establishing ECM
as a distinct ﬁeld of IS research. The categorization of these factors was grounded
in an ECM research framework that distinguishes four ECM levels: content,
processes, technologies, and enterprise context. We ﬁnd that ECM-speciﬁc success
factors are mainly located at the content level, which supports the idea that the
concept of content is at the core of ECM research (as suggested by prior work in
the ﬁeld) but also that content plays a leading role in ECM practice (as suggested
by the interview data).
This study has some limitations. First, the list of ECM acceptance factors
presented in this chapter cannot be considered exhaustive. The factors added from
the interviews are based solely on a small number of interviews that were con-
ducted in the course of this research. Additional empirical studies are required to
determine their relevance in the context of ECM adoption. Second, no distinction
has been made as to whether these factors affect end users’ perceived usefulness or
ease of use—or both. Third, even though the success factors were organized
according to an established ECM framework, other researchers may have chosen
other dimensions or levels of analysis (e.g., factors at the individual, group,
organizational, or market level).
Acknowledgments This article is an extension and revision of a paper originally presented at
the 10th International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI 2011) in Zurich, Switzerland
(Wiltzius et al. 2011). The authors thank the anonymous interviewees who assisted them in this
research and the reviewers from WI 2011 for their constructive comments on earlier versions of
the article.
58
L. Wiltzius et al.

References
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Alalwan, J. A., & Weistroffer, H. R. (2012). Enterprise content management research: A
comprehensive review. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 25(5), 441–461.
Allen, D. (2007). Cost/beneﬁt analysis for implementing ECM, BPM systems. Information
Management Journal, 41(3), 34–41.
Amoako-Gyampah, K. (2007). Perceived usefulness, userinvolvement and behavioral intention: An
empirical study of ERP implementation. Computers in Human Behavior, 23(3), 1232–1248.
Amoako-Gyampah, K., & Salam, A. F. (2004). An extension of the technology acceptance model
in an ERP implementation environment. Information & Management, 41(6), 731–745.
Andersen, R. (2007). The rhetoric of enterprise content management (ECM): Confronting the
assumptions driving ECM adoption and transforming technical communication. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 61–87.
Association for Information and Image Management. (2011). What is enterprise content
management (ECM)? Retrieved July 5, 2011, from http://www.aiim.org/What-is-ECM-
Enterprise-Content-Management
Bals, C., Smolnik, S., & Riempp, G. (2007). Assessing user acceptance of a knowledge
management system in a global bank: Process analysis and concept development. In
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Blair, B. T. (2004). An enterprise content management primer. Information Management Journal,
38(5), 64–66.
Bridges, J. D. (2007). Taking ECM from concept to reality. Information Management Journal,
41(6), 30–39.
Bueno, S., & Salmeron, J. L. (2008). TAM-based success modeling in ERP. Interacting with
Computers, 20(6), 515–523.
Caldwell, F. (2006). The new enterprise knowledge management. VINE, 36(2), 182–185.
Calisir, F., & Calisir, F. (2004). The relation of interface usability characteristics, perceived
usefulness, and perceived ease of use to end-user satisfaction with enterprise resource
planning (ERP) systems. Computers in Human Behavior, 20(4), 505–515.
Chambers, B. (2007). BPM: How does it ﬁt into an ECM strategy? AIIM E-Doc, 21(2), 36–39.
Chiu, D. K. W., & Hung, P. C. K. (2005). Privacy and access control issues in ﬁnancial enterprise
content management. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Conry-Murray, A. (2008). Content, content everywhere. InformationWeek, 1215, 24–31.
Davis, F. D. (1986). A technology acceptance model for empirically testing new end-user
information systems: Theory and results. Doctoral dissertation, Sloan School of Management,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of
information technology. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 13(3), 319–340.
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1989). User acceptance of computer technology:
A comparison of two theoretical models. Management Science, 35(8), 982–1003.
Dhérent, C. (2006). Document management at the French National Library. Records Manage-
ment Journal, 16(2), 97–101.
Di Biagio, M. L., & Ibiricu, B. (2008). A balancing act: Learning lessons and adapting
approaches whilst rolling out an EDRMS. Records Management Journal, 18(3), 170–179.
Downing, L. (2006). Implementing EDMS: Putting people ﬁrst. Information Management
Journal, 40(4), 44–50.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention and behaviour: An introduction to
theory and research. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Garrido, B. G. (2008). Organising electronic documents: The user perspective—a case study at
the European Central Bank. Records Management Journal, 18(3), 180–193.
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
59

Gilchrist, A. (2001). Corporate taxonomies: Report on a survey of current practice. Online
Information Review, 25(2), 94–102.
Grahlmann, K. R., Helms, R. W., Hilhorst, C., Brinkkemper, S., & van Amerongen, S. (2011).
Reviewing enterprise content management: A functional framework. European Journal of
Information Systems, 21(3), 268–286.
Grudman, R. (2008). Mapping an approach for successful content management. Information
Management Journal, 42(5), 60–64.
Hung, S.-Y., Tang, K.-Z., Chang, C.-M., & Ke, C.-D. (2009). User acceptance of intergovern-
mental services: An example of electronic document management system. Government
Information Quarterly, 26(2), 387–397.
IEEE Computer Society. (1991). IEEE standard computer dictionary: A compilation of IEEE
standard computer glossaries. New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
Johnston, G. P., & Bowen, D. V. (2005). The beneﬁts of electronic records management systems:
A general review of published and some unpublished cases. Records Management Journal,
15(3), 131–140.
Jones, P. (2008). The role of virtual folders in developing an electronic document and records
management system: Meeting user and records management needs. Records Management
Journal, 18(1), 53–60.
Lee, Y., Lozar, K. A., & Larsen, K. R. T. (2003). The technology acceptance model: Past,
present, and future. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 12(1),
752–780.
Legris, P., Ingham, J., & Collerette, P. (2003). Why do people use information technology? A
critical review of the technology acceptance model. Information & Management, 40(3),
191–204.
Maguire, R. (2005). Lessons learned from implementing an electronic records management
system. Records Management Journal, 15(3), 150–157.
Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2006). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of Statoil. Scandinavian Journal of Information
Systems, 18(2), 69–100.
Neumann, J. (2007). The next step: Simplifying DAM. Journal of Digital Asset Management,
3(3), 150–163.
Nordheim, S., & Päivärinta, T. (2004). Customization of enterprise content management systems:
An exploratory case study. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Nordheim, S., & Päivärinta, T. (2006). Implementing enterprise content management: From
evolution through strategy to contradictions out-of-the-box. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 648–662.
O’Callaghan, R., & Smits, M. (2005). A strategy development process for enterprise content
management. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Information Systems (pp.
1271–1282). Regensburg.
Päivärinta, T., & Munkvold, B. E. (2005). Enterprise content management: An integrated
perspective on information management. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Pullman, G., & Gu, B. (2007). Guest editors’ introduction: Rationalizing and rhetoricizing
content management. Technical Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 1–9.
Real Story Group. (2010). Document and Records Management (ECM) Vendors. Retrieved Oct 7,
2010, from http://www.realstorygroup.com/Research/Channel/ECM/Vendors
Remington, T. (2006). If you build it, will they come? Not unless you make it so they want to!
Journal of Digital Asset Management, 2(3/4), 203–207.
Rickenberg, T., Neumann, M., Hohler, B., & Breitner, M. (2012). Enterprise content
management: A literature review. In Proceedings of the 18th Americas Conference on
Information Systems. Seattle, WA.
Rockley, A., Kostur, P., & Manning, S. (2003). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content
strategy. Indianapolis: New Riders.
60
L. Wiltzius et al.

Schaffel, B. (2006). Using DAM to drive workﬂow: A concept for transforming information into
knowledge. Journal of Digital Asset Management, 2(3/4), 129–133.
Scheepers, R. (2006). A conceptual framework for the implementation of enterprise information
portals in large organizations. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(6), 635–647.
Scheer, C. (2007). Factors to consider before building your own DAM. Journal of Digital Asset
Management, 3(1), 17–22.
Scott, J., Globe, A., & Schiffner, K. (2004). Jungles and gardens: The evolution of knowledge
management at J.D. Edwards. Management Information Systems Quarterly Executive, 3(1),
37–52.
Shaw, D., & Edwards, J. S. (2005). Building user commitment to implementing a knowledge
management strategy. Information & Management, 42(7), 977–988.
Slawsky, D. (2007). Building a keyword library for description of visual assets: Thesaurus basics.
Journal of Digital Asset Management, 3(3), 130–138.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(1), 647–659.
Smyth, Z. A. (2005). Implementing EDRM: Has it provided the beneﬁts expected? Records
Management Journal, 15(3), 141–149.
Sprehe, J. T. (2005). The positive beneﬁts of electronic records management in the context of
enterprise content management. Government Information Quarterly, 22(2), 297–303.
Stevens, D. (2006). How Agfa implemented a DAM solution. Journal of Digital Asset
Management, 2(2), 119–124.
Straub, D., Keil, M., & Brenner, W. (1997). Testing the technology acceptance model across
cultures: A three country study. Information & Management, 33(1), 1–11.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Guest editorial: Characterizing the
evolving research on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 627–634.
vom Brocke, J., Seidel, S., & Simons, A. (2010). Bridging the gap between enterprise content
management and creativity: A research framework. In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., & Cleven, A. (2011a). Towards a business process-oriented
approach to enterprise content management: The ECM-Blueprinting framework. Information
Systems and e-Business Management, 9(4), 475–496.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., Herbst, A., Derungs, R., & Novotny, S. (2011b). The business
drivers behind ECM initiatives: A process perspective. Business Process Management
Journal, 17(6), 965–985.
Wager, S. (2005). Digital asset management, media asset management, and content management:
From confusion to clarity. Journal of Digital Asset Management, 1(1), 40–45.
Watson, J., Patel, J., Desai, G., & Chambers, B. (2007). ECM in 2008: Compliance takes center
stage. AIIM E-Doc, 21(6), 42–45.
Watts, R. (2005). Lubrizol’s experiences with DAM. Journal of Digital Asset Management, 1(3),
178–181.
Williams, D. J. (2005). EDRM implementation at the National Weights and Measures
Laboratory. Records Management Journal, 15(3), 158–166.
Wiltzius, L., Simons, A., & Seidel, S. (2011). A study on the acceptance of ECM systems. In
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik. Zurich, Switzerland.
Xu, J., & Quaddus, M. (2007). Exploring the factors inﬂuencing end users’ acceptance of
knowledge management systems: Development of a research model of adoption and
continued use. Journal of Organizational and End User Computing, 19(4), 57–79.
Factors in the Acceptance of Enterprise Content Management Systems
61

Rhetorical Challenges and Concerns
in Enterprise Content Management
Dave Clark
Abstract Enterprise Content Management (ECM) can present intriguing new
opportunities for organizations’ writers, but it also poses signiﬁcant challenges to
the rhetorical assumptions that underlie how writers design, work, and train. In this
chapter, I suggest that designers and implementers of ECM consider the rhetorical
changes ECM brings in terms of sales and implementation, component-based
writing, and training and development.
Introduction
The ﬁeld of technical communication specializes in researching and creating
documentation for technical products and processes, including user manuals, white
papers, speciﬁcations, and process and procedure manuals. The ﬁeld is populated
largely by academics and practitioners who are technologists and technophiles,
although some are late, reluctant adopters of new technologies. Since I joined the
ﬁeld in the mid-1990s, we have shifted from working primarily with paper to
working primarily online and we have changed our expectations for new graduates
who wish to work in the ﬁeld.
WearestilllearningtocometotermswithECM,eventhoughithasbeenincreasing
in importance and inﬂuence for many years. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, we
developed an interest in the related philosophies and methods of ‘‘knowledge
management’’ that we hoped would lead to new roles and leadership opportunities for
writers (cf. Wick 2000), but for the most part, we are end users of ECM. Technical
communicatorsarerhetoricians,soourworkisbasedinphilosophicalunderstandings
that combine ancient and contemporary attempts to understand how listeners and
D. Clark (&)
Department of English, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, USA
e-mail: dclark@uwm.edu
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_4,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
63

readers are persuaded and served by texts, whether spoken, written, or multimedia.
Our professional goals are fundamentally those of improving and maintaining the
quality of documents, and we measure our success by whether those documents are
rhetoricallysuccessfulinhelpingusersachievetheirgoals.OurinterestinECM,then,
is primarily related to how it affects the writing, capture, storage, and retrieval of
documents.
While our focus has typically been narrower than that of the information sci-
entists and developers who study enterprise-wide implementations, numerous
articles have pondered content management’s impact on the future of technical
communication (cf. Albers 2003; Carter 2003; Giammona 2004; Sapienza 2004,
2007). Most recently, the program for the May 2011 Society for Technical Com-
munication conference included multiple panels on ‘‘content strategy’’ and
‘‘content management,’’ along with sessions that focused on speciﬁc tools and
frameworks used in implementing content management. The focus was on content
management as employed in creating technical documentation, not on enterprise-
wide activity.
In this chapter, I bring the rhetorical concerns of writing specialists to bear on
ECM in the hope of providing readers with insight into the perspective of a
segment of ECM’s professional end-user population. I do not address all of the
potential rhetorical implications of ECM but highlight some of the key concerns of
technical communication’s academics and practitioners as they relate to writing,
workﬂow, collaboration, and document management in order to provide new
perspective for designers and implementers of ECM. I provide an overview of how
content management operates in technical communication and follow it with a
summary of the key concerns and challenges ECM raises for our ﬁeld.
Content Management in Technical Communication
The deﬁnition of ‘‘ECM’’ is something of a moving target. In 2005, the Associ-
ation for Information and Image Management (AIIM) deﬁned ECM as ‘‘the
technologies used to capture, manage, store, preserve, and deliver content and
documents related to organizational processes,’’ while in 2011, they deﬁned it as
‘‘the strategies, methods and tools used to capture, manage, store, preserve, and
deliver content and documents related to organizational processes. ECM tools and
strategies allow the management of an organization’s unstructured information,
wherever that information exists’’ (AIIM 2012). Since 2005, then, the AIIM has
broadened ECM to incorporate not only tools but ‘‘strategies’’ and ‘‘methods.’’
Arguably, tools and methods were already inseparable if we considered the goals
structured into the design of the tools, but the newer deﬁnition emphasizes ECM’s
focus on content strategy at a time when interest in ‘‘knowledge management’’ as a
management fad and term of note has leveled off. ECM now explicitly embraces a
wider range of activities, including managing entire lifecycles of documents with
a focus on maximizing their utility for business goals.
64
D. Clark

Notice, too, the careful distinction both deﬁnitions draw between ‘‘content’’ and
‘‘documents,’’ a distinction that is of particular concern to technical communica-
tors. A ‘‘document’’ is an instance of any of several organizational genres (like a
memo, a letter, or a report), while ‘‘content’’ refers to ‘‘structured content,’’ that is,
discrete units of text that are tagged with metadata that indicate the text’s potential
uses, allowing them to be repurposed and reused in multiple genres and across
multiple media. For example, a product description, properly crafted and labeled,
could appear in user manuals, marketing brochures, sales materials, and training
documents provided in many types of media.
This kind of content reuse has multiple advantages, including consistency,
accuracy, and cost savings, but such reuse concerns some professional writers and
communicators, who argue that, if it is to be as effective as possible, content
should be carefully tailored for speciﬁc genres, uses, and contexts (Bacha 2008;
Clark 2007; Hart-Davidson 2010). A product description that could work equally
well in user manuals, marketing brochures, sales materials, and training documents
would have to be highly generic, so it may be too sales-oriented for a user manual
or not sufﬁciently sales-oriented for marketing materials.
Still, many in the ﬁeld have embraced the changes brought about by content
management, often even implementing technical-communication-speciﬁc systems
in the absence of or in addition to the enterprise-wide solutions their organizations
implement. These Component Content Management (CCM) systems take content
strategy a step farther, allowing for granular control of content; allowing
communicators to customize content down to the level of the sentence, phrase, or
even word; and making it possible to reuse content even across genres. These
systems often also integrate the Darwin Information Typing Architecture (DITA),
a technical-communication-speciﬁc XML architecture that helps communicators
standardize the writing and production of technical materials. Various ECM sys-
tems increasingly also include CCM, which can help with interoperability issues
between systems.
The modular management of content is not new to technical communicators,
who have long used various kinds of ‘‘single sourcing’’ to manage their docu-
mentation projects; like many technical writers, in the 1990s I used Adobe
Framemaker with some third-party add-ons to output my PDF manuals into an
online help system. However, implementing ECM systems means introducing a
dizzying array of changes to technical communication departments, which are
staffed by professionals who are accustomed to managing their own collaborations
and to crafting genre-speciﬁc content. What makes content management different
from previous technological changes we have encountered is that it automates
processes that had been mostly achieved by cutting and pasting and by working
extensively with style and output tools. Workplace practitioners have been
catching up to these innovations rapidly and have embraced XML, just as they
embraced HTML over a decade ago, but there is seldom sufﬁcient time for
reﬂection on the implications of these changes. For their part, technical commu-
nication scholars have had little access to the systems organizations use, which are
often prohibitively expensive by academic standards, leaving us scrambling to
Rhetorical Challenges and Concerns in Enterprise Content Management
65

discover their implications. As a result, we are just starting to understand the
implications of these systems for writing and designing technical content.
Rhetorical Issues
Hart-Davidson (2010) suggests that technical communicators have both embraced
the potential and criticized the implications of content management (p. 132). Many
communicators ﬁnd the goals of ECM and CCM to be positive and acknowledge
that our ﬁeld is changing and that we must act to keep up, despite signiﬁcant
concerns about the potential of ECM and CCM to accelerate ‘‘outsourcing and
work fragmentation’’ (Hart-Davidson 2010, p. 141; Bacha 2008; Clark 2002). For
the purposes of this paper, I focus on the kinds of issues that increasingly ﬁll
our conference sessions: concerns about sales and implementation, issues with
component-based writing, and new challenges for training and development.
Concerns About Sales and Implementation
Hart-Davidson (2010) wraps up his student-oriented overview of content man-
agement with the thought that ‘‘content management is not magic’’ (p. 141). Too
often, content management systems are sold to organizational managers as
‘‘turnkey’’ solutions that will easily streamline processes and reduce costs, but
vendors sometimes fail to acknowledge the enormous complexity involved in the
design and implementation of successful systems and that it is costly to get to a
point at which the organization will streamline and save. While companies have
spent billions on planning, purchasing, installing, and implementing these systems,
in their introduction to a special issue of Technical Communication Quarterly,
which was devoted to content management, Pullman and Gu (2007) state, ‘‘A large
percentage of such systems fail to yield the kind of effectiveness that is even
remotely acceptable’’ (p. 2).
Technical communicators and other writers can be a great resource for those
who hope to learn from these past failures, as the ﬁeld is full of experienced (but
often jaded) survivors of various content management initiatives who now
understand that while ‘‘content management systems provide resources for
enacting’’ complex communicative work, ‘‘they do not do that work by them-
selves. Nor do they help those who lack expertise in writing studies learn best
practices’’ (Hart-Davidson 2010, p. 141). There is a central irony to content
management in that the philosophies that underlie their adoption often follow
knowledge management in its insistence that an organization is its information and
knowledge. For example, Peter Drucker famously claimed that General Motors
was a producer of information and knowledge just as much as a producer of
automobiles (Drucker 1972). Still, a dichotomy lies in the fact that content
66
D. Clark

management systems pledge to verify that information and knowledge help to
create an organizational culture that respects, organizes, and preserves knowledge,
while content management tools often treat writing as a basic skill rather than a
critical ‘‘strategic activity for a whole enterprise’’ (Hart-Davidson 2010, p. 142)
and seek to automate and eliminate as much writing work as possible (Bacha 2008;
Clark 2002).
It is easy to see why companies purchase these systems, given the rhetoric in
their favor. These systems are pitched by vendors who have the enthusiasm of
technophiles and who assert that the technology can solve organizational problems
by empowering workers, increasing knowledge sharing (eliminating ‘‘content
silos’’), and improving content quality, all while cutting costs (Andersen 2007,
p. 62). Managers often act on these quick ﬁxes because of pressure from their
managers, who are also being sold ECM ﬁxes:
Because business leaders tend to examine the value of ECM solutions and their disparate
applications from a production process model, the extent to which the technologies
promise to increase process efﬁciencies and reduce maintenance and system costs, they are
increasingly drawn to the many attractive ECM vendor promises. In their marketing
materials and published case studies, leading vendors such as EMC/Documentum, FileNet,
Interwoven, Open Text, and Vignette claim that their software solutions will produce a big
return on investment (ROI), reduce time to market, increase worker and process efﬁciency,
improve content quality, and increase knowledge sharing and collaboration. (Andersen
2007, p. 63)
Common to all of these arguments, Andersen (2007) suggests, are the all-
too-familiar claims of worker empowerment and enrichment that have been
common to virtually every technological and managerial development for decades
(Gee et al. 1996; Marvin 1988; Postman 1985). Andersen (2007) notes that these
widely and consistently made claims are backed with white papers, vendor
materials, and industry trade publications that present them as givens. Many of
these publications’ authors ‘‘tend to be the CEOs, vice presidents, marketing
directors, and product managers of ECM vendors’’ (Andersen 2007, p. 68).
Vendors are not necessarily being untruthful; many are true believers who are
so sure of their products and approaches that they offer free trials to organizations
with the belief that rapid deployment and turnkey solutions really are possible and
that, once the products are installed, they will sell themselves. It’s difﬁcult to draw
any other conclusion from Andersen’s eight-month study of a disastrous ‘‘90-day’’
free trial in a Fortune 500 company’s technical documentation department
(Andersen 2009, p. 137). Vendors like trials because it’s easier to sell a system that
is already operational than one that is still abstract, but Andersen found that the
trial, which was extended several times before ultimately failing, failed largely
because of a ‘‘lack of appropriate regulative practices.’’ The vendor hugely
underestimated the training and support required for rolling out a complicated and
nuanced product.
Rhetorical Challenges and Concerns in Enterprise Content Management
67

Issues with Component-Based Writing
Andersen’s vendor failed to secure the sale because the vendor believed, against
all evidence, that implementation would be simple and straightforward and
wouldn’t require a signiﬁcant investment of time and energy either by the vendor
or by its customers. This outcome is common when the vendor ‘‘takes a systems-
based approach towards managing content/information/knowledge’’ that assumes
that implementing an effective content management system is largely a matter of
selecting the right tool (Gu and Pullman 2008, p. 3) and that rhetorical issues will
take care of themselves. However, if an organization is to gain the ROI it hopes for
from a content management solution, it must think critically about the rhetorical
changes such systems bring about and must train its writers (and not just its
professional writers) to write for and interact with these systems.
Consider the changes that end users of content management, particularly
writers, face. CCM systems operate by managing content at levels of granularity
that range from the entire document to the document chunk down to the single
word or punctuation mark. In doing so, they must rely on databases ﬁlled with
content chunks that are associated with metadata but that may be dissociated from
genre and presentation. As I suggested elsewhere, with CCM,
a single piece of content, properly marked and stored, can automatically and simulta-
neously appear in user manuals, help ﬁles, and press releases that can in turn be auto-
matically altered to appear in print, on the Web, or on mobile devices. Once initial designs
are created, fonts, colors, and layout are added on the ﬂy for the speciﬁcs of each genre
and/or medium, and with, for example, a simple change to a style sheet, aesthetic changes
can easily be applied to past as well as future documents, making it easy to maintain
organizational consistency. (Clark 2007, p. 36)
The key complication for writers is the differences across genres. For genera-
tions, teachers have taken a genre-based approach to writing instruction. For
example, students in business writing courses are taught that complaint letters, job
application materials, reports, and technical documents vary in form, function,
approach, and style, depending on what they are intended to accomplish. More
recently, scholars of rhetoric have emphasized that genres also have unique
characteristics depending on the organization and its history, culture, and structure.
These genres change and evolve over time to serve varying organizational needs.
Unlike such customizable and ﬂexible writing, content management operates by
making genres rigid and form-driven, with required ﬁelds. CCM asks writers to
compose text that is so generic that it can be reused across multiple genres, a task
for which few have received training. Consider this example from Rockley’s
Managing Enterprise Content (Rockley et al. 2002), which suggests that some key
text could be customized to work across genres (Table 1).
The assumption in this example is that moving across genres can be accom-
plished by adding or cutting phrases without considering tone, style, or organi-
zation. In this limited example, it seems to work well, but simple product
descriptions are only a small segment of the writing work performed in
68
D. Clark

organizations, and even in this example, the amount of tagging and customizing is
signiﬁcant. As the amount of labor required to make such chunks work across
genres increases, the potential savings drop off.
A more common model of reuse is reuse within genres. For example, if a
company that produces laser printers also produces technical documentation for
those printers, that documentation need only be as different as the products
themselves are. Often the differences are small, and large pieces of the docu-
mentation can easily be reused for different models of printers. Therefore, writers
need not spend signiﬁcant time customizing and coding at the sentence and word
level but can instead write genre-speciﬁc chunks that can be reused wholesale
across different media.
Even in those cases, though, it is important for managers and writers to ask
whether reusing content, while it may improve consistency and accuracy, ulti-
mately serves their organizations best. Several key, interrelated issues can be
exacerbated by uncritical reuse, even when everything otherwise goes well with a
new implementation:
• Reuse promotes consistency, not clarity. Content management is often sold by
emphasizing its advantages to organizations, rather than its advantages to an
organization’s key reading audiences, including its end users. In discussing
writing for content management, Hackos and Rockley (1999) suggest, ‘‘Each
component of information [should] be written exactly alike. This means it will
be completely transparent when it is used in multiple locations’’ (p. 2). While
the information will be transparent to writers and managers, will it be the best
possible text for users? Consider the case of an end user of a laser printer who is
struggling to use his new wireless printer with his Mac, even though it works
ﬁne with his PC. He checks the company web site, the printed manual, and the
online help built into their printer’s installation DVD and ﬁnds in each case an
identically written description of the installation process—that is, the same
description that didn’t help him in the ﬁrst place. As companies hope, many
users would consult discussion forums at this point and ﬁnd a solution, but
Table 1 Example of content customization
Brochure
Operations guide
E-commerce site
The B-Brother model 1984 is
a programmable device
that connects directly to
consumers’ televisions to
track the channels they ﬂip
to, what programs they
record, and what
commercials they skip.
The information is
instantly transmitted to the
cable or satellite provider.
The B-Brother connects
directly to consumers’
televisions. It can be
programmed to track what
channels they ﬂip to, what
programs they record, and
what commercials they
skip. The information is
transmitted to the cable or
satellite provider.
The B-Brother model 1984 is a
device that connects
directly to consumers’
televisions to track their
television viewing habits.
Source Rockley et al. (2002), p. 36
Rhetorical Challenges and Concerns in Enterprise Content Management
69

others will instead call technical support—or, worse, return the product and
write a bad online review.
• Reuse can limit writing and design craft. Content management can provide dis-
incentives to creative thinking about rhetorical problems. There is nothing new
about the reuse of content within and even across genres; for example, technical
communicators have always copied and pasted relevant, repeatable material in
similar manuals for similar products. However, content management systems by
their nature regularize and standardize processes and, in the process, interfere with
customization and creativity (vom Brocke et al. 2010), if only by discouraging
potential solutions that wouldn’t ﬁt inside the literal and ﬁgurative boxes presented
by ECM. Rhetoric scholars have long worried that content management software
strips writing of much of its status; Albers (2003) compared the effects of content
management to the effects that late-nineteenth-century automated production had
on craftspeople and product quality (p. 336). Just as worrisome is the possibility
that optimal solutions for human users might not be developed because of the
pressure to devote time only to those writing and design tasks that can be reused
with minimal effort.
• Reuse can create issues with internationalization. Global organizations often
must provide international users with translations, either out of necessity or by
law. Few organizations can afford to localize their materials in any real way, so
they rely on literal, word-for-word translations of their materials instead of
undertaking the labor and expense of customizing for their target language and
culture. Content management systems are frequently promoted as offering
signiﬁcant opportunities to save costs on translation (Hackos 2002; Rockley
et al. 2002), but these savings are realized at the cost of clear communication by
turning translation into a chunk-by-chunk process in which each reusable chunk
needs to be translated only once into each target language. While this process is
much less expensive than translating each of a dozen product manuals indi-
vidually from beginning to end, it also provides ‘‘enormous incentive to not
improve phrasings, change designs, or add user-requested content’’ (Clark 2002)
because each minor change could mean signiﬁcant new translation expenses
across multiple languages.
New Complexities for Training and Development
Dozens of textbooks, conferences, and organizations are dedicated to teaching
writers and non-writers how to become proﬁcient at writing for organizations. In
the United States, most university engineering, science, and business programs
require students to take technical and/or business writing courses and introductory
composition courses. The last ﬁfteen years have also seen growth in ‘‘writing
across the curriculum’’ programs that use the key courses in their disciplines to
help students learn to write.
However, as educators we are still learning how to help students adapt to the
new writing environments and expectations of ECM. All types of writers in ECM
70
D. Clark

organizations need signiﬁcant skills in working with metadata, search optimiza-
tion, and information design, even if their interaction with the ECM system is only
in the form of storing and retrieving full documents. If they also write and design
using web content management or a CCM system, they must understand writing
differently than how they were taught in most writing courses.
Technical communicators are wise to view these changes as opportunities
because preparing students for ECM environments can help them rethink how
writing and other communicative work take place. We have long recognized the
importance of helping students see their writing work as central to the work of
their organizations and as consisting of far more than simply avoiding embar-
rassing errors or inaccuracies:
From today’s academic programs, most technical communicators do receive training, not in
‘‘how to write,’’ but rather in how to perceive writing as a social and cultural practice and in
how to take an inquiry-based, problem-solving approach to understand this practice in
particular contexts….The lingering idea that writing is somehow a ‘‘basic skill’’ rather than
an area of strategic activity for a whole enterprise sometimes causes managers to make poor
choices when implementing CM practices and systems. Many see these as a chance to
automate, or, worse, eliminate the work that writing specialists do. (Hart-Davidson 2010,
pp. 141–142)
Many in the technical communication ﬁeld echo Hart-Davidson’s concerns that
content management automates many processes that were once important parts of
the daily work of practitioners, in some cases undercutting the perceived value of
writing work. On the other hand, we might heed the ﬁrst part of the quotation as it
relates to how ECM can help us equip students for the new realities of organi-
zational writing. For example, Rockley (2001) and Hackos (2002) argue that
content management work can help writers return to writing, since freedom from
the work of formatting, layout, and production, which is now standardized, allows
writers to focus on writing. Others, including me, argue that this streamlining has
the potential to strip communicators of much of their hard-won expertise in layout,
design, and specialized tools; in my own work, I have argued that trimming writing
work down to tagging ‘‘content’’ carries with it the risk that writers will be seen as
little more than typists.
All of this furor over writing and content occurs at a time when writing is
becoming more complex than ever and when our teaching has not yet caught up to
organizational needs. Even contemporary technical writing textbooks rely on
increasingly outmoded notions that conceive of writing as a discrete and singular
task in which an author relies on traditional rhetorical understandings of audience,
purpose, and context but is not asked to envision how her texts might be stored,
distributed, fragmented, and repurposed in ways that were rare before the adoption
of content management systems. Now particularly large organizations are adopting
these systems, and we are far behind in preparing future workers to think and work
with them adequately. We are in the business of studying writing and communi-
cation through the examination of organizational contexts, and those contexts are
undergoing a signiﬁcant technological shift; it’s time for us to ﬁnd ways to
leverage and teach that shift.
Rhetorical Challenges and Concerns in Enterprise Content Management
71

Technical communicators are keenly aware of this problem, and practitioners at
conferences and local meetings encourage me to ensure that students are receiving
training in structured writing, XML, and related tools, while scholars emphasize
the importance of teaching students rhetorical theories that will help them cope
with contemporary networked communication (cf. Brooke 2009; Spinuzzi 2008).
At the same time, students still need the same kinds of writing training as ever,
training in coherence, conciseness, and sentence structure.
Despite years of assertions that technical communicators are well-positioned to
play leadership roles in content management design and implementation (Johnson
and Fowler 2008; Wick 2000), scholars are just beginning to develop best prac-
tices for ﬁtting all of these needs into our curricula, and mainstream textbooks are
just beginning to catch on and catch up. A consensus is emerging that not only
technical communicators, but all students who work in organizations that use such
technologies should be well versed in the theories and tools of writing (Eble 2008;
Hart-Davidson 2010).
We can train students to work with these tools by leveraging rhetorical theory.
Robidoux (2008), for example, suggests that content management authors can be
trained by relying on current structured writing methods that are not dissimilar from
Robert Horn’s ‘‘structured writing,’’ which ﬁnds its roots in classical rhetoric’s
similar concerns with structure. According to Robidoux (2008), ‘‘These strategies
represent basic principles of content development, structure, and organization—
principles described long ago by Aristotle, Aphthonius, and Hermogenes’’ (p. 120).
Robidoux (2008) includes a thorough multi-module, multi-semester proposed
curriculum, but I despair at the notion of trying to ﬁnd space for it within existing
programs, and it’s altogether too much for training non-specialists.
Conclusion: Future Work
Technical communicators, who are useful to examine as representative ECM end
users, are still learning to manage its cultural, rhetorical, and pedagogical
implications:
• Concerns about sales and implementation. Content management is too often sold
without adequate acknowledgment and understanding of the training, support,
and process overhauls required for it to work effectively in an organization.
• Issues with component-based writing. CCM radically restructures long-standing
rhetorical practices. The new processes it introduces can prioritize efﬁciency and
cost savings over effective, audience-based writing.
• New complexities for training and development. Academics and practitioners
are still learning to train writers to work with content management’s very dif-
ferent understandings of invention, writing, storage, retrieval, and repurposing.
These issues are being explored by technical communicators, but there is plenty
of room for additional exploration and research that will help all end users of ECM
72
D. Clark

to make new installations and implementations more rhetorically and ﬁnancially
successful.
‘‘Knowledge management,’’ both as a term and a philosophy, seems to have
peaked in use and interest, and although it’s not entirely clear that it was only a
management fad, it has largely been replaced in business and management dis-
cussions by more pragmatic discussions of ‘‘content strategy’’ and a variety of
tool-based approaches. Still, done well, organizational implementations of ECM
systems carry forward knowledge management’s assumption that organizations
should restructure themselves in ways that emphasize the importance of capturing
and reusing information and knowledge. However, organizations that do so will
raise many questions about existing practices for publishing requirements, work-
ﬂows, markup, storage, retrieval, and so on that it will touch ‘‘nearly everything
about the culture of writing in an organization, beginning with how texts are
understood and encompassing every step of the text generation life cycle up to and
including the way a text should behave when a user interacts with it’’ (Hart-
Davidson et al. 2008, p. 12).
From the perspective of professional writers, ECM is fundamentally a shift in how
an organization reads and writes—two of the most critical functions in any company
or industry. Hart-Davidson et al. (2008) suggest that all workers must ‘‘do
accounting,’’ but professional accountants ensure the organization as a whole is well
accounted. Similarly, all workers must write, but professional writers should ensure
that organizations are creating the kinds of reading and writing environments that
best support organizational goals and priorities. An important part of creating those
environments is following technical communicators in putting resources into
thinking rhetorically as well as technologically about organizational goals.
References
Albers, M. (2003). Single sourcing and the technical communication career path. Technical
Communication, 50(3), 335–343.
Andersen, R. (2007). The rhetoric of enterprise content management (ECM): Confronting the
assumptions driving ECM adoption and transforming technical communication. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 61–87.
Andersen, R. (2009). The diffusion of content management technologies in technical commu-
nication work groups: A qualitative study on the activity of technology transfer. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI.
Association for Information and Image Management (AIIM). (2012). What is enterprise content
management? Retrieved August 12, 2012, from http://www.aiim.org/What-is-ECM-Enterprise-
Content-Management
Bacha, J. (2008). Single sourcing and the return to positivism: The threat of plain-style,
arhetorical technical communication practices. In B. Gu & G. Pullman (Eds.), Content
management: Bridging the gap between theory and practice (pp. 143–159). New York:
Baywood.
Brooke, C. G. (2009). Lingua fracta: Toward a rhetoric of new media. Cresskill: Hampton Press.
Carter, L. (2003). The implications of single sourcing for writers and writing. Technical
Communication, 50(3), 317–320.
Rhetorical Challenges and Concerns in Enterprise Content Management
73

Clark, D. (2002). Rhetoric of present single-sourcing methodologies. In Proceedings of the 20th
Annual International Conference on Computer Documentation. New York, NY.
Clark, D. (2007). Content management and the separation of presentation and content. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 35–60.
Drucker, P. F. (1972). Concept of the corporation. New York: John Day Co.
Eble, M. (2008). Digital delivery and communication technologies: Understanding content
management systems through rhetorical theory. In B. Gu & G. Pullman (Eds.), Content
management: Bridging the gap between theory and practice (pp. 87–102). New York:
Baywood.
Gee, J. P., Hull, G. A., & Lankshear, C. (1996). The new work order: Behind the language of the
new capitalism. Boulder: Westview Press.
Giammona, B. (2004). The future of technical communication: How innovation, technology,
information management, and other forces are shaping the future of the profession. Technical
Communication, 51(3), 349–366.
Gu, B., & Pullman, G. (2008). Introduction: Mapping out the key parameters of content
management. In B. Gu & G. Pullman (Eds.), Content management: Bridging the gap between
theory and practice (pp. 1–12). New York: Baywood.
Hackos, J. (2002). Content management for dynamic web delivery. New York: Wiley.
Hackos, J., & Rockley, A. (1999). Single sourcing white paper. Center for Information-
Development Management.
Hart-Davidson, W. (2010). Content management: Beyond single sourcing. In R. Spilka (Ed.),
Digital literacy for technical communication: 21st century theory and practice (pp. 128–143).
New York: Routledge.
Hart-Davidson, W., Bernhardt, G., McLeod, M., Rife, M., & Grabill, J. (2008). Coming to
content management: Inventing infrastructure for organizational knowledge work. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 10–34.
Johnson, C. S., & Fowler, S. (2008). Analyze before you act: CMS and knowledge transfer.
In B. Gu & G. Pullman (Eds.), Content management: Bridging the gap between theory and
practice (pp. 43–56). New York: Baywood.
Marvin, C. (1988). When old technologies were new: Thinking about electric communication in
the late nineteenth century. New York: Oxford University Press.
Postman, N. (1985). Amusing ourselves to death: Public discourse in the age of show business.
New York: Viking.
Pullman, G., & Gu, B. (2007). Guest editors’ introduction: Rationalizing and rhetoricizing
content management. Technical Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 1–9.
Robidoux, C. (2008). Rhetorically structured content: Developing a collaborative single-sourcing
curriculum. Technical Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 110–136.
Rockley, A. (2001). The impact of single sourcing and technology. Technical Communication,
48(2), 189–193.
Rockley, A., Kostur, P., & Manning, S. (2002). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content
strategy. Indianapolis: New Riders.
Sapienza, F. (2004). Usability, structured content, and single sourcing with XML. Technical
Communication, 51(3), 399–408.
Sapienza, F. (2007). A rhetorical approach to single-sourcing via intertextuality. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 16(1), 83–102. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
10572250709336578#.UjSIyj-E4cs
Spinuzzi, C. (2008). Network: Theorizing knowledge work in telecommunications. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
vom Brocke, J., Seidel, S., & Simons, A. (2010). Bridging the gap between enterprise content
management and creativity: A research framework. In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI.
Wick, C. (2000). Knowledge management and leadership opportunities for technical commu-
nicators. Technical Communication, 47(4), 15–29.
74
D. Clark

Cultural Values Matter: The Role
of Organizational Culture in ECM
Theresa Schmiedel and Jan vom Brocke
Abstract Even though many enterprise content management (ECM) initiatives in
practice struggle with cultural issues, research seems to have not yet addressed this
intangible organizational aspect in ECM. Therefore, this chapter focuses on the
role of organizational culture with regard to ECM. Organizational culture refers to
the shared values embraced by an organization’s employees. The chapter analyzes
the mutual inﬂuence of the concepts of ECM and organizational culture on each
other, examines the speciﬁc characteristics of a culture that is supportive of an
ECM approach, and identiﬁes ways how to realize such a culture. The ﬁndings
provide insights on the intangible aspects to be considered when implementing and
operating ECM.
Introduction
ECM has increasingly gained importance in today’s information ﬂooded business
world. It focuses on the efﬁcient and effective handling of all information assets in
an organization (Smith and McKeen 2003). Only few scholars have addressed
ECM in their research to date, but it seems to be common sense that ECM refers
not only to technologies but also to organizational aspects of the management of
content (Munkvold et al. 2006; Scott et al. 2004; vom Brocke et al. 2010, 2011b).
Given this comprehensive understanding of ECM, it is surprising that research
seems to have not yet focused on the role of culture with regard to ECM. This gap
T. Schmiedel (&)  J. vom Brocke
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-Josef-Str. 21,
9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein
e-mail: theresa.schmiedel@uni.li
J. vom Brocke
e-mail: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_5,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
75

is especially remarkable considering that many ECM initiatives in practice
struggle or even fail for cultural reasons—though the importance of culture for
ECM is well-known (Bridges 2007; Rockley et al. 2003; Scott et al. 2004).
Against this background, the purpose of this chapter is to examine the role of
organizational culture in ECM. Speciﬁcally, a closer look is taken at the inﬂuence
of culture on ECM and the inﬂuence of ECM on culture to then determine
underlying cultural values that generally support ECM as a management approach.
The analysis is based on the understanding that a particular management approach
reﬂects a certain philosophy on how to handle a speciﬁc facet of business to
achieve performance improvements and competitive advantage (Schmiedel et al.
2013). Therefore, it is assumed that speciﬁc ways of thinking and, thus, speciﬁc
value orientations are inherent in the philosophy underlying ECM as a manage-
ment approach. These considerations serve as a starting point for the examination
of an organizational culture supportive of ECM.
The analysis of the role organizational culture plays in ECM is based on
interviews and group discussions with ECM experts from academia and practice.
In the following, a brief background of ECM and organizational culture is pre-
sented. This introduction of the understanding of the two concepts which underlies
this research is followed by an analysis of the mutual inﬂuence of these concepts
on each other. Finally, the facets of an ECM-supportive organizational culture are
examined, and ways how to realize such a culture are identiﬁed. Concluding, the
implications for research and practice are discussed.
Background
Existing research provides several deﬁnitions for ECM and culture. To position the
approach taken in this chapter, the understanding of the two concepts that underlie
the research of this chapter is introduced. The following section elaborates on
ECM and organizational culture as the major concepts of this research.
Enterprise Content Management
The term ‘‘ECM’’ stems primarily from software vendors and business analysts
(Tyrväinen et al. 2006; vom Brocke et al. 2011a). For this reason, early ECM
approaches in research and practice focused on technologies that support the
management of content since ECM was understood as an IT solution to an
organization’s administration of information assets (e.g., Gupta et al. 2001;
McNay 2002). Only in recent years has ECM been addressed more comprehen-
sively as ‘‘the strategies, tools, processes, and skills an organization needs to
manage all its information assets (regardless of type) over their lifecycle’’ (Smith
and McKeen 2003, p. 648).
76
T. Schmiedel and J. vom Brocke

In fact, a recent literature review reports that two different perceptions of ECM
can be identiﬁed in existing research (Grahlmann et al. 2011). One stream of
research takes a content and technology perspective on ECM, including aspects
like data management and functional requirements for ECM systems. The other
concentrates on an enterprise or process perspective, focusing on the social aspects
of ECM in addition to its technological aspects and, thus, taking an integrated
perspective on ECM.
Despite this rather holistic understanding of ECM that has developed, one
major organizational factor that seems to have not yet been sufﬁciently considered
in ECM research is that of organizational culture. While the relevance of this
intangible factor in ECM is well-known (Bridges 2007; Rockley et al. 2003; Scott
et al. 2004), an in-depth analysis of culture’s role in the context of ECM seems to
have not been undertaken. Change management as a concept related to culture has
been addressed in extant ECM research (Munkvold et al. 2006; Päivärinta and
Munkvold 2005), yet there still seems to be lack of research on how to change an
organizational culture so it is supportive of an ECM approach. The next section
considers the concept of organizational culture.
Organizational Culture
Many scholars agree that shared values are the core element of culture (Straub
et al. 2002). Parsons and Shils (1951) describe patterns of value-orientation ‘‘as the
most crucial cultural elements’’ (p. 159). Hofstede’s (2005) culture onion displays
layers of culture ‘‘around a core that consists of values’’ (p. 10). Schein (2004)
deﬁnes the essence of culture as deeply embedded, unconscious, and nonnego-
tiable ‘‘underlying assumptions’’, acknowledging that other culture researchers
prefer the term ‘‘values’’. In other words, many approaches focus on a value-based
deﬁnition of culture.
When alluding to culture, it is important to be aware of the cultural group one
refers to. Every group shares speciﬁc values and culture research commonly dis-
tinguishes nations, organizations, and work groups as cultural groups (Leidner and
Kayworth 2006). Even though research on culture typically focuses on one of these
cultural groups, these categories have a complex interrelationship as no cultural
group is homogeneous in the sense that all people who belong to it think and act
the same way. On the contrary, every person is shaped by several cultural groups at
the same time. For example, the region, the nation, the profession, the religion, the
organization to which we belong inﬂuence our value system and provide us with a
variety of cultural identities (Huntington 1997; Tajfel and Turner 1986).
While this chapter acknowledges the complexity of the culture concept, it
focuses on the organization as a speciﬁc cultural group so it does not address the
interrelationship between organizational culture and, for example, national or
professional cultures. Against this background, the understanding of the culture
concept that underlies this chapter can be summarized as follows: Organizational
Cultural Values Matter: The Role of Organizational Culture in ECM
77

culture refers to the shared values that are lived by an organization’s members.
Based on this deﬁnition, the relationships between the concepts of ECM and
organizational culture are analyzed in the following.
Relationship Between ECM and Organizational Culture
Building on results from interviews and group discussions with ten ECM experts
from academia and practice, and grounded in the academic literature on ECM and
organizational culture, this section provides insights how organizational culture
can inﬂuence ECM, how ECM can inﬂuence organizational culture, and what the
relationship between ECM and organizational culture ideally looks like. In the
following, the relationships between the two concepts of ECM and organizational
culture are analyzed.
Impact of Organizational Culture on ECM
In this section, culture is considered an independent variable inﬂuencing ECM.
The following paragraphs examine (1) how organizational culture can positively or
negatively inﬂuence ECM, (2), why organizational culture inﬂuences ECM one
way or the other, and (3) what the implications of these cultural inﬂuences are for
the implementation and operation of ECM in an organization.
1. How organizational culture positively or negatively inﬂuences ECM. Culture
has been identiﬁed as both a driver and an inhibitor of organizational management
initiatives in general and ECM initiatives in particular (du Gay 1997; Gerstner
2002; Kutty 2011).
As a driver, organizational culture positively inﬂuences ECM. In fact, it is not
surprising that it is hardly noticed when organizational culture functions as a
facilitator of ECM implementations and operations. A smooth realization of an
organizational ECM approach is far less astonishing than one in which organi-
zational culture serves as an inhibitor of change. In this case, one typically does
not notice any obstacles related to resistances based on people’s cultural identity.
As an inhibitor, organizational culture negatively inﬂuences ECM. Cultural
barriers to the management approach become apparent when employees perceive
ECM-related tasks as a burden because these tasks do not seem to be compatible
with some of their values. For example, employees from the marketing department
may see ECM as an approach that restricts their way of working in that it limits
their freedom to creatively develop and use content.
2. Why organizational culture inﬂuences ECM positively or negatively. The
impact of organizational culture on ECM depends on the compatibility of the lived
values in the existing cultural context of an organization with values that are
78
T. Schmiedel and J. vom Brocke

generally supportive of an ECM approach (cf. vom Brocke and Sinnl 2011). If the
cultural context of an organization ﬁts with an ECM approach, there is no conﬂict
between existing cultural values and the ones that facilitate ECM. However, if the
cultural context of an organization does not ﬁt with the ECM approach, the
existing cultural values conﬂict with those that generally support an ECM
approach.
A closer look at the question concerning why culture inﬂuences ECM either
positively or negatively reveals several cultural dimensions that determine the
direction of inﬂuence. They include the following dimensions:
• Perception of competition: Based on the extent to which the employees of an
organization perceive themselves as being in competition with their colleagues,
knowledge and content may rather be hidden or shared. A culture of high
competition in which individuals aim for predominance through knowledge
advantages has a tendency to hinder ECM because employees will not share
content voluntarily. However, a culture that emphasizes cooperation rather than
competition is likely to inﬂuence ECM positively.
• Handling of mistakes: Depending on the way that mistakes are handled in an
organization, employees may either fear control and blame for their mistakes or
be happy to learn from their mistakes and from the opinion of others. A culture
of surveillance and blame for mistakes is likely to negatively inﬂuence ECM, as
people will not like sharing content (as they are afraid of any negative conse-
quences based on potential mistakes), while a culture with a positive view of
control as a chance for improvement and learning supports an ECM approach.
• Meaning of self-fulﬁllment: Based on the importance that is attached to indi-
vidual self-fulﬁllment, employees either feel a loss of freedom and creativity or
enjoy the uniformity gained through ECM. A culture of strong self-fulﬁllment
may have a negative impact on ECM because employees may prefer to generate
content creatively rather than to be obliged to (re)use given content. However, a
culture that emphasizes uniformity rather than self-fulﬁllment may inﬂuence
ECM positively.
• Purpose of rules: The role of rules in an organization can determine whether
employees perceive ECM as dictatorial or as a common service. A culture in
which rules serve as a means to dictate ways of working is unlikely to support
ECM. Yet, a culture that sees rules as common sense-making structures posi-
tively inﬂuences ECM because employees may rather be happy to contribute to
the bigger picture in this kind of culture.
These four cultural dimensions provide some insight into why organizational
culture can have a positive or negative inﬂuence on ECM. The implications of
these inﬂuences on ECM implementation and operation are as follows.
3. Implications for the implementation and operation of ECM. Cultural drivers or
barriers can inﬂuence both the speed of implementation and the acceptance of
ECM in daily operations. Regarding the former, an ECM implementation can be
slower or faster depending on the existing organizational culture. Cultural
Cultural Values Matter: The Role of Organizational Culture in ECM
79

resistances, for example, can hinder an efﬁcient implementation of ECM. As
indicated above, these resistances are based on the given cultural context of an
organization, which may negatively inﬂuence ECM.
Organizations that launch an ECM approach while ignoring cultural barriers are
likely to face difﬁculties regarding its adoption in daily operations. The imple-
mentation of ECM systems, for example, does not guarantee that employees will
adopt the measures and habits that are required for a successful long-term reali-
zation of ECM in an organization. If the given cultural context is not initially
supportive of ECM, a change in organizational culture is required. Accordingly,
the next section examines the impact ECM can have on organizational culture.
Impact of ECM on Organizational Culture
This section considers culture as a dependent variable inﬂuenced by ECM. The
following paragraphs focus on (1) why ECM can inﬂuence organizational culture,
(2) how ECM can inﬂuence organizational culture, and (3) what the implications
of these inﬂuences are for the implementation and operation of ECM in an
organization.
1. Why ECM inﬂuences organizational culture. A successful ECM approach
requires a supportive cultural setting. It has been recognized that an ECM
implementation inﬂuences the existing cultural context of an organization (e.g.,
Cameron 2011), as the cultural context needs to embrace a set of cultural values
that are particularly supportive of ECM. In other words, the adoption of the
management approach requires the inclusion of cultural values that are particularly
supportive of ECM in the lived organizational culture. The extent of the required
cultural change depends on the compatibility of the cultural context with values
that generally support an ECM approach.
Organizations whose cultures prove to have a negative inﬂuence on ECM
require a signiﬁcant cultural change. The ability to implement and operate ECM
successfully in such an organization depends to a large extent on the organiza-
tional competences to realize this cultural change.
2. How ECM inﬂuences organizational culture. ECM drivers for cultural change
include the following:
• Standardization: With ECM comes standardization of the way in which
content is managed in an organization, such as generation of corporate
metadata models (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005). This standardization
intends to replace the individual management of content, which often does not
allow efﬁcient retrieval and reuse on a corporate level. By standardizing
global corporate processes related to the management of content, organiza-
tions have the chance to deﬁne and implement a global culture that supports
the ECM approach. In other words, standardization in the context of ECM can
80
T. Schmiedel and J. vom Brocke

drive required cultural change when organizations not only deﬁne and
implement technical or methodological speciﬁcations but also realize com-
mon values that support their approach.
• Professionalism: ECM provides organizations with the opportunity to add to a
professional appearance for external and internal stakeholders. An effective
approach toward managing content has mainly been enabled through the
availability of information systems, which allow, for example, a separation of
presentation and content (Clark 2007), such as web content management
systems. The professionalism that these systems facilitate can serve as an
important driver of ECM-required cultural change. This is due to the fact that
the resulting professionalism creates awareness of the beneﬁts of ECM and
can thus shape the values of the cultural context.
• Collaboration: ECM involves a signiﬁcant amount of collaboration between
employees, especially in terms of content and knowledge sharing (Päivärinta
and Munkvold 2005). To ensure this collaboration, appropriate communica-
tion is required to foster the acceptance of ECM and the related information
systems. The resulting collaboration, which accompanies the ECM approach,
can then create a strong culture of teamwork. In other words, collaboration
can serve as an essential driver of cultural change. In this regard, ECM can be
considered an approach which strengthens the corporate spirit of an
organization.
• Qualiﬁcation: ECM requires that employees have a speciﬁc skillset. This
skillset includes a certain level of IT-afﬁnity but also managerial and soft
skills when it comes to collaboration. Therefore, employees may need to
obtain additional qualiﬁcations. For example, IT requirements may be espe-
cially challenging for employees who have difﬁculties with computers.
However, these additional qualiﬁcations can serve as a strong driver of cul-
tural change, as they foster a common understanding of the ECM approach.
These drivers of cultural change are some examples of how ECM can inﬂuence
organizational culture. The following examines the implications of these impacts
for ECM implementation and operation.
3. Implications for the implementation and operation of ECM. The effort required
for the implementation of ECM in an organization depends to a large extent on
how much cultural change the ECM approach requires. This, in turn, depends on
the compatibility between the cultural context and ECM. In other words, the extent
to which ECM inﬂuences organizational culture is determined by the organiza-
tional culture itself. Further, a cultural change that is based on an ECM initiative
not only requires signiﬁcant organizational efforts but can also go far beyond the
timeframe of the ECM implementation.
As any cultural change, an ECM-induced cultural change can take considerable
time before organizational structures and employees’ behavior have transformed in
the intended way. However, only this internalization of speciﬁc cultural values
sustainably changes the way people work and supports the acceptance of ECM in
Cultural Values Matter: The Role of Organizational Culture in ECM
81

daily operations. While this section and the previous section focused on ways in
which ECM and organizational culture can inﬂuence each other, the next section
examines the speciﬁc cultural values that are supportive of an ECM approach.
ECM-Supportive Cultural Values
This section combines aspects of the previous two sections in that it takes a closer
look at cultural values that generally support an ECM approach. These normative
values determine the nature of an organizational culture that positively inﬂuences
ECM on the one hand, and, thus, determine the inﬂuence ECM can have on a given
organizational culture on the other hand.
The speciﬁc ECM-supportive cultural values presented here were identiﬁed in
an iterative process with ECM experts from academia and practice. First, various
values were collected that are generally perceived as being supportive of ECM.
These values were then consolidated and ranked according to the degree to which
they support ECM. The resulting top ﬁve values were considered core values
supportive of an ECM approach. To gain a deeper understanding of the meaning of
each individual value, deﬁnitions were derived as follows. First, terms for the
deﬁnitions were collected from all experts. Second, these terms were consolidated
and deﬁnitions were suggested to the experts. Finally, the deﬁnitions were dis-
cussed and reﬁned. In this process, the following cultural values were identiﬁed as
supportive of ECM:
• Discipline is deﬁned as appreciating the bindingness of deﬁned rules on the
handling of content.
• Transparency is deﬁned as appreciating the availability of content and the
traceability of its usage.
• Systematization is deﬁned as appreciating logic patterns for structuring content.
• Trust is deﬁned as expecting security of the content that is generally available in
processes and systems.
• Responsiveness to change is deﬁned as being open to improved or new pro-
cesses and systems for the management of content.
Based on the identiﬁcation of these ECM-supportive values, an additional
rating of those values according to their importance for ECM implementation and
ECM operation was conducted as follows. Each expert was given 100 points for
distribution among the ﬁve values. The more points were allocated to a speciﬁc
value, the higher its perceived importance was. This exercise was done twice: once
to rate the importance of each value for ECM implementation and once to rate the
importance of each value for ECM operation. The resulting ranking of values
revealed additional insights.
The importance of the ﬁve ECM-supportive values for ECM implementation
was perceived in directly opposite order of that for ECM operation. While
82
T. Schmiedel and J. vom Brocke

responsiveness to change is perceived as by far the most important in the context
of ECM implementation, this value is signiﬁcantly less important for ECM
operation. Conversely, discipline is perceived as much more important for ECM
operation than it is for ECM implementation. Table 1 provides an overview of the
rating results.
The identiﬁed ECM-supportive values provide ﬁrst insights on the nature of an
organizational culture that positively inﬂuences ECM. The next section examines
what measures an organization can take to realize these values, i.e., how these
values can be incorporated in the given cultural context of an organization.
Measures to Realize a Culture Supportive of ECM
The identiﬁed ECM-supportive values make up the core of a reference culture that
facilitates ECM. A comparison of these values with those being lived in the given
cultural context of an organization allows identifying speciﬁc mismatches. For
example, if the handling of mistakes in an organization is such that employees fear
control and blame, a misﬁt can be identiﬁed with the ECM-supportive value of
transparency, as employees will not appreciate the traceability of content usage. In
cases like this, speciﬁc measures are required to change facets of the existing
organizational culture to match with the intended reference culture.
Against this background, the experts involved in the study identiﬁed several
measures how to realize a culture supportive of ECM by incorporating the iden-
tiﬁed values in the organization’s culture. These measures include the following
general and value-speciﬁc actions.
Table 1 Importance of ECM-supportive values as determined by ECM experts
ECM-supportive
values
Rating of importance to ECM through distribution of 100 points among the ﬁve
values
Importance for
ECM implementation
(average of responses)
Rank
Importance for
ECM operation
(average of responses)
Rank
Discipline
15.0
5
26.7
1
Transparency
15.8
3
22.5
2
Systematization
15.8
3
20.0
3
Trust
18.3
2
19.2
4
Responsiveness
to change
35.0
1
11.7
5
Cultural Values Matter: The Role of Organizational Culture in ECM
83

• General
– Consider ECM-supportive values when hiring new personnel.
– Generate awareness for ECM-supportive values (e.g., through cultural train-
ings, through communication of the personal beneﬁt and the organizational
signiﬁcance of the values).
– Pay attention to the needs of employees for integration and participation
(addressing fear of employment loss).
– Gain managerial support and involve key multipliers or inﬂuencers.
• Discipline
– Link KPIs with positive and/or negative incentives.
– Request case-related information through supervisors (to avoid the impression
of control).
– Point out employees’ duty and the gap between the as-is and the to-be state
(e.g., standards related to the archiving of documents).
• Transparency
– Review incentives that may foster non-transparency (e.g., bonuses for patents).
– Create awareness of already existing transparency (addressing fear of
transparency).
– Emphasize integrity (making idea theft taboo).
• Systematization
– Minimize work efforts through system support (e.g., ﬁxing metadata).
– Establish awareness for processes (e.g., communicating beneﬁts for the
overall business process through structured content).
– Emphasize the simpliﬁcation that results from structured content.
• Trust
– Spread a positive atmosphere through early success stories.
– Walk the talk.
– Increase trust in the solution through certiﬁcates and references.
• Responsiveness to change
– Challenge existing content management systems (pointing out the danger of
water, ﬁre, theft).
– Involve both tenured and young employees in work teams.
– Identify and involve negative missionaries early.
– Encourage continuous improvements and establish a service structure for
continuous user support.
The identiﬁed measures provide ﬁrst insights into how a culture supportive of
ECM could be established in terms of actions that could foster the incorporation of
speciﬁc ECM-supportive values in the culture of an organization. As initial ﬁnd-
ings, the identiﬁed measures provide a basis for future research. They may well be
84
T. Schmiedel and J. vom Brocke

complemented by other measures. Most importantly, the applicability of these
measures for speciﬁc cultural contexts needs to be veriﬁed. Even though the
identiﬁed measures seem generic, they may serve their purpose only in particular
cultural contexts. Nevertheless, the identiﬁcation of these measures provides an
initial idea of how an ECM-supportive organizational culture may be created. In
the following, the research ﬁndings are discussed in more detail.
Discussion
This chapter provides two major insights regarding the role of organizational
culture in ECM. First, it sheds light on the relationships between the two concepts
of ECM and organizational culture in that it examines their mutual inﬂuence on
each other and identiﬁes speciﬁc ECM-supportive cultural values. Second, the
chapter introduces a set of initial measures that may establish an organizational
culture that embraces the identiﬁed ECM-supportive values.
While the chapter emphasizes the establishment of an organizational culture
supportive of ECM, it does not call for an overall change of the existing culture
toward one that embraces only ECM-supportive values; ECM requires establishing
a speciﬁc facet of organizational culture that supports the ECM approach, yet it
also allows for the maintenance of cultural facets that have evolved over time,
often tracing back to the founding fathers of an organization.
The same holds true for work group cultures. The suggested ECM-supportive
culture is not intended to unify the cultures of the various work groups in an
organization. There are usually good reasons why, generally speaking, the
accounting department focuses less on creativity than the marketing department
does. The results do not suggest standardizing these work group cultures but that
they embrace the values supportive of an ECM approach in order for the initiative
to be successful. While there may be some arguments suggesting that, for example,
creative departments cannot perform ECM because it is against their nature, this
chapter argues that ECM does not require giving up creativity but that, in addition
to creativity, incorporating values like discipline and systematization is useful for
tasks related to ECM.
There are limitations to the research presented in this chapter. The ﬁndings
regarding the relationships between ECM and organizational culture and regarding
the measures for establishing an ECM-supportive organizational culture are based
on interviews and focus groups with ten experts from academia and practice. The
involvement of more experts in the ﬁeld of ECM may reveal additional or even
controversial ﬁndings. With regard to the identiﬁed measures for realizing a cul-
ture supportive of ECM, further research is necessary to determine how far the
ﬁndings hold true for any type of cultural context and how they can be comple-
mented by measures that apply only to a speciﬁc cultural context.
As to implications for research, future work could address the described limi-
tations, but it could also operationalize the identiﬁed ECM-supportive cultural
Cultural Values Matter: The Role of Organizational Culture in ECM
85

values in order to be able to measure them. Such operationalization would facil-
itate an analysis of organizational and work group cultures in terms of the degree
to which they support ECM. This analysis, in turn, would indicate the amount of
cultural change that is required to implement ECM in an organization.
As to implications for practice, the identiﬁed ECM-supportive cultural values
may serve as guiding principles for organizations to determine the roll-out strategy
of an ECM implementation. If ECM is initiated in departments with cultures that
already embrace ECM-supportive values, the resulting early success stories can
help inspire the rest of the organization and ease the overall implementation.
In other words, quick wins may be realized with departments which foster the
implementation of ECM based on their organizational sub-culture. For example,
the cultural context of the accounting department is likely to have an appropriate
cultural ﬁt with the identiﬁed ECM reference culture, so one may expect a rela-
tively smooth implementation of ECM, as the employees of this department are
possibly already used to archive data based on compliance requirements.
Conclusion
It is widely recognized that the implementation of ECM in an organization often
requires cultural change. Therefore, this chapter examines the role of organiza-
tional culture in ECM and provides insights based on interviews and focus groups
with ECM experts from academia and practice. The chapter shows how organi-
zational culture can inﬂuence ECM and how ECM can inﬂuence organizational
culture. In addition, it suggests speciﬁc cultural values that are supportive of an
ECM approach. Based on these values, measures are derived for how an organi-
zational culture can be realized that supports the implementation and operation of
ECM. While the presented research includes limitations, its contribution lies in its
development of ﬁrst insights on the role of culture in ECM that may serve as a
basis for future research and that may support organizations, especially in devel-
oping a roll-out strategy for their ECM approach.
References
Bridges, J. D. (2007). Taking ECM from concept to reality. Information Management Journal,
41(6), 30–39.
Cameron, S. A. (2011). Enterprise content management: A business and technical guide.
Swindon: Charlesworth Press.
Clark, D. (2007). Content management and the separation of presentation and content. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 35–60.
du Gay, P. (1997). Production of cultures/cultures of production. Glasgow: Bath Press
Colourbooks.
Gerstner, L. Jr. (2002). Who says elephants can’t dance? New York: Harper Business.
86
T. Schmiedel and J. vom Brocke

Grahlmann, K. R., Helms, R. W., Hilhorst, C., Brinkkemper, S., & van Amerongen, S. (2011).
Reviewing enterprise content management: A functional framework. European Journal of
Information Systems, 21(3), 268–286.
Gupta, V. K., Govindarajan, S., & Johnson, T. (2001). Overview of content management
approaches and strategies. Electronic Markets, 11(4), 281–287.
Hofstede, G. (2005). Cultures and organizations (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Huntington, S. P. (1997). The clash of civilizations and the remaking of the world order. New
York: Touchstone.
Kutty,S.(2011). ECM = Enterpriseculturemanagement: The GCC analogy. RetrievedMay6,2012,
from
www.aiim.org/community/blogs/community/ECM-3d-Enterprise-Culture-Management-
The-GCC-Analogy
Leidner, D. E., & Kayworth, T. (2006). A review of culture in information systems research.
Management Information Systems Quarterly, 30(2), 357–399.
McNay, H. E. (2002). Enterprise content management: An overview. In Proceedings of the
International Professional Communication Conference. Portland, OR.
Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2006). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of statoil. Scandinavian Journal of Information
Systems, 18(2), 69–100.
Päivärinta, T., & Munkvold, B. E. (2005). Enterprise content management: An integrated
perspective on information management. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Parsons, T., & Shils, E. A. (1951). Toward a general theory of action. New Brunswick:
Transaction Publishers.
Rockley, A., Kostur, P., & Manning, S. (2003). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content
strategy. Indianapolis: New Riders.
Schein, E. H. (2004). Organizational culture and leadership (3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass.
Schmiedel, T., vom Brocke, J., & Recker, J. (2013). Which cultural values matter to business
process management? Results from a global Delphi study. Business Process Management
Journal, 19(2), 292–317.
Scott, J., Globe, A., & Schiffner, K. (2004). Jungles and gardens: The evolution of knowledge
management at J.D. Edwards. MIS Quarterly Executive, 3(1), 37–52.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(2), 647–659.
Straub, D., Loch, K., Evaristo, R., Karahanna, E., & Srite, M. (2002). Towards a theory-based
measurement of culture. Journal of Global Information Management, 10(1), 13–23.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of inter-group behavior. In S. Worchel
& L. W. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of intergroup relations. Chicago, IL: Nelson-Hall.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Guest editorial: Characterizing the
evolving research on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 627–634.
vom Brocke, J., Seidel, S., & Simons, A. (2010). Bridging the gap between enterprise content
management and creativity: A research framework. In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., & Cleven, A. (2011a). Towards a business process-oriented
approach to enterprise content management: The ECM-Blueprinting framework. Information
Systems and e-Business Management, 9(4), 475–496.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., Herbst, A., Derungs, R., & Novotny, S. (2011b). The business
drivers behind ECM initiatives: A process perspective. Business Process Management
Journal, 17(6), 965–985.
vom Brocke, J., & Sinnl, T. (2011). Culture in business process management: A literature review.
Business Process Management Journal, 17(2), 357–377.
Cultural Values Matter: The Role of Organizational Culture in ECM
87

Part II
Methods and Tools

Strategy Development for Enterprise
Content Management
Martin Smits and Ramon O’Callaghan
Abstract Many organizations maintain a variety of systems and databases in a
complex ad-hoc information infrastructure that does not fulﬁll the need for com-
pany-wide unstructured information management in business processes, business
functions, and the extended enterprise. We present a framework and a method for
implementing enterprise content management (ECM) in order to address this
problem. Framework and method help to select content objects that can be brought
under ECM to create business value and guide the IT investments needed to realize
ECM. Framework and method were tested in a large high-tech organization that
runs four key business processes and a very large set of unstructured content.
Application of the framework and the method resulted in the identiﬁcation of
twenty core content objects and 100 content features that were well accepted by
the thirty managers involved in two key business processes.
Introduction
Most organizations today generate information at such a rate that it is a challenge
to put it in a format and a place where it can be found again when needed. Much of
these data is unstructured and not in a format that it can be found efﬁciently. Many
organizations maintain a variety of systems and databases in a complex ad-hoc
architecture that does not fulﬁll the need for company-wide unstructured
M. Smits (&)
Tilburg School of Economics and Management, Tilburg University, Warandelaan 2,
5037 AB, Tilburg, The Netherlands
e-mail: m.t.smits@uvt.nl
R. O’Callaghan
Graduate School of Business, Nazarbayev University, 53 Kabanbay Batyr Ave,
Astana 010000, Kazakhstan
e-mail: ramon.ocallaghan@nu.edu.kz
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_6,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
91

information management in business processes, business functions, and the
extended enterprise (Weill et al. 2002). ERP and other systems do not exchange
workﬂow information easily, so much of the unstructured data is re-keyed man-
ually, leading to errors, inaccuracies, and duplications (Nordheim and Päivärinta
2006; Oesterle et al. 2000).
A key challenge for organizations is to decide which unstructured data must be
put under some kind of management control and which can be left unstructured
and unmanaged (Gupta et al. 2001; Smith and McKeen 2003). This problem has
both a business perspective and a technology perspective: The business perspec-
tive involves the analysis of information and content needs in organizational units
and a decision concerning which content will be managed and how it will be
managed. The technology perspective involves the analysis of the existing systems
that provide content management solutions and their potential interconnection in
an overall architecture to meet the content management needs. This paper
addresses these business and technology perspectives and provides a framework
with which to develop content management strategies and their underlying
architectures.
Our research method is based on the design science approach (Hevner et al.
2004). In order to address the business and technology issues, we design an ECM
framework artifact based on the analysis of ECM literature and then evaluate the
artifact by applying it in a case. In this chapter, we deﬁne ECM (section ‘Deﬁning
Enterprise Content Management’), develop our ECM framework and method
(section ‘Framework for ECM Strategy’), test the framework and the method in a
large high-tech organization (section ‘Testing the Framework in a Case’),
and end with discussion and conclusions (sections ‘Conclusions’ and ‘Further
Considerations’).
Deﬁning Enterprise Content Management
Enterprise Content Management (ECM) has emerged as the convergence of two
earlier technologies for managing unstructured information in organizations:
document management (DM), and content management (CM).
Document Management
Document Management (DM), which is well established, was well-regarded in the
1980s and 1990s (Wei et al. 2002). DM systems organize and make ﬁles accessible
(Sprague 1995) using the following parts (based on Boiko 2002):
• File storage: The system ‘knows’ the physical location of each ﬁle it tracks but
doesn’t require the end user to know that location.
92
M. Smits and R. O’Callaghan

• File categorization: The users can assign ﬁle types and groups based on the
criteria they choose.
• Metadata services: The users can attach any kind of extra data to a ﬁle (such as
owner, status, and creation date) based on its type.
• Collaboration services: The users can check ﬁles in and out of the system and
jointly edit them.
• Workﬂow services: The users can route ﬁles from worker to worker in an
organized way.
• Versioning services: The users save a historical series of ﬁles and can retrieve
them when required.
• Access services: The users can ﬁnd ﬁles through tables of contents, indexes, and
full-text searches.
DM systems do not necessarily deal with ‘documents’. Although users often
target systems toward word-processing and other ofﬁce ﬁles, DM systems have no
restrictions about the types of ﬁles they contain. Therefore, DM systems could
more accurately be called ﬁle-management systems (Boiko 2002).
Content Management
Content management (CM) was originally associated with Web-development
projects. As the Web moved past small, informally designed sites and into large,
rapidly changing sites, the need for strong management tools increased. Systems
vendors addressed this need by offering content management systems (Boiko 2002;
Hackos 2002), although Websites are only one of many outlets. As the number of
outlets and the information shared between them grow (e.g., multiple Web sites,
print publications and anything else that can be created from the same information,
especially in e-business networks), the need for a generic approach also grows
(Boiko 2002). CM is an overall process for collecting, managing, and publishing
content to any outlet.
CM and DM systems have a great deal in common: Both systems seek to
categorize information, apply metadata to it, organize its creation through work-
ﬂow and collaboration, and give end users complete access to it. However, the two
systems also differ in signiﬁcant ways (based on Boiko 2002):
• DM systems deal with ﬁles, while CM systems deal with content components.
Files don’t make good containers for content, as they can hold only one com-
ponent per ﬁle if their metadata is to prove at all useful for ﬁnding individual
components.
• DM systems were invented to manage ﬁles that other applications create, not to
work with what’s inside them, while CM systems are directly concerned with
creating content, as well as managing it. In both systems, the user controls the
Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management
93

creation of metadata for storage and access, but only in the CM system does the
user control the creation of the content as well.
• DM systems provide access to the ﬁles under its control, while the purpose of a
CM system is to create publications that are a combination of the components
under its control. To create publications, CM systems need all the access power
of DM systems plus the ability to construct a publication automatically out of
the components that it ﬁnds.
The focus of CM on content components represents an important paradigm shift
to content re-use. Rather than writing entire documents, authors create elements
(‘content objects’) that can be assembled in ‘information products’ (e.g., a bro-
chure, a press release, a presentation) for a number of ‘delivery methods’ (print,
mail, intranet, extranet, internet) and audiences (‘target users’). Reusing content
has multiple advantages: Costs can be saved by writing once and using the
information in two places, not only eliminating duplicate writing tasks but also
reducing the time needed for reviews, as once a module is written, it can be
reviewed, tested, and readied for use in multiple documents. The cost reduction
associated with reuse is augmented by the ability to ensure that information is
correct, complete, and appropriate to the needs of the users. For example, Dell
Computer Corporation creates manuals for a wide variety of related products by
creating interchangeable modules. Variations in the information needed to support
individual products can be tagged and selected so the author of a manual for a
desktop computer uses the same core modules as does the author of a manual for a
laptop computer. Where the information differs, the authors write unique modules
or modify existing modules by labeling the details that are different (Terra and
Gordon 2003).
Enterprise Content Management
The concept of ECM encompasses both CM and DM. ECM capabilities manage
many different types of content (e.g., images, ofﬁce documents, graphics, draw-
ings, print streams, Web content, email, video, and rich media assets) (AIIM
2008). The deﬁnition of ECM has expanded beyond core library services to
include imaging, workﬂow, records management, enterprise report management/
computer output to laser disc, collaboration, and Web content management (Du-
hon 2003). ECM has become the umbrella term for a technology category for
managing unstructured content, and the Association for Information and Image
Management (AIIM) deﬁnes it as follows: ‘‘ECM is the strategies, methods and
tools used to capture, manage, store, preserve, and deliver content and documents
related to organizational processes. ECM tools and strategies allow the manage-
ment of an organization’s unstructured information, wherever that information
exists’’ (www.aiim.org).
94
M. Smits and R. O’Callaghan

ECM involves tasks related to the development of content, from its creation
(from sources) to its use by one or more audiences, as represented in Fig. 1 (Boiko
2002; Gupta et al. 2001):
• Create or acquire information from an existing source.
• Structure the information in the system by editing it, segmenting it into chunks
(or components), and adding appropriate metadata.
• Create a repository of database records and/or ﬁles containing content compo-
nents, documents, and metadata.
• Extract components out of the repository and produce targeted publications,
such as Web sites, printable documents, and e-mail newsletters.
• Make the content easily accessible through a search engine or push it to key
users.
One way to enable ECM is to create a central repository that uniﬁes content
structure and content access (search, retrieve, version, index, and archive). Crea-
tion of such a repository includes deﬁning content structure standards (types,
metadata) and content organization standards (taxonomy, indexes, cross-refer-
ences). To function as a central repository, the ECM system must extend the
following qualities over all content (Boiko 2002; Rockley et al. 2003):
• Uniﬁed content structure: How content is chunked and tagged (components and
their elements) must be standardized across all data sources.
• Uniﬁed organization: The hierarchies and other organizational schemes used to
categorize and access content must extend to any place the content is stored.
• Uniﬁed access: How content is queried and used must be the same across all
data sources.
The management of content is based on metadata, which is information about
the data (e.g., the instructions that come with the data). Metadata, which is not the
content, exists in addition to or after the data and adds context and widens
interpretation of the data (Everett et al. 2002). Metadata is also a set of standards
Sources
Author
(Existing) documents
Components
Components and 
metadata
Publications
Information 
products
Audiences
Target
users
Individuals/groups
Workflows/processes
Storage (DB/XML)
Publishing
Access/distribution
Structuring
Creation/acquisition
Fig. 1 Stages in the process of content creation (based on Gupta et al. 2001)
Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management
95

that groups agree to for information deﬁnitions. Standards, which are the basis of
any kind of data sharing, bring the possibility of large-scale efﬁciencies in infor-
mation interchange among groups that may not even know one another. Standards
ensure that others can automatically reuse the efforts of another person or group
since everyone follows the same standards (Boiko 2002; Stuckenschmidt and van
Harmelen 2004).
To manage content, a choice must be made concerning what information must
be included as metadata (Boiko 2002). Managing content is managing metadata
since metadata makes it possible to share data across applications. In a content
management context, metadata enables publications that need a somewhat dif-
ferent form of the same data to draw from a common repository (Wei et al. 2002).
We develop a framework for ECM strategy to support this selection process and to
identify content that is worth managing on an enterprise-wide scale.
Framework for ECM Strategy
An ECM strategy is intended to reduce the costs of creating, managing, and
distributing content and to ensure that content supports organizational needs. An
ECM strategy identiﬁes content requirements, creates content for reuse, manages
that content in a deﬁnitive source, and assembles content on demand to meet
organizational and customer needs (Rockley et al. 2003). The ECM strategy
development process starts by analyzing existing needs and how these needs are
being met: who needs what information, how information supports users, and how
it is produced, that is, what processes and technology are used to create content.
The ECM strategy consists of three components (based on Rockley et al. 2003,
pp. 16, 17):
• CM system: ECM requires a robust CM solution that manages content in a
single source. Most CM systems provide traditional DM functionality, such as
secure access to content (check-in/check-out), revision control, reporting,
powerful search and retrieval mechanisms, and metadata. However, ECM is not
just technology; it addresses the interaction of business with content, people,
processes, and tools. Authors need CM to assist them in ﬁnding, distributing, or
publishing content and to ensure that the content they distribute is accurate and
appropriate.
• Reusable content: Content reuse refers to writing once and reusing that content
many times. Traditional documents are written in ﬁles that consist of sections,
but reusable content is written as objects or elements, not documents. Docu-
ments are made up of content objects that can be mixed and matched to meet
speciﬁc information needs. Reusable content is broken down into the smallest
reusable object (section, paragraph, and sentence) so it is easy to select an
element to reuse or repurpose it. However, even though content elements are
reused, copying and pasting is eliminated because elements are stored in the
96
M. Smits and R. O’Callaghan

database or CM system and are referenced (pointed to) for inclusion in a virtual
document. In this way, the element can appear in multiple places while residing
in only one.
• Processes: An ECM strategy also involves people and collaborative processes.
The processes must create a collaborative environment in which authors share in
the development of content to create a single, deﬁnitive source of information.
The goal in deﬁning uniﬁed processes is to ensure that all departments are aware
of what content exists, that all authors can reuse existing content, and that all
processes are repeatable and transparent, regardless of which department and
which authors are following them.
Figure 2 shows the framework for developing ECM strategy, and the following
sections describe the framework, the method, and the steps involved.
Content Audit
Determining ECM needs begins with a content audit, a list of the information in
the organization. The purpose of a content audit is to determine how content is
used, reused, and delivered to various audiences and how information (and the
Content audit
ECM content 
candidates
Value of features: 
Value 
assessment
Costs of implementing 
the features: 
Cost 
assessment
• Find
• Distribute
• Re-Use
• Track
• Associate
• Structuring
  content
• Adding
  metadata
• Updating
  taxonomies
Specify features per 
content object:
ECM needs 
specification
• Find
• Distribute
• Re -Use
• Track
• Associate
Existing infrastructure
Gap analysis
• ERP
• Document
  management
• Web content    
  management
• Intranet
• Workflows
• Databases
• Networking
• CM processes
• CM staffing
Existing infrastructure’s
impact on costs/effort
Existing systems and
their interoperability
Infrastructure
requirements
• Access
• Security
• Storage
• Latency
• Bandwidth
• Access
• Security
• Storage
• Latency
• Bandwidth
IT infrastructure
new investments
(e.g. systems, 
processes, staff)
Managed 
content 
portfolio
Value of feature 
per object
Cost/effort per 
  Assessing
infrastructure 
needs of chosen 
content portfolio
Content objects 
portfolio decisions
object and feature
Fig. 2 Overview of the ECM strategy framework
Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management
97

processes that create it) can be uniﬁed, eliminating the ‘cut and paste’ method
many authors use (Rockley et al. 2003, p. 104). The following questions are
pertinent:
• How much content exists in a given organizational unit? How fast is it growing?
• How many types of information content are there?
• Who manages which content? Who owns the content? Who uses it?
• How is content reused and repurposed?
• What content must be saved, in what form, and for how long?
• What solutions, systems, and methods are currently used?
The content audit provides the organization with an overview of all of its
content and how it is used and reveals those content objects that are potentially
more relevant from the point of view of ECM. These objects will typically be those
that are used most frequently or those used in important management decisions or
key business processes. Since the process of assessing whether it is worth (or not
worth) putting a given content object under ECM requires considerable effort, this
preliminary step has the practical purpose of reducing the number of content
objects that have to be scrutinized. The audit may reveal thousands of documents
or content objects for a given business unit or process, but only a fraction of these
should be analyzed in depth.
Specifying ECM Needs
ECM facilitates the capture, creation, storage, maintenance, revision, reuse,
distribution, search and retrieval of content (AIIM 2008; Boiko 2002; Terra and
Gordon 2003). For the purposes of this research, we focus on the elements that
have value from the user (business) perspective and select ﬁve basic ECM fea-
tures: ﬁnd, distribute, reuse, track, and associate. The aim of this step is to review
each content object and to specify whether the object needs to be made ‘ﬁndable’,
‘distributable’, ‘reusable’, ‘traceable’, and/or ‘associable’. Focus group sessions
with key informants (people knowledgeable about the content that belongs to a
given organizational unit) specify the needed features for each object.
One of the key decisions concerning reuse is the level of granularity, which
determines the smallest piece of information that is reusable. For an existing
document, reuse may imply breaking it into smaller pieces (chapters, paragraphs,
sentences), but the level of granularity can change throughout the content. In one
instance, large sections may be reused unchanged while in others, content may be
reusable at the sentence or even the word level. What’s more, different levels of
granularity can be used for authoring, for reuse, and for delivery.
98
M. Smits and R. O’Callaghan

Business Value Assessment
The next step is to assess the value of putting the content object candidates under
ECM, a step that is accomplished object by object by analyzing the potential value
of each feature separately. In other words, what is the value of making a given
object ﬁndable, distributable, reusable, traceable, and/or associable? In practice,
this value assessment can be done by surveying potential users (representatives of
the key audiences) or by convening a focus group with key informants (typically,
managers familiar with the information used in the main business processes) and
asking them to rate the perceived value of each feature. Based on our preliminary
experience, we developed some guidelines that can be used to initiate the value
discussion in the focus groups:
• Find: The value of making a given object ‘easy to ﬁnd’ is a function of a number
of factors, including the number of users or potential users (audience size), the
importance of the tasks for which the object will be used, the criticality of
the problem being addressed, and the status of the author/provider of the
information.
• Distribute: The value of making a given object ‘easy to distribute’ depends on
the deﬁned target audience that ‘needs to know’, the importance of the content
object for that audience’s task, or the importance of the object as informational
input to a given business process.
• Re-use: The value of making a content object ‘re-usable’ is a function of the
diversity of authors, information products, delivery methods, and users; the
frequency of use/repurposing; and the processes in which a given content object
may be reused.
• Track: The value of making an object ‘easy to track’ relates to the size of the
potential audience, the role of the user, the criticality of the process/task, and the
need for compliance (e.g., Sarbanes–Oxley legislation in the US).
• Associate: The value of ‘associating’ a given content object with other content
refers to search situations in which the user does not know exactly what he or
she is looking for (‘fuzzy requests’). Thus, the value will depend on the fre-
quency/need for such ‘fuzzy’ inquiries, which tend to be more common in
decision-making audiences, in collaborative networks, and in dealing with
information from multiple sources.
A short questionnaire is used for each of these features. For instance, we asked
respondents to answer (on a 10-point Likert scale) ‘how important is it to reuse this
content object?’ These questions can be used in focus group discussions as well as
in surveys of a large number of content users.
Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management
99

Cost/Effort Assessment
The cost of putting a content object under ECM is directly related to the effort and
complexities associated with how the features (ﬁnd, distribute, reuse, etc.) are
implemented. The costs depend on the existing infrastructure and on how content
is currently being handled. For example, the handling costs of a document that
resides in the hard disk of a desktop computer are higher than those of a document
already being handled by an enterprise system or a DM system. Therefore, both
value and cost should be assessed on a relative basis, which depends on the
existing tools, methods, technology infrastructure and information architecture.
As in the case of the business value assessment, it is useful to assess the costs
for each of the ﬁve ECM features. Unlike the value assessment, the cost assess-
ment must be conducted by information management specialists in association
with key informants from the business units or processes. The costs per ECM
feature depend on adding and managing metadata:
• Find: Making a content object ‘ﬁndable’ implies adding content-related meta-
data. To do that, one must take into account the terms that may be used by
authors and users to classify topics and look-up. One way to implement this step
is to consider a controlled list of keywords, associate them with the relevant
business processes, and put them in a taxonomy. Examples of retrieval metadata
are Title, Author, Date (created, modiﬁed), Keywords, Security (who can view
the content), and Abstract.
• Distribute: Making a content object ‘distributable’ implies adding user proﬁle
metadata for targeting (pushing content) to different users or processes, devel-
oping and managing a user-oriented taxonomy, and grouping (clustering) con-
tent for a given audience. There are differences between Find and Distribute and
in their implications for adding metadata: In ‘Find’, users ﬁnd the content, such
as when a user queries a content database and retrieves the selected content,
while in ‘Distribute’, content ‘ﬁnds’ the users, such as when the system queries a
person’s database and sends out a message to selected people based on their
proﬁle and targeting criteria.
• Re-use: Making content ‘re-usable’ implies breaking it into smaller documents/
components (‘bursting’), putting them in a content repository instead of for-
matted ﬁles, and adding metadata to each component for subsequent retrieval
and use. The level of granularity is a key decision that has a major impact on
costs and effort; ﬁne granularity requires more complexity in modeling,
authoring and managing content, but if content is not granular enough, the
ability to reuse information can be compromised. Regardless of the level of
granularity, however, authors still write complete documents, not elements, and
assign the required granularity to elements (as deﬁned in the information model)
as they write. The main difference for authors is in following the assigned
structure and in assigning or selecting metadata. In essence, the granularity
deﬁnes how the completed document is broken down, tagged, and stored for
reuse; but it does not deﬁne the authoring processes.
100
M. Smits and R. O’Callaghan

• Track: Making a content object ‘easy to track’ implies adding metadata for the
review and approval workﬂow as well as content tracking. Status metadata, for
example, could specify whether a document is in draft version, ready for review,
in review, ﬁnal, in approval, or approved. Content tracking adds version control
metadata, such as who created the content, when it was created/modiﬁed, who
reviewed/approved it, how long it took to create/modify/review, and where it
has been reused (channel, information product). In addition, when content has
been changed, users may want to be notiﬁed through alert messages.
• Associate: Making a content object ‘easy to associate’ implies making it easy to
ﬁnd related content automatically, which can be done by adding links to other
content objects and by grouping or clustering related content. One can also use
taxonomies to ﬁnd related content. Whereas in ‘Find,’ people ﬁnd content, and
in ‘Distribute’ content ﬁnds people, in ‘Associate,’ content ﬁnds content.
Content Portfolio Decisions
The outcome of the value assessment and effort assessment is a series of scores for
every content object and the ﬁve ECM features for each object. The users surveyed
will have their perceptions of the relative value of implementing the ECM features
for all content objects under consideration, and the information specialist will have
rated his or her perception of the marginal effort/cost associated with the imple-
mentation of the ECM features for all the content object candidates. Thus, the total
number of data points is ﬁve times the number of objects.
The next step is to plot these data points using a scatter diagram that plots
objects based on value and effort required. Figure 3 illustrates a simple example
with six content objects and thirty data points.
In the scatter diagram, each dot represents a decision concerning whether to
implement an ECM feature for a given content object based on its value and the
effort required. For example, dots that involve high value and low effort (i.e., in the
top left quadrant) are clear candidates for implementation, and those that involve
low value and high effort (i.e., in the bottom right quadrant) are clear candidates
for non-implementation. Dots that would involve considerable effort but would
have potentially high value (i.e., in the upper right quadrant) should be carefully
analyzed, as the effort may well be justiﬁed (high risk, high gain decisions). The
low cost, low value points (i.e., in the lower left quadrant) can go either way
because the costs involved are relatively low. In practice, the ﬁnal decision may be
inﬂuenced by the potential value of having several features or objects implemented
together as a set, even though they are initially assessed independently. The out-
come of this step is a managed content portfolio that reﬂects the decisions con-
cerning which objects will be put under ECM and which features will be
implemented.
Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management
101

Gap Analysis
The previous ﬁve sections (i.e., content audit, specifying ECM needs, business
value assessment, cost/effort assessment, and content portfolio decisions) focused
on selecting the most valuable enterprise content objects to be included in a
managed content portfolio. The lower part of the ECM strategy framework (Fig. 2)
focuses on the next step in the ECM process: deciding on the IT infrastructure
needed to realize ECM. The need for new investments in the ECM infrastructure
may inﬂuence the costs of ECM features, thereby causing changes in the managed
content portfolio.
In the next section, we test the ﬁrst ﬁve steps of the framework in a case. We
consider infrastructure implications brieﬂy afterwards (‘‘further considerations’’).
Effort to implement
0
5
10
5
10
Perceived value
Content object portfolio
MTR-T
Candidate objects
CVR: Customer visit report
PR: Product roadmap
CR: Customer requirements
MTR: Minutes of tech review
PDS: Product data sheets
PC: Project charter
F: Find
D: Distribute
R: Re-use
T: Track
A: Associate
MTR-D
MTR-F
MTR-R
MTR-A
CVR-F
CVR-D
CVR-R
CVR-T
CVR-A
PR-F
PR-D
PR-R
PR-A
PR-T
CR-F
CR-D
CR-R
CR-T
CR-A
PDS-F
PDS-D
PDS-R
PDS-T
PDS-A
PC-F
PC-D
PC-R
PC-T
PC-A
DO
CONSIDER
DON‘T
Fig. 3 An example of the managed content portfolio
102
M. Smits and R. O’Callaghan

Testing the Framework in a Case
The method was tested in a large manufacturing ﬁrm in the high-tech sector. The
company has about 30,000 employees, four key business processes (business
units), and a large IT infrastructure with a single-kernel ERP application and
several dozen legacy applications. The scope of the exercise was limited to the two
business processes that had expressed greater needs for ECM: the product
development process (PD process) and the marketing strategy process (MS
process).
Introduction to the Case
The PD process covers all business activities from determining the speciﬁcations
of the products customers need (worldwide) to the manufacturing of the products
in a handful of high-tech production plants and the delivery of the ﬁnished goods.
The MS process covers all business activities regarding market development,
product strategy development, and customer relationship management. Over the
past decade, both processes have developed into a well-deﬁned set of activities,
including well-deﬁned procedures for reporting and information exchanges to
enable strict process control. However, most control activities focus on one pro-
cess only, while coordination across the four business processes is still in its
infancy. Considerable information (and content) is created and exchanged within
each process.
Most managers, including the CIO and the supply chain manager, recognize
that information exchanges between processes need to be improved. Therefore, the
company began an ECM program in 2004 in an effort to improve access to
valuable content in the many Websites (intranet, extranet, internet), the many
group pages, and the overwhelming amount of PowerPoint (and other MS Ofﬁce)
documents.
Based on an analysis of thirty interviews and multiple internal documents, we
estimate that the PD process creates forty formal documents (including formal
product data sheets of up to 1,400 pages each) and an enormous amount of
informal information. Informal documents include news and brochures for about
250,000 people and 15 million Intranet pages (about 60 % of all Intranet pages in
the company) created by 500 people. Data to create reports, pages and Ofﬁce
documents come from many different groups and systems. As one interviewee
explained, ‘Getting a business plan from a business unit is a nightmare’ and
‘putting content in the Autonomy (ECM) application is not possible because
Autonomy is badly implemented.’ Formal ‘golden documents’ which are stored in
well-developed planning systems take up about twenty gigabytes per year (project
milestone dossiers are 40 mb each; 20 projects per business line (25) = 500
Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management
103

projects/year), while informal project content takes up twenty terabytes per year
(up to 80 Gb per project).
Testing the Method
The content audit involved thirty interviews with key business managers and
information specialists who are domain experts on the business processes and the
information created and used in these processes. The interviews resulted in a list of
twenty key content objects.
Value assessment was conducted in a focus group meeting with key managers
of the PD process and the MS process. The session was used to discuss what the
implementation of ECM would imply for the selected content objects and to
determine the value of each feature (ﬁnd, distribute, reuse, track, associate) for
each object. After agreeing on the speciﬁcation of the need and the value
assessment, the group rated the features per object using a 1–10 scale.
Effort assessment was conducted with the help of IT staff and the chief IT
architect who, with their knowledge of the existing CM tools and the new ECM
solution, assessed potential difﬁculties in the implementation of the content objects
in question and rated the relative effort on a ten-point scale.
The content portfolio contains twenty objects and one hundred data points (ﬁve
features per object). The scatter diagram provides the basis for discussion on what
to do with each content object and ECM feature.
The focus of our analysis here is not on the resulting content portfolio (the
outcome of the process) but on the process of using the framework. The next
section discusses the conclusions we reached in assessing this process.
Conclusions
The outcome of the ECM strategy process is a managed content object portfolio,
which reﬂects the choices concerning what content should be put under ECM and,
as such, represents the content management strategy. The tests conducted in the
case led to the following conclusions:
• The method has conceptual and face validity.
• The usability of the method was not straightforward. The team concluded that a
good team brieﬁng is required before application.
• The value of ECM features and the efforts/costs of ECM features require in-
depth discussion and examples of scoring the concepts.
• Since the process takes a long time, it is better to start with a session to select
content objects and then to conduct a session to assess value/cost.
104
M. Smits and R. O’Callaghan

The analysis included twenty content objects (i.e., 100 feature dots), so it
covered only a small sample of all content objects in a large ﬁrm. However, even
such small samples can trigger effective ECM discussions among managers and
facilitate shared ECM decisions, so full analysis of many content objects will take
considerable time and effort. Further tests must be done with different groups,
different content objects, and/or a survey based on a structured questionnaire in
order to determine how to optimize the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the method.
Further Considerations
The value and cost assessment for developing the content portfolio was done on a
relative basis, that is, taking into account the current situation, which is inﬂuenced
by the existing IT tools, methods, and infrastructures. The development of an ECM
strategy in an organization is not a ‘green ﬁeld’ exercise but must take into account
the existing infrastructure and must assess which elements will enable or constrain
ECM implementation. In the end, the ECM strategy process must also identify
elements of the IT infrastructure that should be changed, extended, or comple-
mented with new systems/tools and how they will be integrated with the existing
base.
Infrastructure Implications
Although the focus of this paper is on developing an approach to content man-
agement strategy (i.e., deciding on the ECM content portfolio), information
managers will care about the subsequent steps that an organization must undertake
in the area of software tools and IT infrastructure. As the organization moves
toward implementation, a number of questions will emerge. What does the chosen
content portfolio require in terms of tools and systems? How does the existing IT
infrastructure support these needs? What should be modiﬁed or added?
The implementation of an ECM strategy should address issues such as the
interoperability of information and document repositories with applications, con-
sistency across processes to facilitate access and sharing of information, and
modiﬁcation of company’s information systems architecture to accommodate
ECM. In particular, the demands imposed by implementing each of the ECM
features (ﬁnd, distribute, reuse, track, and associate) will differ in terms of infra-
structure needs. At a basic level, these needs can be articulated in terms of ﬁve
technology domains—access, security, storage, latency, and bandwidth—some of
which refer to the need to make content available so it can be easily searched and
found (e.g., via a URL) in a secure way (only for those authorized to see a given
content object and excluding others). Other technology domains—storage, latency,
Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management
105

and bandwidth—refer to the physical properties of the network and storage
capabilities that will affect network conﬁguration and response time.
ECM Governance
Having a powerful ECM system and/or IT infrastructure is useless if the content is
inaccurate, outdated, or irrelevant to improving users’ ability to perform. Orga-
nizations must be disciplined about the publishing process and the management of
taxonomies.
Taxonomies, which are used in tagging (adding metadata to) the documents
created, are developed continuously in organizations, but multiple people develop
multiple taxonomies, resulting in multiple ways to ﬁnd the same information. This
difﬁculty leads to the governance question concerning who is responsible for
maintaining the integrity of the taxonomies as they grow over time. Ongoing
maintenance of the information architecture requires assigned responsibilities, not
just the use of sophisticated tools.
Conclusions and Further Research
After deﬁning CM and ECM, we developed a framework and a method to select
content objects to be put under ECM. Applying and testing the method and
framework in a large ﬁrm shows that content objects can be listed per business
(sub-)process and then selected based on their added value and speciﬁc costs.
Added value can be determined based on whether the object is ‘easy to ﬁnd,’ ‘easy
to distribute’, ‘easy to reuse’, ‘easy to track’, and/or ‘easy to associate’, while the
costs of bringing content objects under ECM can be determined based on ‘costs of
structuring the content’, ‘costs of adding metadata’, and ‘costs of updating taxo-
nomies’. Added value and cost per content object can be used to decide on an
optimal content portfolio to be put under ECM.
The costs of ECM depend to an extent on the company’s existing IT archi-
tecture, but the ECM portfolio decision can be used in planning investments in IT
architecture. In this way, the ECM framework and methodology presented in this
paper help to manage and bridge the complex relationships between IT architec-
ture, business processes, information, and enterprise content. In line with the
resource based view of the ﬁrm, investments are never made from scratch but build
on the existing technology, knowledge, and competency resources of the ﬁrm
(Barney 1991).
The framework and methodology presented here should be tested in more depth
and in more organizations, as the work here is a preliminary step toward building a
sound ECM strategy development methodology.
106
M. Smits and R. O’Callaghan

Acknowledgments A previous version of this paper was published in the proceedings of the
13th European Conference on Information Systems (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005).
References
Association for Information and Image Management (AIIM). (2008). Enterprise content
management roadmap. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from http://www.aiim.org/Research-
and-Publications/Research/AIIM-Posters/ECM-Roadmap
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management,
17(1), 99–120.
Boiko, B. (2002). Content management bible. New York: Wiley.
Duhon, B. (2003). ECM: what is it, why should you care? AIIM E-Doc, 17(6).
Everett, J. O., Bobrow, D. G., Stolle, R., Crouch, R., de Paiva, V., Condoravdi, C., et al. (2002).
Making ontologies work for resolving redundancies across documents. Communications of the
ACM, 45(2), 55–60.
Gupta, V. K., Govindarajan, S., & Johnson, T. (2001). Overview of content management
approaches and strategies. Electronic Markets, 11(4), 281–288.
Hackos, J. T. (2002). Content management for dynamic web delivery. New York: Wiley.
Hevner, A. R., March, S. T., Park, J., & Ram, S. (2004). Design science in information systems
research. MIS Quarterly, 28(1), 75–105.
Nordheim, S., & Päivärinta, T. (2006). Implementing enterprise content management: From
evolution through strategy to contradictions out of the box. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 648–662.
O’Callaghan, R., & Smits, M. (2005). A strategy development process for enterprise content
management. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Information Systems (pp.
1271–1282). Regensburg.
Oesterle, H., Fleisch, E., & Alt, R. (2000). Business networking, shaping collaboration between
enterprises (2nd ed.). Berlin: Springer.
Rockley, A., Kostur, P., & Manning, S. (2003). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content
strategy. Indianapolis: New Riders.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(1), 647–659.
Sprague, R. H. (1995). Electronic document management: Challenges and opportunities for
information systems managers. MIS Quarterly, 19(1), 29–50.
Stuckenschmidt, H., & van Harmelen, F. (2004). Generating and managing metadata for web-
based information systems. Knowledge-Based Systems, 17(5/6), 201–206.
Terra, J. C., & Gordon, C. (2003). Realizing the promise of corporate portals: Leveraging
knowledge for business success. Burlington: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Wei, C. P., Hu, P. J., & Dong, Y. X. (2002). Managing document categories in e-commerce
environments: An evolution-based approach. European Journal of Information Systems,
11(3), 208–222.
Weill, P., Subramani, M., & Broadbent, M. (2002). Building IT infrastructure for strategic agility.
Sloan Management Review, 44(1), 57–65.
Strategy Development for Enterprise Content Management
107

Critical Success Factors in Enterprise
Content Management: Toward
a Framework for Readiness Assessment
Andrea Herbst, Alexander Simons, Jan vom Brocke
and René Derungs
Abstract Enterprise content management (ECM) is an important enabler of
information management, as it supports the creation, storage, retrieval, and
retention processes of organizational documents and their content. The term
‘‘ECM’’ was coined in information management practice in the early 2000s, and it
found its way into Information Systems (IS) research a few years later. While the
level of research and publication activity in the ﬁeld is increasing, we still see only
a few academic reports on actual ECM practices. As yet, IS research provides little
guidance to practitioners concerning the factors that drive or hinder ECM
implementation. As a response, this chapter identiﬁes a set of critical success
factors for ECM and develops on that basis a framework that helps organizations
assess their readiness for ECM. The framework was developed based on data
collected in workshops with ECM project leaders and members of ﬁve companies.
The expert opinions and experiences are combined with research results from the
academic literature, and two illustrative cases show how the framework has been
applied in practice.
A. Herbst  A. Simons  J. vom Brocke (&)
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-Josef-Str. 21,
9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein
e-mail: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li
A. Herbst
e-mail: andrea.herbst@uni.li
A. Simons
e-mail: alexander.simons@uni.li
R. Derungs
Ivoclar Vivadent AG, Schaan, Principality of Liechtenstein
e-mail: rene.derungs@ivoclarvivadent.com
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_7,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
109

Introduction
The management of information with the help of information technology (IT) has
always been a core topic for IS researchers, but it is more important today than
ever. According to IDC’s worldwide information growth ticker, the amount of
digital information created and replicated in 2011 exceeded 1.8 zettabytes (IDC
2012). In the current version of their regular digital-universe report, IDC writes
that enterprises have some responsibility for 80 percent of that information at some
stage during its digital lifecycle (Gantz and Reinsel 2011). The huge amounts of
digital information created and shared in and between enterprises come with many
challenges (Munkvold et al. 2006; vom Brocke et al. 2011a, 2011b), most of which
are not new, but they have taken on far greater signiﬁcance in today’s Internet age.
For example, digital ﬁles are copied, modiﬁed, and distributed at such a rate that it
becomes increasingly difﬁcult for employees to ﬁnd the information they need
(e.g., Smith and McKeen 2003), especially when several versions of a ﬁle exist or
several people work with it. It is also challenging for today’s companies to keep
the information they share with others, such as customers and suppliers, consistent
and up-to-date (vom Brocke et al. 2010). For example, many marketing materials
contain largely the same texts or images, and this content must be updated across
all outlets once it has expired. For a multi-national, multi-product ﬁrm, this job is
far from trivial, considering that a variety of documents or ‘‘content containers’’
(including product speciﬁcations, manuals, FAQ lists, marketing brochures, Web
pages, and many more) must be maintained in several languages for every product
that is or has been sold in the recent past (Rockley and Cooper 2012).
The ﬂood of digital information has given rise to ECM, a holistic approach to
information management. While earlier approaches, perhaps most notably docu-
ment management, focused on similar challenges, driven by the pressing need to
manage more information than ever before, ECM has become vital for most of
today’s companies. ECM has been deﬁned as ‘‘the strategies, tools, processes and
skills an organization needs to manage all its information assets (regardless of
type) over their lifecycle’’ (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 648), so it can be
understood as a contemporary approach to the management of unstructured
information at the ﬁrm level. While it took ECM some time to reach IS research
(Tyrväinen et al. 2006), the number of academic publications in the ﬁeld is
increasing. However, recent literature reviews on ECM (e.g., Alalwan and
Weistroffer 2012; Grahlmann et al. 2011; Rickenberg et al. 2012) suggest that the
number of academic reports on ECM implementations remains comparably low, so
IS research currently provides only some guidance to the planners and managers of
ECM initiatives concerning the factors that drive or hinder ECM implementation.
As a response, this chapter identiﬁes and discusses a set of critical success factors
for ECM and provides methodological support for organizations that wish to
assess their ECM readiness. Such a readiness assessment can help organizations to
get the best out of their ECM programs and avoid expensive project failures from
110
A. Herbst et al.

the beginning. The framework helps organizations to determine whether they are
ready for ECM and, if they are not, to identify the actions required to be ready.
The section ‘Enterprise Content Management’ provides a background for this
chapter by explaining what we already understand about ECM and organizational
readiness. Then we give an overview of our study and describe how we identiﬁed
the critical success factors that organizations should consider in their ECM pro-
grams. We suggest assessing an organization’s readiness for ECM with the help of
these factors and their respective information measures, which is illustrated using
two examples. The paper concludes with a summary of the results and suggestions
for future research.
Enterprise Content Management
The Association for Information and Image Management (AIIM) deﬁnes ECM as
‘‘the strategies, methods and tools used to capture, manage, store, preserve, and
deliver content and documents related to organizational processes. ECM tools and
strategies allow the management of an organization’s unstructured information
wherever that information exists’’ (AIIM 2012). This deﬁnition highlights why
ECM is distinct from other approaches, such as document and records manage-
ment (compare Simons and vom Brocke (2013) for a more detailed discussion).
First, ECM is an enterprise-wide and process-oriented approach (e.g., vom Brocke
et al. 2011a, 2011b), so it addresses the challenges related to the exchange of
information across departmental and organizational borders. Second, ECM focuses
on all types of unstructured information while also referring to the management of
content components (e.g., texts and images embedded in documents) (e.g., Tyr-
väinen et al. 2006). Third, ECM vendors provide holistic software suites that offer
several functionalities and components of earlier systems for document/content
management while exceeding the scopes of these systems by providing additional
features (Grahlmann et al. 2011). Fourth, unlike other approaches in the infor-
mation management ﬁeld, ECM acknowledges the necessity of managing infor-
mation over its entire lifecycle, that is, from creation to deletion (Munkvold et al.
2006). As such, ECM is considered an integrated and contemporary approach to
digital information management (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005), and many
authors see it as the next step in the evolution of earlier approaches in the ﬁeld
(Alalwan and Weistroffer 2012).
Given the holistic and integrative nature of the concept, it is not surprising that
IS researchers have not been consistent in their descriptions of ECM. For example,
Grahlmann et al.’s (2011) literature review on ECM indicates that no consensus on
the ECM deﬁnition had yet emerged in IS research, and Alalwan and Weistroffer
(2012) likewise denote ‘‘some confusion’’ around the term (p. 442). These reviews
also show that IS researchers have taken very different approaches to studying
ECM, with one major stream doing research from an enterprise/process perspec-
tive and another one from a content/technology perspective (Grahlmann et al.
Critical Success Factors in Enterprise Content Management
111

2011; also compare Rickenberg et al. 2012). Only a few studies explore ECM from
the viewpoint of all the relevant dimensions (Alalwan and Weistroffer 2012), and
they also approach these dimensions differently. For example, some who take the
content perspective include structured data in their ECM deﬁnitions, while others
do not. Similarly, many studies that take the technology perspective focus on
holistic ECM software suites, while others deal with solutions that focus on spe-
ciﬁc tasks, branches, or content types in order to address integration issues.
The above characterization of ECM suggests that all organizations do ECM at
least to some extent, wittingly or unwittingly, systematically or not. Clearly, not all
companies exploit the potentials of managing content to the fullest, but every
company creates, distributes, and receives digital documents and content, and
every company uses some strategies, methods, and tools to support these activities,
even if they do so only on the departmental level, they take a tactical rather than
strategic approach, or they do not systematically reuse content with the help of
sophisticated content component systems but use copy and paste. The extent to
which companies implement ECM is determined by the targets that companies
pursue in using it (see, e.g., Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005).
In this chapter we understand ECM as a holistic, enterprise-wide approach to
digital information management that refers to all types of unstructured informa-
tion, all the lifecycle phases the information goes through, and a variety of soft-
ware, hardware, and standards. Taking such a strategic approach to ECM requires
considerable investments in IT infrastructure, user training and support, strategy
development, and an ECM roadmap, among other things, which makes ECM a
strategic program at the intersection of business and IT, rather than a single IT
project. Accordingly, assessing an organization’s ECM readiness helps it to justify
and evaluate necessary investments in IT infrastructure and to implement required
changes in how people work with content.
Readiness Assessment
Companies typically do readiness assessments in the context of change projects
(see, e.g., Fixsen et al. 2005) to determine whether they are ready for the desired
change. The higher the level of readiness for that change, the more likely is a
successful outcome (Aziz and Yusof 2012). If the assessment determines that a
company is not ready, it also helps the company to identify and plan required
actions in order to proceed to higher readiness levels. In the IT innovation context,
organizational readiness has been broadly deﬁned as the ‘‘level of ﬁt between new
IT/S and the organization’’ (Snyder-Halpern 2001, p. 180). While organizational
readiness has not yet received much attention in IS adoption (Aziz and Yusof
2012), instruments have been developed for IT innovation (Snyder-Halpern 2001),
program change (Lehman et al. 2002), business process reengineering (Abdolvand
et al. 2008), and B2B integration systems (Mouzakitis and Askounis 2010), among
other purposes.
112
A. Herbst et al.

Instruments for readiness assessment often make use of critical success fac-
tors—‘‘those few things that must go well to ensure success for a manager or an
organization, and, therefore, they represent those managerial or enterprise areas
that must be given special and continual attention to bring about high perfor-
mance’’ (Boynton and Zmud 1984, p. 17). Critical success factors are especially
helpful in revealing important areas of concern and in providing basic measures for
these areas (Boynton and Zmud 1984). Therefore, readiness assessment on the
basis of critical success factors requires evaluating the probability for success
within each of these areas with the help of appropriate information measures.
IS researchers have explored critical success factors in several contexts
(Williams and Ramaprasad 1996), many of which can be considered ECM-related,
including knowledge management (e.g., Alazmi and Zairi 2003), business process
management (e.g., Trkman 2010), customer relationship management (e.g.,
Mendoza et al. 2007), and enterprise resource planning (e.g., Ngai et al. 2008;
Umble et al. 2003). However, while these studies produced important results that
are relevant to ECM implementation, the concept of ECM has not been studied to
its full extent from the viewpoint of critical success factors in IS research—there
are a few exceptions, such as those in Haug (2012)—nor does IS research currently
provide guidance for ECM readiness assessment.
What all this amounts to is that ECM readiness reﬂects the ﬁt between the ECM
program and the organization, and this ﬁt is inﬂuenced by the probability of
success in several areas based on critical success factors for ECM. Therefore, their
identiﬁcation and measurement is at the core of this paper. The idea is that
organizations must determine their levels of readiness for all of the relevant ECM
success factors in order to make a knowledgeable decision concerning whether to
launch an ECM initiative (high level of readiness) or not (low level of readiness).
In the latter case, such an assessment helps them to identify actions that are
necessary to increase their ECM readiness and the probability that their ECM
programs will succeed.
Framework for ECM Readiness Assessment
Overview
The results presented in the following are grounded in research work we did in a
competence center on ECM that was founded in 2008. Competence centers have
been proposed as a viable model for private–public research partnerships,
including both one-to-one research projects between the university and a business
partner and joint workshops with all partners (Cleven et al. 2010). They are
institutionalized partnerships between industry and universities in which practi-
tioners and academics work together on speciﬁc subject areas with the goal of
increasing the relevance and rigor of research (Back et al. 2007).
Critical Success Factors in Enterprise Content Management
113

In our case, we draw from data collected in six joint workshops with partici-
pants from ﬁve organizations from various industries. Each workshop lasted three
hours, and the workshops took place from March 2010 to December 2011. While
only two of these workshops were digitally recorded, we took notes in all the
workshops to allow for detailed data analysis. The results of the workshops—the
opinions and comments of all members—were consolidated in written protocols
that were shared with all participants to encourage feedback and revisions. We also
had the chance over the past four years to observe the ECM programs at the
participating organizations and to contribute to the same, so we can also draw from
experiences we gained in conducting case studies at these organizations.
Seven critical success factors were identiﬁed during the workshops: top man-
agement support, change agent deployment, information and communication,
identiﬁcation of quick wins, appreciation of corporate culture, change manage-
ment, and vision and mission statement. The discussion of these factors resulted in
a set of information measures for each. Figure 1 provides an overview in the form
of a readiness assessment framework.
The following sections explain the seven ECM success factors and their
measures.
Top Management Support
Top management support is likely an important factor in all kinds of IT projects.
Generally, it describes the level of commitment by the top management to inno-
vation, which includes top managers’ involvement in the project and its willing-
ness to allocate required resources (Holland and Light 1999).
All workshop participants identiﬁed top management support as a critical
success factor for ECM because an ECM implementation typically causes sig-
niﬁcant, enterprise-wide changes in IT infrastructures, policies, and standards—
put simply, in the way people work. Therefore, it is imperative for managers to
convince employees that ECM is important for the company and the fulﬁllment of
Top management 
support
Commitment of 
resources 
Awareness of 
ECM risks  
Awareness of 
ECM benefits 
Understanding of
ECM  
Change agent 
deployment
Communication 
skills
Intrinsic motivation
IT skills
ECM knowledge 
Interdepartmental
knowledge 
Process knowledge
Information and 
communication
Defined target 
groups 
Different 
communication 
channels
Appropriate time 
schedule
Adjusted informa-
 tion
Communication 
strategy
Identification of 
quick wins
Identification of 
quickwins 
Development of 
use cases 
Appreciation of 
corporate culture 
Change 
management
Consideration of 
user requirements
User training
Willingness to 
enforce ECM 
Vision and mission 
statement
ECM vision
Clear understan-
ding of strategic 
goals  
Expected ECM 
results
Discipline 
Transparency
Systematization
Trust
Responsiveness to 
change
Fig. 1 Framework for ECM readiness assessment
114
A. Herbst et al.

their tasks. This task can be challenging, considering that some ECM drivers, such
as complying with external regulations and standards, do not necessarily help
employees to get their jobs done more efﬁciently, so employees have to see the
beneﬁts of ECM before implementation. Doing so requires establishing discipline
in such things as the consistent deﬁnition and use of metadata, and communication
and control is important in this effort. The participants said that, from the begin-
ning, top managers have to make important decisions, including budgetary and
scheduling decisions, develop and communicate strict rules and guidelines, and set
an example by living the change themselves. Respondents said that risks related to
information management, rather than the beneﬁts of ECM (although they are
important), provide the best arguments to convince top management to support
ECM. Considering the elusive character of the concept, top managers must
develop a solid and consistent understanding of ECM in order to identify both
information management risks and the potential for improvement. Only then will
top management understand, internalize, and communicate the value of ECM,
which are prerequisites to building employees’ commitment to the program.
Change Agent Deployment
Change agents are especially important in IT projects that signiﬁcantly change
users’ daily routines (Wong and Tein 2003), so the deployment of change agents
was identiﬁed as a major success factor for many types of IT projects (e.g., Nah
et al. 2001; Wong and Tein 2003). Change agents are people who have an intrinsic
motivation to do a project and to promote it among their colleagues. They tend to
be strong leaders and can be either external or internal to the company. However,
external change agents like consultants are often not as effective as internal change
agents like end users (Zafeiropoulos et al. 2005).
The workshop participants also deployed (or suggested deploying) end users as
change agents in ECM and concluded that change agents should have strong
intrinsic motivation in order to convince their colleagues about the program.
Therefore, they play an active role in an ECM roll-out by promoting the change
and diminishing resistance. Characteristics of a good change agent include soft
factors like communication skills, an enthusiastic and motivated nature, and a
good reputation among the workforce. Hard factors include an appropriate skill
set, such as professional competence in information management and existing IT
infrastructures, knowledge about information management requirements in mul-
tiple departments and functions, and business process knowledge, especially
regarding end-to-end processes that rely heavily on content. Therefore, change
agents should receive training on how to use new ECM systems, as well as on how
to convince and train their colleagues.
Critical Success Factors in Enterprise Content Management
115

Information and Communication
Communication is important in IT projects in order to ensure that all levels of the
organization are clearly and effectively informed before and during the initiative
(Ngai et al. 2008). Communication should consider the users’ requirements and
reactions (Nah et al. 2001), it should happen at the departmental and interde-
partmental levels, and in some cases it must also target external parties like
business partners, suppliers, and customers (Remus 2007).
Workshop participants suggested an initial formal presentation for explaining
the importance of ECM for the company and an ECM vision. In addition, a
communication strategy should be developed to ensure all interested parties are
continuously informed about the status and the success of the ECM program. The
development of such a strategy should at least address the information to be
communicated, the target groups, the communication channels, and a time sche-
dule such that the information communicated is adjusted to different groups.
Relevant target groups identiﬁed in the workshops were the ECM project team, the
top management, the sponsor, people who are directly affected by the change, and,
of course, the entire workforce. Possible communication channels are informa-
tional letters, e-mails, the Internet and the company’s intranet, personal meetings,
workshops, and screen savers. The participants in the workshops considered that
these lists of channels and target groups, while not exhaustive, would provide a
good framework for the development of an ECM communication strategy. Having
such a strategy in place is important in implementing ECM because it helps to
overcome resistance to change among the workforce, which the enterprise-wide
scope of ECM and the many changes in the daily information work it often causes
make critical.
Identiﬁcation of Quick Wins
Quick wins are projects or initiatives that deliver fast results with little effort. They
can help to demonstrate the beneﬁts of an IT program early and contribute to the
planning process by breaking the program down into pieces, such as single projects
and activities (see, e.g., Wilson et al. 2002).
At the beginning of the workshops, the participants disagreed concerning
whether quick wins can be realized in ECM at all because the realization of quick
wins is a matter of perspective in ECM. While some of the beneﬁts that ECM
offers are important at the ﬁrm level (e.g., archiving and retention of records),
others are predominantly relevant at the individual level (e.g., searching and
creating information), the group level (e.g., collaboration and information shar-
ing), and the market level (e.g., product documentation), and from these per-
spectives, ECM can have its drawbacks. At the individual level, for example, the
reduction in search times is a beneﬁt frequently mentioned in the ECM literature,
116
A. Herbst et al.

but it requires the deﬁnition and use of appropriate taxonomies and metadata;
therefore, while some employees might save time in searching for information,
others might lose it during the storage process. Such drawbacks become especially
apparent at the beginning of an ECM program, when an organization is preparing
to implement ECM. The digitization of paper records and archives to facilitate
later electronic document management, for example, is an often costly endeavor
that, depending on the branch of industry and its maturity level in information
management, can take a company considerable time.
Workshop participants also found it difﬁcult to measure the results of ECM
since many of the impacts of ECM cannot be easily quantiﬁed in terms of time and
costs because they concern qualitative, not quantitative issues (e.g., consistency,
accuracy, and currency of information, branding in terms of presentation, and
ﬂexibility in collaboration). Measurement is even more challenging because ECM
is an ongoing endeavor, a strategy or vision for digital information management,
rather than a single IT project. Nevertheless, the workshop participants concluded
that the identiﬁcation and realization of quick wins is still important in spreading
the word about the program across the company and in gaining support from the
workforce. However, they found it difﬁcult to tell precisely what is ‘‘won’’ (or lost)
with ECM, and they believed that ‘‘quick wins’’ often do not happen very quickly.
Among the most important quick wins they identiﬁed were automated archiving,
improved and personalized search functions, global availability of content, and
compliance. For demonstration purposes they suggested creating use cases for
speciﬁc tasks and areas.
Appreciation of Corporate Culture
Organizational culture can generally be understood as the ‘‘character or personality
of an organization’’ and ‘‘the way things are done’’ (Park et al. 2004, p. 107).
Organizational culture reﬂects how people work together and how they react to
change, so a successful change project requires the appreciation of cultural issues
(see, e.g., Tan et al. 2009) and an organizational culture that is open to that change
(Nah et al. 2001).
The workshops participants identiﬁed the set of cultural values that are bene-
ﬁcial for ECM as discipline, transparency, systematization, trust, and respon-
siveness to change (see Schmiedel and vom Brocke (2013) for a more detailed
presentation). Discipline, which refers to the appreciation of being bound to
deﬁned rules and guidelines, is important because ECM establishes control over
the creation and use of information assets like texts and images, even though these
activities are often highly creative in nature. Closely related to control is trans-
parency, which includes the availability of content and the traceability of its use.
An organization that is receptive to discipline and transparency is likely to adopt
ECM better than one that is not because, by serving as an organizational memory,
ECM systems make many processes in which content is created and used
Critical Success Factors in Enterprise Content Management
117

transparent in order to help organizations meet compliance standards and regu-
lations. With systematization the workshop participants referred to the apprecia-
tion of logical patterns for structuring content, which plays an important role in
content reuse. For example, implementing a systematic approach to content reuse
requires that content be structured in a way that allows content components from
existing documentation to be used and reassembled elsewhere (e.g., in product
documentation). Trust mainly concerns content security, which requires the deﬁ-
nition of user roles and access rights, while responsiveness to change describes the
level of openness to new or modiﬁed processes and systems. The workshop par-
ticipants contended that organizations that do not have these cultural values should
rethink how ECM should be done in the organization or realign the organizational
culture itself. Possible actions include cultural training or the deployment of
change agents. After all, if users do not adhere to the rules and guidelines dictated
by ECM, the program is likely to fail.
Change Management
Change management requires a detailed and structured program (Finney and
Corbett 2007; Nah et al. 2001) to generate a positive attitude among the employees
and acceptance of the project (Finney and Corbett 2007). To achieve user
acceptance it is important to involve the user when designing and implementing
new processes and their systems (Nah et al. 2001).
The workshop participants considered change management programs important
in implementing ECM but also mentioned some challenges. They suggested that it
is important to collect feedback from the users regarding their requirements and
demands in change management programs, but doing so is not always possible in
ECM. For example, many companies consider compliance a major driver of ECM,
and the re-design of processes and systems in accordance with new regulations can
mean that user needs are secondary. Compliance requires strict adherence to
internal and external rules for information management, which often includes the
deﬁnition of workﬂows, the use of metadata, and centralized storage, which can
compromise employees’ ability to work creatively (vom Brocke et al. 2010). For
example, some employees believe they are most efﬁcient in their daily work if they
store the information they need or create on their local hard drives, and much of
the creative work done in organizations is less structured and organized than the
workﬂows dictated by an IT system. Therefore, user training, which the partici-
pants also identiﬁed as an important issue in change management, should help
employees to recognize that some ECM components and processes must be
designed to comply with internal and external documentation standards, even
though doing so may limit employees’ choices regarding document storage and
retrieval. At some stage, if an intrinsic motivation for the new processes, systems,
and standards cannot be established, an organization must have the will to enforce
them.
118
A. Herbst et al.

Vision and Mission Statement
Having a clear vision, mission, and goals for a project is important throughout its
lifecycle (Nah et al. 2001). Goals, which can be both strategic and tactical in
nature, can be deﬁned with the help of such a vision.
The workshop participants operated in several branches of trade, so their
understanding of ECM differed to a certain extent, as did the objectives they
pursued in their companies. However, they also discussed ECM objectives that are
relevant at a more general level, such as compliance with internal and external
regulations. Other goals they identiﬁed were improved organizational innovation
(e.g., by collecting and disseminating organizational knowledge), improved stor-
age of content assets, along with content structuring and integration (which can
provide a basis for new business models), improved efﬁciency at the process level
(including inter- and intradepartmental processes, but also entire supply chains),
higher information quality (e.g., fewer errors and improved currency), and
improved customer orientation (e.g., in terms of audits, professionalism, and
service). While general, these goals provide a reference from which a company
can identify a set of objectives that matches its individual context.
Doing so requires that the company develops a vision for ECM as the grounding
for the entire program. ECM is a broad term, and there is no one-size-ﬁts-all
approach to it. In fact, organizations have to think carefully about what ECM
means to them in order to determine what they want to gain from implementing it.
The ECM programs at the companies that participated in the workshops differed
widely regarding their scopes and objectives, as is likely for most other companies.
Accordingly, deﬁning a clear vision, a mission statement, and a set of challenging
and achievable goals is prerequisite for ECM success.
Example Cases
We used the success factors the workshop participants identiﬁed to assess the
ECM readiness of two of the organizations, in the following organization A and
organization B, that participated in the workshops and that were running two large
projects as part of their broader ECM programs at the time the assessment was
conducted. The ECM project at organization A focused on storage and retrieval,
including the implementation of a new intranet solution with collaboration support
(e.g., in the form of virtual project rooms) and the development of respective
guidelines and standards. The ECM project at organization B focused on product
information management, including the implementation of new IT solutions and
the re-design of affected processes. The ﬁrst author had the chance to accompany
both projects from their beginnings, participated in several meetings, and she also
conducted the two ﬁnal interviews in which the readiness assessment was done.
During the interviews the respondents were asked to rate the relevance of
the success factors using the factors’ respective measures for their individual
Critical Success Factors in Enterprise Content Management
119

ECM readiness
Factor relevance
Fig. 2 Assessment of ECM readiness and factor relevance
120
A. Herbst et al.

projects on a scale from ‘‘not relevant’’ (1) to ‘‘extremely relevant’’ (5). Then the
respondents were asked the extent to which they believed their organizations
would be ready for the project change on a scale from ‘‘strongly disagree’’ (1) to
‘‘strongly agree’’ (5). The average relevance and readiness scores were calculated
for each success factor. (We also calculated the weighted average readiness based
on the relevance of all measures, and the results differed only slightly). Figure 2
shows the assessment results for both cases.
Organization A has a similar readiness level for all success factors, with the
lowest factor being change management and the highest being change-agent
deployment. Readiness and relevance are largely aligned, although the relevance
scores of all factors are somewhat higher than the respective readiness values. The
most relevant success factor (change agent deployment) also has the highest
readiness level, and the factor considered the least important (identiﬁcation of
quick wins) has the second-lowest readiness level. These ﬁndings indicate that
organization A is well-prepared for the ECM project, with some room for
improvement. Organization B has a high readiness level for four of the seven
success factors (change management, top management support, information and
communication, and identiﬁcation of quick wins), while two factors are mid-level
(change agent deployment, vision and mission statement) and one factor has a
comparatively low level (corporate culture appreciation). While corporate culture
appreciation and information and communication are ranked the highest for rel-
evance, quick wins were considered relatively irrelevant but the level of readiness
for this factor was high. Therefore, there are gaps between the relevance and
readiness of some of the success factors, so the assessment indicates areas where
improvement is needed. For example, the company plans to increase the number of
change agents as the project proceeds.
Summary and Limitations
In this chapter we presented a framework for ECM readiness assessment that is
grounded in a set of critical success factors and information measures. IS research
currently provides little guidance for practitioners on how to implement ECM, so
we addressed a timely and important topic in information management research
and practice. The factors and measures were collected in a series of workshops
with ﬁve companies from different branches that are currently implementing ECM
systems and related processes. While many of these factors are well-known from
related studies, the experiences and opinions of the workshop participants provide
valuable, fresh insights, including those related to beneﬁts and pitfalls of ECM,
measures of implementation, and issues in planning and monitoring. We used the
framework to assess the ECM readiness of two of these companies to illustrate the
framework’s use in practice and shortcomings to be addressed in future research.
Among these shortcomings, the list of ECM success factors and information
measures is grounded in data collected in only six workshops, so this list is not
Critical Success Factors in Enterprise Content Management
121

exhaustive, although the readiness assessment conducted for the two ECM projects
conﬁrmed the relevance of the factors. Because this assessment was conducted
with companies that also participated in the workshops, future research should
assess the relevance of the factors for other companies and branches. A second
shortcoming is that, even though the ﬁrst author actively participated in the two
projects, the assessment was conducted in only two qualitative interviews with
ECM project members, so the respondents’ personal attitudes play an important
role in interpreting the results. For example, one respondent rated the relevance of
many factors considerably higher than the other respondent did. While this dif-
ference in ratings may mean that the factors’ relevance differs for the two projects,
it may also reﬂect different preferences at the individual level. Further assessments
with the project groups are planned to remedy this shortcoming.
References
Abdolvand, N., Albadvi, A., & Ferdowsi, Z. (2008). Assessing readiness for business process
reengineering. Business Process Management Journal, 14(4), 497–511.
AIIM. (2012). What is enterprise content management (ECM)? Retrieved December 5, 2012,
from http://www.aiim.org/What-is-ECM-Enterprise-Content-Management
Alalwan, J. A., & Weistroffer, H. R. (2012). Enterprise content management research: A
comprehensive review. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 25(5), 441–461.
Alazmi, M., & Zairi, M. (2003). Knowledge management critical success factors. Total Quality
Management and Business Excellence, 14(2), 199–204.
Aziz, K., & Yusof, M. M. (2012). Measuring organizational readiness in information systems
adoption. In Proceedings of the 18th Americas Conference on Information Systems. Seattle,
WA.
Back, A., von Krogh, G., & Enkel, E. (2007). The CC model as organizational design striving to
combine relevance and rigor. Systemic Practice and Action Research, 20(1), 91–103.
Boynton, A. C., & Zmud, R. W. (1984). An assessment of critical success factors. Sloan
Management Review, 25(4), 17–27.
Cleven, A., Winter, R., & Wortmann, F. (2010). Towards private–public research partnerships
combining rigor and relevance in DWH/BI research: The competence center approach.
International Journal of Business Intelligence Research, 1(2), 60–71.
Finney, S., & Corbett, M. (2007). ERP implementation: A compilation and analysis of critical
success factors. Business Process Management Journal, 13(3), 329–347.
Fixsen, D. L., Naoom, S. F., Blase, K. A., Friedman, R. M., & Wallace, F. (2005).
Implementation research: A synthesis of the literature. Tampa: University of South Florida.
Retrieved
December
5,
2012,
from
http://nirn.fpg.unc.edu/sites/nirn.fpg.unc.edu/ﬁles/
resources/NIRN-MonographFull-01-2005.pdf
Gantz, J., & Reinsel, D. (2011). Extracting Value from Chaos. Retrieved November 20, 2011,
from http://www.emc.com/collateral/analyst-reports/idc-extracting-value-from-chaos-ar.pdf
Grahlmann, K. R., Helms, R. W., Hilhorst, C., Brinkkemper, S., & van Amerongen, S. (2011).
Reviewing enterprise content management: a functional framework. European Journal of
Information Systems, 21(3), 268–286.
Haug, A. (2012). The implementation of enterprise content management systems in SMEs.
Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 25(4), 349–372.
Holland, C. P., & Light, B. (1999). A critical success factors model for ERP implementation.
IEEE Software, 16(3), 30–36.
122
A. Herbst et al.

IDC. (2012). Worldwide information growth ticker. Retrieved December 6, 2012, from http://
www.emc.com/leadership/programs/digital-universe.htm
Lehman, W. E. K., Greener, J. M., & Simpson, D. D. (2002). Assessing organizational readiness
for change. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 22(4), 197–209.
Mendoza, L. E., Marius, A., Pérez, M., & Grimán, A. C. (2007). Critical success factors for a customer
relationship management strategy. Information and Software Technology, 49(8), 913–945.
Mouzakitis, S., & Askounis, D. (2010). A knowledge-based framework for measuring
organizational readiness for the adoption of B2B integration systems. Information Systems
Management, 27(3), 253–266.
Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2006). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of Statoil. Scandinavian Journal of Information
Systems, 18(2), 69–100.
Nah, F. F.-H., Lau, J. L.-S., & Kuang, J. (2001). Critical factors for successful implementation of
enterprise systems. Business Process Management Journal, 7(3), 285–296.
Ngai, E. W. T., Law, C. C. H., & Wat, F. K. T. (2008). Examining the critical success factors in
the adoption of enterprise resource planning. Computers in Industry, 59(6), 548–564.
Päivärinta, T., & Munkvold, B. E. (2005). Enterprise content management: An integrated
perspective on information management. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Park, H., Ribière, V., & Schulte, W. D. Jr. (2004). Critical attributes of organizational culture that
promote knowledge management technology implementation success. Journal of Knowledge
Management, 8(3), 106–117.
Remus, U. (2007). Critical success factors for implementing enterprise portals: A comparison
with ERP implementations. Business Process Management Journal, 13(4), 538–552.
Rickenberg, T. A., Neumann, M., Hohler, B., & Breitner, M. H. (2012). Enterprise content
management: A literature review. In Proceedings of the 18th Americas Conference on
Information Systems. Seattle, WA.
Rockley, A., & Cooper, C. (2012). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content strategy.
Berkeley: New Riders.
Schmiedel, T., & vom Brocke, J. (2013). Cultural values matter: The role of organizational
culture in ECM. In J. vom Brocke & A. Simons (Eds.), Enterprise content management in
information systems research: Foundations, methods and cases. Berlin: Springer.
Simons, A., & vom Brocke, J. (2013). Enterprise content management in information systems
research. In J. vom Brocke & A. Simons (Eds.), Enterprise content management in
information systems research: Foundations, methods and cases. Berlin: Springer.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(1), 647–659.
Snyder-Halpern, R. (2001). Indicators of organizational readiness for clinical information
technology/systems innovation: A Delphi study. International Journal of Medical Informat-
ics, 63(3), 179–204.
Tan, W.-G., Cater-Steel, A., & Toleman, M. (2009). Implementing IT service management: A
case study focusing on critical success factors. Journal of Computer Information Systems,
50(2), 1–12.
Trkman, P. (2010). The critical success factors of business process management. International
Journal of Information Management, 30(2), 125–134.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Characterizing the evolving
research on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(6),
627–634.
Umble, E. J., Haft, R. R., & Umble, M. M. (2003). Enterprise resource planning: Implementation
procedures and critical success factors. European Journal of Operational Research, 146(2),
241–257.
vom Brocke, J., Seidel, S., & Simons, A. (2010). Bridging the gap between enterprise content
management and creativity: A research framework. In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI.
Critical Success Factors in Enterprise Content Management
123

vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., & Cleven, A. (2011a). Towards a business process-oriented
approach to enterprise content management: The ECM-blueprinting framework. Information
Systems and e-Business Management, 9(4), 475–496.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., Herbst, A., Derungs, R., & Novotny, S. (2011b). The business
drivers behind ECM initiatives: A process perspective. Business Process Management
Journal, 17(6), 965–985.
Williams, J. J., & Ramaprasad, A. (1996). A taxonomy of critical success factors. European
Journal of Information Systems, 5(4), 250–260.
Wilson, H., Daniel, E., & McDonald, M. (2002). Factors for success in customer relationship
management (CRM) systems. Journal of Marketing Management, 18(1), 193–219.
Wong, B., & Tein, D. (2003). Critical success factors for ERP projects. In Proceedings of the
National Conference of the Australian Institute of Project Management 2003. Alice Springs.
Zafeiropoulos, I., Metaxiotis, K., & Askounis, D. (2005). Dynamic risk management system for
the modeling, optimal adaptation and implementation of an ERP system. Information
Management and Computer Security, 13(3), 212–234.
124
A. Herbst et al.

Content Management for Advisory
Support Information Systems
Joachim Pﬁster and Gerhard Schwabe
Abstract This chapter demonstrates how advisory support information systems
can beneﬁt from Enterprise Content Management (ECM) support. It introduces
that type of information system, elaborates on an architectural sketch, and shows
how ECM can support advisory support information systems. Requirements like
providing ﬁlters, supporting collaborative content management through several
organizational levels, and aggregating content from different resources on an inter-
organizational level to foster transparency and to adapt content items to a user’s
speciﬁc role are formulated. The challenge of information integration, which is
inherent in all advisory support information systems, can be generalized to all
workplaces in which information is aggregated from multiple sources. For this
reason, the content architectural sketch may also be applicable to other settings in
which content must be shared with and presented to different groups.
Introduction and Motivation
ECM helps organizations implement their information management strategies at
an organization-wide level. ECM encompasses all of the strategies, methods, and
tools needed to ‘‘capture, manage, store, preserve, and deliver content and docu-
ments related to organizational processes’’ (AIIM 2011). ECM components
(e.g., scanning, indexing, records management, collaboration, search, and retrie-
val) provide the infrastructure for implementing services that rely on up-to-date
J. Pﬁster (&)  G. Schwabe
Department of Informatics, University of Zurich, Binzmuehlestrasse 14 8050 Zuerich,
Switzerland
e-mail: pﬁster@iﬁ.uzh.ch
G. Schwabe
e-mail: schwabe@iﬁ.uzh.ch
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_8,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
125

and accurate information, such as product or service customization and purchases
that take place during a service encounter. We deﬁne advisory support information
systems as information systems that are used during a service encounter supporting
the dialogue between a customer and an expert in which they will serve as an
interface to access an organization’s internal and external data sources.
This chapter focuses on determining how advisory support information systems
can beneﬁt from ECM technologies and services. First, we describe advisory
support information systems and explain why these systems are useful in sup-
porting the communication between a client and an expert during a service
encounter. After we explain the communicative challenges associated with service
encounters, we provide two examples of advisory support information systems and
show how this type of information system contributes to improving service
encounters. The second part of this chapter deals with the challenges when content
for advisory support information systems has to be managed. ECM technologies
are shown as viable and vital backend services and systems that help to manage
and improve content quality and, in consequence, the result of service encounters.
Characterization of an Advisory Situation
People need consulting or advice by someone when their personal knowledge
about an issue or process is insufﬁcient. This information interchange is commonly
performed in a communicative situation involving an expert and a layperson
(cf. Jungermann 1999), known in sociology as a dyad. Advisory or counseling
services like career counseling or supervision can be based on a social-psychology
background, where a client works with his or her advisor to ﬁnd a solution to a
speciﬁc problem (cf. Warschburger 2009). Advisory services can also be provided
by organizations that offer services or products designed to fulﬁll certain customer
needs. Such advisory services can either be sales-dominated, such as ﬁnancial
advisory in banks (Nussbaumer et al. 2011) and travel counseling (Schmidt-Rauch
and Nussbaumer 2011), or non-sales oriented, such as advice services provided to
citizens by the government.
In a service encounter, a customer interacts with a service for a certain period of
time (Shoestack 1985). This very broad deﬁnition encompasses the entire range of
interactions a customer experiences with the variety of service elements offered by
the provider, such as interpersonal interaction, media-supported customer self-
service, or the physical facilities in which the encounter takes place. According to
Solomon et al. (1985), a service encounter is a dyadic interaction between a
customer and a service provider.
Three problems are common to all dyadic communication advisory situations
(Novak 2009): (1) Information asymmetry between the participants may be caused
by principal-agent conﬂicts (Eisenhardt 1985), leading the involved parties to act
in a self-interested manner because they may have incongruent goals in situations
with uncertainty. (2) The ‘‘burden of choice’’ phenomenon occurs when a client is
126
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

presented with too many alternatives, leading to information overload and to
choosing ‘‘the standard’’ rather than a customized solution (Schwartz 2005). (3)
Customers often experience difﬁculties in formulating an explicit information
need, which is described as an ‘‘anomalous state of knowledge’’ (Belkin et al.
1982) or as ‘‘sticky information’’ for problem-solving situations (von Hippel
1994).
Bradley et al. (2010) propose a ‘‘service encounter needs theory’’ (SENT) and
argue that the outcome of a service encounter depends on whether the participants’
needs are satisﬁed. They identify a core set of eight needs (cognition, competence,
control, justice, power, trust, respect, and pleasing relations) that are relevant to
both the advisor and the client. Adequate technology that organizes, supports, and
attends to the customer’s needs contributes to a successful service encounter.
Furthermore, Bradley et al. (2010) suggest that the importance of needs varies
among participants in service encounters and among types of services (e.g., per-
sonal versus non-personal service).
Structure of an Advisory Process
The amount of structure an organization imposes on a service encounter is based
on many factors, including the frequency with which such encounters occur and
how often common patterns can be identiﬁed that eventually evolve into standards
that can be used in every client-expert interaction. Structured processes for
advisory services are common in the ﬁnancial services industries (Credit Suisse
2006; UBS 2010), but they are lacking in the majority of service encounters in the
public sector (Schwabe et al. 2010). Figure 1 shows the ideal process structure of a
generic advisory process.
The three central phases of a service encounter are framed by the welcoming
and greeting at the start of the conversation and the farewell at the end of the
conversation. Obtaining a shared understanding of the client’s situation, including
Start of 
conversation
Needs 
elicitation
End of 
conversation
Rework on 
information 
gathered
Information seeking
Information aggregation
Goal:
Side conditions:
Elicitation
Structuring
Personalization
Goal:
Side conditions:
Empowerment/capacity to act
Structuring
Personalization
Goal:
Reusability of information
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Fig. 1 Example of a generic, ideal, structured advisory process (Schwabe et al. 2010)
Content Management for Advisory Support
127

his or her needs, requests, and concerns, is part of the ﬁrst phase, the purpose of
which is to elicit the client’s information needs by learning his or her problems and
enabling him or her to formulate the questions in which he or she is particularly
interested. Two side conditions apply: ﬁrst, the results of the needs elicitation
should be noted in a structured way so they can be reused in the next phase for an
information search without forgetting or having to re-elicit the same needs.
Second, the needs elicitation should be personalized; that is, it should be based on
the individual’s questions, rather than on a standardized script. Scripted commu-
nication processes tend to be rigid and to prescribe every step during the inter-
action, a process that can become highly formalized and inﬂexible. In the second
and third phases of the advisory process, information seeking and information
aggregation tasks alternate until the solution is found.
During information seeking, content from an organization’s internal informa-
tion sources, such as forms, brochures, and ﬂyers, are collected, along with content
from outside the organization, if necessary. In the information aggregation phase,
the information fragments are put together to provide structure and personaliza-
tion, according to the side conditions, so the customer is ultimately empowered
with the means to act (Schwabe et al. 2010). After a service encounter, customers
may have to rework on the information gathered. In doing so, they can beneﬁt
from the previous phase and from information structuring and personalization in
particular.
Information systems can be used to increase the structure and comprehensibility
of the jointly elaborated results in terms of information provision and to create an
enjoyable advisory session. By introducing a technological artifact that is shared
between a customer and an expert (Novak and Schwabe 2009), the service
encounter can be improved. These socio-technical systems that support the dyadic
communication between an expert and a customer are termed advisory support
information systems. Before the advantages and underlying concepts of these
systems are described, we present two examples of advisory support information
systems that are currently part of ongoing development and research.
Advisory Support Information Systems in the Service
Encounter
Service encounters that have traditionally been ‘‘high touch, low tech’’ have changed
because of ‘‘technological infusion’’ (Bitner et al. 2000). Bitner et al. (2000) state
that information technology support allows providers to offer services that respond
to individual customer needs and requests (offering customization and ﬂexibility),
respond to failures in the service delivery system (offering service recovery), and
create spontaneous delight by means of unprompted or unsolicited actions. While
service encounters occur in many contexts, each of which has its own unique
characteristics (e.g., person-to-person, self-service, cf. Glushko 2010), we focus on
128
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

technology-enhanced person-to-person service encounters. Fitzsimmons and
Fitzsimmons (2007) distinguish between ‘‘technology-assisted’’ (in which tech-
nology is used only by the frontline employee to enhance his or her capabilities) and
‘‘technology-facilitated’’ (in which both parties interact with the same technological
artifact). The latter approach goes along with our notion of how to enable IT support
for service encounters that emphasize advisory or consulting services.
Consider an example from the domain of travel counseling (Fig. 2). The cus-
tomer and the travel agent sit in front of a touch-sensitive 25’’ display that is
running the SmartTravel prototype (for a description of a prior prototype, see
Novak et al. 2008). All the results of the needs elicitation—such as the type of trip,
the destination and so on—are visualized and the customer and agent can move (in
order to prioritize), modify, or create new icons and label them accordingly. The
planning screen is arranged around a map that shows the desired destination area,
and activity markers can be placed on the virtual map to facilitate the booking of
organized excursions, deﬁne arrival and departure destinations, and identify means
of transportation. The offer behind each activity marker is integrated from the
travel agency’s product database, or it originates from travel industry-speciﬁc backend
systems. Moreover, content like photos (Flickr: http://www.ﬂickr.com, Panoramio:
http://www.panoramio.com), videos (YouTube: http://www.youtube.com), and hotel
ratings (TripAdvisor: http://www.tripadvisor.com) from third-party sources is inte-
grated in order to offer additional unﬁltered information. All together, the customer
enjoys a unique service experience.
Citizen advisory services delivered by public authorities provide another
example. A 25’’ touch-sensitive display runs ‘‘Citizen Advice 2.0’’ (Fig. 3), a
prototype developed to assist employees of citizen advice bureaus who are con-
sulting people who are having a baby (Schwabe et al. 2010). During the needs-
elicitation phase, memo stickers are used as a metaphor to capture topics of
interest, each of which is associated with four dimensions—activities, locations,
resources, and appointments—that are visualized on separate screens to which
users can move by clicking on the corresponding icons (forms, map, web links, and
Needs elicitation
Needs overview from needs elicitation
ltinary Calender
Interaction of customer and agent
Drawings of travel routes
Fig. 2 SmartTravel prototype (images from Schmidt-Rauch and Nussbaumer 2011)
Content Management for Advisory Support
129

calendar). After the information search is complete, the results are documented
and associated with the information needs on the memo. For instance, a map
visualizes all points of interest, such as kindergartens and hospitals, and the
addresses and other information for each selected point of interest is stored on the
respective memo sticker. The personalized information items and structured
memos (e.g., those arranged on a timeline as a to-do list) can be printed or sent via
e-mail to the advice-seeking client. Tight integration with other backend sys-
tems—for instance, to execute transactions like registering for a kindergarten or
aggregating information from several sources—are possible extensions of this
scenario.
The above examples demonstrate how service encounters can beneﬁt from
information systems support. The next section explains the role of information
systems in advisory situations more precisely, providing a rationale for advisory
support information systems.
Rationale for Advisory Support Information Systems
Novak (2009) proposed that customers and experts can beneﬁt from collaboration
via a shared artifact. The visualization of the individual worlds of knowledge (the
customer’s problem space versus the agent’s solution space) helps to establish a
common understanding of the customer’s needs and the agent’s proposed solu-
tions. Furthermore, information asymmetry can be alleviated if both parties have
access to the same information, resolving the principal-agent conﬂicts that are
inherent in nearly every advisory situation. Hidden actions can be mitigated
Fig. 3 Prototype of an advisory support information system for citizen advice
130
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

through the creation of social ties by joint interaction with the artifact, and
opportunistic seller behavior can be restricted by the integration of external third-
party information (e.g., forums). An expert can signal his or her trustworthiness by
showing the customer the third-party information, presenting the entire solution
space to the customer, and letting him or her engage in its exploration. The
‘‘burden of choice’’ problem is resolved by the expert’s human intervention.
Advisory support information systems facilitate co-creation, a process in which a
customer or client jointly participates with an organization (e.g., a government unit or
company) in value-creation activities. This co-creation activity is one of the foun-
dational premises of the service-dominant logic wherein service is regarded as the
central process of value creation. Vargo and Lusch (2008) deﬁne services as ‘‘the
application of specialized competences (knowledge and skills) through deeds, pro-
cesses, and performances for the beneﬁt of another entity or the entity itself’’ (p. 2).
An increasing number of economic activities is shifting toward services, like
sales services and after-sales services. In post-industrialized countries, the tertiary
service sector is predominant; for example, more than 70 % of the EU’s GDP
comes from the service sector (CIA 2011). Service-dominant logic provides an
alternative perspective on how to capture the importance of service and its
implications, and advisory support information systems provide the technological
grounds on which co-production during a service encounter can be performed.
Prahalad and Ramaswamy (2004) focus on customers and their ‘‘co-creation
experience’’ throughout all points of the interaction with a company, with each
point offering the opportunity for value creation and extraction. They identify four
building blocks of consumer-company interaction: dialogue to ensure joint and
equal participation in problem solving processes with clearly deﬁned rules of
engagement (e.g., the feedback mechanisms on eBay); access and transparency to
achieve a meaningful interaction without exploiting information asymmetry by
hiding potentially valuable information; and a risk-beneﬁt assessment that helps
customers understand and estimate their personal risks associated with a certain
decision, such as a change in medication. These building blocks are fundamental
in the design of advisory support information systems and the content they deliver.
To be readily accepted by the experts, the dialogue must be supported in a
meaningful way, such as when the elicited needs are used for an information
search and its results are attached to the needs. At the same time, information must
be accessible and must be presented in an understandable manner in order to
achieve transparency and create a positive experience for each customer.
A Content Ecosystem for Advisory Support Information
Systems
Next, we present the types of content that can emerge in advisory support
information systems, the stakeholders and their roles, and an architectural
sketch of content management within advisory support information systems.
Content Management for Advisory Support
131

Ecosystem refers to an advisory support information system’s embodiment in a
social context in which several stakeholders are involved and to its aspects of
data integration, as several types of content from different resources constitute
the building blocks of the information to be delivered during an advisory
session. Both factors—embodiment in a social system and data integration—
must be taken into account for the advisory support information system to be
successful.
Types of Content Used in Advisory Support Information
Systems
In advisory sessions, a variety of content is directed either to advisors to support
them and their tasks or to the clients. For example, a client receives printed
materials from an organization, such as checklists, detailed how-to descriptions,
brochures, catalogues about products and services, and forms to complete and
submit with other documents. Product or service information is also brought to the
customer via electronic media (e.g., the Internet) to enable transactions like
product purchases. In addition to the content elements issued by organizations,
user-generated content is now a rich source of information that many users consult.
Forums, question-and-answer portals, opinion or rating portals, and social net-
works are used to exchange information. A content audit can be beneﬁcial in
identifying which content is available inside an organization and how it is used
and/or reused and presented to different audiences (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005).
Content elements do not necessarily consist of complete documents but can be
much smaller, such as images and text passages, to facilitate reuse on a ﬁner-
grained level (The Rockley Group 2003). In the following sections we describe
which content elements can occur in advisory support information systems, how
we distinguish content items and support items and how content elements have to
be adapted to a user’s speciﬁc role.
Characterization of Content Elements
The content elements that are integrated into an advisory support information
system can be characterized by their type (multimedia objects like videos, images,
and plain text, and formatted text like HTML documents) or by the amount of
structure they have (structured, factual data that originates from a relational
database system or unstructured data like plain text; cf. Godinez et al. 2010).
Content elements can also be distinguished by their status as either dynamic and
still open for changes or static and more appropriate for preservation or archiving.
Ideally, each content element is associated with metadata that describes the
information item (e.g., the creation date). Moreover, the provenance or intended
132
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

use (internal or external) of a content element and its format (ﬁle format or print-
only) are important dimensions in the context of advisory support information
systems. Finally, the mode of collaborative creation must be considered because
content can be developed on the basis of well-deﬁned workﬂows or using the
wisdom-of-the-crowd approach.
The origin or provenance of data is a useful type of content categorization, as
the organization itself can create data with knowledge about how the information
was gathered and what kind of quality might be expected, or third-party infor-
mation can be acquired from external sources, which raises questions about how
the data were generated and how to determine their quality. Data quality ranges
from commercially created content from content integrators to freely available
user-generated content, such as reviews on opinion portals and images posted on
image-sharing sites. Not all information provided in an advisory support infor-
mation system necessarily adheres to rigorous quality standards, but sometimes the
‘‘wisdom of the crowd’’ approach, with or without peer reviewing, is sufﬁcient.
In other contexts, formally deﬁned quality-assurance processes are needed, for
example when decisions are to be made based on ﬁnancial data or on speciﬁc laws
that are referred to during an advisory session.
Content Items and Support Items
We suggest that two main types of content used in advisory support information
systems be distinguished: content items and support items. Content items refer to
the content that is delivered via a certain medium, for instance, product speciﬁ-
cations presented either in a brochure or on a web page. The content item can be
directed either toward external usage (for the client) or toward internal usage (for
the advisor or expert, such as detailed product speciﬁcations or service manuals).
ECM components help to manage these content items by versioning or managing
the required metadata.
Support items are those that are dedicated to enabling advisors to carry out
advisory sessions. Support items describe how the entire advisory process should
be performed, suggest when to use which content element in an advisory session,
direct the advisor to others in the organization who have certain competencies,
and/or point to reference materials (glossaries or other aids) that can be used to
retrieve information and/or to determine which sources should be consulted.
ECM systems can be used to assist users in managing and sharing their
(individual) support items as well as an organization’s content items. For instance,
an advisor individually creates a checklist and shares it with other members of his
or her team, who add to the original checklist in order to improve it. In another
example in the domain of travel consulting, the travel agents share links related to
destinations in order to augment their shared knowledge. ECM components like
Wikis help to categorize, index, and store these support items in repositories where
they can be retrieved or syndicated throughout the organization, encouraging
reuse.
Content Management for Advisory Support
133

Stakeholders and Roles
In order to be useful, the content elements for an advisory support information
system must be adapted to a users’ speciﬁc role. This is necessary because of the
diverging needs of the different stakeholders in a technology-facilitated service
encounter. Three main stakeholders can be identiﬁed: the service organization, the
contact personnel, and the customer (Cook et al. 2002). Parasuraman and Grewal
(2000) extend this triangle to a pyramid by adding technology, which serves as a
mediator among the actors.
In addition, the service provider (contact personnel and the company itself) is
structured according to the hierarchical levels that are assigned by the organiza-
tion. For example, an individual advisor is assigned to a team that belongs to an
organizational unit of a company that is just one line of business among many
others in the ﬁrm. A profound understanding of where and in what context content
elements originate will facilitate integrating them in an advisory support system.
Godinez et al. (2010) suggest three scopes of integration: the local scope, where
information is used only within a department or a line of business, as in a support
ticket that is dealt with only in the support organization; the enterprise-wide scope,
which encompasses data used throughout the entire enterprise, as in customer or
product master data; and the cross-enterprise scope, which includes data
exchanged across enterprises, such as supply-chain data.
Cross-boundary information integration proposes new possibilities for collab-
oration (e.g., B2B, B2C) through content reuse. Non-competing organizations in
the public sector in particular are assumed to have a pre-established culture of
sharing common organizational structures and information needs, whereas it is
more difﬁcult to start information sharing across proﬁt-making ﬁrms (White and
Lutters 2007). The idea of inter-organizational information integration is a key
enabler in the domain of digital government (Pardo and Tayi 2007). ECM provides
the basis for implementing higher-level services like the customer advisory sup-
port during service encounters that contributes to an organization’s orientation to
service-dominant logic. Information quality and content integration are essential to
the acceptance and use of an advisory support information system.
Toward an Architecture for ECM-Based Advisory Support
Information Systems
In their framework for ECM research, Tyrväinen et al. (2006) propose subdividing
the content perspective into three views: the user view, the information view, and
the systems view. We use this division as a basis on which to model a content
architectural sketch for advisory support information systems (Fig. 4). We sepa-
rated the user view according to the two major parties involved in a service
encounter: the service provider and the customer. Further division based on the
134
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

entities involved in a knowledge management setting (cf. Nonaka and Takeuchi
1995) helps to differentiate the roles and spheres in which the service provider and
the customer interact. Each of the views is a distinct layer that uses the data and
services provided by the layers below. In the user view, content based on the
aggregated content from the information view is presented to an individual (cus-
tomer or service provider), and that information relies on the internal or external
resources managed in the systems view.
Identifying Requirements for ECM-Based Advisory
Support Information Systems
This section describes in detail the architectural sketch developed in the previous
chapter, focusing on how ECM technologies can support an advisory support
information system. Requirements are devised and summarized for each of the
three views—user, information, and systems.
Systems view
Inter-organization
Organization
Group
Individual
Service provider
Customer
Presentation
Semantic
Syntactic
Standards
Data and application integration
User view
Information view
DB 1
DB n
…
System 1
System n
…
WWW 1
WWW n
…
Internal
resources
External
resources
Fig. 4 Content architectural sketch for ECM-based advisory support information systems
Content Management for Advisory Support
135

User View: Providing Adapted Information
The user view puts the user at the center of interest and addresses questions con-
cerning how users may read or misread the content, how they retrieve the content,
and how much a certain content item helps to satisfy an information need (Tyrväinen
et al. 2006). From the perspective of an advisory support information system, it is
beneﬁcial to provide the right amount of information openly (requirement uv1)
during a service encounter, thereby fostering transparency and relieving principal-
agent conﬂicts. At the same time, ﬁlters (requirement uv2) help the user to drill down
the size of a result set by, for example, using a faceted search.
Individual level—The service provider perspective: When an advisor works on
an individual level with a customer, the expert may have to document the results of
an advisory session or some other characteristics of the client (requirement uv3)
using an advisory support or customer relationship management (CRM) system. In
addition to the information the advisors are obliged to capture, they may also take
some personal notes about products or about customers that they are not willing to
share (requirement uv4) because the information was uttered conﬁdentially. ECM
provides the modules for this personal information management.
It may be desirable at times to consult additional expert information that is
hidden or not shown as the default in the normal course of interaction with the
system (requirement uv5). In the public administration domain, von Lucke (2006)
introduced the idea of ‘‘main texts’’ and ‘‘additional texts.’’ Ideally, only the ‘‘main
texts’’ are presented as the default, and the ‘‘additional texts’’ with experts’
knowledge are consulted only when needed. ECM modules help to manage this
additional target-group-speciﬁc content, which contributes to satisfying some of
the core needs expressed in the SENT-model Bradley et al. (2010) proposed. Thus,
advisors maintain their aura of competence and still exert control by deciding
when to show or consult certain content or support items.
Individual and group level—The customer perspective: The client expects
individualized help and information tailored to his or her needs. Filters help the
advisor select the relevant information during the information aggregation phase.
If the customer interacts with the information system as well, an even higher level
of ease of use must be achieved (requirement uv6); therefore, the ECM compo-
nents used to retrieve information during the information aggregation phase must
be equipped with an appropriate user interface and must support queries in the
customer’s vocabulary (requirement uv7). Customers also expect the advisory
support information system to deliver up-to-date information (requirement uv8).
ECM offers the option to set up processes and workﬂows that guarantee the
currency of the content elements.
Group level—The service provider perspective: In this perspective, a team of
advisors works together and shares information. For instance, advisors in travel
agencies share link lists related to destinations in order to augment their mutual
knowledge. The collaboration components of ECM systems help to capture, manage,
store, preserve, and deliver these content items or support items (requirement uv9).
136
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

Organizational level—The service provider perspective: When content is
provided by the organization via its custom software systems, such as transaction
systems for ﬂight bookings, product databases or CRM systems, ECM technolo-
gies facilitate reusing content elements that are adapted according to the channels
to which they are delivered. Some information may have been formatted for the
interaction in a dyadic, physical service encounter, while other elements of the
same content item may be used on an organization’s webpage or in its call center.
Tailoring the content items to the speciﬁc channels or media (requirement uv10) to
which they are delivered increases successful perception. For instance, call center
agents need easily comprehensible, brief content or support items that can be
looked up during a telephone call (Steinmetz 2011). ECM facilitates other issues,
such as version control, improved credibility by applying user management ser-
vices to allow only authorized changes or additions, and additional transparency
by logging who added which part of information at what time.
Organization level—The customer perspective: In this perspective, after an
advice-giving session, a client may receive links to websites with additional
information or electronic forms he or she must complete, and ECM helps to
manage the content associated with this information. For example, links and their
descriptions are reused in a consistent manner that facilitates recognition
(requirement uv11) of the customer’s content items and on the public website of an
organization. ECM workﬂow components also help to initiate workﬂows if cus-
tomers can submit forms electronically.
Inter-organizational level—The service provider perspective: On this level,
content is provided to and received from external partners by professional content
integrators like GIATA (http://www.giata.de) in the travel domain. For example,
in the domain of public administration, the currency of information like laws and
rules is a decisive aspect of information quality. To add additional complexity,
several levels of the public administration may contribute laws or rules that must
be considered. Therefore, ECM systems are needed to support collaboration
throughout several organizational levels (requirement uv12).
Inter-organizational level—The customer perspective: To increase transpar-
ency, an advisor can integrate third-party information like product reviews on
opinion portals in the advisory session. The user view must provide access to
content that is aggregated on an inter-organizational level (requirement uv13).
Information View: Semantic and Syntactic Data Integration
The information view concentrates on the content’s semantics and on how the
content will be represented and made accessible. The following sections detail the
challenges associated with data integration, the roles of standards and content
integrators, the problems of object identiﬁcation, and the provision of appropriate
content structure.
Content Management for Advisory Support
137

Challenges of Data Integration
Using metadata to describe and ﬁlter data items is a prerequisite for successful
information integration, but agreeing on the standardized information structures
that provide semantics to data is even more important (Tyrväinen et al. 2006).
Capturing the semantics of data cannot be done by relying on structural or syn-
tactic information like XML schemas but must include the application of widely
accepted standards (requirement iv1) that contribute to the exchange and inte-
gration of information. In the domain of tourism, many standards, such as the
IATA (International Air Transport Association) airport codes and the ACRISS
(Association of Car Rental Industry Systems Standards) codes that identify the
features of a car in the car rental industry, are used to offer consumers transparency
and comparability. However, much of the tourism-related data is available only in
unstructured or semantically unannotated formats like hotel descriptions in plain
text or product opinions on websites.
Problems arise when data from different providers who use incompatible
standards or no standards at all are integrated. In this case, ontologies can help to
overcome the semantic heterogeneity (requirement iv2). In the travel domain,
locally used description and classiﬁcation systems like star ratings for accom-
modation are largely inﬂuenced by a country’s speciﬁc culture or the laws gov-
erning such classiﬁcations, making different schemes or criteria difﬁcult to
compare (Comité Européen de Normalisation 2009). Standards that facilitate
information sharing and cross-organizational reuse of data are about to evolve,
much like the content management interoperability standard (CMIS). By using
CMIS, content repositories can interchange metadata and content items via web
services to offer new possibilities for content reuse.
The task of integrating several content resources on a syntactic and semantic
level can be challenging and time-consuming, especially if high-quality data is
demanded. Content aggregators specialize in these tasks and offer pre-processed
and integrated data to their customers for a fee. For example, in the public
service sector, the Service-BW portal (http://www.service-bw.de) serves as a
content aggregator that offers information which is approved by the state and
which is structured around life events aggregated across different levels of
government. All of these content elements can be reused on the websites of cities
and communal service providers, allowing them to beneﬁt from the automatic
updates and the accuracy and authoritativeness guaranteed by the state as issuer
and maintainer of the content items. Thus, a content aggregator creates value for
customers by alleviating the need to deal directly with problems of object
identiﬁcation.
A trend toward integrating data from various sources that are openly
available in (enterprise) mashups is also currently observable. Linked data, ﬁrst
deﬁned by Berners-Lee (2006), is one way to publish structured data on the
public web or private intranet, thereby allowing one data source to be linked
with another to build a rich information network (DBpedia is the most
prominent example) (http://www.dbpedia.org). In advisory support information
138
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

systems, linked (open) data that originates either from external sources or from
other units of the same organization can also be used. Exploiting the relations
associated with the data can provide holistic information. For example, in the
domain of citizen information, a mashup was created using publicly available
linked data to create an integrated view of neighborhoods’ local services,
environmental information, and crime statistics (Omitola et al. 2010). ECM
modules can consume linked data or help provide it by equipping the raw data
with necessary metadata and adding versioning or provenance information in
order to overcome some of the challenges related to the use of linked data
(Sheridan and Tennison 2010).
Another problem related to the information view is that of guaranteeing up-to-
date information. Referring to external data resources like web pages or user-
generated content imposes challenges like broken links. Therefore, mechanisms
designed to check the availability of the linked information must be established or,
when appropriate ECM modules are available, to inform the content owner about
the changes.
Challenges of Object Identiﬁcation
The identiﬁcation of an object (a ﬂight, a hotel, a destination in general, events
like guided tours, and so on) plays an important role in information integration,
particularly in the domain of tourism. Because there are so many possible
contributors (companies, governments, local authorities, and users) who use a
plethora of platforms and manifold standardized or non-standardized ways to
describe the entities (car rentals, hotels, events, etc.) involved in a journey, the
different object-related pieces of information (requirement iv3) must be brought
together in order to offer a customer a holistic view of a hotel during an
advisory session.
On a technological level, the introduction and widespread use of object iden-
tiﬁers like uniform resource names (URNs) will be decisive if content is integrated
from multiple sources. Most of the problems encountered in the prototype of the
advisory support information system SmartTravel are due to object identiﬁcation.
GIATA, a content provider specializing in tourism data, offers hotel descriptions,
among other content elements. Although GIATA is not a standardization body, its
unique IDs that are widely accepted in the tourism industry, are used to commonly
identify objects. In order to aggregate information for the same hotel from other
sources, such as Wikitravel (http://www.wikitravel.com), or multimedia content
from YouTube, one must often resort to parsing the address, which sometimes
creates ambiguities (the same name for a city but in a different country) that
require manual resolution. Unique object identiﬁers help to overcome these
difﬁculties.
Content Management for Advisory Support
139

Challenges of Providing a Content Structure
Content must be equipped with an appropriate structure (requirement iv4) in order
to assist users of an advisory support information system in locating the desired
information. Some government portals on the Internet are already structured
around the life-event metaphor (Tambouris and Tarabanis 2008), which helps
citizens to ﬁnd relevant content items associated with this event. However, in
complex situations that touch multiple life events, such as expatriating to another
country, additional structuring aids offer an advantage. Life events can be com-
bined with a target-group perspective that is based on a requirements proﬁle for a
speciﬁc group (Böhm et al. 2010). In an advisory support information system, both
the expert and the client can rely on such structures—along with other navigational
aids, such as indices, directories, glossaries, and free-text search boxes—to help
them navigate within the information space.
Appropriate structures are also essential to the integration of information. This
is the case, for example, when a person enters the life event of ‘‘having a baby’’
and, thus, is entitled to obtain ﬁnancial aid and now wants to collect information
on this subject. The results of an information search can be improved if all
information related to the topic is easily retrievable. Object identiﬁers can be used
to achieve this goal; for example, URNs serve to uniquely identify content or
support items that are associated with a life event. And this life event is also
identiﬁed by an URN; thus, the content or support items are clearly identiﬁable.
When several governmental levels (e.g., the city, county, or national level) are
involved in creating content and support items, they can relate their information to
identiﬁable life events. In addition, such information can be characterized as
suitable to speciﬁc roles (requirement iv5), which are also identiﬁed by URNs.
Systems View: Overcoming Data Silos
The systems view focuses on the systems in which content is stored or made
accessible to users. Especially in the case of advisory support information systems,
content is distributed and located at different sources. Because of an organization’s
structure, key content elements may be trapped in silos, making effective mech-
anisms and methods necessary in order to integrate data and deliver uniﬁed content
(Tyrväinen et al. 2006). In our architectural model, we divided the systems view
according to the origin of the resources as internal or external. A data and
application integration layer is used to access the internal or external resources,
provide an interface for the advisory support information system and the infor-
mation resources, and convert the sources’ several data formats so they can be
accessed by the advisory support information system. Such an integration layer
can be realized by an enterprise service bus based on a service-oriented archi-
tecture (e.g., using web services) (requirement sv1).
140
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

Several internal content repositories relevant to advisors co-exist in most
organizations that have evolved historically because of the introduction of new
software tools that satisfy the specialized needs of certain organizational units. The
repositories can range from simple ﬁle servers (perhaps with an agreed standard on
how to set up the directory structure and naming conventions for ﬁles) to digital
asset-management systems like picture databases, sophisticated content manage-
ment systems, transaction-oriented backend systems, and enterprise 2.0 produc-
tivity tools like social networks, blogs, and wikis. In the classical database-oriented
integration perspective, one solution to deal with this heterogeneity is to build a
centralized data warehouse. The other perspective, especially useful in settings in
which internally and externally distributed information sources are accessed within
advisory support information systems, is to accept this heterogeneity and use
methods that support distributed information access (requirement sv2).
Summary and Conclusion
Table 1 summarizes all requirements of advisory support information systems
with regard to ECM. To instantiate these requirements, several ECM components
can be used to integrate and provide access to content resources.
Research on advisory support information systems is only emerging and the
same holds true for research on ECM, so the above requirements are not neces-
sarily exhaustive. We assume that transferring existing approaches of advisory
support information systems to other domains where content is managed in other
ways and by other systems will result in additional or reﬁned requirements.
Some of the requirements are interrelated; for instance, the ease of use
(requirement uv6) is inﬂuenced by the information’s currency (requirement uv8)
and the amount of information that is usually presented to the user in order to
create transparency (requirement uv1). Therefore, an advisory support information
system’s beneﬁts can be exploited only if the requirements are taken wholly into
account. Because of this interrelatedness, substantial effort has to be put into a test
or evaluation design in order to discern which requirement or component con-
tributes to the information system’s success and to what extent.
With an appropriate information management strategy and its organization-
wide implementation, beneﬁts like the reuse of existing content and support items
and their combination into new services and products add to an organization’s
business ﬂexibility. Organizations are increasingly inclined to follow the service-
dominant logic paradigm, and advisory support information systems are primary
candidates to improve the service encounter, especially in service encounters
where huge amounts of information are exchanged or several internal or external
information sources must be consulted simultaneously.
ECM helps users and advisors cope with the multitude of tasks necessary to
work effectively with new and existing content throughout an organization. The
modules used to capture, manage, store, preserve, and deliver content provide the
Content Management for Advisory Support
141

infrastructure to build services and applications that rely on these mechanisms or
the content governed by them. Advisory support information systems are built on
this infrastructure in order to provide higher-level services to employees and
customers; at the same time, they use certain ECM components like collaboration
to contribute to an organization’s information management. Generally speaking,
with an appropriate infrastructure, new services that strengthen an organization’s
competitive position or contribute to its acceptance can be delivered. Advisory
support information systems beneﬁt from an appropriate and technologically
sound infrastructure, but the approaches are also applicable in other information-
rich areas, whether characterized by customer contact or not, where information is
aggregated from various sources and consulted in a co-located setting, for
example, by an advisor and a client.
References
Association for Information and Image Management (AIIM). (2011). What is enterprise content
management (ECM)? Retrieved June 30, 2011, from http://www.aiim.org/What-is-ECM-
Enterprise-Content-Management
Belkin, N. J., Oddy, R. N., & Brooks, H. M. (1982). ASK for information retrieval: Part I.
Background and theory. Journal of Documentation, 38(2), 61–71.
Table 1 Requirements of advisory support information systems from the content perspective
User view:
1. Provide the right amount of information to foster transparency
2. Provide ﬁlters to ease searching, e.g., by drilling down a search result set’s size via facets
3. Provide ways and methods to document results
4. Manage an advisor’s personal content, such as by using notes about clients or products
5. Provide expert hints on demand
6. Focus on the tool’s ease of use, especially when the customers use it themselves
7. Support search queries in the customer’s vocabulary
8. Deliver up-to-date content
9. Provide ways and methods for collaborative information sharing
10. Tailor content to several channels to increase its perception and usage
11. Facilitate recognition of content items through the consistent use of document names and
descriptions across distribution channels and media
12. Support collaborative content management throughout several organizational levels
13. Aggregate content from an inter-organizational level (e.g., to foster transparency)
Information view:
1. Rely on widely accepted standards
2. Overcome semantic heterogeneity if resources from different sources are integrated
3. Bring the same objects together (e.g., by using URNs)
4. Equip content with appropriate structures (e.g., ‘‘life events’’)
5. Adapt content items according to a user’s role
Systems view:
1. Use a data and application integration layer (e.g., an enterprise service bus)
2. Rely on methods that allow distributed information search and access
142
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

Berners-Lee, T. (2006). Linked data. Retrieved December 19, 2010, from http://www.w3.org/
DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
Bitner, M. J., Brown, S. W., & Meuter, M. L. (2000). Technology infusion in service encounters.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28(1), 139–149.
Böhm, K., Wolf, P., & Krcmar, H. (2010). Context oriented structuring of egovernment
services—An empirical analysis of the information demand of expatriates in Germany. In
Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI.
Bradley, G. L., McColl-Kennedy, J. R., Sparks, B. A., Jimmieson, N. L., & Zapf, D. (2010).
Service encounter needs theory. A dyadic psychosocial approach to understanding service
encounters. In W. J. Zerbe, C. E. J. Härtel, & N. M. Ashkanasy (Eds.), Emotions and
organizational dynamism. Research on emotions in organizations (Vol. 6, pp. 221–258).
Emerald.
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). (2011). The world fact book: European Union. Retrieved July
18, 2011, from https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
Comité Européen de Normalisation. (2009). Harmonization of data interchange in tourism. CEN
Workshop Agreement. CWA 15992.
Cook, L. S., Bowen, D. E., Chase, R. B., Dasu, S., Stewart, D. M., & Tansik, D. A. (2002).
Human issues in service design. Journal of Operations Management, 20(2), 159–174.
Credit Suisse. (2006). Der Credit Suisse Beratungsprozess im Private Banking—Ein Lern- und
Arbeitshandbuch (Reprint of the ﬁrst edition from 2005). Credit Suisse.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1985). Agency theory: An assessment and review. The Academy of
Management Review, 14(1), 57–74.
Fitzsimmons, J. A., & Fitzsimmons, M. J. (2007). Service management: Operations, strategy,
information technology (6th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Glushko, R. J. (2010). Seven contexts for service system design. In P. P. Maglio, C.
A. Kieliszewski, & J. C. Spohrer (Eds.), Handbook of service science: Research and
innovations in the service economy (pp. 219–249). Berlin: Springer.
Godinez, M., Hechler, E., Koenig, K., Lockwood, S., Oberhofer, M., & Schroeck, M. (2010). The
art of enterprise information architecture. A systems-based approach for unlocking business
insight. Upper Saddle River: IBM Press.
Jungermann, H. (1999). Advice giving and taking. In Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Maui, HI.
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, I. (1995). The knowledge creating company. How Japanese companies
create the dynamics of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Novak, J. (2009). Mine, yours… ours? Designing for principal-agent collaboration in interactive
value creation. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik.
Wien.
Novak, J., & Schwabe, G. (2009). Designing for reinter mediation in the brick-and-mortar world:
Towards the travel agency of the future. Electronic Markets, 19(1), 15–29.
Novak, J., Schmidt, S., Aggeler, M., & Schwabe, G. (2008). Kooperative Medienumgebungen für
das Reisebüro der Zukunft. In M. Herczeg & M. C. Kindsmüller (Eds.), Mensch & Computer
2008. 8. fachübergreifende Konferenz für interaktive und kooperative Medien: Viel Mehr
Interaktion (pp. 97–106). München: Oldenbourg.
Nussbaumer, P., Matter, I., Slembek, I., & Schwabe, G. (2011). Information search behavior of
investors and the role of advisory services. In Proceedings of the 19th European Conference
on Information Systems. Helsinki.
O‘Callaghan, R., & Smits, M. (2005). A strategy development process for enterprise content
management. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Information Systems.
Regensburg.
Omitola, T., Koumenides, C. L., Popov, I. O., Yang, Y., Salvadores, M., Szomszor, M., et al.
(2010). Put in your postcode, out comes the data: A case study. In Proceedings of the 7th
Extended Semantic Web Conference. Heraklion.
Parasuraman, A., & Grewal, D. (2000). The impact of technology on the quality-value-loyalty
chain: A research agenda. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28(1), 168–174.
Content Management for Advisory Support
143

Pardo, T., & Tayi, G. K. (2007). Interorganizational information integration: A key enabler for
digital government. Government Information Quarterly, 24(4), 691–715.
Prahalad, C. K., & Ramaswamy, V. (2004). Co-creation experiences: The next practice in value
creation. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(3), 5–14.
Schmidt-Rauch, S., & Nussbaumer, P. (2011). Putting value co-creation into practice: A case for
advisory support. In Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on Information Systems.
Helsinki.
Schwabe, G., Schenk, B., & Bretscher, C. (2010). Enabling advisors and citizens through
Citizens’ Advice 2.0. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual Conference of the International
Research Society for Public Management. Bern.
Schwartz, B. (2005). The paradox of choice: Why more is less. New York: Ecco.
Sheridan, J., & Tennison, J. (2010). Linking UK government data. In Proceedings of the
WWW2010 Workshop on Linked Data on the Web. Raleigh, NC.
Shoestack, G. L. (1985). Planning the service encounter. In J. A. Czepiel, M. R. Solomon, & C.
F. Surprenant (Eds.), The service encounter (pp. 243–254). Lexington: Lexington Books.
Solomon, M. R., Surprenant, C. F., Czepiel, J. A., & Gutman, E. G. (1985). A role theory perspective
on dyadic interactions: The service encounter. Journal of Marketing, 49(1), 99–111.
Steinmetz, U. (2011). Bürgerservice am Telefon. In G. Schwabe (Ed.), Bürgerservices (pp.
113–138). Berlin: Edition Sigma.
Tambouris, E., & Tarabanis, K. (2008). Understanding and scoping life events. International
Journal of Electronic Governance, 1(2), 139–154.
The Rockley Group. (2003). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content strategy. White
Paper. The Rockley Group Inc.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Characterizing the evolving
research on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(6),
627–634.
UBS. (2010). Advisory approach. Retrieved August 12, 2010, from http://www.ubs.com/1/e/
ubs_ch/wealth_management_switzerland/relationship/advisory_approach.html
Vargo, S., & Lusch, R. (2008). Service-dominant logic: Continuing the evolution. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 36(1), 1–10.
von Hippel, E. (1994). ‘‘Sticky Information’’ and the locus of problem solving: Implications for
innovation. Management Science, 40(4), 429–439.
von Lucke, J. (2006). Das Stammtext- und Ergänzungsmodell in einem Verbund der
Verwaltungsportale. In G. Viola (Ed.), eGovernment Kompendium 2006—Referenzbuch für
den öffentlichen Sektor (pp. 39–40). Augsburg: Vogel.
Warschburger, P. (2009). Beratungspsychologie. Heidelberg: Springer.
White, K. F., & Lutters, W. G. (2007). Structuring cross-organizational knowledge sharing. In
Proceedings of the 2007 International ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work. New
York.
144
J. Pﬁster and G. Schwabe

Make or Buy? Factors that Impact
the Adoption of Cloud Computing
on the Content Level
Ivo Gonzenbach, Christian Russ and Jan vom Brocke
Abstract The emergence of cloud computing has led enterprises to rethink fun-
damentally how they organize their content assets. In particular, IT managers are
challenged to decide what content should be managed in the cloud and what
should not. Grounded in the IS literature on IT outsourcing, this chapter presents a
set of criteria that organizations can consider when making this decision. Because
it is a make-or-buy decision, transaction cost theory (TCT) was used as a theo-
retical lens for the study. Accordingly, the chapter suggests speciﬁcity (e.g., degree
of standardization of content management), frequency (e.g., frequency of usage),
and uncertainty (e.g., legal situation) to impact the cloud computing decision.
Introduction
Cloud computing is a new paradigm for delivering information services to cus-
tomers, offering various advantages over traditional IS (Information Systems)
deployment models. Cloud computing is characterized by on-demand self-service,
broad network access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity, and measured service
(Mell and Grance 2011). Research has identiﬁed the beneﬁts cloud computing
offers to organizations: improved ﬂexibility and speed of implementation,
easy
access,
massive
scalability,
reasonable
performance,
and
speciﬁable
I. Gonzenbach
Steffen Informatik AG, Fürstenlandstrasse 142, 9014 St., Gallen, Switzerland
e-mail: ivo.gonzenbach@steffeninf.ch
C. Russ
Corporate IT, SoftwareONE AG, Richtistrasse 7 8304 Wallisellen, Switzerland
e-mail: christian.russ@softwareone.com
J. vom Brocke (&)
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-Josef-Strasse 21
9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein
e-mail: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_9,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
145

conﬁgurability (e.g., Armbrust et al. 2010; Kondo et al. 2009; Zhang et al. 2010).
Because these beneﬁts can often be realized at relatively low costs compared to the
cost of dedicated infrastructures (Kondo et al. 2009), the emergence of cloud
computing has had an enormous impact on the IT industry (Zhang et al. 2010).
Gartner (2012) estimates the worldwide cloud services revenue at $109 billion in
2012 (a 19.6 % increase over 2011) and expects it to reach $206.6 billion in 2016.
Therefore, it is not surprising that many authors consider cloud computing the next
computing paradigm (e.g., Buyya et al. 2008; Gartner 2010; Weiss 2007; Zhang
et al. 2010).
Foster et al. (2008) identify three factors in particular that have facilitated this
development: First, hardware costs are decreasing, while both computing power
and storage capacity are increasing. Second, data size is growing quickly; for
example, an IDC study estimates the amount of digital information captured
worldwide to reach 40 trillion gigabytes (GB), or 5,200 GB of data for every
person on earth, by 2020 (50-fold growth from the beginning of 2010) (Gantz and
Reinsel 2012). Third, service computing and Web 2.0 applications have already
been widely adopted.
The implementation of cloud computing also comes with risks (e.g., Paquette
et al. 2010; Svantesson and Clarke 2010) that can be categorized into policy and
organizational risks, technical risks, and legal risks (ENISA 2009). Subashini and
Kavitha (2011) also argue that cloud computing often causes security headaches,
such as problems related to data access, protection, and privacy. Chen et al. (2010)
agree, contending that ‘‘security has emerged as arguably the most signiﬁcant
barrier to faster and more widespread adoption of cloud computing’’ (p. 3). For
example, extant research has shown that fears about cloud computing stem largely
from the perceived loss of control over sensitive data (Chow et al. 2009), Svan-
tesson and Clarke (2010) address a range of privacy and consumer risks, and
Subashini and Kavitha (2011) identify the security issues that must be taken into
account when adopting cloud computing.
Since the challenges that revolve around the implementation of cloud com-
puting are both technological and managerial, cloud computing is also a relevant
IS research topic (e.g., Armbrust et al. 2010; Buyya et al. 2009; Vaquero et al.
2009; Zhang et al. 2010). However, IS research is lacking when it comes to advice
about how organizations should decide which content assets to put into the cloud
and which not to. As a response, this paper develops a conceptual framework that
identiﬁes factors that impact this decision. As Chow et al. (2009) write, ‘‘When
thinking about solutions to cloud computing’s adoption problem, it is important to
realize that many of the issues are essentially old problems in a new setting,
although they may be more acute’’ (p. 85), so existing research on IT outsourcing
essentially has informed the development of the framework.
The chapter proceeds as follows. Section ‘Cloud Computing’ explains the
concept of cloud computing and provides the background for this research.
Section ‘The Role of Cloud Computing in IS Research’ reviews related work from
IS research, in particular cloud computing studies that informed the development
of the proposed framework. Section ‘Theoretical Foundation’ describes the TCT
146
I. Gonzenbach et al.

we used as a theoretical lens in the process of developing the framework.
Section ‘Conceptual Framework Development’ then presents the framework and
explains criteria that IT executives can use to characterize and analyze their
content assets, thus supporting them in decisions about what to put into the cloud.
Section ‘Conclusion’ concludes the chapter with a summary and an outlook to
future research activities.
Cloud Computing
The IS literature offers several deﬁnitions of cloud computing (e.g., Armbrust et al.
2010; Foster et al. 2008; Vaquero et al. 2009; Youseff et al. 2008). Vaquero et al.
(2009) study more than twenty deﬁnitions and conclude that many of them focus
only on certain technological aspects of the concept but that a deﬁnition of cloud
computing should also include scalability, pay-per-use utility model, and virtual-
ization. The widely accepted deﬁnition from the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) accepts this approach:
Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network
access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers,
storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with
minimal management effort or service provider interaction. (Mell and Grance, 2011, p. 2)
Many researchers have found this deﬁnition to be appropriate, as it includes the
ﬁve essential characteristics, three service models, and four deployment models
(Sriram and Khajeh-Hosseini 2010; Zhang et al. 2010) that are the most common
features of cloud computing. Mell and Grance (2011) describe the ﬁve cloud
computing characteristics as follows:
• On-demand self-service refers to the cloud consumer’s ability to access com-
puting capabilities without requiring human interaction from the service
provider.
• Broad network access refers to the ability to access a cloud service through
standard mechanisms that promote the use of various platforms (e.g., mobile
phones, laptops).
• Resource pooling means that the provider’s computing resources are pooled to
serve multiple consumers using a multi-tenant model.
• Rapid elasticity describes unlimited computing capabilities that can be pur-
chased in any quantity and at any time rapidly and elastically.
• Measured service refers to the monitoring, controlling, and reporting of resource
usage, which provides transparency for both the provider and the consumer.
The three cloud service models can be described as follows (Armbrust et al.
2010; Foster et al. 2008; IBM 2010; Mell and Grance 2011):
Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud Computing
147

• Cloud Software as a Service (SaaS): The service provider offers applications as
services that run on the provider’s cloud infrastructure and are accessible from
client devices through a web browser.
• Cloud Platform as a Service (PaaS): The service provider supplies consumer-
created or acquired applications created using programming languages and tools
as a service. The service also includes the management or control of the
underlying cloud infrastructure, as the customer controls the deployed applica-
tions and may also control conﬁguration of the application-hosting environment.
• Cloud Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): The service provider supplies funda-
mental computing resources, such as processing, storage, and networks where
the consumer can deploy and run arbitrary software, including operating systems
and applications. The customer controls operating systems, storage, and
deployed applications, and may have limited control over certain networking
components (e.g., host ﬁrewalls).
Several cloud deployment models are discussed in the literature. Armbrust et al.
(2010) and IBM (2010), for example, distinguish two primary cloud delivery
models: the public cloud and the private cloud, while Mell and Grance (2011)
further describe the hybrid cloud and the community cloud.
• Private cloud: In the private cloud, the consumers and the providers of these
services are in the same organization. The cloud is managed either by the
organization itself or a third party, and it may exist on or off the organization’s
premises.
• Community cloud: The cloud service infrastructure is shared among multiple
organizations whose requirements are similar and that want to share an infra-
structure in order to realize beneﬁts, thus supporting a speciﬁc community. The
service is managed either by the organizations themselves or by a cloud service
provider.
• Public cloud: The public cloud is the most traditional deployment model. The
cloud service infrastructure is shared among multiple customers, made available
to the general public or a large industry group, and owned by an organization
that sells cloud services.
• Hybrid cloud: A hybrid cloud combines elements of public and private clouds,
including any combination of providers and consumers, and it may contain
multiple layers of service.
The discussion that follows focuses primarily on public cloud services provided
by remote suppliers who take responsibility for delivering the services to their
customers. This focus was chosen because the beneﬁts related to economies of
scale can be realized in public clouds more easily through service to multiple
customers on the same infrastructure (Fehling et al. 2010), and because the
challenges and risks in sourcing software services are much greater in public
clouds than they are in other deployment models. Because the question concerning
whether content is managed in the cloud is most likely to be discussed in an SaaS
context, we also focus on this particular type of service model.
148
I. Gonzenbach et al.

The Role of Cloud Computing in IS Research
Although cloud computing has gained attention in academia, most of the research
has focused on its technical aspects (e.g., Foster et al. 2008; Koehler et al. 2010;
Youseff et al. 2008). Reviews of the academic literature in IS research have shown
that frameworks and methods that support decision making during the adoption of
cloud computing are all but nonexistent (Sriram and Khajeh-Hosseini 2010). An
analysis of the AIS Senior Scholars’ Basket of Journals, for example, suggests that
only a few IS sources have focused on cloud computing (Table 1). (Most of these
papers were published in a 2010 JMIS special issue on information systems in
services.)
The above examples indicate that prior IS research has not sufﬁciently explored
the adoption of cloud computing on the content level from a decision-making
perspective. While several approaches have been proposed by consultancies (e.g.,
Accenture 2009; IBM 2010; Jenkins 2010), only few IS studies have sought to
identify the characteristics of an adoption framework that would help decision-
makers determine which content to put in the cloud. For example, Khajeh-Hosseini
et al. (2010a) propose a cloud adoption toolkit to support decision makers in
identifying their concerns and matching them to appropriate tools and techniques.
Table 1 Cloud computing articles in the AIS Senior Scholars’ Basket of Journals
Reference
Contents
Bardhan et al.
(2010)
The paper evaluates existing literatures, identiﬁes current streams in research,
and presents possible outcomes and directions in the future with respect
to service-oriented technology and management and service science
Choudhary (2007) The paper describes a model of endogenous software quality under perpetual
licensing and subscription licensing (SaaS). The paper suggests that
publishers who adopt the latter scheme will typically invest more in
software quality compared to publishers who adopt the perpetual
licensing scheme
Demirkan et al.
(2010)
The paper examines the economic performance of an SaaS infrastructure
under different coordination strategies involving information sharing
between the ASP and the API. It explains the market dynamics in the
burgeoning area of SaaS infrastructure providers
Schwarz et al.
(2009)
Based on four organizational theories (TCT, resource-based view, resource-
dependence view, knowledge-based view of the ﬁrm), the study suggests
ten attributes that ﬁrms should consider when deciding upon outsourcing
of applications
Susarla et al.
(2009)
The paper argues that the contract design of SaaS provided by ASPs should
address ex post transaction costs resulting from contractual
incompleteness and opportunism. It further suggests that it is necessary to
design governance structures in a way that they protect user ﬁrms from
shirking and monitoring costs
Susarla et al.
(2010)
The paper examines contract choices in the provision of SaaS. It draws upon
agency theory and modularity theory and suggests that one of the central
challenges in service disaggregation is that of knowledge
interdependencies across client and provider organizations
Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud Computing
149

Benlian (2009) develops a research model for assessing SaaS sourcing at the
application level, demonstrating that uncertainty is the strongest factor for SaaS
adoption, closely followed by application speciﬁcity. However, none of these
approaches focuses on decision support from the viewpoint of content. Therefore,
this chapter addresses this shortcoming with a conceptual framework of factors
that inﬂuence the decision concerning what content to put into the cloud. The next
section provides a theoretical foundation for the framework.
Theoretical Foundation
The TCT has been widely applied in the IS literature to analyze decision problems
likes outsourcing and make-or-buy decisions. In the context of IT outsourcing
decisions, the TCT is the most frequently applied theory (e.g., Aubert et al. 2004;
Dibbern et al. 2004; Lacity and Hirschheim 1993; Lacity et al. 2009; Lacity and
Willcocks 1995). Managers’ main objective in IT outsourcing is to minimize total
cost (service costs and transaction costs) and maximize total value (Ngwenyama
and Bryson 1999). The decision concerning whether to manage content in the
cloud can be considered an outsourcing decision, so the TCT was also used in this
research.
According to the TCT, which was pioneered by Coase (1937) and developed by
Williamson (1975, 1979, 1981, 1985), transaction costs are ‘‘comparative costs of
planning, adapting, and monitoring task completion under alternative governance
structures’’ (Williamson 1985, p. 2). These transaction costs can be separated into
set-up and contracting costs, which include search-related costs to ﬁnd a service
provider and negotiation costs (ex ante). After a contract has been concluded,
transaction costs like monitoring and coordinating costs and, in situations of failure
or weak performance, switching costs accrue (ex post) (Ngwenyama and Bryson
1999). Hence, the TCT posits that organizations outsource a certain task when the
internal governance costs are higher than the costs of using the market.
Williamson (1985) argues that the TCT has two underlying assumptions:
bounded rationality and opportunism. While the ﬁrst assumption acknowledges
limits on cognitive competences, the second recognizes self-interest-seeking
(Williamson 1985). Bounded rationality reﬂects individuals’ inability to ﬁnd and
process all information and difﬁculties in assigning probability values to the
occurrence of future events, so transactions are conducted with a certain level of
uncertainty. Opportunism refers to incomplete or distorted disclosure of infor-
mation with the intent to mislead, distort, disguise, obfuscate, or otherwise confuse
(Williamson 1985). According to Aubert et al. (2004), the combination of these
two assumptions results in information asymmetry: Because both parties in a
transaction have the goal of maximizing their proﬁts, they will not share all of the
information they possess; sellers will hide the negative characteristics of their
services, while buyers will not reveal how much they are willing to pay (Aubert
150
I. Gonzenbach et al.

et al. 2004). Because both parties are aware of such opportunistic behaviors, they
will seek information.
All of the actions described so far generate transaction costs. In addition to the
two human-related factors (i.e., bounded rationality and opportunism), the TCT is
based on three environmental factors: asset speciﬁcity, uncertainty, and frequency
(Williamson 1985).
• According to Williamson (1989), asset speciﬁcity refers to ‘‘the degree to which
an asset can be redeployed to alternative uses and by alternative users without
sacriﬁce of productive value’’ (p. 142). As such, it describes the investment that
is necessary for certain transactions to occur. Speciﬁcally, Williamson (1985)
distinguishes among four types of asset speciﬁcity: site speciﬁcity, physical
asset speciﬁcity, human asset speciﬁcity, and dedicated assets (p. 55). In the
context of cloud computing, asset speciﬁcity primarily refers to the knowledge,
infrastructure, and location required to use and provide speciﬁc cloud services.
The degree of speciﬁcity can be measured as the difference between the cost of
the asset and the value of its second-best use (Williamson 1981). Prior IS studies
have evaluated the extent to which the degree of asset speciﬁcity affects the
outsourcing decision. While Nam et al. (1996) do not ﬁnd signiﬁcant depen-
dencies between asset speciﬁcity and outsourcing, Aubert et al. (2004), Benlian
(2009), and Dibbern et al. (2005) argue that asset speciﬁcity contributes sig-
niﬁcantly to the outsourcing decision. This leads to the following proposition:
the more speciﬁc the assets required to manage enterprise content are, the higher
are the transaction costs and the less beneﬁcial is it to obtain the service from
third parties.
• Uncertainty arises when the relevant contingencies surrounding an exchange are
too unpredictable to be speciﬁed ex ante in a contract (Geyskens et al. 2006).
Analogous to asset speciﬁcity, the environmental uncertainty in an outsourcing
relationship is posited to be negatively associated with the degree of outsourcing
(Williamson 1985), so more uncertainty and perceived risk lead to less out-
sourcing (Nam et al. 1996). Wang (2002) deﬁnes uncertainty in the context of IT
outsourcing as ‘‘the inherent characteristics of speciﬁc software outsourced in
terms of the difﬁculties of prescribing speciﬁcations, scheduling delivery dates
and estimating costs at the contracting stage’’ (p. 161). This construct then
reﬂects the extent of bounded rationality and, as such, the incompleteness of the
contract. Dibbern (2004) separates environmental uncertainty in the IT out-
sourcing context into business-driven uncertainty and technology-driven
uncertainty (pp. 53–54). Business-driven uncertainty refers to the extent to
which the IT vendor may change the development of business-related issues
over time in the course of the outsourcing relationship, while technology-driven
uncertainty reﬂects the extent to which the IT vendor may change the required
technical functions or features of the outsourced application over time. Prior
empirical studies in IS research, such as Aubert et al. (2004), Benlian (2009),
Nam et al. (1996), and Wang (2002), have shown that environmental uncertainty
is the main deterrent of outsourcing on-demand IT applications. Benlian (2009)
Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud Computing
151

ﬁnds that ‘‘environmental uncertainty emerges as the strongest factor for SaaS-
based outsourcing’’ (p. 9). A high degree of uncertainty always negatively
inﬂuences the outsourcing decision because, as Wang (2002) explains, uncer-
tainty has a direct and positive impact on the opportunistic behaviors of the
vender and the seller.
• The transaction cost framework also includes transaction frequency, although
this construct has received little attention in the transaction cost literature
(Geyskens et al. 2006), and far less in the empirical literature than asset spec-
iﬁcity or uncertainty (Rindﬂeisch and Heide 1997). Transaction frequency refers
to the extent to which certain transactions recur. Williamson (1985) argues that a
high transaction frequency incents ﬁrms to employ hierarchical governance
because the overhead costs of hierarchical governance are easier to recover for
recurring transactions. In contrast, it would not pay for the ﬁrm to establish a
specialized governance mechanism for transactions that occur rarely because
doing so would involve signiﬁcant set-up and maintenance costs, which are
likely to exceed the potential losses from opportunism.
Conceptual Framework Development
Various IS researchers (e.g., Sambamurthy and Zmud 1999) have recognized the
importance of establishing appropriate IT decision rights to manage and coordinate
an organization’s IT resources. Schwarz et al. (2009) argue that ‘‘executives are
adaptive decision-makers, employing a complex processing strategy when
assessing the attributes involved in making outsourcing decisions’’ (p. 754), and
Dibbern et al. (2004) list attributes that inﬂuence the IT outsourcing decision.
Accordingly, the conceptual framework presented in this section describes a set of
criteria that organizations should consider when deciding what content should be
managed in the cloud. Understanding the characteristics of content assets that are
amenable to being hosted in the cloud can help IT professionals in content audits
(O’Callaghan and Smits 2005). The content audit then produces an overview of an
organization’s content assets and their usage and reveals the potential beneﬁts and
pitfalls of putting these assets into the cloud. The criteria presented in what follows
here are based on the TCT theory and grounded in the academic literature on IT
outsourcing and cloud computing.
Asset Speciﬁcity
Generally, assets of low speciﬁcity can be used without difﬁculty, so they can
easily be outsourced in the cloud. Less speciﬁc assets can be obtained from the
market quickly and without difﬁculty. In contrast, it is difﬁcult and often expensive
to obtain assets that are highly speciﬁc to clients without considerable effort.
152
I. Gonzenbach et al.

Because vendors are wary about making such client-speciﬁc investments, assets
with high client speciﬁcity are not often contracted for use in the cloud, so they
must often be developed in-house. In the context of a content assessment, the
construct of asset speciﬁcity can be understood as content speciﬁcity, which
describes the extent to which the content is related to the individual needs of a
company. We can further separate content speciﬁcity into physical asset speci-
ﬁcity, human asset speciﬁcity, and site speciﬁcity.
Physical Asset Speciﬁcity
Physical asset speciﬁcity refers to items like specialized production equipment and
computer technology (Artz and Brush 2000). In the context of content manage-
ment, physical asset speciﬁcity includes all of the speciﬁc investments made in
order to manage enterprise content. The content-related criteria that affect such
investments (e.g., complex computer software and systems designed for a single
purpose) are compliance requirements, data retention requirements, and the
degree of standardization of content management (Table 2). The more speciﬁc the
physical assets related to the content are, and the larger the speciﬁc investments to
manage the content are, the higher the transaction costs are and the less favorable
it is to outsource them to the cloud.
Human Asset Speciﬁcity
Human asset speciﬁcity refers primarily to the knowledge and skills required to
handle and manage content. Dibbern et al. (2005) list three criteria we use in what
follows to determine whether to put content into the cloud: the unique business
knowledge required, the unique software knowledge required, and the social
collaboration skills required. Unique business knowledge includes all of the spe-
ciﬁc knowledge required to understand an organization’s content management
requirements. Unique software knowledge is affected by criteria like the content
classiﬁcation level, the skills needed to meet the requirements of content
encryption, and knowledge of access restrictions. Social collaboration skills refer
Table 2 Criteria based on physical asset speciﬁcity
Criteria
Description
Degree of standardization of
content management
Amount of speciﬁc investment needed to manage content in a
content management system (e.g., dependent on content
format, size)
Compliance requirements
Amount of speciﬁc investment needed to fulﬁll the compliance
requirements related to content
Data retention requirements
Amount of speciﬁc investment needed to fulﬁll the data
retention requirements of content
Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud Computing
153

to the ability to have strong social/interpersonal working relationships between the
IT personnel and the system users (and among the IT workers themselves) when
doing the work for each of the IS functions (Table 3).
Where there is a high level of human asset speciﬁcity, high transaction costs
can be expected. Accordingly, the main outsourcing question here concerns
whether the company has the required knowledge in-house or not.
Site Speciﬁcity
Site speciﬁcity, which refers to the conditions at a location that are not changeable
or are changeable only at great costs, combines all of the content management
requirements that are location-speciﬁc. Location-speciﬁc requirements include
jurisdiction and the applicable laws that are relevant to the management of content.
According to Subashini and Kavitha (2011), the legal jurisdiction is an essential
attribute in assessing content that should be considered in all cloud computing
situations. It has to be clear under which jurisdiction the content is managed and, at
the same time, it has to be safeguarded that the laws of the location where the
cloud service supplier stores the data are at least as strong as the ones under the
user’s jurisdiction. For example, this was an issue for non-American organizations
that hosted their content in the US because they came into conﬂict with the US
Patriot Act. Pearson (2009) mentions that applicable laws that place geographic
and other restrictions on the collection, processing, and transfer of personally
identiﬁable and sensitive content limit the usage of cloud services (Table 4).
Jaeger et al. (2009) emphasize the importance of locality by pointing out that cloud
computing increases the governments’ and corporations’ control over resources.
Examples of rules that increase site speciﬁcity also include internal corporate
regulations that apply to the location where certain content assets are stored.
Khajeh-Hosseini et al. (2010b) contend that ‘‘it is unlikely that these jurisdiction
issues will stop the use of cloud services; however, they will have long-term
implications that need to be considered by users’’ (p. 7). In summary, the more
Table 3 Criteria based on human asset speciﬁcity
Criteria
Description
Source
Unique business
knowledge
The understanding of business processes
and speciﬁc knowledge of content
management requirements that are
unique to an organization
Dibbern et al. (2005), based on
Ang and Cummings (1997)
and Poppo and Zenger
(1998)
Unique software
knowledge
The knowledge of software systems
developed speciﬁcally for an
organization (e.g., encryption, access
restrictions, privacy issues)
Dibbern et al. (2005), based on
Ang and Cummings (1997)
and Poppo and Zenger
(1998)
Social
collaboration
skills
Social collaboration skills between IT
workers and users (and among IT
workers)
Dibbern et al. (2005), based on
Pinto et al. (1993)
154
I. Gonzenbach et al.

complex and speciﬁc the location requirements of content assets are, the greater is
the location asset speciﬁcity. Hence, high transaction costs can be expected, and
this kind of content should be managed in-house.
Uncertainty
Dibbern (2004) differentiates uncertainty into business-driven uncertainty and
technical-driven uncertainty (pp. 53–54), a categorization that can also be applied
to the context of cloud computing.
Business-Driven Uncertainty
Business-driven uncertainty refers to the extent to which the IT service provider
may change business-related issues like pricing and processes over time in the
course of the outsourcing relationship. Such changes include the pricing, the
provider’s business model, and developments and changes in business require-
ments. Another driver of business-driven uncertainty is the development of the
legal situation, which remains complex in the context of cloud computing
(Table 5).
Table 4 Criteria based on site speciﬁcity
Criteria
Description
Source
Legal
jurisdiction
In legal cases that involve the cloud
provider, where will the cases be
adjudicated? How favorable is that
jurisdiction to the cloud provider’s
interests?
Jaeger et al. (2009); Subashini and
Kavitha (2011); Svantesson
and Clarke (2010)
Applicable laws
The scope and complexity of laws and
regulations that apply to the
management of content
Joint et al. (2009); Khajeh-
Hosseini et al. (2010b);
Pearson (2009)
Table 5 Criteria based on business-driven uncertainty
Criteria
Description
Source
Pricing
Uncertainty about price developments related
to cloud services
Benlian (2009)
Business model
Uncertainty about changes in business
models related to cloud providers
Smith and Kumar (2004)
Business
requirements
Uncertainty about developments and changes
in business requirements
Benlian (2009)
Legal situation
Uncertainty about developments in the legal
situation
Svantesson and Clarke
(2010)
Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud Computing
155

Technical-Driven Uncertainty
Technical-driven uncertainty describes the intensity with which content out-
sourcing is subject to technical difﬁculties in terms of availability and reliability
and captures the extent to which the required technical features and functions of
the outsourced application may change over time. An often mentioned uncertainty
in the context of cloud computing is the level of data protection that lies beyond
the control of recipients of cloud services. Other criteria, such as continuity and
connectivity, affect the availability of content, and must also be considered
(Table 6).
For both business-driven and technical-driven uncertainty, it can be assumed
that a high level of uncertainty that is due to potential opportunistic behaviors by
the IT service providers causes high transaction costs, so the outsourcer will prefer
internal governance for highly risky content.
Frequency
The content characteristics that primarily affect the concept of frequency are the
number of applications that access the content and the number of content users
who access the content. Other criteria, such as the frequency of content usage by
either applications or by users, and user access points also affect transaction costs.
Another, but increasingly negligible factor is the content size (Table 7).
Dibbern (2004) argues that usage of an application system that requires many
technical and human interfaces, skills and resources, and interactions will translate
into increased coordination complexity between these entities. Hancox and
Table 6 Criteria based on technical-driven uncertainty
Criteria
Description
Source
Features and
functions
Uncertainty about developments of
technical features and functions
Benlian (2009)
Data protection
Uncertainty about the level of
data protection
Svantesson and Clarke (2010)
Reliability
Uncertainty about whether the content
will be reliable or not
Clarke (2010)
Availability
Uncertainty about how long the content
will be available
Clarke (2010); Ma et al. (2005);
Smith and Kumar (2004); Zhang
et al. (2010)
Continuity
Uncertainty about how long it will take
to recover the content after a
disaster scenario
Ma et al. (2005)
Connectivity
Uncertainty about how long the
connection to content will be
available
Khajeh-Hosseini et al. (2010a);
Smith and Kumar (2004)
156
I. Gonzenbach et al.

Hackney (2000) conclude that frequency criteria are negatively associated with the
use of the cloud, so high frequency leads to internal governance, rather than to
outsourcing.
Additional Criteria
Another criterion often mentioned in the context of make-or-buy decisions is the
level of strategic importance. Quinn and Hilmer (1994) mention that core com-
petencies ‘‘for which the [outsourced] ﬁrm has neither a critical strategic need nor
special capabilities’’ should be kept in-house (p. 43). Similarly, Lacity and Will-
cocks (2001) write, ‘‘Outsource commodity, keep strategic in-house’’ (p. 186).
Closely related to strategic importance is business criticality, which describes the
degree to which the content is critical to the existence and continuation of the
business (Table 8). Westner and Strahringer (2008) mention that a high level of
criticality makes an application less suitable for outsourcing because more effort
has to be invested to ensure stable delivery. This guideline also applies to the
outsourcing of content.
Table 7 Criteria based on frequency
Criteria
Description
Source
Number of content
users
The number of users who have access
to the content
Benlian (2009); Smith and
Kumar (2004)
Number of
applications
The number of applications that
access the content
Benlian (2009); Smith and
Kumar (2004)
Frequency of content
usage
The frequency with which a user or an
application accesses the content
Benlian (2009); Smith and
Kumar (2004)
User access points
The number of user locations that
access the content
Smith and Kumar (2004)
Content size
The size of the content
Table 8 Additional criteria
Criteria
Description
Source
Strategic
importance
The level of strategic
importance of content
for the company
Lacity and Willcocks (2001); Quinn
and Hilmer (1994)
Business
criticality
The importance of content
for fulﬁlling daily
business operations
Westner and Strahringer (2008)
Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud Computing
157

Conclusion
This chapter contributes to the cloud computing literature by offering a set of
criteria for organizations to consider when deciding what content should be
managed in the cloud. Grounded in the academic literature on IT outsourcing and
cloud computing, the conceptual framework presented here was developed on the
basis of the TCT. The discussion suggests that the higher the transaction costs are
the more likely it is that content is stored on-premise. In contrast, low transaction
costs might suggest putting content into cloud. The chapter further shows which
criteria inﬂuence the transaction costs.
The results are relevant for researchers and practitioners alike. Researchers are
provided with factors that can inform future empirical studies of cloud computing
adoption, while practitioners can consider these factors in their own cloud com-
puting projects.
However, the study has several limitations. First, the development of the
framework was grounded in selected literature, so the list of criteria presented is
not exhaustive. Second, only criteria from the TCT were considered, and the use of
other theories might produce a more general and holistic model. Third, the
framework has not yet been evaluated in practice.
Because of these limitations, the research presented in this chapter can be
considered only a ﬁrst step toward developing a decision framework for cloud
computing. Future research should develop and evaluate the proposed framework
and incorporate other theories (e.g., incomplete contracts or agency theory) in
order to add insights into the factors that are relevant in the context of cloud
computing.
References
Accenture. (2009). Accenture cloud computing accelerator. Retrieved November 9, 2010, from
http://www.accenture.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/
Accenture_Technology_Labs_Cloud_Computing_Accelerator.pdf
Ang, S., & Cummings, L. L. (1997). Strategic response to institutional inﬂuences on information
systems outsourcing. Organization Science, 8(3), 235–256.
Armbrust, M., Stoica, I., Zaharia, M., Fox, A., Grifﬁth, R., Joseph, A. D., et al. (2010). A view of
cloud computing. Communications of the ACM, 53(4), 50–58.
Artz, K. W., & Brush, T. H. (2000). Asset speciﬁcity, uncertainty and relational norms: An
examination of coordination costs in collaborative strategic alliances. Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, 41(4), 337–362.
Aubert, B. A., Rivard, S., & Pandey, S. (2004). A transaction cost model of IT outsourcing.
Information & Management, 41(7), 921–932.
Bardhan, I. R., Demirkan, H., Kannan, P. K., Kauffman, R. J., & Sougstad, R. (2010). An
interdisciplinary perspective on IT services management and service science. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 26(4), 13–64.
Benlian, A. (2009). A transaction cost theoretical analysis of software-as-a-service (SaaS)-based
sourcing in SMBs and enterprises. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Information
Systems. Verona.
158
I. Gonzenbach et al.

Buyya, R., Yeo, C. S., & Venugopal, S. (2008). Market-oriented cloud computing: Vision, hype,
and reality for delivering IT services as computing utilities. In Proceedings of the 10th IEEE
International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications. Dalian.
Buyya, R., Yeo, C. S., Venugopal, S., Broberg, J., & Brandic, I. (2009). Cloud computing and
emerging IT platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing as the 5th utility.
Future Generation Computer Systems, 25(6), 599–616.
Chen, Y., Paxon, V., & Katz, R. (2010). What’s new about cloud computing security? EECS
Department, University of California, Berkeley, CA. Retrieved October 11, 2010, from http://
www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2010/EECS-2010-5.html
Choudhary, V. (2007). Comparison of software quality under perpetual licensing and software as
a service. Journal of Management Information Systems, 24(2), 141–165.
Chow, R., Golle, P., Jakobsson, M., Shi, E., Staddon, J., Masuoka, R., et al. (2009). Controlling
data in the cloud: Outsourcing computation without outsourcing control. In Proceedings of the
2009 ACM Workshop on Cloud Computing Security. Chicago, IL.
Clarke, R. (2010). Computing clouds on the horizon? Beneﬁts and risks from the user’s
perspective. In Proceedings of the 23rd Bled eConference. Bled.
Coase, R. H. (1937). The nature of the ﬁrm. Economica, 4(16), 386–405.
Demirkan, H., Cheng, H. K., & Bandyopadhyay, S. (2010). Coordination strategies in an SaaS
supply chain. Journal of Management Information Systems, 26(4), 119–143.
Dibbern, J. (2004). Sourcing of application software services. Empirical evidence of cultural,
industry and functional differences. Heidelberg: Physica-Verlag.
Dibbern, J., Chin, W. W., & Heinzl, A. (2005). The impact of human asset speciﬁcity on the
sourcing of application services. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on
Information Systems. Regensburg.
Dibbern, J., Goles, T., Hirschheim, R., & Jayatilaka, B. (2004). Information systems outsourcing:
A survey and analysis of the literature. The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems,
35(4), 6–102.
ENISA. (2009). Cloud computing: Beneﬁts, risks and recommendations for information security.
Retrieved March 28, 2013, from http://www.enisa.europa.eu/act/rm/ﬁles/deliverables/cloud-
computing-risk-assessment/at_download/fullReport
Fehling, C., Leymann, F., & Mietzner, R. (2010). A framework for optimized distribution of
tenants in cloud applications. In Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE Conference on Cloud
Computing. Athens.
Foster, I., Zhao, Y., Raicu, I., & Lu, S. (2008). Cloud computing and grid computing 360-degree
compared. In Proceedings of the Grid Computing Environments Workshop.
Gantz, J., & Reinsel, D. (2012). The digital universe in 2020: Big data, bigger digital shadows,
and biggest growth in the far east. Retrieved March 13, 2013, from http://www.emc.com/
collateral/analyst-reports/idc-the-digital-universe-in-2020.pdf
Gartner. (2010). 2010 Emerging technologies hype cycle is here. Retrieved March 28, 2013, from
http://blogs.gartner.com/hypecyclebook/2010/09/07/2010-emerging-technologies-hype-cycle-
is-here/
Gartner. (2012). Gartner says worldwide cloud services market to surpass $109 billion in 2012.
Retrieved February 5, 2013, from http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2163616
Geyskens, I., Steenkamp, J.-B., & Kumar, N. (2006). Make, buy, or ally: A transaction cost
theory meta-analysis. Academy of Management Journal, 49(3), 519–543.
Hancox, M., & Hackney, R. (2000). IT outsourcing framework for conceptualizing practice and
perception. Information Systems Journal, 10(3), 217–237.
IBM. (2010). Deﬁning a framework for cloud adoption. Retrieved November 8, 2010, from ftp://
public.dhe.ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/en/ciw03067usen/CIW03067USEN.PDF
Jaeger, P., Lin, J., & Grimes, J. (2009). Where is the cloud? Geography, economics, environment,
and jurisdiction in cloud computing. First Monday, 14(5).
Jenkins, T. (2010). Managing content in the cloud. Waterloo: OpenText Corperation.
Joint, A., Baker, E., & Eccles, E. (2009). Hey, you, get off of that cloud? Computer Law and
Security Review, 25(3), 270–274.
Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud Computing
159

Khajeh-Hosseini, A., Greenwood, D., Smith, J. W., & Sommerville, I. (2010a). The cloud
adoption toolkit: Addressing the challenges of cloud adoption in the enterprise. Retrieved
November 3, 2010, from http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1003/1003.3866.pdf
Khajeh-Hosseini, A., Sommerville, I., & Sriram, I. (2010b). Research challenges for enterprise
cloud computing. Retrieved March 28, 2013, from http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1001/
1001.3257.pdf
Koehler, P., Anandasivam, A., & Dan, M. (2010). Cloud services from a consumer perspective. In
Proceedings of the 16th Americas Conference on Information Systems. Lima.
Kondo, D., Javid, B., Malecot, P., Capello, F., & Anderson, D. P. (2009). Cost-beneﬁt analysis of
cloud computing versus desktop grids. In Proceedings of the 18th International Heterogeneity
in Computing Workshop, 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed
Processing. Rome.
Lacity, M. C., & Hirschheim, R. (1993). Information systems outsourcing: Myths, metaphors and
realities. Chichester: Wiley.
Lacity, M. C., Khan, S. A., & Willcocks, L. P. (2009). A review of the IT outsourcing literature:
Insights for practice. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 18(3), 130–146.
Lacity, M. C., & Willcocks, L. P. (1995). Interpreting information technology sourcing decisions
from a transaction cost perspective: Findings and critique. Accounting, Management and
Information Technologies, 5(3–4), 203–244.
Lacity, M. C., & Willcocks, L. P. (2001). Global information technology outsourcing: In search
of business advantage. Chichester: Wiley.
Ma, Q., Pearson, J. M., & Tadisina, S. (2005). An exploratory study into factors of service quality
for application service providers. Information & Management, 42(8), 1067–1080.
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST deﬁnition of cloud computing: Recommendations of the
National Institute of Standards and Technology. National Institute of Standards and
Technology, US Department of Commerce. Retrieved March 28, 2013, from http://csrc.nist.
gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf
Nam, K., Rajagopalan, S., Rao, H. R., & Chaudhury, A. (1996). A two-level investigation of
information systems outsourcing. Communications of the ACM, 39(7), 37–44.
Ngwenyama, O. K., & Bryson, N. (1999). Making the information systems outsourcing decision:
A transaction cost approach to analyzing outsourcing decision problems. European Journal of
Operational Research, 115(2), 351–367.
O’Callaghan, R., & Smits, M. (2005). A strategy development process for enterprise content
management. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Information Systems.
Regensburg.
Paquette, S., Jaeger, P. T., & Wilson, S. C. (2010). Identifying the security risks associated with
governmental use of cloud computing. Government Information Quarterly, 27(3), 245–253.
Pearson, S. (2009). Taking account of privacy when designing cloud computing services. In
Proceedings of the ICSE Workshop on Software Engineering Challenges of Cloud Computing.
Vancouver.
Pinto, M. B., Pinto, J. K., & Prescott, J. E. (1993). Antecedents and consequences of project team
cross-functional cooperation. Management Science, 39(10), 1281–1297.
Poppo, L., & Zenger, T. (1998). Testing alternative theories of the ﬁrm: Transaction cost,
knowledge-based, and measurement explanations for make-or-buy decisions in information
services. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 853–877.
Quinn, J. B., & Hilmer, F. G. (1994). Strategic outsourcing. Sloan Management Review, 35(4),
43–55.
Rindﬂeisch, A., & Heide, J. B. (1997). Transaction cost analysis: Past, present, and future
applications. Journal of Marketing, 61(4), 30–54.
Sambamurthy, V., & Zmud, R. W. (1999). Arrangements for information technology governance:
A theory of multiple contingencies. MIS Quarterly, 23(2), 261–290.
Schwarz, A., Hirschheim, R., Jayatilaka, B., & Goles, T. (2009). A conjoint approach to
understanding IT application services outsourcing. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 10(10), 748–781.
160
I. Gonzenbach et al.

Smith, M. A., & Kumar, R. L. (2004). A theory of application service provider (ASP) use from a
client perspective. Information & Management, 41(8), 977–1002.
Sriram, I., & Khajeh-Hosseini, A. (2010). Research agenda in cloud technologies. Retrieved
March 28, 2013, from http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.3259
Subashini, S., & Kavitha, V. (2011). A survey on security issues in service delivery models of
cloud computing. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 34(1), 1–11.
Susarla, A., Barua, A., & Whinston, A. B. (2009). A transaction cost perspective of the ‘‘software
as a service’’ business model. Journal of Management Information Systems, 26(2), 205–240.
Susarla, A., Barua, A., & Whinston, A. B. (2010). Multitask agency, modular architecture, and
task disaggregation in SaaS. Journal of Management Information Systems, 26(4), 87–118.
Svantesson, D., & Clarke, R. (2010). Privacy and consumer risks in cloud computing. Computer
Law and Security Review, 26(4), 391–397.
Vaquero, L. M., Rodero-Merino, L., Caceres, J., & Lindner, M. (2009). A break in the clouds:
Towards a cloud deﬁnition. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 39(1), 50–55.
Wang, E. T. G. (2002). Transaction attributes and software outsourcing success: An empirical
investigation of transaction cost theory. Information Systems Journal, 12(2), 153–181.
Weiss, A. (2007). Computing in the clouds. netWorker, 11(4), 16–25.
Westner, M. K., & Strahringer, S. (2008). Evaluation criteria for selecting offshoring candidates:
An analysis of practices in german businesses. Journal of Information Technology
Management, 19(4), 16–34.
Williamson, O. E. (1975). Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications. New
York: The Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1979). Transaction-cost economics: The governance of contractual relations.
Journal of Law and Economics, 22(2), 233–261.
Williamson, O. E. (1981). The modern corporation: Origins, evolution, attributes. Journal of
Economic Literature, 19(4), 1537–1568.
Williamson, O. E. (1985). The economic institutions of capitalism: Firms, markets, relational
contracting. New York: The Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1989). Transaction cost economics. In R. Schmalensee & R. Willing (Eds.),
Handbook of industrial organization (pp. 136–182). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Youseff, L., Butrico, M., & Da Silva, D. (2008). Toward a uniﬁed ontology of cloud computing.
In Proceedings of the Grid Computing Environments Workshop. Retrieved March 30, 2013,
from http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/*lyouseff/CCOntology/CloudOntologyPres.pdf
Zhang, Q., Cheng, L., & Boutaba, R. (2010). Cloud computing: State-of-the-art and research
challenges. Journal of Internet Services and Applications, 1(1), 7–18.
Factors that Impact the Adoption of Cloud Computing
161

Fostering Comparability in Content
Management Using Semantic
Standardization
Jörg Becker, Tobias Heide and Łukasz Lis
Abstract This chapter addresses the lack of consistency and comparability in
content management. We provide a solution to this problem and propose a con-
ceptual speciﬁcation of a generic portal structure that allows for semantic stan-
dardization of content. The structure and semantics of textual descriptions must be
customized for given application scenarios, so we demonstrate such a custom-
ization for an exemplary research portal. In the example we address design science
research and describe a research process that uses the customized portal deﬁnition.
We conclude that our approach can increase the consistency and comparability of
content in general through (1) an individually customizable system structure that
reﬂects the nature of a speciﬁc application scenario better than generic structures
can and (2) a semantic standardization of textual descriptions that forces the portal
users to be precise and compact in their descriptions and to consistently apply the
vocabulary of the domain.
Introduction
In a digital society in which increasing numbers of documents are digitally
exchanged, companies need enterprise content management (ECM) in order to
keep up with data volume and manage their data properly. ECM handles the whole
J. Becker (&)  T. Heide
European Research Center for Information Systems, University of Muenster,
Muenster, Germany
e-mail: becker@ercis.uni-muenster.de
T. Heide
e-mail: tobias.heide@ercis.uni-muenster.de
Ł. Lis
Viadee Unternehmensberatung GmbH, Muenster, Germany
e-mail: lukasz.lis@viadee.de
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_10,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
163

lifecycle of digital assets and addresses their capture, organization, processing, and
maintenance (Smith and McKeen 2003). For ECM, structuring and comparability
of content is important, so this chapter proposes a method for structured content
description. Used in addition to the classiﬁcation of entries and free-text ﬁelds, this
method can be used to describe content in content management systems (CMS).
The structured content description is introduced for the example of research
portals, which are a special type of CMS used in the university context. Research
portals collect, structure, and present information about research, such as research
results and the projects and organizations involved, so they have many properties
in common with the general concept of ECM.
Similar to ECM systems research portals have different stakeholders with their
own, typically diverse expectations, including researchers, research funders, and
the general public. While researchers have to provide information about com-
plementary and similar work in the ﬁeld, advertise their research and ﬁndings, and
look for potential partners for collaboration (Carayol and Matt 2004; Fox 1992;
Krücken and Meier 2006), research funders need an overview of the ﬁeld, to
identify gaps in the current research, and to identify emerging and regressing
topics in order to decide on a future funding policy (Schimank 2005). The general
aim for most stakeholders is the retrieval of information, which is usually
unstructured and located in multiple places. Therefore, stakeholders need ways to
store and disseminate content in a structured manner and to search for them
effectively. Research portals are IT portals that address this challenge and provide
a way to disseminate research information.
An important challenge in the design and application of CMS is ensuring
comparability and common understanding of content. This problem has to do with
both the natural language and the structure of information. Although approaches
like glossaries, tooltips, layout conventions, and description templates exist, they
have not yet solved the problem (Becker et al. 2010b). Even if such description
guidelines are present, users have to follow them, or the contents must be stan-
dardized by a moderator, which can be costly. Our empirical study of 813 research
portals showed that roughly 90 % of the portals we analyzed rely solely on a
textual description of the application domain (Becker et al. 2012).
ECM systems have very similar problems: context comparability and common
understanding of content must also be ensured. Standardization enables content to
be found and retrieved efﬁciently and helps entries to be interpreted correctly.
Against this background, the topic of this chapter is semantic standardization of
content. We propose an approach that allows for an individual context-speciﬁc
deﬁnition of a research portal structure and a speciﬁcation of semantic standardi-
zation conventions for these structures. The approach is capable of a semi-automatic
enforcement of these conventions in research portals and other types of CMS. Thus,
our approach fosters syntactic and semantic consistency of content in order to allow
for more efﬁciency in content management.
The remainder of this chapter is structured as follows. Section ‘Research
Background’ presents the research background and discusses approaches to the
standardization of information. Section ‘Standardization in CMS at the Example
164
J. Becker et al.

of Research Portals’ presents the conceptual foundation of our approach. An
application example for research that follows the design science paradigm is
discussed in section ‘Application Example’. Section ‘Discussion and Outlook’
concludes with a brief summary and an outlook for future research.
Research Background
Semantic Standardization of IT Artifacts
A uniﬁed approach to knowledge representation has been a research problem for
the last few decades. Approaches that have been proposed to resolve the ambig-
uous representation of knowledge in various areas of application can be classiﬁed
into two categories: those that deal with the problem prior to the explication of
knowledge (ex ante) and those that deal with the problem after the explication of
knowledge (ex post). Ex post approaches address the problem by analyzing
existing knowledge representations, identifying ambiguities, and trying to solve
them. Ex ante approaches prevent the emergence of ambiguities by guiding the
author. As our chapter deals with content management, we focus on the explication
of knowledge with the help of software like CMS, wikis, databases, and conceptual
models.
Popular ex post approaches that originate from the 1980s and 1990s address
the resolution of ambiguities in IT artifacts that are related to the problem of
database schema-matching (cf. Rahm and Bernstein (2001) for an overview).
They analyze given schemas and identify fragments that may match. Other
approaches do not take single terms into consideration, as it is common in
schema-matching approaches, but so-called concepts (e.g., Ehrig et al. 2007;
Höfferer 2007; Sabetzadeh et al. 2007). These concepts, which consist of
interrelated terms that are part of a domain ontology (Guarino 1998), have in
common that existing IT artifacts (in this case: conceptual models) are con-
nected to a domain ontology.
On the other hand, ex ante approaches focus on avoiding semantic ambiguities
during the creation of contents. Ex ante approaches usually use conventions to
limit the likelihood that ambiguous terminology will be used during the con-
struction. Naming conventions are usually provided as written glossaries or
ontologies that are suitable for the domain.
An ontology is a declarative formalization of a set of objects that represent the
universe of discourse (Gruber 1993). This set of objects and the relationships
among them are the vocabulary used to describe the entities of a speciﬁc domain.
Applied to the description of knowledge with the help of an ontology, the terms
allowed in describing the knowledge are objects in the ontology and have a deﬁned
meaning. Ahlemann et al. (2006) provide a general explanation of how to annotate
Fostering Comparability in Content Management
165

IT artifacts with ontological concepts. Several approaches adopt terms or concepts
from ontologies to use in conceptual models (Abramowicz et al. 2007; Born et al.
2007; Greco et al. 2004; Hepp and Roman 2007; Thomas and Fellmann 2009).
Approaches related to linguistics provide standardized phrase structures as a
way to generate unambiguous denotations. Approaches related to conceptual
modeling are presented by Rosemann (1996), Kugeler (2000), Nüttgens and
Zimmermann (1998) and Delfmann et al. (2009). Ortner (1997) proposes a method
related to requirements engineering, while Fliedl et al. (2005) generate conceptual
models automatically from descriptions of natural language requirements.
To achieve semantic unambiguity, compliance with semantic standards deﬁned
either in an ontology or linguistically must be enforced. Therefore, it must be
assured that users follow the standards while entering content into the system. The
semantic standards must also consider not only single terms, but combinations of
terms since the meaning of sentences whose order of terms differs may also differ.
The idea of our approach is to regard a CMS as an IT tool with a structure that
can be semantically standardized, analogous to a conceptual model. Therefore, we
combine the idea of content management with that of semantic standardization of
conceptual models. In particular, we favor the linguistic approach, as it is nec-
essary to provide a way to express syntactically correct sentences that describe
content rather than simple labels and describing dimensions. Therefore, we reuse
an approach that provides the user with a domain vocabulary and syntactic con-
ventions that restrict the possibilities for formulating sentences.
In our approach, conventions for the vocabulary and syntax of textual
descriptions must be speciﬁed ex ante while deﬁning the structure of the CMS, that
is, before any content is entered. During the process of entering content, the user is
guided by a software wizard that ensures compliance with the conventions
(Delfmann et al. 2009). Textual descriptions are parsed in the background and
validated against speciﬁed conventions, and the grammatical structure and
vocabulary are analyzed. If the description provided is considered valid, it is
accepted by the system and the content can be persisted. Otherwise, the system
informs the user about the violation, and the user has to adjust the input. Excep-
tion-handling routines are available so content can be saved temporarily in case
conventions are insufﬁcient.
ECM and Research Portals
Research portals support the creation of virtual communities of practice (Palmi-
sano 2009; Wenger and Snyder 2000) in research settings. In addition to sup-
porting internal communication in the community (Yu et al. 2010) and content
management for research, research portals focus on reaching external stakeholders
and fostering the knowledge transfer between practitioners and academics (Rynes
et al. 2001) .
166
J. Becker et al.

ECM and information portals have much in common (see Scheepers 2006), and
it is the same with research portals, but they also differ in some important ways.
The differences between the two approaches can be explained using Tyrväinen
et al. (2006) research framework for ECM, which distinguishes four perspectives:
the enterprise context, content, processes, and technologies. First, while ECM is
typically implemented in an enterprise context (Munkvold et al. 2003), research
portals are implemented in the university or research context. In the dimension of
content, unlike enterprise/corporate/knowledge portals (Benbya et al. 2004; Daniel
and Ward 2005; Zhang and Li 2006), research portals do not act as repositories for
accumulating accessible knowledge on a topic but point to original sources that
makes them similar to knowledge maps (Vail 1999; Wexler 2001). Furthermore,
research portals structure metadata on the referenced contents, while ECM systems
focus on the storage of predominantly unstructured data. Differences between
these two types of systems also exist in the covered process steps of the content
lifecycle. The concept of ECM covers all phases, from creating and capturing to
storing and retrieving, editing and reviewing, and retaining and deleting the
information (Smith and McKeen 2003), whereas research portals primarily cover
the storage and retrieval of contents. Research portals can signiﬁcantly reduce the
effort required in the search for knowledge assets because of structured–often
visual–representation (Eppler and Burkhard 2007). The technology dimension of
ECM is also very wide and covers many types of systems (Grahlmann et al. 2010),
while research portal technologies are primarily covered by (web) content man-
agement and some collaboration features (Becker et al. 2012). Research portals
provide a general overview of the involved parties, research topics, and achieved
results in an effort to emphasize existing mutual relationships that can be geo-
graphic, organizational, ﬁnancial, or causal.
Concluding, information portals play an important role in ECM in general, and
research portals are one particular type of information portals.
yourResearchPortal.com
Like in ECM, research portals have a wide range of systems with various sets of
functionalities and approaches to structuring and storing the content entries. The
example in this chapter is based on yourResearchPortal.com, a platform capable of
generating and maintaining arbitrary research portals. Using this platform reduces
the effort and overhead required in creating domain-speciﬁc research portals, as all
are set up on the same foundation (Becker et al. 2010a). The central entity of the
platform is the research result (Table 1), which describes the research and rep-
resents the content that is documented in the portal.
The problem of comparability of contents in the system is solved by introducing
ideas from the area of business intelligence. In particular, these ideas help to deﬁne
the dimensions for the classiﬁcation of entities in the portal. The application of a
single classiﬁcation schema throughout a portal allows multi-dimensional analyses
Fostering Comparability in Content Management
167

of the research information gained in the portal to be conducted. However,
yourResearchPortal.com also includes large, unstructured text ﬁelds to be used in
the description of research results, projects, and organizations, which descriptions
are prone to semantic ambiguities that are expensive to eliminate. The approach
presented in this chapter can be seen as a development that augments those large,
unstructured textual descriptions through the use of semantic standards.
Standardization in CMS at the Example of Research
Portals
This section presents the conceptual speciﬁcation of our approach as the concept of
semantic standardization is applied to a research portal. However, research portals
are only one application scenario, and the approach introduced here can also be
applied to similar ECM scenarios. The approach consists of two main concepts:
the research portal structure deﬁnition and the semantic standardization deﬁnition,
which are linked (Fig. 1). These two concepts allow for an individual deﬁnition of
a concrete portal structure that is based on a given application scenario and for a
context-based speciﬁcation of semantic standardization conventions.
Figure 1 illustrates the suggested structure in form of an entity relationship
model (ERM) (Chen 1976). The central element of the conceptual basis for the
speciﬁcation of the research portal structure is the Research Entity, which sub-
sumes core entities that represent the research environment (e.g., Researcher,
Project, and Organization) and the result entities that cover the outcomes of
research activities (e.g., Publication and Research Result). Research entities may
also represent other concepts (e.g., patents, products, goals, missions, and topics).
In general, it is important to group similar items, where each of these groups
contains one type of entity. As the semantic standardization aims to describe
content, each deﬁned entity type (e.g., Project) has its own semantically stan-
dardized properties. Research entities can be linked together to build an Entity
Table 1 Attributes of an exemplary research result
Attribute
Type
Cardinality
Internal identiﬁer
String
One
URI
String
One
Result title
Multi-language string
One per language
Result description
Multi-language string
One per language
Topic speciﬁc dimensions
Various types
One
Publication
Typed link
Many per type
Organization
Typed link
Many per type
Project
Typed link
Many per type
Person
Typed link
Many per type
168
J. Becker et al.

Structure, and every relationship has a concrete Relationship Type, such as ‘‘is
author of,’’ ‘‘is part of,’’ and/or ‘‘is result of’’.
We also borrow from Knackstedt et al. (2009) the concept of Entity Classiﬁ-
cation. Multiple Dimensions (e.g., type of project) can be deﬁned that subsume the
Values (e.g., type: funded research project) aligned in Value Hierarchies (e.g.,
funded research project [ locally funded research project). The classiﬁcation of
research entities occurs by linking an entity to one or more values of a dimension.
The deﬁnition of such dimensions allows the contents to be ﬁltered while con-
ducting multidimensional analyses of information accumulated in research entities
and their structures.
It is important that a research portal provides research entities with textual
Descriptions (e.g., ‘‘state the aim of the project’’) that represent natural-language
research information. Our approach provides a way to standardize (or restrict) the
semantics of these descriptions. For this purpose, we introduce the concept of a
Standardized Text (Fig. 1) as a specialized description. As we contend that not
every description can be semantically standardized, we also provide the construct
of a Free-text for a semantically unrestricted description. The semantic stan-
dardization of a description is carried out by assigning one or more Naming
Portal Structure
Semantic Standardization
Convention 
Assignment
(0,n)
(1,n)
Free-text
Standardized 
Text
Description
(1,1)
(0,n)
Naming 
Convention
Vocabulary
Phrase
Syntax
Convention 
Vocabulary
Convention 
Syntax
(1,n)
(0,n)
 
(0,n)
(1,1)
Dimension
Researcher
Research
Result
Project
Organization
Value 
Hierarchy
(0,n)
(0,1)
Value
(0,n)
(1,1)
Publication
Research Entity
D,P
Entity 
Classifi-
cation
(0,n)
(0,n)
Entity 
Structure
(0,n)
(0,n)
Relationship
Type
(0,n)
D,T
Fig. 1 Conceptual speciﬁcation of the approach. It is displayed by an ERM with entities and
their relationships. Rectangles represent entities and rhombuses their relationships. Entities can
be specialized or generalized, which is indicated by a triangular shape.
Fostering Comparability in Content Management
169

Conventions to a description. The convention itself consists of two main compo-
nents: a speciﬁc Vocabulary and one or more deﬁnitions of the Phrase Syntax.
Thus, we are able to restrict the applicable grammar of a description by controlling
its main components’ lexicon and syntax. (See Delfmann et al. (2009) for details
on this semantic standardization approach in the context of conceptual models.)
Here, we make the phrase syntax speciﬁcation ﬂexible in order to allow for both
highly concrete, but also more general speciﬁcations. An example of the former is
‘‘\verb, present simple[\noun, singular[ ,’’ and examples of the latter are
‘‘nominal phrase’’ and ‘‘afﬁrmative present tense phrase.’’ These phrase-structure
speciﬁcations must be compatible to the linguistic parsers/taggers applied in the
validation process. Linguistic parsers and taggers split the user input into single
phrases and analyze its grammar. Based on this analysis, the phrase is tested to
determine whether it complies with the deﬁned rules for the given input ﬁeld. We
use syntax restrictions to control the granularity of descriptions. For example, if a
goal must be stated as a single nominal phrase, the goal must be precisely
explicated.
The conceptual foundation of our approach must be individually customized
based on a speciﬁc application scenario of the research portal to be developed.
This effort includes the concrete deﬁnition of existing research entities, allowed
relationships, and their types. The same applies to transferring the approach to
ECM, as the relevant entities must be identiﬁed. If needed, additional data ﬁelds,
dimensions for classiﬁcation, and values must be speciﬁed as well. These
dimensions and ﬁelds must ﬁt the entities in order to provide a suitable description
of the underlying contents and to make these contents traceable. For example, we
suggest that the reference model for research portals (Knackstedt et al. 2009) may
be a good starting point for this task.
For the purposes of semantic standardization, a portal customization includes
the deﬁnition of one or more applicable vocabularies (i.e., repositories of allowed
terms, accompanied by meta-information) and the deﬁnition of allowable phrase
structures. Both must ﬁt the contents of the portal. For vocabularies, general-
purpose repositories like WordNet (Fellbaum 1998) or the literature of the aca-
demic discipline might be a good starting point, depending on the concreteness of
a standardized text. For allowable phrase structures, basic natural-language phrase
deﬁnitions could be a basis on which to build.
Application Example
We demonstrate the application of our approach using the example of design
science information systems research (March and Smith 1995). A speciﬁc research
portal for collecting research results that follow the design science paradigm (a
process for developing IT) is designed. As all contents in this portal have in
common that they are design science, all entities are of the same type. Therefore,
the portal can be customized to this type of content, and semantically standardized
170
J. Becker et al.

descriptions of the contents can take design science into consideration. The goal of
this example is to show that, given a speciﬁc scenario, customization of a research
portal’s structure and semantic standardization for this scenario are feasible. We
analyze a research process proposed for design science research and derive the
structure and semantic standardization of a portal that addresses research that
follows this paradigm. Thus, we conﬁgure a research portal that suits the needs of
the design science research dissemination more than a general-purpose research
portal would. The research portal is customized to ﬁt this speciﬁc context and to
hold contents of only this type, showing the possibilities of semantic standardi-
zation. We choose this research paradigm as an example, but analogous custom-
izations are feasible for other application scenarios (e.g., paradigms and
disciplines) and types of content.
Peffers et al. ’s (2007) design science research process (in the following, DSRP)
used in this example for semantic standardization is a reference process model. It
was inspired by a number of inﬂuential literature positions on design science from
the past twenty-ﬁve years (e.g. Archer 1984; Hevner et al. 2004; Nunamaker et al.
1990). In contrast to exploratory research, the central purpose of which is to
explore and explain phenomena (Nunamaker et al. 1990), design science is a
research approach that seeks to solve problems in science by designing and
evaluating IT solutions. We argue that the DSRP is a good example of process
documentation, as it can be clearly structured in a variety of activities, each
represented as an entity.
Based upon the structure and discussion of the DSRP activities, we derive
research entities and their descriptions in both standardized and free-text form,
showing exemplarily the design and ﬁtting process for a portal customized to its
contents based on an existing model. This customization is done similarly in all
other contexts. Figure 2 shows how research entities are linked to the corre-
sponding concepts of DSRP and how we associate descriptions to research entities.
One goal of developing the DSRP was to ‘‘provide a mental model for pre-
senting and evaluating design science research in information systems’’ (Peffers
et al. 2007). The model is meant to give design science researchers a predeﬁned
structure and guidelines to follow, so they can structure their publications and
presentations accordingly. Thus, we establish the research entity Research Process
as a central result construct in the portal structure. When researchers present their
design science research, they talk about the research process, and this entity acts as
a container for the more detailed entities that are linked to that container. The
DSRP consists of six activities, each of which we analyze in order to determine
which research entities with which descriptions would document these activities
appropriately.
From the activity of problem identiﬁcation and motivation, we derive the
research entity Problem Deﬁnition. Here, researchers deﬁne the problem
(Description) and motivation (Importance) using free text. As ‘‘it may be useful to
atomize the problem conceptually’’ (Peffers et al. 2007), these descriptions may
each have its own structure, so we do not seek to restrict researchers too much by
introducing semantic standardization for this research entity. In our opinion, a
Fostering Comparability in Content Management
171

DSRP has exactly one problem deﬁnition, although it is possible that the same
problem deﬁnition triggers more than one research process, as multiple solutions
can address the same issue.
The research entity Objective documents the activity ‘‘Deﬁne Objectives of a
Solution’’; that is, it represents a desired property (state) of a solution that is to be
achieved in the DSRP. Based on goal management in controlling literature, we
divide the objective into three main components, which we think can be seman-
tically standardized. First, Objective Content states what exactly is to be achieved,
using nominal phases (e.g., ‘‘Increase of performance’’) or afﬁrmative present-
Identify Problem & 
Motivate
- Define problem
- Show importance
Define Objectives of 
Solution
-What would a better 
artifact accomplish?
Design & 
Development
- Artifact
Demonstration
- Find suitable context
- Use artifact to solve 
problem
Evaluation
- Observe how effective,  
efficient
- Iterate back to design
Communication
- Scholarly publications
- Professional publications
Research Process
Objective Content
Objective Extent
Objective Timing
Artifact Type
Description
Design
Applying Subject
Application 
Context
Application Time
BibTeX Citation
Research Entity
Standardized Text
Free-text
Description
Problem Definition
Objective
Artifact
Evaluation
Publication
Functionality
Importance
Artifact Name
Achievement 
Summary
Evaluation
Result
Achievement 
Description
Fig. 2 Deriving research
portal structure and semantic
standardization from the
DSRP
172
J. Becker et al.

tense statements (e.g., ‘‘Wireless communication is possible’’). The phases and
statements are deﬁned using the Naming Convention for Standardized Texts
introduced in Fig. 1. Then, Objective Extent describes how much of the goal
content is to be achieved. This information is explicated using a list of adjectives
that represent the extent. Finally, Objective Timing states when the goal is to be
achieved. This description ﬁeld can be standardized to include date/time values.
Based on the activity of artifact design and development, we derive two
interrelated research entities, Artifact and Functionality. An artifact is character-
ized by an identifying Artifact Name, standardized as a nominal phrase, that
supports its autonomous character. Farther on, artifacts are identiﬁed as a concrete
Artifact Type, a description that can also be semantically standardized. For
example, Hevner et al. (2004) restrict the artifact type list to four: construct,
model, method, and instantiation. Thus, this ﬁeld is realized as a single-choice
selection list. Finally, for each artifact, the Artifact Design is described in terms of
its inner structure (architecture). As research portals do not accumulate all
accessible knowledge but point instead to original sources (Vail 1999; Wexler
2001), the design description should have an aggregated rather than an extensive
form. Nevertheless, we do not see a semantic standardization as feasible for this
issue. Therefore, the description of the artifact design is modeled as free text.
Each artifact is further characterized by at least one research entity, Func-
tionality, the dynamic counterpart to the more structural aspect of an artifact
design (architecture). The desired features of the artifact should contribute to
achieving the objectives. We believe functionality descriptions can be semanti-
cally standardized based on nominal phrases.
From the two activities of demonstration and evaluation, we derive only one
research entity, Evaluation, as neither activity is autonomous and as each depends
on the other. A demonstration of an artifact application with no critical analysis of
its contribution to the objectives merely shows that an artifact can be applied but
not that it solves the problem by reaching the objectives. Evaluation without a
demonstration is not possible, as without the knowledge that an artifact achieves
the objective content, we cannot measure the extent of objective achievement. If
more than one artifact is developed in a DSRP, each must be demonstrated and
evaluated, although simultaneous evaluation can be conducted for multiple arti-
facts (Fig. 3).
The research entity Evaluation is characterized by three semantically stan-
dardized descriptions: The Applying Subject is a single nominal phrase that
denotes the person or group of persons who applies the artifact. Application
Context describes the particular purpose of the application (i.e., it answers the
question ‘‘why does the subject apply the artifact?’’) by means of a single nominal
phrase; thus, the application context is a concrete instantiation of the general
problem deﬁnition that the applying subject faces. Application Time denotes when
the application took place.
Based on the evaluation, we derive the entity Evaluation Result, which is
directly related to one of the previously deﬁned objectives and to a concrete
evaluation. An evaluation result describes to what extent an objective was
Fostering Comparability in Content Management
173

achieved in the evaluation using two characterizing descriptions: a semantically
standardized Achievement Summary, which is a brief statement about the extent of
objective achievement, and a free-text Achievement Description for additional
explanations.
The last activity in the nominal DSRP is communication of the conducted
research to the research and professional communities. From this activity, we
derive the research entity Publication, whose description is standardized using a
BibTeX Citation (Patashnik 1988). We chose BibTeX, as its use is widespread in
the research community, and it can be mapped to other notations using accessible
tools. BibText is a standardized textual format for exchanging information on
publications, and with the help of BibTex, information like Title, Authors, Editors,
and Publishers can be encoded and exchanged. Researchers are prompted to
communicate ‘‘the problem and its importance, the artifact, its utility and novelty,
the rigor of its design, and its effectiveness’’ (Peffers et al. 2007), that is, the DSRP
as a whole and the outcomes of individual activities. To this end, we allow pub-
lications to be related to all derived research entities (Fig. 3).
To improve comprehensibility, we present the structure of the entities we have
derived separately in Fig. 3. The ERM also represents the design science research
process, that is, our example case. It is an alternative perspective of the contents
described in Fig. 2, and it helps to clarify the relationships between the entities.
Research 
Process
Problem 
Definition
Objective
Functionality
Publication
Evaluation
(1,n)
(1,1)
(1,1)
(1,n)
Artifact
(1,1)
(1,n)
(1,n)
(1,n)
(1,n)
(1,1)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(0,n)
(1,n)
(1,1)
Evaluation 
Result
(1,1)
(1,n)
Fig. 3 Relations between
research entities based on
DSRP
174
J. Becker et al.

This presentation also shows how such a customized portal could be implemented.
In the model we refrain from depicting concrete Relationship Types (i.e., their
names), as presenting them would reduce the model’s readability. For the sake of
clarity and focused presentation, we also refrain from deriving dimensions and
deﬁning general vocabulary.
Semantically Standardized Entries
To demonstrate the practical feasibility of this derived research portal structure
and semantic standardization, we apply the derived structure to describe an
exemplary instance of design science research. The following discussion describes
one entry of such a portal and shows how this entry would appear in the cus-
tomized portal. The goal is to describe every item (in this case, ﬁtting design
science research projects) in the demonstrated way in order to ﬁnd and compare
the contents and use the captured knowledge. For the purpose of such an exem-
plary demonstration, we picked up the research process used in designing your-
ResearchPortal.com based on Becker et al. (2010a). (The authors of this chapter
also participated in that research process.) See Table 2 for details.
The example shows the practical applicability of the structure and semantic
restrictions derived from DSRP. All descriptions (except those that reference time)
could be found in the source publication (Becker et al. 2010a) and are expressed
using the given structure. Deciding on semantically standardized descriptions like
objectives and functionalities was challenging, as one has to build a mental model
of the conducted research based on the accessible documentation and memorized
experiences. However, in our opinion, doing so enhanced the quality of repre-
sentation, as statements should be precise and should comply with semantic
restrictions. Even though the phrase structure speciﬁcations are largely unrestric-
tive (e.g., ‘‘nominal phrase’’), they allow the granularity of descriptions to be
controlled. For example, the process of specifying the objectives as single afﬁr-
mative present-tense statements, along with their expected extent in the form of
adjectives, seems to be ﬂexible enough to allow convenient description but is
restrictive enough to impact the granularity and quality. In this example, we do not
make excessive use of lexical conventions, as we cannot identify a domain
vocabulary for design science research, although identiﬁcation of such a vocab-
ulary should be possible for research portals that are organized around a certain
narrow topic (e.g., medical science, biology, or business intelligence).
Summarizing, the derived portal deﬁnition forces the description of the content
item to be structured, explicit, and compact, and a direct relationship to the
nominal DSRP process could be established. However, the derived structure and
restrictions made the task of describing a research process more time-consuming,
as simple data reuse techniques (e.g., copy and paste) are generally not applicable.
Fostering Comparability in Content Management
175

Table 2 Standardized description of the DSRP of the item yourResearchPortal.com (Descrip-
tions that are not semantically standardized are written in italics.)
Research entity/
description
Contents (phrase syntax)
Problem deﬁnition
Description
Research portals help to countervail the disadvantages of specialization in
research. The creation and maintenance of a research portal requires
not only domain knowledge but also thorough IT skills.
Importance
Enabling IT-unskilled researchers to create functional research portals is
required for a widespread application of research portals.
Objective 1
Objective content
Researchers are able to generate research portals. (afﬁrmative present-
tense statement)
Objective extent
Easy, fast (list of adjectives)
Objective timing
N/a (date/time value)
Objective 2
Objective content
Generated research portals realize ﬁve introduced core functions.
(afﬁrmative present-tense statement)
Objective extent
Full (list of adjectives)
Objective timing
N/a (date/time value)
Artifact
Artifact name
yourResearchPortal.com (nominal phrase)
Artifact type
Instantiation (noun; restricted selection)
Design
The system consists of two main components. The data administration
component is realized using the CMS Drupal. The data analysis
component is realized using the OLAP engine Mondrian. Both
components operate on the same database structure and are integrated
in one GUI.
Functionality 1
Description
Easy and fast generation of research portals (nominal phrase)
Functionality 2
Description
Maintenance of multiple portals on one site (nominal phrase)
Functionality 3
Description
Multidimensional analyses (nominal phrase)
Evaluation
Applying subject
Authors (nominal phrase)
Application context
Creation and maintenance of a research portal for service science (nominal
phrase)
Application time
N/a (date/time value)
Evaluation result 1
Achievement
summary
Full (adjective; restricted selection)
Achievement
Description
Easy and fast generation of research portals is possible ‘‘at the push of a
button’’
Evaluation result 2
Achievement
summary
Partial (adjective; restricted selection)
Achievement
description
The core functions one to four are fully supported. The ﬁfth core function
is partially supported. Better discussion support is needed.
(continued)
176
J. Becker et al.

Discussion and Outlook
The work presented in this chapter addresses the problem of ensuring consistency
and comparability of content. We seek to solve this problem in the context of
research content using portals customized to individual application scenarios. To
this end, we propose a conceptual speciﬁcation of a generic portal structure with an
enhancement that allows for semantic standardization of textual contents. This
conceptual basis must be customized for a given application scenario by deﬁning
the speciﬁc portal structure and concrete semantic standardization restrictions. We
demonstrate such a customization for a research portal that focuses on design
science and show how research information could be represented in this cus-
tomized portal by describing an exemplary research process.
We conclude that our approach has the potential to increase the consistency and
comparability of research dissemination with research portals. This approach can
be realized by an individually customizable portal structure that reﬂects the nature
of a speciﬁc application scenario better than generic structures do, and a semantic
standardization of textual descriptions that forces them to be precise and compact
and to use the vocabulary of the domain. Using consistent descriptions and
enabling stored contents to be compared, our approach is also appropriate and
similarly advantageous for use in the context of ECM.
On the other hand, our approach requires more effort in the design phase of a
portal and during the description of research entities than generic ones do. We argue
that these higher costs result in a higher-quality content representation, but this
assumption requires thorough evaluation. Therefore, we are currently working on
an implementation of the presented approach in a system. We base the system on a
common CMS that supports a ﬂexible deﬁnition of content types (research entities
and descriptions). We extend the system by allowing semantically standardized
Table 2 (continued)
Research entity/
description
Contents (phrase syntax)
Publication
BibTeX citation
@inproceedings{Becker2010,
author = {Becker, J. and Knackstedt, R. and Lis, L
/ . and
Stein, A.},
title = {Entwicklung und Anwendung eines
Internetwerkzeugs zur Generierung von
Forschungsportalen},
year = {2010},
booktitle = {Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik
(MKWI 2010)},
note = {Go¨ttingen}
}
Fostering Comparability in Content Management
177

ﬁelds to be speciﬁed and binding linguistic tools for on-the-ﬂy data validation.
Finally, with a completed implementation we will be able to conduct empirical
analysis on the cost-beneﬁt ratio of our approach in real life portal settings. We
expect the presented concept also to be applicable to ECM, as we have already used
a generic CMS for the prototypical implementation. As long as the context can be
grouped into homogeneous groups, the ﬁelds for a semantic description can be
identiﬁed for each type of content. The other differences between ECM and
research portals—like the scope on the enterprise level, the covering of the whole
content lifecycle, and the technologies used—should make no difference.
Future research should investigate the compatibility of our work with automated
data collection approaches like data harvesting (Arms et al. 2003; Ortyl and Pﬁngstl
2004). This effort might be particularly advantageous as it relates to the biblio-
graphic aspect of the approach. Another promising research effort would be the
semantic standardization of large textual ﬁelds, incorporating multiple sentences.
Acknowledgments This chapter is an extension of work originally published in the Proceedings
of the 10th International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik (Becker et al. 2011)
References
Abramowicz, W., Filipowska, A., Kaczmarek, M., & Kaczmarek, T. (2007). Semantically
enhanced business process modelling notation. In: M. Hepp, K. Hinkelmann, D. Karagiannis,
R. Klein, & N. Stojanovic (Eds.), Semantic business process and product lifecycle
management. Proceedings of the workshop SBPM 2007 (pp. 88–91). Innsbruck.
Ahlemann, F., Teuteberg, F., & Brune, G. (2006). Ontologie-basierte Attributierung von
Informationsmodellen: Grundlagen und Anwendungsgebiete. ISPRI-Arbeitsbericht, Nr. 01/
2006. Universität Osnabrück.
Archer, L. B. (1984). Systematic method for designers. In N. Cross (Ed.), Developments in design
methodology (pp. 57–82). London: Wiley.
Arms, W. Y., Dushay, N., Fulker, D., & Lagoze, C. (2003). A case study in metadata harvesting:
The NSDL. Library Hi Tech, 21(2), 228–237.
Becker, J., Knackstedt, R., Lis, Ł., & Stein, A. (2010a). Entwicklung und Anwendung eines
Internetwerkzeugs zur Generierung von Forschungsportalen. In Proceedings of the Multi-
konferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik 2010. Göttingen.
Becker, J., Knackstedt, R., Lis, Ł., & Stein, A. (2010b). Towards a maturity model for research
portals. In Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Information Systems. Pretoria.
Becker, J., Delfmann, P., Knackstedt, R., & Lis, Ł. (2011). Fostering comparability in research
dissemination: A research portal-based approach. In Proceedings of the Wirtschaftsinformatik
2011 (paper 74). Zurich.
Becker, J., Knackstedt, R., Lis, Ł., Stein, A., & Steinhorst, M. (2012). Research portals: Status quo
and improvement perspectives. International Journal of Knowledge Management, 8(3), 27–46.
Benbya, H., Passiante, G., & Belbaly, N. A. (2004). Corporate portal: A tool for knowledge
managementsynchronization. InternationalJournal ofInformationManagement, 24(3),201–220.
Born, M., Dörr, F., & Weber, I. (2007). User-friendly semantic annotation in business process
modeling. In M. Weske, M.-S. Hacid, & C. Godart (Eds.), WISE 2007 Workshops, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 4832 (pp. 260–271). Berlin: Springer.
Carayol, N., & Matt, M. (2004). Does research organization inﬂuence academic production?
Laboratory level evidence from a large European university. Research Policy, 33(8),
1081–1102.
178
J. Becker et al.

Chen, P. P.-S. (1976). The entity-relationship model: Toward a uniﬁed view of data. ACM
Transactions on Database Systems, 1(1), 9–36.
Daniel, E., & Ward, J. (2005). Enterprise portals: Addressing the organizational and individual
perspectives of information systems. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on
Information Systems. Regensburg.
Delfmann, P., Herwig, S., & Lis, Ł. (2009). Uniﬁed enterprise knowledge representation with
conceptual models—Capturing corporate language in naming conventions. In Proceedings of
the 30th International Conference on Information Systems, Phoenix, AR.
Ehrig, M., Koschmider, A., & Oberweis, A. (2007). Measuring similarity between semantic
business process models. In J. F. Roddick & A. Hinze (Eds.), Proceedings of the Fourth Asia-
Paciﬁc Conference on Conceptual Modelling (pp. 71–80). Ballarat: Australian Computer
Society.
Eppler, M. J., & Burkhard, R. A. (2007). Visual representations in knowledge management:
Framework and cases. Journal of Knowledge Management, 11(4), 112–122.
Fellbaum, C. (Ed.). (1998). WordNet: An electronic lexical database. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Fliedl, G., Kop, C., & Mayr, H. C. (2005). From textual scenarios to a conceptual schema.
Data & Knowledge Engineering, 55(1), 20–37.
Fox, M. F. (1992). Research, teaching, and publication productivity: Mutuality versus
competition in academia. Sociology of Education, 65(4), 293–305.
Grahlmann, K. R., Hilhorst, C., van Amerongen, S., Helms, R., & Brinkkemper, S. (2010).
Impacts of implementing enterprise content management systems. In Proceedings of the 18th
European Conference on Information Systems (paper 103). Pretoria.
Greco, G., Guzzo, A., Pontieri, L., & Saccà, D. (2004). An ontology-driven process modeling
framework. In F. Galindo, M. Takizawa, & R. Traunmüller (Eds.), Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 3180 (pp. 13–23). Berlin: Springer.
Gruber, T. (1993). A translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁcations. Knowledge
Acquisition, 5(2), 199–220.
Guarino, N. (1998). Formal ontology and information systems. In N. Guarino (Ed.), Proceedings
of the 1st International Conference on Formal Ontologies in Information Systems (pp. 3–15).
Trento: ACM Press.
Hepp, M., & Roman, D. (2007). An ontology framework for semantic business process
management. In A. Oberweis, C. Weinhardt, H. Gimpel, A. Koschmider, V. Pankratius
& B. Schnizler (Eds.), eOrganisation: Service-, Prozess-, Market-Engineering. Proceedings
der 8. Internationalen Tagung Wirtschaftsinformatik, Band 1 (pp. 423–440). Karlsruhe:
Universitätsverlag.
Hevner, A. R., March, S. T., Park, J., & Ram, S. (2004). Design science in information systems
research. MIS Quarterly, 28(1), 75–105.
Höfferer, P. (2007). Achieving business process model interoperability using metamodels and
ontologies. In Proceedings of the 15th European Conference on Information Systems
(pp. 1620–1631). St. Gallen.
Knackstedt, R., Lis, Ł., Stein, A., Becker, J., & Barth, I. (2009). Towards a reference model for
online research maps. In Proceedings of the 17th European Conference on Information
Systems. Verona.
Krücken, G., & Meier, F. (2006). Turning the university into an organizational actor. In G. Drori,
J. Meyer, & H. Hwang (Eds.), Globalization and organization (pp. 241–257). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kugeler, M. (2000). Informationsmodellbasierte Organisationsgestaltung: Modellierungskon-
ventionen und Referenzvorgehensmodell zur prozessorientierten Reorganisation. Doctoral
Thesis: University of Münster.
March, S. T., & Smith, G. F. (1995). Design and natural science research on information
technology. Decision Support Systems, 15(4), 251–266.
Fostering Comparability in Content Management
179

Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2003). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of Statoil. In Proceedings of the 11th European
Conference on Information Systems (pp. 1364–1383). Naples.
Nunamaker, J. F., Chen, M., & Purdin, T. D. M. (1990). Systems development in information
systems research. Journal of Management Information Systems, 7(3), 89–106.
Nüttgens, M., & Zimmermann, V. (1998). Geschäftsprozeßmodellierung mit der objektorien-
tierten Ereignisgesteuerten Prozeßkette (oEPK). In M. Maicher & H.-J. Scheruhn (Eds.),
Informationsmodellierung—Branchen, Software- und Vorgehensreferenzmodelle und Werkz-
euge (pp. 23–36). Wiesbaden.
Ortner, E. (1997). Methodenneutraler Fachentwurf. Stuttgart: Vieweg & Teubner Verlag.
Ortyl, P., & Pﬁngstl, S. (2004). Extrahierung bibliographischer Daten aus dem Internet. In Lecture
Notes in Informatics, Vol 51 (pp. 203–207). Bonn: Gesellschaft für Informatik (GI).
Palmisano, J. (2009). Motivating knowledge contribution in virtual communities of practice:
Roots, progress and needs. In Proceedings of the 15th Americas Conference on Information
Systems. San Francisco, CA.
Patashnik, O. (1988). BibTeXing. Retrieved March 9, 2013, from http://dante.ctan.org/tex-
archive/biblio/bibtex/contrib/doc/btxdoc.pdf
Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M. A., & Chatterjee, S. (2007). A design science
research methodology for information systems research. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 24(3), 45–77.
Rahm, E., & Bernstein, P. A. (2001). A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching.
International Journal on Very Large Data Bases, 10(4), 334–350.
Rosemann, M. (1996). Komplexitätsmanagement in Prozeßmodellen. Methodenspeziﬁsche
Gestaltungsempfehlungen für die Informationsmodellierung. Wiesbaden: Gabler.
Rynes, S. L., Bartunek, J. M., & Daft, R. L. (2001). Across the great divide: Knowledge creation
and transfer between practitioners and academics. Academy of Management Journal, 44(2),
340–355.
Sabetzadeh, M., Nejati, S., Easterbrook, S., & Chechik, M. (2007). A relationship-driven
framework for model merging. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Modeling in Software
Engineering at the 29th International Conference on Software Engineering. Minneapolis,
MN: IEEE Computer Society.
Scheepers, R. (2006). A conceptual framework for the implementation of enterprise information
portals in large organizations. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(6), 635–647.
Schimank, U. (2005). New public management and the academic profession: Reﬂections on the
German situation. Minerva, 43(4), 361–376.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(1), 647–659.
Thomas, O., & Fellmann, M. (2009). Semantic process modeling—Design and implementation of
an ontology-based representation of business processes. Business and Information Systems
Engineering, 1(6), 438–451.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Characterizing the evolving research
on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(6), 627–634.
Vail, E. (1999). Knowledge mapping: Getting started with knowledge management. Information
Systems and Management, 16(4), 1–8.
Wenger, E. C., & Snyder, W. M. (2000). Communities of practice: The organizational frontier.
Harvard Business Review, 78(1), 139–146.
Wexler, M. N. (2001). The who, what and why of knowledge mapping. Journal of Knowledge
Management, 5(3), 249–263.
Yu, M. Y., Lang, K. R., & Kumar, N. (2010). Supporting better communication in academic
communities of practice: An empirical study of AIS/ISWORLD. Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, 26(1), 305–328.
Zhang, W., & Li, G. (2006). Wonders knowledge portal. Communications of the Association for
Information Systems, 17(1), 223–238.
180
J. Becker et al.

Part III
Examples and Cases

The Knowledge Garden and Content
Management at J.D. Edwards
Judy E. Scott
Abstract From 1995 to 2003, J.D. Edwards instituted three innovative approaches
to managing knowledge and content. The evolution of each started with a grass-
roots team effort and grew to become an institutionalized enterprise application.
With limited resources, J.D. Edwards built a global website community, a
sophisticated intranet/extranet called the Knowledge Garden, and a content
management application (called Content Manager) that enabled the company to
reuse multilingual technical documents drawn from a ‘‘single source’’ location.
Knowledge Management Efforts at J.D. Edwards,
1995–2003
In 2003, J.D. Edwards & Company (JDE), based in Denver, Colorado, had been
in business for twenty-ﬁve years and nearly 5,000 employees served more than
6,000 customers in seventy-eight sales and consulting ofﬁces around the world.
Annual revenues from enterprise software licenses and integration services totaled
roughly $1 billion. JDE’s software and services enabled companies to conduct
collaborative commerce with their suppliers, customers and other business part-
ners. In August 2003, JDE merged with PeopleSoft, which was acquired by
Oracle in 2005.
J. E. Scott (&)
University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado
e-mail: judy.scott@ucdenver.edu
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_11,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
183

The Beginning, 1995
In 1995, JDE’s 2,500 employees in forty global locations were ﬁnding it
increasingly difﬁcult to stay current on product lines, corporate policies, beneﬁt
information, key competitive issues, job openings, and company news. Hardcopy
employee resource manuals, which were often out of date soon after publication
because they took 30–45 days to assemble and distribute, were not standardized
and often existed in multiple versions, so locating the latest and ofﬁcial corporate
answer to an issue or policy was cumbersome. In short, the company needed new,
faster, and more efﬁcient ways to communicate with its employees and customers
in order to keep pace with the continual changes in JDE and its competitive
environment. Around that time, innovative organizations like JDE became aware
of the Internet and its potential as a marketing channel and as a means to house
organizational knowledge (Scott 1998).
The Conclusion, 2003
By 2003, JDE had three full-blown knowledge management (KM) systems:
• The Knowledge Garden, JDE’s intranet/extranet, contained 1.3 million docu-
ments, and some 140 people published 250 new documents every day. The
system contained 85 custom-built applications, providing global access to more
than 6,000 customers, more than 2,000 business partners, and nearly 5,000
employees.
• Content Manager, part of JDE’s ﬁve collaborative enterprise solutions, per-
mitted the company to release its ninety internal manuals simultaneously in
multiple languages. Some ninety customers also used Content Manager to create
custom training and documentation.
• Its global website community, consisting of www.jdedwards.com and JDE
international websites, rolled out new versions in December 2001, powered by
content management software. By February 2002, the websites were attracting
more than million page visits per month.
While few organizations have been able to assess the impact of investing in
tools for managing organizational knowledge, JDE has ascertained that its
Knowledge Garden reaped an 1,800 % return on investment over three years, that
its Content Manager increased revenues by over $10 million dollars per year, and
that its global website community generated thousands of sales leads and more
than million page impressions per month. By 2003 the three KM efforts shared an
enterprise vision and common taxonomy.
184
J. E. Scott

The Challenges in the Middle Years, from 1995–2003
JDE achieved these improvements even though its content management goals had
been undeﬁned for years, its KM teams were under-staffed, and the company
lacked a clear direction for its KM efforts. Some projects had been abandoned
because of lack of enterprise buy-in and funding. Others survived only because of
a team’s perseverance such as when the Knowledge Garden team gained approval
in 1998 to build Knowledge Garden 2.0 using Microsoft’s SiteServer 3.0. On the
other hand, the web team spent four years drafting multiple business cases for
purchasing a content management tool for the new international websites and for
Knowledge Garden 3.0. Seen as progressive, the web team encountered organi-
zational resistance to change. The team struggled to introduce new ways of
writing, editing, and designing content and reaching customers and business
partners, yet it had no authority to enforce content lifecycle management. As a
result, it developed an organizational structure that encouraged more than 140
employees to take ownership of their own content, which required training and
motivating both the authors and their managers to shoulder new responsibilities.
Human Resources had to be educated about hybrid job roles and as to why web-
based responsibilities should be included in job descriptions and compensation
plans.
The Knowledge Garden, which contained 1.3 million documents by 2003,
needed continual weeding, and searches often yielded poor hits, as no one was
accountable for content quality or for deleting old content, so renegade sites
developed quickly. Because there were no metadata standards that published items
had to use and no enterprise vision for web content, the websites’ designs were
inconsistent, and they all ‘‘felt’’ different. As a result, publishing policies, taxon-
omy design, and website architecture became battlegrounds for organizational and
political conﬂicts.
In the next sections, we analyze how these challenges were met.
JDE’s Knowledge Management Initiatives
We summarize the technical and organizational evolutions of the KM initiatives at
JDE using Damsgaard and Scheepers’ (1999, 2000) four-stage interpretation of the
Nolan Stage Model as the framework (Nolan 1973, 1979). Although we extend
Damsgaard and Scheepers’ model from intranets to websites, portals, and business
software applications, we do not attempt to validate the model; we simply use it as
a framework.
The four stages of the model are initiation, contagion, control and integration.
During the initiation stage, champions begin a project and look for a sponsor to
provide resources and organizational support. If a sponsor is found, the project
proceeds to the contagion stage, during which the technology experiences
The Knowledge Garden and Content Management at J.D. Edwards
185

widespread adoption. However, a crisis develops if the technology spreads out of
control, so during the control stage, the focus is on bringing the technology under
control. An example of such control is when management improves an intranet’s
search capability by limiting the number of documents and deleting out-of-date
information. During the integration stage, the technology becomes institutionalized.
Table 1 shows that, technically, JDE’s three projects tracked fairly closely with
the predictions in the stage model. All three projects initially focused on pub-
lishing, with early efforts involving static web pages built with HTML and manual
editing processes. However, the result was a ‘‘branding and promotion bottleneck’’
in which, for example, it took the four-person web team three months to ‘‘re-skin’’
a single dot-com website with a new look and feel. (Eight years later, re-skinning
up to ﬁfteen websites could be accomplished in less than a month via template-
based publishing.) Early on, as predicted by the model, the solutions were not
integrated, but by 2003 the technologies had been signiﬁcantly updated and
integrated. For example, JDE built central controls for website design for all ﬁfteen
local websites that shared six sets of common templates, had disaster recovery, and
dispersed server farms, mirroring, offsite storage, and caching for increased speed
of web page delivery.
Table 2 shows that, organizationally, all three projects also tracked model
predictions, with all beginning as grassroots efforts and eventually gaining exec-
utive sponsorship after ‘‘technology evangelists’’ communicated their vision. JDE
Table 1 Evolution of KM technologies at JDE
Stages
Initiation
Contagion
Control
Integration
Web
HTML
Netscape
HTML and Java
Microsoft
FrontPage
Netscape and
Internet
Explorer
Microsoft Windows
NT Server 4.0
Microsoft FrontPage
Windows NT Server,
replication, staging
and production
environment
Annuncio
V6.04 Vignette
(customized)
Autonomy search
Aprimo
Knowledge
Garden
HTML
Netscape
Microsoft
FrontPage,
Internet
Explorer,
Microsoft
Windows NT
Server 4.0
Microsoft FrontPage
Site Server 3.0, SQL
Server, System
Management Server,
Visual Studio,
Windows NT Server
4.0, Internet
Information Server
V6.04 Vignette
(customized)
Tivoli
Autonomy search
Centralized control
of design via
common
templates
Content
Manager
Interleaf
2 RS6000
AIX
IBM
servers
Content ManagerTM
Windows NT
SQL repository
Client server
Content Manager
Customer released as
V1.0
Content Manager
Shared taxonomy
enables
information
passing to
Knowledge
Garden V3.0
186
J. E. Scott

was an early adopter of many new commercial knowledge-enabling technologies,
but management believes success came from the team structure and governance
models as well as the tools. The cross-functional teams struggled to maintain
control of content by assigning process owners, setting standards, and institu-
tionalizing roles.
Lessons Learned
By combining the predictions from the stage models with JDE’s managerial
actions, we arrived at twelve lessons related to managing the evolution of KM
initiatives. Table 3 summarizes these lessons by stage.
Table 2 Evolution of the KM organization at JDE
Stages
Initiation
Contagion
Control
Integration
Web
Executive support
4-person web
team
Effort begins in
marketing
Outreach to
subject matter
experts
International
ofﬁces
8-person web
team
Search for new
content
management
strategy
Business case for
content
management tool
approved
12-member cross-
functional team
spent 6 months
designing system
and taxonomy
standards
4-member core
team with
decentralized
publishing
(20 ? domestic
and
international)
Dedicated
maintenance
team
Knowledge
Garden
Grassroots effort
gained
executive
support
One-day training
for users and
knowledge
authors
Evangelism
effort in ﬁeld
ofﬁces
Initial design
standards
developed and
enforced
Governance via
author roles,
coordinators,
KRAs
IT challenges
System crash
motivates budget
approval and
plans for new
governance
structure
Top-down cross-
functional
executive team
deﬁned strategy
and selected
core team to
drive adoption
New web
governance
framework
Content
Manager
35 technical
authors
Only professional
authors can use
the tool
Output is static
(.pdf)
Non-technical
authors adopt
Customer
demand for
customizable,
web-based
solution
Content can be
decentralized for
custom training
development and
for consultancies
Output is
customizable
Becomes a
proﬁtable,
revenue-
generating
product
90 customers have
the product
The Knowledge Garden and Content Management at J.D. Edwards
187

Table 3 Lessons learned
Stage
JDE’s actions
Lessons for other organizations
Initiation
An individual with a vision for web-based KM hired personnel
for a web team and gained management support
Implemented a single source strategy for technical
documentation, which evolved into Content Manager
1. Gain executive support. A technology evangelist or
champion needs to ﬁnd sponsorship
2. Reuse technical documentation. Implement a single source
strategy
Contagion
Established author roles to deﬁne content ownership and
facilitate content growth
Developed user enthusiasm by addressing user requirements
via ‘‘storyboards’’
Established design standards for meta-data, document
templates, interaction design and navigation taxonomy
3. Establish content ownership early. Clear roles for managing
content are the key to quality and are needed to support
growth
4. Align each technical initiative to revenue-generating
business processes. Encourage widespread user adoption
5. Establish and leverage standards. Plan for sustainability
Control
Needed perseverance with business cases, as sponsorship
varied with champion and top management turnover
Implemented a new technology infra-structure to automate
version control, content expiration and workﬂow
Created a new web governance framework (see Fig. 1)
6. Persevere to keep resources available. Sponsorship needs to
be ongoing
7. Replace outgrown technology. Growth in content volume
requires control
8. Replace outgrown governance. Editorial workﬂow ensures
quality content; control mechanisms require continual
updating
Integration
10 senior managers representing all departments deﬁned
enterprise vision and strategy
Collaborated across KM projects to transfer knowledge and
experience, and to take advantage of commonality across
projects
Updated the metadata for Web, Knowledge Garden, and
Content Manager dynamically, numerically, and at the
enterprise level
Certiﬁed authors to publish, with formal job description to be
benchmarked by human resources
9. Develop and operationalize an enterprise vision. Use a cross-
functional executive team
10. Reuse and extend organizational knowledge. Transfer
knowledge, expertise and experience across KM projects
11. Replace static with dynamic metadata. Enterprise vision
and numeric metadata are needed because of constantly
changing terminology
12. Certify authors and formalize job descriptions. These
processes will help to institutionalize KM
188
J. E. Scott

Lessons for the Initiation Stage
Two lessons apply to the initiation stage: gain executive support and reuse tech-
nical documentation.
Lesson 1: Gain Executive Support
In September 1995, with the support of company founder and CEO Ed McVaney,
a technology evangelist in marketing hired the initial ‘‘web team’’ of four mem-
bers. Three months later, the team used static HTML to launch JDE’s ﬁrst external
website. It was developed as a marketing tool with three goals in mind: to sell
software, support customers, and recruit staff. An eight-person Knowledge
Resources Strategies team was assembled in the marketing group (including ori-
ginal dot-com team members) that, working with HTML, rolled out the ﬁrst in-
tranet, Knowledge Garden 1.0, in November 1996. Like many early internal
websites, initial versions of the Knowledge Garden were designed around cor-
porate departmental structures. Later, the Web team learned the importance of
designing site content around user needs.
Early on, the Knowledge Garden provided access via a static home page to ten
information categories: people, careers and beneﬁts, industry, products and solu-
tions, events, news, library, worldwide customer support, departments and area
ofﬁces. Using this simple taxonomy, employees could access all company infor-
mation online, including product updates, technical messages and issues, training
sessions, calendars, job descriptions and postings, competitive information and
analyst reports, product information and business forms.
In the initiation stage, the champions for each project found an executive
sponsor who gave them the top-level support they needed for broad adoption.
However, there was no enterprise vision for managing content, which resulted in
duplicate efforts, extra cost, and morale issues that reduced productivity. Over
time, though, these issues were resolved through perseverance and improved
coordination.
Lesson 2: Reuse Documentation with a Single Source Strategy
In 1995 VP of Global Content Management Ben Martin launched a single-source
strategy for technical publications. Sentences and paragraphs used in technical
publications were treated as ‘‘objects’’ that reside in one place and can be
dynamically assembled. This implementation was the forerunner of Content
Manager, which was launched in 2000. Until the early 1990s, technical docu-
mentation was only in printed form or help ﬁles, but by 1992 small, frequent text
changes were triggering multilingual content management nightmares that span-
ned software modules and versions across all delivery channels. JDE needed a
The Knowledge Garden and Content Management at J.D. Edwards
189

cost-effective way to write documentation once and reuse it many times, in many
languages and forms distributed via many channels—help ﬁles, CD-ROMs, web-
based documentation, training guides, and user guides.
In November 1992, JDE released a Request for Information for a publications
application and in 1995 installed Interleaf, a commercial document management
system for a total of $2.9 million, for hardware, software and consulting. In the
following year, International Data Corporation assessed the system and uncovered
a 270 % ROI in Interleaf’s ﬁrst year of use, despite the system’s heavy custom-
ization. The study found that the number of manuals had increased 175 %, while
JDE’s staff grew by only 87 %, resulting in a $2.1 million savings from
employment of twenty-one fewer people (Campbell 1997). Another beneﬁt was
the decreased development time, as IS time fell from 10 % to 0, for a savings of
$873,600. In addition, JDE saved $1.7 million because translation could be
completed in-house, for a total savings of $4.7 million.
In 1998 JDE decided to develop its own toolset for internal use and to give
customers a tool to reduce costs when translating content into different languages.
The result, Content Manager, contained 70 user guides and end-user training
material that was ‘‘chunked’’ for reuse. This single-source tool gave customers a
knowledge base they could customize by blending their own processes into the
generic documents and even into the software. By early 2003, ninety customers
had purchased Content Manager, generating revenue of $7.1 million for JDE.
Web-based training tools and courseware added another $7.4 million. Savings also
included $300,000 a year in internal costs for infrastructure, licensing savings, and
Open Solution savings. The in-house cost to translate and produce a book was
$13,000, versus an outsourced cost of $65,000. The total in-house cost for thirty
books in seven languages was $2,730,000, versus $13,650,000 if the work had
been outsourced. Turnaround time dropped from 12–16 weeks to 4–6 weeks, and
the cost to translate one source for all three deliverables (book, help, and training
materials) was $75,000 versus $135,000 for independent translations.
Lessons for the Contagion Stage
Three lessons apply to the contagion stage: establish content ownership early,
align each technical initiative to revenue-generating business processes, and
establish and leverage standards.
Lesson 3: Establish Content Ownership Early
By 1998 the web team had developed and adopted new best practices. They
developed new versions on a regular schedule using a software development
methodology and a single-stage editorial workﬂow based on a new staff structure.
The staff included knowledge resource coordinators, who had editorial approval of
190
J. E. Scott

content; analysts, who were chosen for their story-telling ability; and knowledge
authors, who handled day-to-day publishing. A knowledge strategies group acted
as the liaison among the staff and the IT support groups. This workﬂow ensured
both content ownership and strong editorial control.
Lesson 4: Align Technical Initiative to a Revenue-Generating Business
Process
JDE’s main revenue source was selling licensed software, so the sales cycle was
the logical starting place to look for process improvements. In creating proﬁles of
key sales staff in 1997, JDE learned that the personnel responsible for taking a
prospect from a qualiﬁed lead to a closed sale needed four types of information
every day: information on positioning, alliances, schedules, and win/loss.
To match user needs to an information key to revenue and growth, other areas
in the company adopted this research methodology, which technique came to be
called a ‘‘knowledge storyboard.’’ It positioned staff roles against information
cycles, decision points, key processes, and speciﬁc documents.
The combination of user proﬁles, storyboards, and business processes was so
successful that three employees wrote a book on the approach (Applehans et al.
1998). Several articles and case studies were also published about the Knowledge
Garden in the late 1990s (e.g., Gittlen 1998; Greengard 1999; Montague Institute
Review 1999; Murphy 1997; Walker 1998; Woods and Sheina 1999).
An intranet ROI case study by analyst ﬁrm IDC (Campbell 1997) concluded
that the Knowledge Garden was widely used. Conservative estimates of time
savings in searching for information ($4.28 million annually) and elimination of
printing costs ($990,000 per year) led to an ROI of 1,811 % over three years for
the Knowledge Garden alone. Other beneﬁts included a central information
repository accessed through an enterprise portal, an employee communication tool,
easier access to information on demand, faster delivery of critical information to
new employees, improved productivity, and online distribution that cut document
delivery time in half, which resulted in the competitive advantages of faster speed
to market, compressed sales cycles, faster low cost change management, enhanced
corporate culture, and improved staff satisfaction.
Lesson 5: Establish and Leverage Standards
Standards accelerate development, reduce costs, and take advantage of others’
work. Initial design standards were developed, leveraged and enforced to plan for
future growth and to avoid having to ‘‘reinvent the wheel’’ in technology plat-
forms, software, processes, metadata, document templates, support, interaction
design, and navigation taxonomy. Metadata design is difﬁcult because the design
objectives for information retrieval are rarely sufﬁciently clear for those who
implement the systems, but JDE had learned the importance of establishing and
The Knowledge Garden and Content Management at J.D. Edwards
191

managing enterprise-wide metadata standards to describe published information.
These standards ensured consistent descriptions of data and improved the ease of
browsing and retrieval.
While the three initiatives became widely adopted, they evolved by leveraging
new technologies and adapting new business processes that reconciled the
importance of people and culture. However, a crisis often develops in the conta-
gion stage when the systems grow out of control. At JDE, scalability was a major
problem, and the growth of new documents and the inability to purge old ones
slowed the Knowledge Garden’s search speed. The external websites also grew so
fast that the small web team struggled to cope with its editorial tasks, and the
Interleaf system that was used to manage the technical publications became
inadequate. Document growth was not the only challenge. The Web and Knowl-
edge Garden project champions had no role models, few tools, and no established
best practices to follow, and few, if any, software solutions on the market ﬁt their
needs. In spring 2000, JDE launched version 4 of their external and international
websites as an interim measure until they could implement a more sophisticated
content management solution. The web team began work on Knowledge Garden
version 2.0, which would include an extranet for business partners and more online
self-help for customers. Finally, JDE began development of Content Manager.
Lessons for the Control Stage
Three lessons apply to the control stage: persevere to keep resources available,
replace outgrown technology, and replace outgrown governance.
Lesson 6: Persevere to Keep Resources Available
The control stage for the KM projects at JDE occurred between 2000 and 2002.
Management acknowledged that not being able to identify and purge obsolete
information, along with other maintenance issues, led to the deterioration of the
Knowledge Garden. The Knowledge Garden’s technology infrastructure and
governance structure had to be updated, which meant making further investments.
In 2001, the web team resubmitted the 1997 business case for a dynamic content
management tool, and four years after the originally submission, management was
ﬁnally receptive; the case was approved in July. Version 5 of the external website
was powered by a customized version of Vignette, launched in December 2001.
Nearly twenty international websites were implemented in 2002, and by spring
2003 these websites were generating an average of sixty marketing qualiﬁed leads
per month, with almost ninety in March 2003.
192
J. E. Scott

Lesson 7: Replace Outgrown Technology
Even while the Knowledge Garden received awards and recognition, the volume
of documents and high demand from users quickly exceeded capabilities. The
‘‘My Knowledge Garden’’ customization was impaired by an ‘‘8:00 am bottle-
neck,’’ as large numbers of users logged on simultaneously to begin their work-
days. Searching was slow and frustrated users took to calling it ‘‘knowledge weed
patch’’ and the ‘‘knowledge jungle.’’ A system crash in 2001 established once and
for all that the Knowledge Garden had outgrown its technology infrastructure.
Since the crash supported the web team’s business case, management approved
investment in a dynamic content management tool to replace the outdated
infrastructure.
Lesson 8: Replace Outgrown Governance
According to a JDE senior manager, a governance framework ensures that the
organization can meet its project objectives for content and maintain them over
time. Although the initial hierarchical editorial structure for the Knowledge Gar-
den was effective in the early years, it became outmoded when the Knowledge
Garden grew out of control: Knowledge resource authors submitted content to
knowledge resource analysts, who checked the content and submitted it to the
knowledge resource coordinators, who ensured the content was appropriate and
not a duplicate of already published material and submitted it to the manager of
web communications.
The initial governance model was replaced in 2002/2003 by an enterprise
governance model consisting of ﬁve roles, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The new model
promoted effective maintenance because the subject matter experts and content
owners adhered to a periodic content review process. The web council, the deci-
sion-making body for escalation, communicated departmental goals and objectives
New governance model 2002
Channel 
producer
Publisher I /
content owners
Web consultants
Publishing 
pool
Web
 master
Web 
council
Corporate strategy & vision 
enforce decisions
Define web strategy
Provide service
Requests for support
Define web strategy 
Provide service
Actively participate
Review of site appropriateness
Provide content
Provide service
Request assistance
Troubleshoot
ID needs & set 
priorities
Service
Escalate, 
follow direction
Supervise, 
educate, direct
Direction on needs
Old publishing model
Manager, web communications
Knowledge resource coodinators
Knowledge resource analysts
Knowledge resource authors
Old publishing model
Manager, web communications
Knowledge resource coordinators
Knowledge resource analysts
Knowledge resource authors
Fig. 1 Evolution of governance structure
The Knowledge Garden and Content Management at J.D. Edwards
193

for enterprise decisions. Channel producers who understood and represented user
needs and communicated regularly with web consultants and with their target
audience; web consultants researched and educated channel producers on best
practices and corporate standards, understood channel producers’ objectives, and
identiﬁed mechanisms to support them; subject matter experts and content owners
documented appropriate content based on subject matter expertise, adhered to a
periodic content review process, and submitted content to a deﬁned publisher; and
web publishers submitted, tagged, and tested content for display and were
responsible for online forms development, and web programming, as required.
Lessons for the Integration Stage
Four lessons apply to the integration stage: develop and operationalize an enter-
prise vision, reuse and extend organizational knowledge, replace static metadata
with dynamic metadata, and certify authors and formalize job descriptions by HR.
Lesson 9: Develop and Operationalize an Enterprise Vision
A top-down strategy for the Knowledge Garden began when ten senior decision
makers who represented each department deﬁned the strategy, vision, and tasks,
and selected a core team of forty people to set goals and drive adoption. The core
team tested and helped evaluate the newest iteration of the Knowledge Garden. In
this manner, the vision was made operational through continual work to ensure
that people, processes, and technology were aligned in support of the vision.
Lesson 10: Reuse and Extend Organizational Knowledge
The expertise and experience the web team gained in customizing and imple-
menting the Vignette content management package for the external.com website
was reused for the internal Knowledge Garden 3.0 portal. Collaboration helped to
transfer organizational knowledge and take advantage of the commonality between
the two projects, including leadership, staff roles, templates, design standards,
editorial processes, and metadata.
Lesson 11: Replace Static Metadata with Dynamic Metadata
Static metadata is tied one-to-one with the content it describes. A change like a
new product release or a new marketing promotion launch requires a manual step
to update all instances of the metadata across a website. In contrast, dynamic
metadata has been abstracted one layer; since a number is used to represent a term,
194
J. E. Scott

when the term changes, the number does not have to change, giving the metadata a
longer shelf life, providing greater ﬂexibility, and easing the burden of site
maintenance. JDE adopted this new dynamic numeric metadata approach and
centralized the metadata for all three initiatives so all three drew from the same
deﬁnitions and could be repurposed quickly. According to an interviewee:
Corporate marketing terminologies (‘‘Activera portal,’’ ‘‘the portal,’’ ‘‘the OneWorld
portal’’) are moving targets, and you cannot base static metadata on volatile corporate
terminology. J.D. Edwards is less dependent on static metadata today because we use
metadata now, not search, to drive personalization. We are not just dumping information
into buckets as fast as we can; instead, we are trying to create something that builds in
value over time. All our metadata is numeric—there’s no text—so metadata can be re-
purposed instantly in any language and for any audience. With only one place for content
to be managed, the productivity gains can be tremendous.
A JDE senior manager explained the dynamic metadata advantage as a pre-
caching personalization strategy in observing, ‘‘IT makes multiple crawls with the
Autonomy search engine to create different user roles, which we cache before
visitors come to the home page, and then we can dynamically assemble web pages
on the ﬂy very quickly.’’
Lesson 12: Certify Authors and Formalize Job Descriptions by HR
to Institutionalize KM
Authors had to be certiﬁed to publish on the web and Knowledge Garden. Human
Resources benchmarked certiﬁcation, which became part of formal job descrip-
tions. This process helped institutionalize KM roles in the organization. From a
user’s perspective, enterprise content management became seamless with the
partial convergence of the Knowledge Garden, the dot-com external website, and
Content Manager. Any customer who logged on to the Knowledge Garden could
also access the public website in order to schedule training and then return to the
extranet without needing to logon again. The customer version of the Knowledge
Garden also had translation documentation created by Content Manager. Giving
customers the ability to access all three in one online session strengthened JDE’s
brand image, built trust, and increased credibility.
Conclusion
JDE received many awards and citations for its KM best practices, which included
using beta release Microsoft technology for productivity gains across its enterprise
more effectively than any other organization, best use of intranet technology in the
United States (both sources no longer available online); and Intranet Best Practices
from Ovum Consulting (Woods and Sheina 1999). Among others, the Knowledge
The Knowledge Garden and Content Management at J.D. Edwards
195

Garden won the Smithsonian Laureate Award and the KMWorld Best Practice
Award (Computerworld Honors 2000; Saia 1999). The JDE website won the
Software Marketing Award for Best Web Marketing, the Rocky Mountains News
Award in 1997, and U.S. West Web Champions Gold in 1999. Content Manager
also had recognition from IDC and for best practices from the Center for Infor-
mation-Development Management.
Innovative, robust taxonomy and meta-tagging in the Knowledge Garden, Web
content management, and Content Manager produced the following signiﬁcant
savings and efﬁciencies:
• Savings of $4 million a year from reduced employees’ search time, saving thirty
minutes per week per employee.
• Average savings of $167 per support request by providing more effective online
self-service to customers.
• Reduced overtime server support costs of $700/month and support hours by
40 % and increased uptime to 99+ %.
• Shortened publishing time by roughly 25 % for seventy authors.
• Reduced broken links across the site, by using dynamic content management.
• Reduced manual audit activities up to 75 % by automating workﬂow.
• Reduced author training time.
Acknowledgments Thanks to Alden Globe and Kristen Schiffner, who were my coauthors on an
earlier version of this article (Scott et al. 2004). Thanks also to Jennifer Saldanha, J.D. Edwards
Senior Manager, Web Communications and Services; Ben Martin, J.D. Edwards Vice President
of Global Content Management; and Ruth Chambers, former J.D. Edwards Senior Corporate IT
Manager in Knowledge Management Services
References
Applehans, W., Globe, A., & Laugero, G. (1998). Managing knowledge: A practical web-based
approach. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Campbell, I. (1997). Knowledge Management Customer Proﬁle. IDC. Unpublished.
Computerworld Honors. (2000). A search for new heroes. Retrieved December 12, 2012, from
http://www.cwhonors.org/search/his_4a_detail.asp?id=3646
Damsgaard, J., & Scheepers, R. (1999). Power, inﬂuence and intranet implementation: A safari of
South African organizations. Information Technology and People, 12(4), 333–358.
Damsgaard, J., & Scheepers, R. (2000). Managing the crises in intranet implementation: A stage
model. Information Systems Journal, 10(2), 131–149.
Gittlen, S. (1998). Leave it to the hound. Network World, 15(35), I13–I15. Retrieved December
20, 2012, from http://edition.cnn.com/TECH/computing/9809/05/houndseek.idg/
Greengard, S. (1999). Making sense of the info storm. Industry Week, 248(17), 74–77. Retrieved
December 20, 2012, from http://www.industryweek.com/workforce/making-sense-info-storm
Montague Institute Review. (1999). Case study: The J.D. Edwards ‘‘Knowledge Garden.’’
February, 1999 (updated August, 2005). Retrieved December 12, 2012, from http://
www.montague.com/review/edwards.html
Murphy, K. (1997). Designing an intranet 101. Web Week, December 1, 1997.
196
J. E. Scott

Nolan, R. L. (1973). Managing the computer resource: A stage hypothesis. Communications of
the ACM, 16(7), 399–405.
Nolan, R. L. (1979). Managing the crises in data processing. Harvard Business Review, 57(2),
115–126.
Saia, C. (1999). Competition fosters innovation. Knowledge Management World, 8(6). Retrieved
December 20, 2012, from http://www.kmworld.com/Articles/Editorial/Features/Competition-
fosters-innovation-9115.aspx
Scott, J. E. (1998). Organizational knowledge and the intranet. Decision Support Systems, 23(1),
3–17.
Scott, J. E., Globe, A., & Schiffner, K. (2004). Jungles and gardens: The evolution of knowledge
management at J.D. Edwards. MIS Quarterly Executive, 3(1), 37–52.
Walker, C. (1998). New ways to make data pay. PC Week, 15(34), 14–19.
Woods, E. & Sheina, M. (1999). Knowledge management: Building the collaborative enterprise.
London: Ovum.
The Knowledge Garden and Content Management at J.D. Edwards
197

Lessons Learned from Implementing
Enterprise Content Management
at the National Public Administration
in Liechtenstein
Alexander Simons, Jan vom Brocke, Sven Lässer and Andrea Herbst
Abstract The objective of this chapter is to summarize the experiences gained
from an enterprise content management (ECM) initiative at the National Public
Administration (NPA) in Liechtenstein. The results are grounded in the academic
literature on ECM and in qualitative data, including observations, document
analyses, and semi-structured interviews, collected over a period of 19 months
(March 2009 to October 2010). The chapter presents and discusses ﬁfteen
important lessons the project group learned during the implementation and cus-
tomization of an ECM software package in one of the NPA’s departments. These
lessons include informing those who will be affected about the pros and cons of
ECM early in the process, deﬁning a transition strategy from paper to digital
records, performing a content audit, and establishing ownership along the content
lifecycle. The results are limited in that they were determined from a single
implementation project of ECM. Nevertheless, they can assist researchers in future
studies on ECM adoption, also in contexts other than public administration. In
addition, public administrators are provided with ECM success factors at the
organizational and departmental levels that can assist them in planning, executing,
and evaluating their own ECM initiatives. The study contributes to information
systems (IS) research by investigating in some depth the adoption of ECM in the
public administration context.
A. Simons (&)  J. vom Brocke  A. Herbst
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-Josef-Strasse 21,
9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein
e-mail: alexander.simons@uni.li
J. vom Brocke
e-mail: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li
A. Herbst
e-mail: andrea.herbst@uni.li
S. Lässer
Specialised Unit for e-Government, National Public Administration, Vaduz, Liechtenstein
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_12,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
199

Introduction
Today’s organizations are challenged to manage efﬁciently the digital information
ﬂood that is drowning their employees’ desktops, email inboxes, and hard disks
(Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 648). Among the emerging business challenges are
the need to reduce search times, fulﬁll compliance requirements, and improve
information quality (vom Brocke et al. 2011a, p. 475). Researchers have addressed
these and related challenges in studies on document management, knowledge
management, records management, and information resource management, to
name but a few (Munkvold et al. 2006, pp. 86–93).
ECM, which only recently emerged in information management practice (Smith
and McKeen 2003, p. 648), has been described as ‘‘integrated enterprise-wide
management of the life cycles of all forms of recorded information content and
their metadata, organized according to corporate taxonomies, and supported by
appropriate technological and administrative infrastructures’’ (Munkvold et al.
2006, p. 69). As such, ECM is considered an integrated and modern approach to
information management (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 1) under which are
subsumed many related concepts (vom Brocke et al. 2010, p. 2). Because content
carries knowledge (Nordheim and Päivärinta 2006, p. 649), ECM also plays an
important role in the establishment of organizational knowledge management.
With their focus on the explicit, codiﬁed dimension of knowledge, ECM systems
can substantially improve knowledge management in organizations. For example,
based on Alavi and Leidner’s (2001) knowledge management framework,
Munkvold et al. (2006, p. 90) write that ECM can leverage an organization’s
knowledge storage and retrieval processes to facilitate the efﬁcient dissemination
of knowledge. However, because the human-centric processes of knowledge cre-
ation and application are not in the scope of ECM systems (Munkvold et al. 2006,
p. 90), some would see the contribution of ECM as just the tip of the ‘‘knowledge
iceberg.’’ Nevertheless, with the ongoing digitization of information, this formerly
small part of organizational knowledge is growing at such a rate that even the
management of the iceberg’s tip is difﬁcult.
As a consequence, ECM is gaining signiﬁcant attention from information and
knowledge workers from various branches of trade (Päivärinta and Munkvold
2005, p. 1). However, though it has been argued that ECM is a relevant research
topic (Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 628), empirical studies on enterprise-wide content
management initiatives are lacking (Munkvold et al. 2006, p. 71). In particular, the
adoption of ECM in the public administration sector has received little attention,
which is surprising in view of the many challenges that governments face in the
area of information and knowledge management. Patterson and Sprehe (2002)
identify issues in the management of electronic records in federal agencies,
including e-mail management, systems integration, and business process reengi-
neering (pp. 308–312). Since dealing with these and related challenges has become
imperative to the success of any e-Government initiative (Layne and Lee 2001,
p. 122), ECM systems are increasingly ﬁnding their way into the public
200
A. Simons et al.

administration sector. However, the challenges of ECM implementation in public
administration have not been investigated in sufﬁcient depth. As a response, this
chapter summarizes and discusses the experiences gained during an ECM
implementation project at the NPA in Liechtenstein. The results are grounded in
the academic literature on ECM and in qualitative data, including observations,
document analyses, and semi-structured interviews with project members and
ECM end users, collected over a period of 19 months.
The remainder of the chapter is structured as follows. Section ‘Research
Background and Gap’ provides the background for the research and explains the
meaning of ECM in the public administration context. Section ‘Study Overview’
gives an overview of the study and summarizes the procedures for data collection
and analysis. Section ‘ECM at the NPA in Liechtenstein’ presents the lessons that
the NPA in Liechtenstein learned during the ECM project, which are subsequently
discussed in section ‘Discussion’. Section ‘Summary and Outlook’ concludes the
chapter with a short summary, provides an outlook on the future of the ECM
initiative at the NPA in Liechtenstein, and acknowledges limitations.
Research Background and Gap
The notion of ECM emerged with the new millennium (Blair 2004, p. 65). The
ECM Association deﬁnes ECM as ‘‘the strategies, methods and tools used to
capture, manage, store, preserve, and deliver content and documents related to
organizational processes. ECM tools and strategies allow the management of an
organization’s unstructured information, wherever that information exists.’’ (AIIM
2011). ECM is receiving considerable attention from the industry, but researchers
from related disciplines have rarely explored the concept. Munkvold et al. (2003,
p. 1364) claim that the academic discipline of IS ‘‘has practically ignored the
concept of ECM’’ and Päivärinta and Munkvold (2005, p. 1) add, ‘‘beyond the
current hype, few sources have reported research on actual ECM practices in
organizations.’’ Only a few studies report on the experiences gained during the
implementation of ECM in a business context, and the adoption of ECM in the
public administration sector has received even less attention.
It has often been claimed that government departments have little motivation to
meet, much less outperform, the expectations of their customers because citizens
have no real alternatives for getting the public services they need (Evans and Yen
2006, p. 208). Consequently, administrative efﬁciency has been seen for some time
as a core issue of public administration, as has the relatively low level of service
quality it offers compared to that of businesses that must deal with competition
(Dinsdale 1997, p. 371). Because of increasing pressure to make government
departments more sensitive to the demands of their customers and more efﬁcient in
their work practices (Pethe and Lalvani 2006, p. 635), numerous governments have
signiﬁcantly redesigned their structures and services over the past few years. The
new opportunities provided by modern IT have played an important role in this
Lessons Learned from Implementing Enterprise Content Management
201

development, as expressed, for example, in the emergence of e-government
(Mnjama and Wamukoya 2007, p. 274). It has been argued that e-government can
increase the quality of government services and reduce the costs of delivering
them at the same time (Evans and Yen 2006, p. 208).
With e-government, an increasing amount of information is digitized and
processed by public administrations, but this advance poses new challenges in the
management of electronic documents, records, and their content (e.g., text docu-
ments, forms, spreadsheets, and websites) (Johnston and Bowen 2005, p. 131). The
digital information assets that federal agencies have to manage have grown not
only in number but also in diversity and complexity (United States General
Accounting Ofﬁce 2002, p. 10). Challenges in the management of digital infor-
mation in the public administration sector relate particularly to information quality
(Gil-García and Pardo 2005, p. 190), storage and retrieval (Mnjama and Wam-
ukoya 2007, p. 278), and data security (Layne and Lee 2001, p. 129). In addition,
federal agencies have to comply with various legal regulations and standards (e.g.,
preservation)—perhaps even more than industry sectors do—because their work
relies heavily on records that are required to preserve the rule of law (e.g., leg-
islative, court, police, and prison records) (Mnjama and Wamukoya 2007, p. 275).
The United States General Accounting Ofﬁce (2002, p. 10) puts it as follows:
The challenge of managing and preserving vast and rapidly growing volumes of electronic
records produced by modern organizations is placing pressure on the archival community
and on the information industry to develop a cost-effective long-term preservation strategy
that would free electronic records of the straitjacket of proprietary ﬁle formats and soft-
ware and hardware dependencies.
Because these and related problems are not completely new, they have been
recognized by researchers in the contexts of document management (e.g., storage
and retrieval of documents) (Klischewski 2003), content management (e.g., pro-
ducing content for Web sites) (Eschenfelder 2004), and records management (e.g.,
preserving records) (Mnjama and Wamukoya 2007). These challenges also indi-
cate why knowledge management, such as the sharing of codiﬁed knowledge in
the pursuit of high-quality government services (Kim and Lee 2006, p. 370), is
increasingly coming to the attention of public administrators (Wiig 2002, p. 224).
Therefore, according to Apostolou et al. (2009), ‘‘This sector inevitably requires
better management of continually changing knowledge so that public servants can
effectively handle administrative tasks and deliver services to citizens’’ (p. 20).
However, the adoption of ECM has not been investigated in sufﬁcient depth in
non-proﬁt or governmental contexts (except for a few examples, e.g., Iverson and
Burkart 2007). Studying these challenges from the viewpoint of the entire orga-
nization and assessing how they relate to and impact each other is essential in
order to guide public administrators in their efforts of improving their information
management capabilities. ECM presents an integrated perspective on knowledge
management, information resource management, and electronic document man-
agement (Munkvold et al. 2006), and as such, it covers and extends many of the
issues raised by the ongoing digitization of information. Päivärinta and Munkvold
202
A. Simons et al.

(2005, p. 1) suggest that ECM ‘‘integrates the major issues covered in these areas
[knowledge management, information resource management, and electronic doc-
ument management], while also going beyond their individual and collective
scopes,’’ and Munkvold et al. (2006, p. 95) observe, ‘‘While most of the issues
related to ECM initiatives can be traced back to established research areas when
studied individually, the ECM concept integrates these issues in a new manner.’’
Against this background, this chapter describes the experiences gained from an
ECM implementation project at the NPA in Liechtenstein. The next section
describes the procedures for data collection and analysis.
Study Overview
Field data was collected at the NPA in Liechtenstein (http://www.llv.li).1 With an
estimated population of around 35,000, the Principality of Liechtenstein is an
alpine microstate in Central Europe, bordered by Switzerland and Austria (Wi-
kipedia 2011). The capital is Vaduz, but with around 5,800 inhabitants, the biggest
town in Liechtenstein is Schaan. Liechtenstein, which has the highest gross
domestic product per person in the world when adjusted by purchasing power
parity, is a constitutional monarchy divided into eleven municipalities (Wikipedia
2011). The NPA in Liechtenstein is organized into more than forty departments,
including the Ofﬁce of Environmental Protection, the Ofﬁce for Foreign Affairs,
the National Audit Ofﬁce, and the Building and Fire Authority, that all together
employ approximately 960 people (National Public Administration Liechtenstein
2012a). Many of these departments are further divided into special divisions. For
example, the Ofﬁce of Social Affairs operates, among others, divisions for Internal
Services, Children and Youth, and Therapeutic Services (National Public
Administration Liechtenstein 2012b). The NPA established e-government early,
and today their electronic services are among the leaders in Europe. In 2012,
Liechtenstein was ranked 14th among the world e-government development
leaders in the United Nations E-Government Survey (United Nations 2012, p. 11).
All of their forms and templates, which are standardized across the various
departments, can be ﬁlled out electronically, and nearly 75 % of them can be
handed in electronically—around the clock and online (National Public Admin-
istration Liechtenstein 2012c). In addition, application handling is efﬁcient. For
example, a request for a driver’s license is usually processed within a day. The
Ofﬁce of Human and Administrative Resources (OHAR) is responsible for
1 Note that this study reports the state of the ECM project at the NPA in Liechtenstein in
January, 2011. Between the time that the study was conducted and when this report was written
and published, some departments and ofﬁces of the NPA in Liechtenstein have been reorganized.
For example, since 2012, the OHAR is no longer responsible for e-government and ECM;
instead, a new dedicated department of e-Government was established for that purpose
(‘‘Fachstelle E-Government’’).
Lessons Learned from Implementing Enterprise Content Management
203

coordinating the development of e-government at the national level (National
Public Administration Liechtenstein 2012d), so they also took the lead on the
national ECM project that the researchers were allowed to observe for 19 months
(March 2009 to October 2010). During that time, the researchers studied the
implementation and customization of an ECM software suite at one of the NPA’s
ofﬁces, which was undertaken as proof of concept for a possible ECM roll-out
across all departments. Multiple data sources were used in this study, including
observations of workshops and meetings, document analyses (e.g., project docu-
mentation, software manuals), and semi-structured interviews. Table 1 provides an
overview of the data sources.
The study began with informal interviews and meetings with stakeholders in
order to set the frame for the research project. For example, in an initial meeting in
March 2009 and a 90 min presentation in May 2009, the ECM project board
provided the researchers with information about the ECM initiative, and the
vendor introduced the ECM software to be implemented in a meeting held in July
2009. Based on these meetings, topical semi-structured interviews were conducted.
During October 2009, twelve people were interviewed in interviews lasting an
average of one hour. The interviewees, who were selected by the ECM project
board, either belonged to the ECM project group or were ECM end users. As such,
the respondents were actively involved and experienced in implementing or using
an ECM system in a public administration context. The interviews covered open-
ended questions on the ECM project, such as questions regarding its drivers,
objectives, difﬁculties, and outcomes. All interviews were audio-taped and fully
Table 1 Data sources
Date
Type of data
Approximate length
2009-03-17
Initial interview with ECM project board
90 min
2009-05-27
Presentation (project overview)
90 min
2009-07-30
ECM software training
60 min
2009-10-09
Interview (project member)
60 min
2009-10-22
Five interviews (ofﬁce managers, ofﬁcers)
60 min each
2009-10-23
Two interviews (ofﬁcers)
60 min each
2009-10-27
Four interviews (project members, ofﬁce director)
60 min each
2009-11-13
Workshop (ECM project board)
90 min
2009-12-17
Presentation of interview results
150 min
2010-01-20
Workshop (alternative courses of action)
180 min
2010-03-03
Presentation (project progress)
60 min
2010-03-09
Workshop (ECM project board)
120 min
2010-04-15
Workshop (ECM project board)
120 min
2010-05-07
Workshop (ECM project board)
120 min
2010-08-19
Workshop (ECM project board)
60 min
2010-10-12
Interview (project member)
30 min
2010-10-13
Interview (project member)
30 min
2010-10-29
Interview (ofﬁce director)
30 min
2010-10-20
Interview (project member)
30 min
204
A. Simons et al.

transcribed to allow for detailed qualitative data analysis. The transcripts were sent
back to the informants for approval. The software tool NVivo was used to analyze
and code the data, and the informants’ experiences and viewpoints were sum-
marized and categorized by the researchers and presented to them in December
2009. On the basis of these interviews, the ECM project board and the researchers
met in workshops held from January to August 2010 to develop jointly a set of
guidelines on how to implement ECM in other departments in Liechtenstein.
(These guidelines are not in the focus of this chapter and will be presented else-
where.) Finally, the relevance and usefulness of the lessons learned and the
guidelines were evaluated in a second interview round in October 2010. These
interviews, each of which lasted approximately 30 min, were not fully transcribed,
but the researchers took notes where appropriate.
ECM at the NPA in Liechtenstein
Project Summary
This section summarizes the course of the ECM project at the NPA in Liechten-
stein from its initiation in early 2004 to the ﬁrst implementation of an ECM
software suite at one of NPA’s departments during 2009 and 2010. At the most
basic level, the project work can be organized into four main phases: the pre-
liminary study, prototyping, vendor selection, and the ﬁrst implementation project.
The activities undertaken and the results the project team achieved during these
phases are summarized in the following paragraphs.
Preliminary study. The main objective of the preliminary study was to assess
the relevance of ECM for the NPA. An initial project team included representa-
tives from the OHAR, from the department where the ECM system was later
implemented, and from other ofﬁces that were selected for their strong interna-
tional orientation, their close relationship to government, and their responsibilities
for archiving and data security, among other criteria. In addition, external ECM
consultants brought their expertise into the preliminary study, which delivered a
set of information management challenges the NPA in Liechtenstein faced at that
time and which were expected to be addressed by an ECM implementation.
Among the project group’s conclusions was that the existing IT infrastructure was
fragmented, with several departments running their own systems for document and
content management. While these systems had been designed to meet the
departments’ individual needs, they were not sufﬁciently integrated with each
other and they caused unnecessary expenditures. In addition, standardized
guidelines for the storage and retrieval of digital documents and records were not
available at that time.
Prototyping. As a result, the decision was made to develop an initial ECM
prototype in one of the divisions of the department that was later selected for the
Lessons Learned from Implementing Enterprise Content Management
205

ﬁrst ECM implementation. The objectives were to acquire a more profound
understanding of ECM, to gather ﬁrst practical experiences, and to identify soft-
ware requirements to support later evaluation of ECM vendors. These efforts led
the project group to determine a set of potential ECM beneﬁts for the NPA in
Liechtenstein, among which were improved service quality, improved traceability
and accountability, disaster recovery, savings in time and money, and location-
independent, real time access to information.
Vendor selection. Building upon the results of the ﬁrst two phases, particularly
the identiﬁed software requirements, the ECM project board then published an
international call for tenders for an ECM software package. The goals of imple-
menting ECM at the NPA were deﬁned and compared to the service portfolios of
potential ECM vendors. These ECM objectives included improving the efﬁciency
of information and knowledge work, increasing the transparency in working
procedures, supporting the reconstruction of prior business cases and transactions,
simplifying the accountability of digital information processing, identifying and
eliminating weaknesses in the execution of processes, safeguarding a consistently
good and secure sharing of records among departments, and improving the quality
of data processing and archiving.
Implementation. After deciding on an ECM software platform, the government
of Liechtenstein approved a ﬁrst implementation in the division in which the
prototyping had been done. The researchers were allowed to accompany this
project phase in order to identify lessons at the organizational and department
levels to be addressed in further ECM implementation projects in other depart-
ments. While lessons at the organizational level concern the ECM initiative as a
whole, those at the department level refer to the implementation of ECM in
speciﬁc departments. The lessons learned are summarized in the next section,
where the informants’ viewpoints and experiences are combined with the aca-
demic literature on the subject to create an overview that is grounded in both prior
ECM research and current ECM practice.
Lessons Learned
Organizational-Level Lessons
At the organizational level, seven important lessons can be distinguished: develop
and follow a vision for ECM; design and implement an ECM strategy; identify and
monitor the objectives of ECM; develop an ECM project portfolio; clearly deﬁne
and communicate the subject, scope, and purpose of the ECM initiative; contin-
ually evaluate and improve the overall ECM initiative; and establish an ECM
steering board that takes care of these tasks.
Develop and follow a vision for ECM. Given the many ECM-related approaches
that are currently discussed in the public administration sector (e.g., document
management, records management, Web content management), the development
206
A. Simons et al.

of an integrative vision for ECM is important to the success of any ECM initiative.
A vision is generally understood as a clear and challenging picture of the future
(Kaplan and Norton 2008, p. 40) that is meaningful, understandable, and inspiring
(Nolan 1997, p. 123). In order for a vision to be understandable, it must be
unambiguous, coherent, and clear (Nonaka 1998, p. 186). The case of the NPA in
Liechtenstein made clear that an ECM vision must be both challenging and
achievable, as many respondents believed that continuing calls for the entirely
‘‘paperless ofﬁce’’ would remain unanswered in the foreseeable future. If an ECM
vision is also aligned with the overall IT and e-government strategy, it has the
potential to create consensus among executives, to spread positive energy to the
ofﬁcers, and to serve as the starting point for the overall ECM implementation.
Design and implement an ECM strategy. While it has been argued that many
organizations are still taking a more tactical than strategic approach to imple-
menting ECM (although the latter would make for more efﬁcient processing of
information) (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 651), from the beginning, the NPA in
Liechtenstein considered the implementation of ECM a long-term, strategic
endeavor that would go beyond technological issues. ECM strategy development
requires many capabilities and activities, including the ability to audit content,
specify ECM needs, and analyze the value, cost, and effort of implementation
(O’Callaghan and Smits 2005, p. 1275). The data suggest that, in particular, the
evaluation and justiﬁcation of ECM investments is an important (but challenging)
task in ECM strategy development. While project members found it difﬁcult to
assess comprehensively the ﬁnancial pros and cons of the ECM implementation,
particularly at an organizational level, it was considered important to do so in order
to gain governmental support and to plan and coordinate required personnel
resources. The respondents also mentioned that the deﬁnition of ECM objectives
was another necessary but challenging subtask of ECM strategy development.
Identify and monitor the objectives of ECM. According to vom Brocke et al.
(2011b), ‘‘the understanding is still vague as to what organizations strive to gain
through implementing ECM systems and what results they can expect from the
same’’ (p. 966). Indeed, there are a great many objectives that ECM-adopting
organizations can pursue, including complying with legal regulations, reducing
search times, enhancing information quality, and improving communication and
collaboration processes (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, pp. 2–3). Given this
broad range of potentially relevant ECM targets, the identiﬁcation of an appro-
priate set of ECM objectives is an important task in ECM implementation. In
particular, the data suggest that the deﬁnition of ECM objectives is important to
ensure that departmental ECM projects are properly aligned with the overall ECM
initiative. Obviously, setting ECM objectives at an organization-wide level avoids
conﬂicting goals among the departments, but departments have diverse task
assignments and diverse needs and requirements concerning information and
knowledge management. Accordingly, they should be provided with enough
freedom to reﬁne ECM objectives in a way that best matches their individual
contexts. The deﬁnition of ECM objectives is also important in clarifying and
operationalizing what the implementation of ECM means and does not mean for a
Lessons Learned from Implementing Enterprise Content Management
207

particular department. As such, clearly deﬁning ECM objectives helps organiza-
tions to control expectations that may not be fulﬁlled in the end. Finally,
respondents said that clear and balanced ECM objectives provide the ground for
monitoring project progress by, for example, making it possible to break them
down into key performance indicators that can be measured during the run-time of
the project.
Develop an ECM project portfolio. Government departments, like business
divisions in an enterprise context, have diverse information needs and working
procedures, and they create and receive diverse types of documents and records.
As a result, the impact of ECM implementation can differ among them signiﬁ-
cantly. In particular, it proved important at the NPA in Liechtenstein to assess both
the value (i.e., expected outcomes) and the feasibility (i.e., complexity of imple-
mentation) of ECM implementation for different organizational units. To support
decision-making at an organization-wide level, these measures can be used to
arrange departments in an ECM project portfolio as a roadmap to the overall ECM
implementation. Early ECM implementations in departments that offer high
potential for optimization and low implementation complexity provide the
opportunity to communicate project success early and maximize the project’s
acceptance among ECM end users.
Clearly deﬁne and communicate the subject, scope, and purpose of the ECM
initiative. In the practice of ECM, there is a signiﬁcant confusion around the
meaning and boundaries of the concept. It is only recently that Hooper (2009), for
example, called for an elaborate and insightful ECM deﬁnition (p. 56). In fact,
given the many ECM-related concepts available in both research and practice,
organizations are increasingly confused about which terminology to use (Smith
and McKeen 2003, pp. 648, 657). Such confusion could also be observed in this
study, where the understanding of ECM widely differed among the respondents.
Such confusion can easily become an obstacle to the project work because dif-
ferent understandings are likely to raise different expectations that, if unfulﬁlled,
can lead to resistance against the project. Therefore, the ECM project team in
Liechtenstein conducted several seminars and workshops in which they regularly
informed users about the subject, scope, and purpose of the ECM initiative.
Continually evaluate and improve the overall ECM initiative. Discussions with
ECM project members from the NPA in Liechtenstein suggest that project pro-
gress should be continually monitored in order to identify and evaluate potential
improvements. As such, ECM should not be considered a single implementation
project but an ongoing strategic endeavor. The exchange of experiences among the
different departments and the assessment of their ECM maturity appear to be
important to improving the success of the overall ECM initiative. For that purpose,
workshops with representatives from all departments should be conducted
regularly.
Establish an ECM steering board. The tasks summarized above must be
addressed at a department-independent level, for example, in the form of an ECM
steering board. Representatives with both managerial and technological back-
grounds and from a variety of departments should be part of an ECM steering
208
A. Simons et al.

board that takes responsibility for supporting departments in their endeavor to
implement ECM. At the NPA in Liechtenstein, representatives from government,
as well as ofﬁce directors, were also considered important members of an ECM
steering board in order to align the ECM project with related initiatives (e.g., e-
government).
Departmental-Level Lessons
Another eight lessons were categorized at the department level: gain and maintain
executive support, deﬁne a strategy to transition from paper to digital records,
inform users about the pros and cons of ECM, evaluate and provide required
resources, perform a content audit, establish content ownership, train ECM users
and champions, and establish a project group that takes care of these tasks.
Gain and maintain executive support. Top management support is probably a
critical success factor for all types of IT projects (e.g., Brown and Vessey 2003,
p. 66). The case of the NPA in Liechtenstein suggests that, in order to convince the
top management of ECM’s value, it is essential to communicate clearly its scope,
objectives, beneﬁts, and possible challenges of the ECM initiative. Committed
executives can then persuade ofﬁcers of the relevance and need for ECM and
encourage them to use the new system in the pursuit of project milestones. As
such, executive support appears to be an important precondition for successful
change management in the context of ECM implementation.
Deﬁne a strategy to transition from paper to digital records. ‘‘The imple-
mentation of ECM … often represents a massive attempt to collect and digitize
content (Smith and McKeen 2003)’’ (vom Brocke et al. 2011b, p. 971). For many
government departments ECM implementation involves a change from paper to
digital records. The case of the NPA in Liechtenstein conﬁrmed the prevalence of
this change and that, because some records have to be maintained for a long time
(e.g., a person’s dossier from his or her birth to death), managing the transition
from paper to digital dossiers efﬁciently is particularly challenging for government
departments. At the most basic level, which records will be retained in paper
format and which ones will be scanned into a digital format must be determined. It
is similarly important to determine who is responsible for the digitization of paper
records, including the scanning and disposal of paper ﬁles and the assignment of
required metadata. Even the effort required in removing paper clips can be sig-
niﬁcant in the scanning of documents. These and similar issues should be con-
sidered when assessing the necessity, practicability, and efﬁciency of digitizing
paper records and implementing the processes required.
Inform users about the pros and cons of ECM. According to Rockley et al.
(2003), ‘‘people are unwilling to change unless there is a very good reason for that
change and they can see the beneﬁts’’ (p. 402). In the course of the interviews, it
became clear that not all the beneﬁts that ECM promises are immediately useful to
every person. For example, digitizing their paper archives can save departments
storage room and money, but it may also mean an extra effort for the ofﬁcers who
Lessons Learned from Implementing Enterprise Content Management
209

have to scan the paper records. If these ofﬁcers cannot see the beneﬁts of ECM,
they are likely to resist the project. The data suggest that informing them about the
drawbacks of ECM is as important as communicating the beneﬁts of ECM, as
knowledge of both can positively impact the acceptance of ECM. Project group
members also suggested that success stories from other departments can improve
the end users’ perceptions of ECM’s usefulness.
Evaluate and provide required resources. The implementation of ECM does
not necessarily reduce workload; in fact, in some cases, it leads to extra work (e.g.,
scanning paper documents or deﬁning required metadata). Therefore, additional
personnel expenditures that result from an ECM implementation, such as the time
required to eliminate paper archives, must be estimated properly. The imple-
mentation of ECM can also necessitate additional investments in infrastructure.
For example, ofﬁcers at the department under study needed a second screen to
operate the new ECM system efﬁciently. Therefore, required personnel and
infrastructure resources must be committed early to promote the staff’s acceptance
of ECM.
Perform a content audit. The implementation and customization of an ECM
software system requires organizations to analyze the content their employees
create and use as well as how they work with it (vom Brocke et al. 2011a, p. 485).
In the NPA case it became apparent that government departments have diverse
information needs and working procedures and that they create and receive very
different types of documents and records. Therefore, it is important to determine
which IT infrastructures they use to fulﬁll which tasks and what documents are
involved in this process. In other words, a content audit (e.g., Rockley et al. 2003,
p. 104) must be conducted. In particular, the data suggest that an ECM system
must be properly aligned with existing working procedures because ofﬁcers will
not feel comfortable using it otherwise. For example, at the beginning of the ECM
roll-out at the NPA in Liechtenstein, ofﬁcers were unaccustomed to the system’s
terminology and the implemented workﬂows. Accordingly, software customiza-
tion regarding these and similar aspects of the process is an important factor in the
successful establishment of ECM.
Establish content ownership. One of the more noteworthy outcomes of a con-
tent audit is that of content ownership. Päivärinta and Munkvold (2005, p. 5) frame
content ownership as ‘‘general-level understanding of who should be in charge of
what in the enterprise.’’ Smith and McKeen (2003, p. 651) see the stewardship of
content as being closely connected to the content lifecycle, which ‘‘involves all of
the activities required to manage the different forms of organizational content.’’
The collected data support both conceptualizations, suggesting that content own-
ership in the public administration sector refers in particular to the implementation
of the content lifecycle activities, such as content creation (e.g., who opens a new
record), capturing (e.g., who scans the records), maintaining (e.g., who enters the
required metadata), retrieving (e.g., who has the permission to access content), and
retaining (e.g., who is responsible for the archiving of records). Establishing
content ownership along the content lifecycle is particularly important in ensuring
that ofﬁcers operate the ECM system in accordance with its designated use.
210
A. Simons et al.

Train ECM end users and champions. The success of IT systems is inﬂuenced
by the usefulness and ease of use that end users perceive (Davis 1989, p. 320).
Software training of end users in how to use the new software is important to
enhancing their perceived ease of use, but it can also inﬂuence the employees’
perception of the new system’s usefulness. The study of the NPA case showed, for
example, that in an effective approach to ECM user training the training manager
should use department-speciﬁc records and working procedures as guiding
examples and illustrate the beneﬁts of the new ECM system throughout the
training course. In addition, it was suggested that the training be conducted as
close to a test phase as possible so the ofﬁcers can apply the newly acquired
knowledge in practice as soon as possible. Some of the ofﬁcers were trained more
intensively than others, which allowed them to assist and advise their colleagues in
the practical use of the new ECM system. These ofﬁcers, who were called ‘‘ECM
super users’’ or ‘‘ECM champions’’ at the NPA, were selected because of their
high intrinsic motivation to embrace ECM, among other reasons. However, ECM
champions also served as counterparts for their colleagues, spread the word about
ECM, and explained the beneﬁts of the new system to the workforce. This role is
in line with Burn and Robins (2003), who explain that IT champions generally
‘‘keep the project momentum going and … enthuse other members of the orga-
nization to come on board’’ (p. 27).
Establish a project group. Finally, the experiences gained at the NPA in
Liechtenstein suggest that the implementation of ECM in different departments
and the required tasks should be coordinated and executed by individuals from the
departments themselves. Different departments have differing task assignments,
working procedures, and information needs, and the use of the departments’
individual knowledge is critical in accounting for these differences. Departmental
ofﬁcers have speciﬁc knowledge about their information-related tasks and work-
ﬂows, which is essential when it comes to the customization of an ECM system.
The involvement of departmental ofﬁcers can also help to build conﬁdence in the
project and overcome resistance among the workforce. Accordingly, the ECM
project team that was established in the ofﬁce under study was comprised primarily
of departmental employees, although it also included representatives from the
ECM steering board (e.g., project managers from the OHAR) and the software
vendor, as well as external ECM consultants. Respondents suggested also
involving ECM champions from prior ECM implementations in other departments
in order to beneﬁt from organizational learning.
Discussion
The study revealed ﬁfteen lessons learned from implementing ECM at the NPA in
Liechtenstein, which we organized at an organizational and departmental level. As
such, the study complements related studies on ECM adoption, most notably
Munkvold et al. (2006), Nordheim and Päivärinta (2006), and Scott et al. (2004).
Lessons Learned from Implementing Enterprise Content Management
211

However, the results presented differ in three ways from those of related studies.
First, many studies, including Munkvold et al. (2006), Nordheim and Päivärinta
(2006), and Scott et al. (2004), explore the adoption of ECM in a business envi-
ronment, whereas our study has been done in a government context. Second, many
of the lessons we identiﬁed are strategic in nature, while related studies tend to focus
on the tactical level of ECM implementation (although the three studies listed above
are exceptions). Third, even though the duration of our study was substantial, we
reported only on a ﬁrst implementation project of ECM at a single government
department, while some other ECM studies are longitudinal in nature. However, as
ECM is an ongoing, strategic endeavor that takes place at an organizational level,
rather than a single implementation project, some related studies were able to
present only preliminary results of implementation, too. For example, in their study
of ECM systems customization, Nordheim and Päivärinta (2004) analyze the cus-
tomization challenges and needs anticipated only by ECM champions and IT experts
from Statoil (p. 2). We contend that it is mainly for these three reasons that many of
the lessons we learned differ from those of related studies.
We also share results with other studies. Both user training and executive support,
for example, are recognized as ECM success factors in the present study, but they are
also recognized in the two case studies of Statoil and J.D. Edwards. In particular, the
Statoil experience suggests that a lack of user training can result in low acceptance
levels among the workforce (Munkvold et al. 2006, p. 83), and the J.D. Edwards case
highlights the need for gaining and maintaining executive support during project
initiation (Scott et al. 2004, pp. 41–42). In addition, Scott et al. (2004, p. 42) identify
the establishment of content ownership and the transfer of knowledge, expertise, and
experience across ECM projects as important success factors, and Munkvold et al.
(2006, p. 77) conﬁrm the need for justifying and evaluating ECM investments and
establishing a support/service organization for ECM. (We conceptualized estab-
lishing a support/service organization as an ECM steering board.) However, both
studies also discuss factors that were notably absent from this study. Content reuse
and single source publishing, for example, are often considered important ECM
success factors (e.g., Scott et al. 2004, p. 43), and a systematic (i.e., preferably
automatic) approach to the reuse of enterprise content is particularly beneﬁcial when
content is embedded in various documents (e.g., when product-related content is
included in Web pages, marketing brochures, company ﬂyers, product manuals, and
sales presentations). If the content is edited, all of these documents must be updated,
which often proves to be time- and cost-intensive. Content management technolo-
gies can help organizations to improve the speed in which these materials are created
and to ensure that they are kept consistent wherever they are stored (Rockley et al.
2003, p. 25). However, the reuse of content did not play a major role in the present
study, perhaps because of its organizational context (a government department),
where content is seldom reused.
In addition, the NPA case revealed some factors that have not been accentuated
in prior ECM research. One such example is the development of a transition
strategy from paper to digital records. Even though many companies still create
and process documents in paper format, this factor is particularly relevant in a
212
A. Simons et al.

government context, where records are often retained for long periods. Federal
agencies have to comply with legal regulations and standards, perhaps even more
than industry sectors do, because their work relies heavily on records that are
required to preserve the rule of law (Mnjama and Wamukoya 2007, p. 275).
Accordingly, many government departments have huge paper archives, increasing
the effort required for digitization. Our study also showed that it is beneﬁcial to
communicate the pros and cons of ECM clearly because some of its beneﬁts are
more relevant at the organizational level than at the level of the individual
employee. For example, digitizing their paper archives can save departments
storage space and money, but it may also mean extra effort for the ofﬁcers who
have to scan the records. These ofﬁcers should be informed about the extra work,
along with the beneﬁts of doing it. It is likely that they resist the project otherwise.
Summary and Outlook
In this chapter, we presented ﬁfteen lessons learned from implementing ECM at
the NPA in Liechtenstein. We explained these factors at the organizational level
(e.g., develop an ECM project portfolio and deﬁne and communicate the subject,
scope, and purpose of ECM) and at the departmental level (e.g., develop a tran-
sition strategy from paper to digital records and establish content ownership). The
study complements related studies on ECM implementation, which were con-
ducted primarily in the industry sector, because it was conducted in a government
context; therefore, the study goes beyond the scope of related works. While some
of the factors identiﬁed in the chapter conﬁrm prior research, we also identiﬁed
factors that have not been accentuated in earlier studies, thereby making a useful
contribution to the existing body of ECM knowledge.
Some limitations to the present study must be acknowledged. Most notably, the
NPA in Liechtenstein—and the studied department speciﬁcally—are characterized
by highly speciﬁc organizational structures and working procedures, so the results
may not be generalizable to all government environments. In addition, the study
covered only a ﬁrst implementation project of ECM at a single department; even
though the study proceeded for 19 months, it is likely that some factors remained
unexposed in this research.
In 2012, the researchers were updated about the current status of the ECM
initiative at the NPA in Liechtenstein. The ﬁrst implementation project of the ECM
software was considered a success. The digitization of the paper archives has
nearly been completed, and software-related queries and change requests are the
exception, not the rule. The ECM software will be implemented stepwise in
additional departments. (The software is currently being rolled out in three other
departments.) The researchers plan to accompany the further implementation of
ECM at the NPA in Liechtenstein in order to address the limitations of this study.
Lessons Learned from Implementing Enterprise Content Management
213

Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank the anonymous interviewees who supported them
in this research.
References
Alavi, M., & Leidner, D. E. (2001). Review: Knowledge management and knowledge
management systems: Conceptual foundations and research issues. Management Information
Systems Quarterly, 25(1), 107–136.
Apostolou, D., Stojanovic, N., & Anicic, D. (2009). Responsive knowledge management for
public administration: An event-driven approach. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 24(5), 20–30.
Association for Information and Image Management. (2011). What is enterprise content
management (ECM)? Retrieved July 5, 2011, from http://www.aiim.org/What-is-ECM-
Enterprise-Content-Management
Blair, B. T. (2004). An enterprise content management primer. Information Management Journal,
38(5), 64–66.
Brown, C. V., & Vessey, I. (2003). Managing the next wave of enterprise systems: Leveraging
lessons from ERP. Management Information Systems Quarterly Executive, 2(1), 65–77.
Burn, J., & Robins, G. (2003). Moving towards e-government: A case study of organisational
change processes. Logistics Information Management, 16(1), 25–35.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of
information technology. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 13(3), 319–340.
Dinsdale, G. (1997). The new public management and the future public service: Push, pull,
balance, and beyond. Canadian Public Administration, 40(2), 370–386.
Eschenfelder, K. R. (2004). Behind the web site: An inside look at the production of web-based
textual government information. Government Information Quarterly, 21(3), 337–358.
Evans, D., & Yen, D. C. (2006). E-government: Evolving relationship of citizens and
government, domestic, and international development. Government Information Quarterly,
23(2), 207–235.
Gil-García, J. R., & Pardo, T. A. (2005). E-government success factors: Mapping practical tools
to theoretical foundations. Government Information Quarterly, 22(2), 187–216.
Hooper, D. (2009). Enterprise content management: Deﬁnition please! Infonomics, 23(4), 56.
Iverson, J., & Burkart, P. (2007). Managing electronic documents and work ﬂows: Enterprise
content management at work in nonproﬁt organizations. Nonproﬁt Management and
Leadership, 17(4), 403–419.
Johnston, G. P., & Bowen, D. V. (2005). The beneﬁts of electronic records management systems:
A general review of published and some unpublished cases. Records Management Journal,
15(3), 131–140.
Kaplan, R. S., & Norton, D. P. (2008). The execution premium: Linking strategy to operations for
competitive advantage. Boston: McGraw-Hill Professional.
Kim, S., & Lee, H. (2006). The impact of organizational context and information technology on
employee knowledge-sharing capabilities. Public Administration Review, 66(3), 370–385.
Klischewski, R. (2003). Towards an ontology for e-document management in public adminis-
tration: The case of Schleswig-Holstein. In Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Layne, K., & Lee, J. (2001). Developing fully functional e-government: A four stage model.
Government Information Quarterly, 18(2), 122–136.
Mnjama, N., & Wamukoya, J. (2007). E-government and records management: An assessment
tool for e-records readiness in government. The Electronic Library, 25(3), 274–284.
Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2003). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of Statoil. In Proceedings of the 11th European
Conference on Information Systems (pp. 1364–1383). Naples.
214
A. Simons et al.

Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2006). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of Statoil. Scandinavian Journal of Information
Systems, 18(2), 69–100.
National Public Administration Liechtenstein. (2012a). Englische Bezeichnungen für Landtag,
Regierung, Verwaltung und Gerichte. Retrieved January 30, 2012, from http://www.llv.li/pdf-
llv-rk-englische_amtsbezeichnungen.pdf
National Public Administration Liechtenstein. (2012b). Home: Amt für Soziale Dienste (ASD).
Retrieved January 30, 2012, from http://www.llv.li/amtsstellen/llv-asd-home.htm
National Public Administration Liechtenstein. (2012c). Onlineschalter. Retrieved January 30,
2012, from http://www.llv.li/schalteronline.htm
National Public Administration Liechtenstein. (2012d). Home: Amt für Personal und Organi-
sation (APO). Retrieved January 30, 2012, from http://www.llv.li/amtsstellen/llv-apo-
home.htm
Nolan, R. L. (1997). Top-down driven architecture design. Information Management and
Computer Security, 5(4), 123–125.
Nonaka, I. (1998). The knowledge creating company. In D. Neef, G. A. Siesfeld, & J. Cefola
(Eds.), The economic impact of knowledge (pp. 175–188). Woburn: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Nordheim, S., & Päivärinta, T. (2004). Customization of enterprise content management systems:
An exploratory case study. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Nordheim, S., & Päivärinta, T. (2006). Implementing enterprise content management: From
evolution through strategy to contradictions out-of-the-box. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 648–662.
O’Callaghan, R., & Smits, M. (2005). A strategy development process for enterprise content
management. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Information Systems (pp.
1271–1282). Regensburg.
Päivärinta, T., & Munkvold, B. E. (2005). Enterprise content management: An integrated
perspective on information management. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Patterson, G., & Sprehe, J. T. (2002). Principal challenges facing electronic records management
in federal agencies today. Government Information Quarterly, 19(3), 307–315.
Pethe, A., & Lalvani, M. (2006). Towards economic empowerment of urban local bodies in
Maharashtra. Economic and Political Weekly, 41(7), 635–641.
Rockley, A., Kostur, P., & Manning, S. (2003). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content
strategy. Indianapolis: New Riders.
Scott, J., Globe, A., & Schiffner, K. (2004). Jungles and gardens: The evolution of knowledge
management at J.D. Edwards. Management Information Systems Quarterly Executive, 3(1),
37–52.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(1), 647–659.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Guest editorial: Characterizing the
evolving research on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 627–634.
United Nations. (2012). E-government survey 2012. E-government for the people. New York.
Retrieved March 28, 2013, from http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/un/
unpan048065.pdf
United States General Accounting Ofﬁce. (2002). Information management: Challenges in
managing and preserving electronic records. Retrieved December 1, 2010, from http://
www.gao.gov/new.items/d02586.pdf
vom Brocke, J., Seidel, S., & Simons, A. (2010). Bridging the gap between enterprise content
management and creativity: A research framework. In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI.
Lessons Learned from Implementing Enterprise Content Management
215

vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., & Cleven, A. (2011a). Towards a business process-oriented
approach to enterprise content management: The ECM-Blueprinting framework. Information
Systems and e-Business Management, 9(4), 475–496.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., Herbst, A., Derungs, R., & Novotny, S. (2011b). The business
drivers behind ECM initiatives: A process perspective. Business Process Management
Journal, 17(6), 965–985.
Wiig, K. M. (2002). Knowledge management in public administration. Journal of Knowledge
Management, 6(3), 224–239.
Wikipedia. (2011). Liechtenstein. Retrieved January 30, 2011, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Liechtenstein
216
A. Simons et al.

Exploring Two Approaches
to Information Management: Two
Swedish Municipalities as Examples
Proscovia Svärd
Abstract This chapter explores the differences and similarities between records
management and enterprise content management (ECM). The need to manage
information effectively as a key asset is central to the delivery of quality service,
and information management determines the efﬁciency level of business opera-
tions. Information systems are deployed to facilitate the effective creation, capture,
organization, management, and dissemination of information, so a proactive and
holistic approach to information management is critical if information is to be
leveraged in a manner that gives organizations a competitive edge. Records
management, a ﬁeld of management that controls the systematic management of
records, enables organizations to comply with the regulations governing corporate
or government information. It also serves broad societal purposes like the pro-
motion of government accountability and transparency and the societal memory.
While records management focuses on records that carry the evidentiary value of
business transactions, other types of information resources such as documents,
audio ﬁles, video clips, and desktop information have proliferated in governments.
This type of information is unstructured and highly relevant to the day-to-day
business operations, but often it is kept in multiple places and in duplicate, which
complicates the task of ﬁnding it. This development has led to new ways of
managing information such as ECM. ECM is variably deﬁned as a technology, an
initiative, a framework or a set of skills that organizations employ to manage their
unstructured information resources.
P. Svärd (&)
Institute of Culture and History, Faculty of Humanities, University of Amsterdam,
P.C. Hoofthuis, Spuistraat 134, 1012 VB Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: p.svard@uva.nl
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_13,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
217

Introduction
Proponents of ECM claim that integrated records management is part of their
strategy (Iverson and Burkart 2007; MacMillan and Huff 2009), yet they seldom
discuss in detail what records management stands for. It is important to explore the
differences and similarities in the two information management approaches—
ECM and records management—in order to help organizations make an informed
choice. MacMillan and Huff (2009) argue that records management helps orga-
nizations meet compliance requirements, but it also plays an important role in
society. ECM is a relatively new information management concept (Smith and
McKeen 2003) that requires additional investigation.
Both ECM and records management are deployed to help organizations with
the management of their information resources. Information is one of the key
assets in an organization, and if well-leveraged, it facilitates efﬁcient business
operations. All organizations need to capture, manage, organize and retrieve
information in an efﬁcient and timely manner so information can be reliable,
complete and usable. Feldman and Villars (2006) argue that information has
become so valuable and therefore of major concern to organizations.
Records management is an established ﬁeld of research and practice that has
traditionally been employed to help organizations in the private and public sector
to manage their records systematically (Shepherd and Yeo 2003). Records man-
agement has enabled organizations to meet compliance requirements that govern
information, but it also serves broad societal purposes of accountability and
transparency
in democratic
societies
and
enhances
the
societal memory.
McKemmish (1997) articulates the broad role that records management plays in
democratic societies as that of facilitating the documentation of governmental,
organizational, and individual actions, and allowing the maintenance and acces-
sibility of reliable, authentic and useable records of action to function contem-
poraneously and over time, thereby enhancing corporate and democratic
accountability and cultural heritage (p. 1). Records management focuses on
records as evidence of transactions that are undertaken by individuals, govern-
ments or organizations.
In addition to records that carry evidence, organizations are experiencing a
proliferation of unstructured data. Capturing unstructured content facilitates the
collection and conversion of information into valuable knowledge (Iverson and
Burkart 2007). Bantin (2008) and MacMillan and Huff (2009) argue that the
recognition that unstructured data is as important for business operations as
structured data has led to the need to manage it more effectively. Unstructured
content has given rise to new information management approaches such as ECM.
ECM is variably deﬁned as a technology, an initiative, a framework, and skills that
organizations embrace to manage their information resources (de Carvalho 2007;
Munkvold et al. 2006; vom Brocke et al. 2011). ECM focuses on unstructured
content which includes documents, web pages, reports, audio ﬁles, video clips, and
desktop information. MacMillan and Huff (2009) state that 80 % of an
218
P. Svärd

organization’s information is unstructured. This type of information is kept in
multiple places and often in duplicate, which complicates the task of ﬁnding it.
Managing both structured and unstructured information requires a proactive and
holistic approach that emphasizes information planning prior to the acquisition of
information systems (Borglund 2006). Planning how to manage information is
essential to creating an information management infrastructure that will manage
the information and records’ continuum and promote the reuse of information.
This chapter examines differences and similarities in ECM and records manage-
ment using two local administrations as illustrative examples and building on data
collected during the ﬁrst two years of the author’s Ph.D. work. The chapter pro-
ceeds with a short presentation of the two approaches of ECM and records man-
agement; a description of the research method, including the techniques that were
applied for data collection and analysis; the research ﬁndings, based on both the
literature review and the empirical data gathered at the two municipalities; a
discussion of these ﬁndings; and, ﬁnally, a summary of the major differences and
similarities in ECM and records management.
Research Background
Records Management
Records differ from other information assets because of the inherent transactional
characteristics that make them reliable and authentic (Reed 2005a). According to
ISO 15489-1 (2001), a record is ‘‘information created, received, and maintained as
evidence and information by an organization or person in pursuance of legal
obligations or in the transaction of business’’ (p. 7). Therefore, records attest the
transactions that take place in an organization, and it is their evidentiary value that
makes them different from other forms of documents. A record must have the
following characteristics (ISO 15489-1 2001, p. 11):
• Authenticity: A record must be what it purports to be: it must have been created
or sent by the person who is supposed to have created it or sent it, and it must
have been created or sent at the purported date.
• Reliability: The content of a record must be a full representation of what it
purports to be and should be created at the time of the transaction.
• Integrity: The record must be complete and unaltered.
• Usability: The record must be easy to locate, retrieve, present and interpret.
The provenance of the records is central to establishing their authenticity; the
principle of provenance enables the records to be the traced to their original source
and refers to ‘‘‘the ofﬁce of origin’ of records, or that ofﬁce, administrative entity,
person, family, ﬁrm, from which records, personal papers or manuscripts origi-
nate’’ (Hofman 2005; Winget 2004, p. 1). Provenance is also referred to as
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management
219

‘‘respect des fonds,’’ and InterPARES deﬁnes provenance as ‘‘the relationships
between records and the organizations or individuals that created, accumulated
and/or maintained and used them in the conduct of personal or corporate activity’’
(Duranti and Preston 2008, p. 831). The principle of provenance is crucial in the
digital networked environment because it establishes the authenticity of infor-
mation and records and points out which organizations are responsible for the
management of their entire continuation. Upward (2009) argues that it is essential
for electronic records to be identiﬁed and managed in a manner that will make
them accessible for as long as they are of value (p. 2).
According to ISO 15489-1 (2001), records management is a ‘‘ﬁeld of manage-
ment responsible for the efﬁcient and systematic control of the creation, receipt,
maintenance, use and disposition of records, including processes for capturing and
maintaining evidence of and information about business activities and transactions
in the form of records’’ (p. 7). The archival science perspective also emphasizes the
context, provenance, integrity, and authenticity of the records (Yeo 2007, p. 318).
There are two approaches to the theory and practice of records management,
namely lifecycle and continuum. The lifecycle model, which emanates from North
America, assumes that records live through current, semi-current and non-current
phases during which they should be either retained or disposed of (Bantin 2008,
p. 12). It demarcates records management from archives management. Developed
by Australian theoreticians, the continuum model provides a framework for the
continuum of records management responsibilities (McKemmish 1997). It chal-
lenges the traditional view that separates archives and records as distinct entities,
instead offering a framework for thinking and practice related to records and
archives (McKemmish 2001). It is deﬁned as ‘‘a consistent and coherent regime of
management processes from the time of the creation of records (and before crea-
tion, in the design of records keeping systems), through to the preservation and use
of records as archives’’ (Chachage and Ngulube 2006, p. 5) and considers records to
be always in the process of ‘‘becoming’’ since they can be recalled to be used in
other contexts (McKemmish 1997; Reed 2005b). The model can be used as a basis
of analysis and as a tool to communicate records management issues with all of the
records creators in an organization. It highlights the need to
• develop interconnected methods for document creation,
• establish and maintain the routines within which documents are captured as
records, and
• control the different processes involved in organizing documents and records as
an archive (Upward 2001).
In the continuum model, the stages that the records undergo are recurring and
reverberating activities that fall both within archives and records management
(Upward 2001).
Records management systems endeavor to maintain records related to statutory,
regulatory, ﬁscal, operational, and historic activities for a speciﬁed period of time
or long-term, while document systems focus on maintaining as many documents as
220
P. Svärd

possible for the purpose of organizational reference (Emery 2003). Harries (2009)
argues that electronic document and records management has stressed compliance
and continuity and has enhanced the reliability of corporate memories. However, it
has failed to act as a knowledge base with which to guide future action.
Enterprise Content Management
ECM focuses on content, a term used to cover a broad range of digital assets,
including web content management, document management, knowledge man-
agement, and content management, (Gilbane 2000). MacMillan and Huff (2009)
argue that content can be structured or unstructured. Unstructured information is
often stored in duplicate, including project spaces, shared disk drives, and desk-
tops, which makes it very difﬁcult to ﬁnd it. Also, the accuracy of unstructured
information can suffer from redundant storage since it is difﬁcult to differentiate
recent versions from superseded ones, and it may also create content silos.
Structured information contains highly organized data that is used by organiza-
tional applications, including lists of employees, customers, products, orders,
inventories and purchases. Structured data can be stored in a relational database
with a deﬁned structure.
Tyrväinen et al. (2006) refer to the content of assets like documents, websites,
intranets, and extranets in their ECM study. Kampffmeyer (2004) goes further in
dividing content into three categories (p. 31):
• Structured content: data delivered in a standardized layout from database-sup-
ported systems (e.g., formatted data sets from a database)
• Weakly structured content: information and documents that may include layout
and metadata, but that are not standardized (e.g., word processing ﬁles)
• Unstructured content: any kind of information objects whose contents cannot be
directly referenced and which lack a separation of content, layout, and metadata
(e.g., images, GIFs, video, faxes).
ECM is an overarching term that refers to a number of different technologies used
in the management of especially unstructured content (Iverson and Burkart 2007,
p. 407). ECM is used to deal with the issue of vertical applications and island
architectures, and it serves as a uniﬁed repository for all types of content (Kam-
pffmeyer 2004). Bantin (2008) postulates that ECM emerged around 2000 as an
application ‘‘that combines the functionality of enterprise document management
systems with service of content management application’’ (p. 139). This point of
view is further conﬁrmed by Kemp (2006) who states that ECM systems are
comparatively new and are believed to be advancements of electronic document
management systems. Iverson and Burkart (2007) claim that ECM began as a
mechanism for staging and publishing web material.
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management
221

ECM is deﬁned variously but Munkvold et al. (2006) deﬁne it as ‘‘integrated
enterprise-wide management of the life cycles of all forms of recorded information
content and their metadata, organized according to corporate taxonomies, and
supported by appropriate technological and administrative infrastructures’’ (p. 69).
According to Kemp (2006), ECM is ‘‘an aspiration that an enterprise’s intellectual
assets (content) and document systems can be effectively linked to business pro-
cesses for effective utilizations’’ (p. 3), so ECM developments are driven by four
factors (Kemp 2006, p. 19):
• Finding existing content
• Reducing content duplication
• Increasing networking
• Using workﬂow technologies to speed up business processes.
ECM has evolved to address business needs at an enterprise level and to
integrate traditionally independent content management technologies like docu-
ment management, enterprise collaboration, knowledge management, email
management, archiving, records management, and web content management, all in
an uniﬁed platform. ECM is variably deﬁned as a technology, an initiative, a
framework, and skills (Glazer et al. 2005; MacMillan and Huff 2009; Nordheim
and Päivärinta 2004; Smith and McKeen 2003). MacMillan and Huff (2009) argue
that ECM is about the people in an organization, the context and content, and lastly
about the technology.
McNally (2010) observes that ECM systems have been criticized for reducing
the skills of workers and for encouraging the sub-division, routinization, and
automation of workﬂow processes (pp. 357–363). He contends that ECM
empowers management since it facilitates the surveillance of workers and offers
possibilities to audit job performance. Therefore, McNally (2010) sees ECM
systems as management tools with security controls that can restrict document
access, editing, and auditing applications since ECM systems enable management
to track minute changes in a document’s history. This process restricts workers’
access to a broad knowledge base of the institution’s work.
Research Method
The chapter builds on the licentiate research that the author conducted from 2009
to 2011. It draws on a review of articles on ECM and records management and on
empirical data collected at two Swedish municipalities.
Merriam (1988) states that all research should take into consideration previous
work in the area of investigation, and she posits that a literature review facilitates
an understanding of the area of interest by presenting the state of the art. The
literature review in this study served two main purposes: understanding and
describing ECM and records management and distinguishing between the two
222
P. Svärd

concepts. Therefore, databases like Google Scholar, Emerald, Libris, JSTOR, and
ScienceDirect were consulted for articles and books written by researchers and
practitioners alike. The use of search terms like content, record, information,
structured and unstructured information, records management and content man-
agement led to scientiﬁc and practitioner literature in the ﬁelds of records man-
agement and content management.
Establishing what ECM means required analysis of the literature because it had
not been implemented at the two municipalities under study. Accordingly, the
ECM-related results presented here emanate primarily from the literature review.
The review produced important characteristics, features and components of ECM,
in the following categorized as: enterprise architecture, business process man-
agement, collaboration, knowledge management, system integration, information
lifecycle management, and repurposing of information. These factors provided the
ground for analyzing the two case studies not only from the viewpoint of records
management but also from an ECM perspective.
Case studies were used because they enable the researcher to carry out
empirical inquiries, and they facilitate the investigation of a contemporary phe-
nomenon in its real-life context using multiple sources of evidence (Baharein and
Noor 2008; Yin 2009). The case study approach, which helps to clarify the
dynamics of a single setting, entails data collection methods like interviews,
questionnaires, document analyses, and observations (Eisenhardt 2002, p. 8;
Ritchie and Spencer 2002). The empirical data highlighted the problems experi-
enced by the two organizations that were espousing records management to
manage their information resources. A total of ﬁfty-two interviews were conducted
at the two municipalities.
Research Findings
Results from the Literature Review
Overview
Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of both approaches to information man-
agement, records management and ECM, while the discussion here emphasizes
only those characteristics that are central to each approach.
Records management is a discipline and a practice that has occupied records
managers/archivists for some time, while ECM is a relatively new area of research
that has engaged primarily information systems researchers and the technology
industry. Records management is driven by legislative requirements, which
explains why ECM proponents claim to have integrated it in their strategy.
Records management focuses on records and their evidentiary value, while the
focus of ECM is on unstructured content. ECM has an enterprise-wide view and
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management
223

Table 1 Characteristics of ECM and records management
ECM
Records management
Discipline
An emerging discipline and practice; a
subﬁeld of information systems for
the computing disciplines
Established scientiﬁc discipline and
practice
Engages information systems researchers
and the IT industry
Engages records managers and
archivists, and the IT industry
Endeavors to bring all of an
organization’s unstructured content
into a managed environment in order
to promote information sharing,
controlled access, retrievability, and
archiving
Aims to control the creation, receipt,
maintenance, use and disposition of
records efﬁciently and systematically
Deﬁned as an integrated approach (an
initiative) to managing all of an
organization’s information content
Systems
Facilitate access to all the relevant
information in an organization
Used to manage records effectively by
maintaining their authenticity,
reliability, integrity and usability and
to improve the quality and coherence
of processes
Drivers
Driven by the need to meet the global
collaboration needs of an
organization’s employees, customers
and partners through digital
information content
Driven by legislative requirements;
underpins government accountability,
freedom of information and privacy
legislation, protection of people’s
rights and entitlements, and the
quality of the archival heritage
A convergence of document
management, web content
management and digital asset
management
Addresses the records’ integrity,
reliability, authenticity, retention,
disposition and transparency
Claims to improve business process
management, collaboration, change
management, repurposing of
information, knowledge
management, system integration,
enterprise architecture, and the
management of information
throughout its lifecycle
Takes care of risk management,
knowledge sharing and
organizational efﬁciency
Focus
Focuses on unstructured content
Focuses on records that are differentiated
from other types of information
because of their evidentiary value
Approach
Lifecycle view: active, semi-active and
retention or destruction
Has a lifecycle and a continuum
perspective, and a view to long-term
preservation
Orientation Technology-oriented
Both technology-oriented and analogue
(continued)
224
P. Svärd

prescribes enterprise architecture, business process management, collaboration,
knowledge management, system integration, information lifecycle management,
and repurposing of information. Records management is based on international
standards that should promote good records management practice, while no ECM
standards are extant. Records management systems have been used to maintain the
quality of a record, that is, its authenticity, reliability, integrity and usability, while
ECM systems endeavor to manage and facilitate access to all the relevant infor-
mation in an organization.
Several ECM factors were identiﬁed through the literature review as necessary
for the successful implementation of ECM (Glazer et al. 2005; Jenkins et al. 2006;
MacMillan and Huff 2009; vom Brocke et al. 2011): enterprise architecture,
business process management; change management; collaboration; knowledge
management; system integration; information lifecycle management; and repur-
posing of information. These factors are further described in what follows.
Enterprise Architecture
The successful deployment of information systems should be based on an enter-
prise architecture because it enables good decision making processes regarding
information systems and how they ﬁt the existing IT environment (Johnson and
Ekstedt 2007). Enterprise architecture models include applications, business pro-
cesses, information and the organization’s IT infrastructure. Enterprise architec-
ture has become increasingly important to organizations as it helps them to
understand the impact of technology investments on overall operations and to
achieve legislative compliance. It also provides the essential framework for the
communication, interpretation, and implementation of corporate objectives
through a well aligned IT environment (Butler Group 2004).
Table 1 (continued)
ECM
Records management
Standards
Is based on quality assurance standards
ISO 9001 and ISO 17025
Guided by international standards and
best practices, including:
• ISO 15489.1: 2002 records
management—General
• ISO 15489.2: 2002 records
management—Guidelines
• Open archival information system
(OAIS ISO 14721: 2002)
• Standard for metadata ISO 23081
• Technical report on work process
analysis for records ISO/TR 26122:
2008
• ISO 30300: 2011 management system
for records
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management
225

Business Process Management
The analysis of business processes facilitates the ability to identify where records
and information are created and received and helps organizations to improve
business operations in their entirety focusing on the input, the output, the cus-
tomer, and the value of the output (Hammer and Champy 1995; ISO/TR
26122 2008; Ljungberg and Larsson 2008).
Change Management
Change is inevitable in today’s business world but it is important that the reasons
for change are effectively communicated (Rockley et al. 2003). Flexibility and
responsiveness are key to implementing change successfully, but change also
requires capabilities like strong leadership, the ability to change the organizational
culture and values, and a focus on customer service (Sundberg 2006). McGreevy
(2003) points out that difﬁculties in managing organizations through a transition
should not to be underestimated because individual reaction can vary. The line
managers play a central role in implementing change by providing relevant
explanations and information to those affected.
Collaboration
Collaboration is central to ECM; it enables employees to work dynamically toward
a common goal while capturing, storing, and archiving the content they produce.
Conceptually, collaboration implies awareness, motivation, self-synchronization,
participation, mediation, reciprocity, reﬂection, and engagement (AIIM Market
Intelligence 2009). In short, though, collaboration is about openness and knowl-
edge sharing. According to Hockman (2009), collaboration involves:
• Awareness of documents that are shared between departments
• Communicating internal knowledge and experience
• Coming up with a common search terminology that will be meaningful to
different departments as indexing terms
• A shared vision for process improvement
• Input from every department to encourage buy-in.
Knowledge Management
ECM and knowledge management, which is of increasing importance in modern
organizations, are linked. ECM implementation in organizations is underpinned by
the idea and practice of information sharing, which enhances the capture and
transfer of knowledge. In the past, knowledge was retained in the minds of the
226
P. Svärd

employees, but ECM can help organizations to retain it even if employees leave
(Butler Group 2004; MacMillan and Huff 2009). Alavi and Leidner (2001) write
that knowledge management ‘‘refers to identifying and leveraging the collective
knowledge in an organization to help an organization to compete’’ and argue that it
promotes innovativeness and responsiveness (p. 113).
System Integration
System integration allows systems to ‘‘talk’’ to each other and eliminates infor-
mation silos (Rockley et al. 2003). The management of information systems is
central to business operations, and access to accurate and timely information
depends on how well aligned these information systems are with business oper-
ations. According to Themistocleous et al. (2004), the real value of information
systems derives from the integration of disparate applications so they can support
processes across the whole value chain.
Information Lifecycle Management
The lifecycle of information and records has to be managed from its creation,
management, and review to its distribution, storage, and eventual disposition
(MacMillan and Huff 2009). ECM applies a lifecycle model to the management of
information. Munkvold et al.’s (2006) research conﬁrms that Statoil’s ECM
strategy focused on the entire lifecycle of the content—that is, from capture/
creation to long-term preservation or disposal.
Repurposing of Information
Repurposing content saves money (Iverson and Burkart 2007) and enables orga-
nizations to avoid ‘‘reinventing the wheel.’’ Rockley et al. (2003) recommend a
uniﬁed content repository where information would be readily available for use
and reuse. Currently, there is considerable emphasis on the reuse of government
information at the national and European levels through the public sector infor-
mation (psi) directive (European Union 2003). Reuse or repurposing promotes the
development of new services from existing governmental data sets.
Results from the Case Studies
This section presents the empirical ﬁndings from the two case studies.
Swedish municipalities engage in a complex web of processes that facilitate the
delivery of services to citizens. The services they deliver include education
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management
227

services, community and welfare services such as child care and care of the
elderly, cultural and recreational services, and housing. They also provide infra-
structure and utilities, such as water and electricity, and are responsible for local
and regional transport, municipal planning, and environmental planning (Larsson
and Bäck 2008). The two municipalities in this study made some e-services
available to citizens and are actively working toward improving their workﬂows in
order to be more effective. The municipal activities generate a signiﬁcant amount
of information in keeping with the archival law and the Swedish constitution
(Bohlin 2010).
The municipalities use records management since both organizations deal with
public information that is regulated by law. The empirical data revealed that the
municipalities were not aware of ECM, but that they addressed some of the ECM
factors in their records management initiatives nevertheless. These include change
management, business process management, collaboration, repurposing of infor-
mation, knowledge management, and system integration. Table 2 depicts the
activities pursued by municipalities A and B in terms of the ECM factors.
The municipalities undertook change management whenever new systems were
implemented because they recognized that, without training for the staff, there
would be a high risk of under-utilization or rejection of the new system. The
training also enabled the employees to acquire the necessary skills required in the
new environment. The municipalities were further involved in the analysis of their
business processes, although this effort was pursued at differing levels of maturity;
municipality A had done much more than municipality B. However, a compli-
cation ensued in municipality A, since there was no common deﬁnition of what
business process management was. In municipality B process analysis was still
premature but there was awareness of its importance. Collaboration around
information management issues was emerging, and municipality A had even
engaged in information modeling in order to identify information needs. However,
this information modeling was not done at an organization-wide level. Information
was being reused by consulting old documents or the archives, so this area needed
further development, but the fact that the municipalities did not have digital
archives complicated the proper reuse of information.
Both municipalities faced the challenge of knowledge management. There was
no systematic way of managing the knowledge accumulated by long-term
employees who developed specialized knowledge. However, there was awareness
of the need to establish a more developed system for knowledge capture. The
current system required retiring/vacating ofﬁcers to pass on knowledge by working
together with their replacements.
The many information systems the municipalities operated complicated their
integration and posed a threat to the maintenance of public information. As a result
of uncoordinated procurement procedures, whereby individual units purchased
their own systems without considering the organizational overall information
needs, disparate information systems created islands of information. While there
were procedures for how new systems should be procured, they were not being
followed.
228
P. Svärd

Table 2 The ECM and records management overlap
ECM factors
Records management factors
Municipality A
Municipality B
Change
management
Engaged in change management
Engaged in change management
Business process
management
Process work is on-going and process owners are
appointed
Process work is still ongoing
Results led to the standardization of case handling in
one of the units and some merging of units
Results in one of the units led to rationalization of work,
reduction in staff and some merging of units
Collaboration
Staff members engaged in information collaboration but
not in a systematic way
Information collaboration existed but not in a
systematic manner
A project to promote information sharing was planned
They were having some issues with collaboration and
the requirements of the public records act
Repurposing of
information
Consultation with earlier documents and the archives
was performed
Consultation of earlier documents and archives had
been done
Investments in a common repository have been made
Information modeling has been undertaken
Knowledge
management
Employee-to-employee transfer of knowledge was the
norm
Employee-to-employee transfer of knowledge was the
norm
Two projects were underway to systematize knowledge
management
System integration
System integration was taken into consideration at the
systems procurement stage
System integration was taken into consideration at the
systems procurement stage
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management
229

The municipalities also lacked enterprise architecture to guide their investments
in IT infrastructure, which resulted in an IT infrastructure consisting of disparate
systems that created islands of information. Issues regarding enterprise architec-
ture had become more pronounced in municipality A because there was a growing
awareness of how systems, processes and practices should be linked, even if these
relationships were not well planned for or mapped.
The management of unstructured data in both municipalities remained a
challenge.
Discussion
This study set out to determine the differences between and similarities in ECM
and records management. Both approaches to information management help
organizations deal with their information assets in order to deliver quality service,
improve their ability to locate their information resources, and improve their
decision making processes. Table 1 lists the characteristics of both approaches
while Table 2 presents areas of overlap.
The purpose of records management is to capture, maintain, organize and
facilitate the retrieval of information systematically, but it also serves broad
societal purposes. Records management uses the lifecycle and the records con-
tinuum models, the latter of which offers the more effective way to manage digital
information since it combines records and archives management. It also promotes
the reuse of information since it views records as artifacts that are constantly in the
process of being recalled for reuse in new environments.
For its part, ECM focuses on the effective management of unstructured content
in order to improve business efﬁciency. It emphasizes the salient features of a well-
functioning information management infrastructure, such as enterprise architec-
ture, business process management, change management, collaboration, knowl-
edge management, system integration, information lifecycle management, and
repurposing of information. ECM systems have been criticized for routinizing
work processes and increasing management’s control over workers, while records
management systems are blamed for failing to act as a knowledge base that guides
future action.
As Table 2 shows, the empirical ﬁndings from the two case studies conﬁrmed
that ECM’s prescribed factors were being espoused by the two municipalities
under their records management frameworks, but these factors needed further
development if the municipalities were to achieve an enterprise-wide information
management. The efforts invested by the municipalities in the management of their
information resources were fragmentary and did not cover the management of the
entire continuum of information and records. What is more, the management of
unstructured data remained a signiﬁcant challenge.
The proliferation of digital information assets will require robust records
management regimes that can maintain authentic records and high-quality
230
P. Svärd

information. The networked environment makes the concept of a record and its
provenance important because information must be trustworthy, authentic and
complete, and users must be able to trace it back to its source. On the other hand,
organizations have considerable content that does not qualify as records but that is
important to the day-to-day running of business. This is what ECM proponents
refer to as unstructured data.
A close examination of both information management approaches reveals that
they should complement each other, as both approaches have components that are
relevant to modern information management. The search of academic outlets and
databases revealed no documented collaboration between archivists/records
managers and ECM proponents and its research community. Although the ECM
strategy claims to have integrated records management, archivists/records man-
agers are not discussing what this integration implies. The mention of records
management in the ECM literature is narrow and does not address fully what
records management stands for in society. Records management serves business
interests, but it also promotes transparent and accountable government work and
enhances the societal memory.
Collaboration of several disciplines is required in order to deal with the soft
(people issues) and hard (technological issues) challenges of information man-
agement. Instead of creating new acronyms, there is need to improve existing and
established information management approaches that will help organizations to get
a return on their investments in information systems and to manage the records and
information continuum.
The ﬁndings conﬁrm that the municipalities were pursuing certain aspects of
ECM within their records management frameworks. Despite their challenges, both
municipalities were making discernible efforts to improve their information
management strategies. However, the challenges are still enormous and omni-
present and are likely to compromise access and reuse of information. Perhaps
what these organizations need is a combination of both approaches in order to
ensure their ability to comply with regulations through the management of records
and to ensure the effective management of all of their content assets. A combi-
nation of ECM and records management could be a proactive and holistic
approach to information management.
Conclusion
Records management and ECM endeavor to help organizations deal with their
information resources. However, as their names suggest, the two approaches differ
in that records management focuses on records, while ECM focuses on content.
Records management has an evidence-based approach and serves broad societal
purposes. As the municipalities continue to struggle with the deluge of unstruc-
tured data to be brought into a managed environment, it is important to understand
the implications of the solutions they espouse. One of the conclusions that could be
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management
231

drawn from this research is the necessity to understand the differences between the
two information management resources. This is because information management
constitutes both soft and technical issues, and there is need to strike a balance
between the two in order to ﬁnd the right solution. Records management offers a
deeper understanding of some of the broad societal issues while ECM is more
business focused. As the two approaches focus on two different types of infor-
mation, that is, records and general information, their management also requires
different systems. Records management systems have to meet the requirements of
maintaining trustworthy, complete and reliable records. There are, however,
claims that ECM systems can now manage records (Sprehe 2005). Organizations
need to manage records in order to comply with regulations but they also need to
focus on the content that facilitates day-to-day business operations. Another
conclusion drawn from this research is that in today’s complex information
environment, organizations need to use both approaches in order to build a well-
functioning information management infrastructure.
In summary, as Table 1 shows, ECM and records management differ primarily
in ﬁve ways:
• ECM is an emerging discipline that requires further investigation, while records
management is an established discipline and practice that continues to develop.
• ECM focuses on content, while records management focuses on records.
• ECM is driven by business efﬁciency while records management is driven by
legislation and broad societal needs of government transparency and account-
ability for democratic developments and the need to maintain the societal memory.
• ECM is technology-oriented while records management is both technology-
oriented and analogue.
• ECM is pursued by information systems scientists and the IT industry while
records management has occupied records managers/archivists and the IT
industry.
The empirical data conﬁrmed that there also are similarities in ECM and
records management as demonstrated in Table 2. These similarities, which cov-
ered areas of improvements pursued by the two municipalities, included:
• Change management efforts conducted during the introduction of new systems
• Business process management undertaken to improve service delivery to the
citizens
• Collaboration, knowledge management, and repurposing of information, which
are still underdeveloped but are being discussed
• System integration undertaken in order to avoid information silos and enhance
collaboration around information use.
Acknowledgments I acknowledge with thanks the European Union Objective 2 funding for this
project in the Centrum för Digital Informationsförvaltning (CEDIF). I also express my appre-
ciation of the support received from my supervisors; Karen Anderson and Erik Borglund. Special
thanks also go to the participants of both municipalities whose views informed this research.
232
P. Svärd

References
AIIM Market Intelligence. (2009). State of the ECM industry 2009: Who’s achieved it, how are
they doing it and is it working for them? Retrieved February 20, 2013, from http://
www.oracle.com/us/products/middleware/content-management/059472.pdf
Alavi, M., & Leidner, D. E. (2001). Review: Knowledge management and knowledge
management systems: Conceptual foundations and research issues. MIS Quarterly, 25(1),
107–136.
Baharein, K., & Noor, M. (2008). Case study: A strategic research methodology. American
Journal of Applied Sciences, 5(11), 1602–1604.
Bantin, P. C. (2008). Understanding data and information systems for recordkeeping. London:
Facet Publishing.
Bohlin, A. (2010). Offentlighetsprincipen (Åttonde Upplaga ed.). Mölnlycke: Elanders Sverige
AB.
Borglund, E. (2006). A predictive model for attaining quality in recordkeeping. Sundsvall: Mid
Sweden University.
Butler Group. (2004). Enterprise architecture: An end-to-end approach for re-aligning IT with
business aims. Butler Group.
Chachage, B., & Ngulube, P. (2006). Management of business records in Tanzania: An
exploratory case study of selected companies. South African Journal of Information
Management, 8(3).
de Carvalho, R. A. (2007). An enterprise content management solution based on open source. In
L. D. Xu, A. M. Tjoa, & S. S. Chaudhry (Eds.), IFIP: The international federation for
information processing (Vol. 254, pp. 173–183). Research and practical issues of enterprise
information systems II: Volume 1 Boston: Springer.
Duranti, L., & Preston, R. (Eds.) (2008). International research on permanent authentic records
in electronic systems (InterPARES) 2: Experiential, interactive and dynamic records.
Retrieved February 20, 2013, from http://132.248.242.14/*proto/web/preservacion_archivos/
libro_luciana_experiential.pdf
Eisenhardt, K. M. (2002). Building theories from case study research. In A. M. Huberman & M.
B. Miles (Eds.), The qualitative researcher’s companion (pp. 5–35). Thousand Oaks: Sage
Publications Inc.
Emery, P. (2003). Document and records management: Understanding the differences and
embracing integration, white paper. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from http://www.docu-
man.co.uk/assets/doc/DocumentAndRecordsManagement.pdf
European Union. (2003). Directive 2003/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
November 2013 on the re-use of public sector information. Ofﬁcial Journal of the European
Union.
Retrieved
February
20,
2013,
from
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/
LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:345:0090:0096:EN:PDF
Feldman, S., & Villars, R. L. (2006). The information lifecycle management imperative. White
paper.
Retrieved
February
20,
2013,
from
ftp://ftp.compaq.com/pub/la/products/
idc_lifecycle_management_imperative.pdf
Gilbane, F. (2000). What is content management? The Gilbane Report, 8(8), 1–24. Retrieved
February 20, 2013, from http://gilbane.com/artpdf/GR8.8.pdf
Glazer, D., Jenkins, T., & Schaper, H. (2005). Turning content into competitive advantage:
Enterprise content management technology, what you need to know. Waterloo, Ontario: Open
Text Corporation.
Hammer, M., & Champy, J. (1995). Re-engineering the corporation. A manifestor for business
revolution. London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing.
Harries, S. (2009). Managing records, making knowledge and good governance. Records
Management Journal, 19(1), 16–25.
Hockman, H. (2009). Change management: Ensuring ECM success by preparing end-users for
automation. Optical Image Technology. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from http://
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management
233

www.docﬁnity.com/change-management-ensuring-ecm-success-by-preparing-end-users-for-
automation/
Hofman, H. (2005). The archive. In S. McKemmish, M. Piggot, B. Reed, & F. Upward (Eds.),
Archives: Recordkeeping in society (Topics in Australasian library and information studies).
New South Wales: Charles Sturt University, Centre for Information Studies.
ISO 15489-1. (2001). Information and documentation: Records management: Part 1 general.
ISO/TR 26122. (2008). Information and documentation: Work process analysis for records (1st
ed.).
Iverson, J., & Burkart, P. (2007). Managing electronic documents and work ﬂows: Enterprise
content management at work in nonproﬁt organizations. Nonproﬁt Management and
Leadership, 17(4), 403–419.
Jenkins, T., Köhler, W., & Shackleton, J. (2006). Turning content into competitive advantage:
Enterprise content management methods, what you need to now. Waterloo, Ontario: Open
Text Corporation.
Johnson, P., & Ekstedt, M. (2007). Enterprise architecture, models and analyses for information
systems decision making. Pozkal: Studentlitteratur.
Kampffmeyer, U. (2004). Trends in record, document and enterprise content management. White
paper.
Retrieved
February
20,
2013,
from
http://twiki.bes-sa.org/pub/Development/
SystemsPlanningInformationSystem/ECM_Handout_english_SER.pdf
Kemp, J. (2006). A critical analysis into the use of enterprise content management systems in the
IT industry. A report based on a dissertation by James Kemp. Retrieved February 20, 2013,
from http://www.aiimhost.com/whitepapers/JamesKemp_ECMReport.pdf
Larsson, T., & Bäck, H. (2008). Governing and governance in Sweden. Elanders Hungary Kft.
Ljungberg,
A.,
&
Larsson,
E.
(2008).
Processbaserad
verksamhetsutveckling.
Lund:
Studentlitteratur.
MacMillan, A., & Huff, B. (2009). Transforming infoglut! A pragmatic strategy for oracle
enterprise content management: Manage corporate-wide content and intellectural property.
USA: The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.
McGreevy, M. (2003). Managing the transition. Industrial and Commercial Training, 35(6),
241–246.
McKemmish, S. (1997). Yesterday, today and tomorrow: A continuum of responsibility. In
Proceedings of the Records Management Association of Australia 14th National Convention.
Perth.
McKemmish, S. (2001). Placing records continuum theory and practice. Archival Science, 1(4),
333–359.
McNally, M. B. (2010). Enterprise content management systems and the application of Taylorism
and Fordism to intellectual labour. Ephemera: Theory and Politics in Organization, 10(3/4),
357–373.
Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case study research in education. A qualitative approach. San Franscisco:
Jossey-Bass Inc.
Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2006). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of Statoil. Scandinavian Journal of Information
Systems, 18(2), 69–100.
Nordheim, S., & Päivärinta, T. (2004). Customization of enterprise content management systems:
An exploratory case study. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Reed, B. (2005a). Reading the records continuum: Interpretations and explorations. Archives and
Manuscripts, 33(1), 19–43.
Reed, B. (2005b). Records. In S. McKemmish, M. Piggot, B. Reed, & F. Upward (Eds.),
Archives: Recordkeeping in society (Topics in Australasian library and information studies).
New South Wales: Charles Sturt University, Centre for Information Studies.
Ritchie, J., & Spencer, L. (2002). Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research. In A.
M. Huberman & M. B. Miles (Eds.), The qualitative researcher’s companion (pp. 305–329).
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications Inc.
234
P. Svärd

Rockley, A., Kostur, P., & Manning, S. (2003). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content
strategy. Indianapolis: New Riders.
Shepherd, E., & Yeo, G. (2003). Managing records, a handbook of principles and practice.
London: Facet publishing.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(1), 647–659.
Sprehe, J. T. (2005). The positive beneﬁts of electronic records management in the context of
enterprise content management. Government Information Quarterly, 22(2), 297–303.
Sundberg, H. (2006). Problems in public e-services development. Härnösand: Mid Sweden
University.
Themistocleous, M., Irani, Z., Kuljis, J., & Love, P. E. D. (2004). Extending the information
system lifecycle through enterprise application integration: A case study experience. In
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Guest editorial: Characterizing the
evolving research on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 627–634.
Upward, F. (2001). Modelling the continuum as paradigm shift in recordkeeping and archiving
processes, and beyond: A personal reﬂection. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from http://
infotech.monash.edu/research/groups/rcrg/publications/frank-u-rmj-2001.pdf
Upward, F. (2009). Structuring the records continuum: Part 1: Post custodial principles and
properties. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from http://www.infotech.monash.edu.au/research/
groups/rcrg/publications/recordscontinuum-fupp1.html
vom Brocke, J., Derungs, R., Herbst, A., Novotny, S., & Simons, A. (2011). The drivers behind
enterprise content management: A process-oriented perspective. In Proceedings of the 19th
European Conference on Information Systems (pp. 445–456). Helsinki.
Winget, M. (2004). The archival principle of provenance and its application to image
representation systems. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from www.unc.edu/winget/research/
provenance.pdf
Yeo, G. (2007). Concepts of record (1): Evidence, information, and persistent representations.
The American Archivist, 70, 315–343.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage
Publications Inc.
Exploring Two Approaches to Information Management
235

Conceptual Modeling of Electronic
Content and Documents in ECM Systems
Design: Results from a Modeling Project
at Hoval
Alexander Simons, Jan vom Brocke, Stefan Fleischer
and Jörg Becker
Abstract The implementation of enterprise content management (ECM) software
requires careful analysis of an organization’s content and document assets, and
conceptual information models can provide substantial input for ECM systems
design. In particular, content models can support the documentation of both orga-
nizational and technological conditions and can illuminate software-related
requirements. Therefore, a conceptual modeling language for electronic content and
documents has to meet several conditions: It should facilitate description of how
content can be reused in different documents, the creators and users of content, and
the software systems involved. In addition, given the vast number of digital assets
created and used in today’s organizations, such a language has to safeguard a clear
and consistent representation while also being ready for efﬁcient adaptation and
maintenance. With the help of the general criteria of conceptual modeling proposed
by Becker et al. (e.g., correctness, relevance, clarity), this chapter identiﬁes these
and related requirements and argues that they are not sufﬁciently met by existing
modeling approaches. As a response, we propose a novel modeling language that
we developed and evaluated during the course of a modeling project at Hoval, to be
used in describing electronic content and documents.
A. Simons (&)  J. vom Brocke
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-Josef-Strasse 21,
9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein
e-mail: alexander.simons@uni.li
J. vom Brocke
e-mail: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li
S. Fleischer  J. Becker
European Research Center for Information Systems, University of Muenster,
Leonardo-Campus 3, 48149 Muenster, Germany
e-mail: stefan.ﬂeischer@ercis.uni-muenster.de
J. Becker
e-mail: becker@ercis.uni-muenster.de
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_14,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
237

Introduction
In the era of digitization, companies are confronted with an avalanche of infor-
mation, and managing the tremendous amount and variety of electronic and other
content requires, among other things, maintaining its timeliness and consistency
(vom Brocke et al. 2010, p. 3). For example, product descriptions are often present
in several types of materials, including instruction manuals, technical speciﬁca-
tions, sales catalogues and presentations, and marketing brochures and ﬂyers
(compare Rockley et al. 2003, pp. 4–6). Particularly in the early stages of the
product lifecycle, such content is subject to frequent change, which can have
important economic effects, as updating all of the relevant documents may be
difﬁcult and time-consuming at an enterprise-wide level. Because many of these
documents make promises about products and services, outdated and/or incon-
sistent documentation can lead to problems with customers and can even have
legal consequences (vom Brocke et al. 2011b, p. 970).
Numerous approaches to and software solutions for dealing with these or
similar challenges have been discussed in research and practice. Document
management systems, which primarily serve to store and retrieve ﬁles, are of only
limited help to companies. More promising are solutions for content management
that allow content to be handled independently of its structure and presentation
(Boiko 2002, pp. 135–137; Clark 2007, pp. 44–45) so textual or graphical content
from different containers, such as Web pages and documents, can be reused efﬁ-
ciently (O’Callaghan and Smits 2005, pp. 1272–1274), increasing efﬁciency in the
process of creating documents and keeping them up-to-date (e.g., when content is
revised, extended, or translated) (Rockley et al. 2003, pp. 24–26). Since the turn of
the millennium, the academic discipline of IS has addressed the issue of company-
wide management of electronic content and documents under the umbrella term
‘‘ECM’’ (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005; Smith and McKeen 2003; Tyrväinen
et al. 2006; vom Brocke et al. 2011a), an integrated concept that supports the
management of all possible forms of information across their entire lifecycle
(Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 648; vom Brocke et al. 2011b, pp. 967–968).
ECM systems offer a number of beneﬁts to companies, such as meeting
retention requirements, improving information quality, capturing and disseminat-
ing knowledge, and supporting collaboration within and between organizations
(Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, pp. 2–3). At the same time, however, organiza-
tions that adopt ECM face challenges in selecting the right software, implementing
efﬁcient workﬂows, deﬁning and maintaining metadata and corporate taxonomies,
and training and motivating the staff involved (Munkvold et al. 2006, pp. 75–84).
The process of implementing ECM in a company begins with identifying and
analyzing the company’s existing documents and content, a process commonly
referred to as a ‘‘content audit’’ (Rockley et al. 2003, pp. 104–105). Having an in-
depth understanding of a company’s business documents and content facilitates the
best possible selection and customization of ECM systems (O’Callaghan and
Smits 2005, p. 1275).
238
A. Simons et al.

The results of a content audit can be documented in the form of conceptual
models that can then serve as starting point for ECM systems implementation.
Conceptual content models help the creators and users of content by describing
and illustrating the software systems involved and how content is reused in dif-
ferent documents. As such, content models may facilitate communication between
the ECM project team and the users who will work with the system, revealing the
demand for support on the system’s side in particular (Kung and Solvberg 1986; as
cited in Wand and Weber 2002, p. 363). Thus, content models can provide a
roadmap to the company’s increasingly complex content and system landscapes
that often grow over many years.
Therefore, a modeling language has to meet several requirements, which are
identiﬁed in this paper with the help of the general modeling principles from
Becker et al. (1995), including correctness, relevance, clarity, comparability, and
efﬁciency (pp. 437–439). The requirements we identify are not sufﬁciently met by
traditional approaches, so a novel modeling language, which was developed and
evaluated during the course of a modeling project at Hoval, is proposed.
The research project described in this chapter followed the design science
paradigm (Hevner 2007; Hevner et al. 2004; March and Smith 1995), in particular
the design research methodology from Peffers et al. (2008, p. 54). In the next
section, we provide a background for the chapter, and on that basis, identify the
requirements a modeling language for electronic content and documents must
meet. Then we present the proposed modeling language based on a meta-model
and summarize the results from the modeling project at Hoval. The results of the
project conﬁrm the utility of the modeling language but also indicate the need for
future research, which is outlined in the last section.
Background
ECM remains an elusive concept that lacks a theoretically sound foundation (vom
Brocke et al. 2011a, pp. 478–480). However, for the purposes of this chapter, ECM
is understood as a modern and integrated approach to digital information man-
agement (Päivärinta and Munkvold 2005, p. 1). The integrative nature of ECM has
at least three parts (vom Brocke et al. 2011b, pp. 967–968): First, ECM refers to
the management of all of an organization’s information assets, regardless of type,
format, granularity, or source. Second, ECM includes both technological (e.g.,
software, hardware, and standards) and managerial (e.g., strategies, methods, and
processes) capabilities. Third, ECM covers the management of information over
its entire lifecycle. As such, the concept of ECM includes ‘‘the strategies, tools,
processes and skills an organization needs to manage all its information assets
(regardless of type) over their lifecycle’’ (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 648).
Developing and implementing such a comprehensive approach to managing
content and documents is often a highly complex and time-consuming endeavor
(White 2002, p. 22). In a longitudinal case study, Munkvold et al. (2006) identiﬁed
Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content
239

a number of challenges companies face when implementing ECM systems (pp.
75–84). As these challenges are both technological and managerial in nature,
Tyrväinen et al. (2006) characterize ECM as a research topic relevant to the IS
discipline (p. 628).
Tyrväinen et al. (2006) present a framework for ECM research (pp. 628–631),
which is used here to explain the salient role content audits and models play in
ECM implementation. The framework distinguishes four perspectives to which
questions relevant to IS research can be assigned: processes, content, technologies,
and the enterprise context (Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 628). The four perspectives
should be viewed from an integrated perspective, not separately. For example,
developing and implementing efﬁcient processes that support different phases of
the content lifecycle requires careful selection and alignment of ECM technologies
and consideration of the legal aspects relevant to content management in the
enterprise context (e.g., long-term retention).
While Tyrväinen et al. (2006) designed their framework to stimulate and guide
future research in the ﬁeld of ECM (p. 627), the framework’s core ideas can also be
transferred to the practical implementation of ECM systems. The content perspec-
tive represents the core of the framework, as, ‘‘in any piece of ECM research, the
content perspective is involved in some way’’ (Tyrväinen et al. 2006, p. 628). At the
outset of any ECM initiative, organizational documents and their content should be
closely examined, as they substantially affect the managerial and technological
requirements of the three remaining dimensions of processes, technologies, and the
enterprise context. Only after a thorough analysis of the content is it possible to
determine the relevant legal, economic, and social factors at the level of the enter-
prise, how existing processes have to be redesigned, and the technologies needed to
meet all these requirements (vom Brocke et al. 2011a, pp. 483–484). However, the
analysis of content is often a challenge for companies to address, as multiple factors
must usually be considered from the content perspective. O’Callaghan and Smits
(2005) list a number of questions that should be answered in a content audit
including questions related to the types of content that are present in the organiza-
tion, who is responsible for it, who uses the content, how and where the content is
reused and repurposed, which content is to be retained and in what form, and which
systems are to be used for the creation and processing of content (p. 1275).
Given the enormous amount and variety of electronic content in today’s
enterprises, the answers to these questions may be elusive. Unlike structured data,
which is usually well-documented, semi-structured or unstructured information is
often described to only a limited extent. While document overviews may be
present in the form of, for example, tables, these overviews usually answer the
central questions only partially and/or they refer only to speciﬁc departments,
business functions, or processes. Documentation of the results of a content audit is
also aggravated, as documents, content, an organization’s information needs, and
content-related processes are dynamic. Therefore, an approach that allows orga-
nizations to acquire, analyze, report, and maintain the information they need to
understand the creation and use of content at an enterprise-wide scale is needed.
Conceptual information models can serve this purpose.
240
A. Simons et al.

Content Modeling Requirements
A modeling language for electronic documents and content has to meet several
requirements. Any of a number of general approaches to evaluating conceptual
models can be used to identify the requirements of a modeling language for elec-
tronic documents and content. Many of these approaches refer to data modeling
(Frank 1997, pp. 97–98), particularly entity relationship models. For example,
Moody and Shanks (1994) propose six criteria for assessing the quality of a data
model: simplicity, completeness, ﬂexibility, integration, understandability, and
implementability (p. 101). Kesh (1995) presents a framework for evaluating entity
relationship models, taking into consideration the structure (suitability, soundness,
consistency, conciseness) and contents (completeness, cohesiveness, validity) of
data models (pp. 681–685). Genero et al. (2000) examine the maintainability of
entity relationship models, differentiating between understandability, legibility,
simplicity, analyzability, modiﬁability, stability, and testability (p. 514).
Similar to Frank (1997), who distinguishes criteria inherent to the model (e.g.,
completeness and non-redundancy) and discusses the relationship of a model with
the observer, with reality, and with the modeling purpose (pp. 98–99), Becker et al.
(1995) present a general approach to evaluating conceptual models (‘‘Grundsätze
ordnungsmäßiger Modellierung’’) using the criteria of correctness, relevance,
efﬁciency, clarity, and comparability1 (pp. 437–439; own translation). Our
requirements for a modeling language for electronic documents and content are
derived from Becker et al.’s (1995) ﬁve general criteria (pp. 437–439).
Correctness. Becker et al. (1995) distinguish between the syntactical and
semantic correctness of a conceptual model (p. 437). While the former refers to the
consistent use of the model elements and notation rules deﬁned in the meta-model,
semantic correctness is related to the model’s structural and behavioral compliance
with the object system it represents (Becker et al. 1995, pp. 437–438). Accord-
ingly, a modeling language for electronic documents and content has to support
modeling on both syntactically and semantically correct levels. On the semantic
level, the language should particularly allow the illustration of reuse of content in
different documents, the correct assignment of user roles and rights, and the
consideration of the software systems involved to be described. For its part,
developing a syntactically correct content model requires a meta-model that
describes all of the relevant model elements and the possible relationships among
them. The modeling language should also provide options that help prevent the
language defects (e.g., the use of synonyms) that can occur when the same content
1 With systematic structure, Becker et al. (1995) propose another quality criterion of conceptual
modeling, acknowledging that information models are typically put up for different views that
must be integrated (e.g., data, process, and functional views) (p. 439). Although this criterion
appears also to be relevant in the context of content modeling (e.g., documents are typically part
of process models), it is outside the scope of this chapter.
Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content
241

or document objects are part of more than one sub-model (e.g., for certain business
functions and areas).
Relevance. Relevance generally refers to a model’s goal orientation; model
elements are relevant if their exclusion reduces the overall beneﬁt of the model
(Becker et al. 1995, p. 438). For example, a model’s relevance is closely related to
its level of abstraction; that is, models that feature higher degrees of completeness
or exactness than others do are likely to cover increased amounts of irrelevant
information (Becker et al. 1995, p. 438). Because of the enormous number and
variety of documents that must be handled in today’s enterprises, the level of
abstraction is an important criterion in content modeling. In addition, a modeling
language for electronic documents and content must meet the requirements of
multiple model users with diverse goals. The potentially relevant content modeling
goals include both organizational goals (e.g., in the case of reorganization projects)
and technology-related goals (e.g., in the case of implementation projects).
Therefore, model developers must be given considerable freedom in the process of
content modeling.
Efﬁciency. Whereas relevance generally refers to the scope of a model (i.e., the
results view), efﬁciency refers to the effort that must be undertaken in the course of
the modeling process (i.e., the process view) (Becker et al. 1995, p. 438). The
efﬁciency of content modeling is particularly determined by the frequency with
which the developed models must change. Documents and content, as well as
information needs and software systems, are constantly changing in today’s
organizations, so a modeling language for electronic documents and content
should ensure efﬁciency with regard to model development and with regard to
model adaptation. The support from appropriate modeling tools may substantially
reduce the effort required for model development and adaptation.
Clarity. A language’s clarity, which refers to a model’s structure and readability,
depends largely on the subjective perception of the model user (Becker et al. 1995,
p. 438), so it is particularly determined by the graphical notation of a modeling
language. Model clarity is also closely related to the principle of correctness
because higher degrees of model completeness or exactness are likely to result in
reduced model clarity (Becker et al. 1995, pp. 438–439). Therefore, the assignment
of attributes to model elements (e.g., metadata for content storage and retrieval), for
example, should not too severely impair the model’s readability. Furthermore, the
clarity of a content model is important to the ability to consider organizational and
technological content management requirements equally. Whereas content creators
and users typically know more about organizational conditions than they do about
technological implications, the adopters of ECM systems are more likely than
content creators to be aware of available and required software features. To
facilitate communication between the ECM project team and the users, a content
model should be equally comprehensible for both groups (i.e., business and IT).
The development of sub-models, each of which has its own scope, may be able to
take into account the heterogeneity of modeling goals and model users, which
would contribute to the relevance of content modeling. Clarity is also an issue when
the modeling language is to be extended (e.g., by new model elements).
242
A. Simons et al.

Comparability. Comparability, like correctness, has both syntactical and
semantic dimensions. While the syntactical aspect refers to the compatibility of
models developed with different modeling methods and languages, the semantic
aspect refers to the comparability of different models at the content level (e.g.,
as-is model vs. to-be model) (Becker et al. 1995, p. 439). While the syntactical
dimension is out of the scope of this chapter, the notion of semantic comparability
is especially important in content modeling to support the consolidation and
integration of content models developed for multiple company divisions and
functional areas.
Discussion of Existing Modeling Approaches
The development and evaluation of conceptual modeling languages and methods is
a core topic of design-oriented IS research (Fill et al. 2007, p. 419). During the
course of our modeling project, we evaluated some of the approaches for infor-
mation and data modeling that have been discussed in the community with regard
to their applicability for enterprise-wide content modeling. This evaluation was
based on the modeling requirements summarized above using questions such as
whether all element types relevant to content modeling are provided by the lan-
guages, how much time and effort would be needed to develop and adapt the
content models, whether there is suitable tool support for the adaptation of the
modeling languages, whether the clarity, structure, and readability of content
models developed with these languages is sufﬁcient, and whether there is sufﬁcient
freedom in the process of content modeling.
The results of the review suggest that existing approaches to information and
data modeling have only a limited applicability to the modeling of content and
documents at an enterprise-wide level. While many approaches are likely to result
in the development of both syntactically and semantically correct content models,
they do not sufﬁciently meet the other requirements of conceptual content mod-
eling, particularly the ones regarding clarity and efﬁciency. As of today, there are
but a few speciﬁc approaches to modeling electronic documents and content at an
enterprise-wide level. For example, Rockley et al. (2003) propose a table-based
approach to content modeling that aims at documenting the reuse of content
(pp. 159–182) by distinguishing among semantic data (e.g., subject, date, or
contact), basic data (e.g., title or container), and architecture-related data (e.g.,
type of reuse) (Rockley et al. 2003, p. 175). Existing approaches to content
modeling focus on speciﬁc areas of information management (e.g., training
material or software guides) or are developed for certain industries (e.g., tele-
communication or pharmaceutical), while more generic approaches with enter-
prise-wide scopes are rare (Rockley et al. 2003, p. 177). As a response, the next
section presents a modeling language for electronic documents and content
developed in consideration for the requirements and criteria presented above.
Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content
243

Modeling Language
The purpose of conceptually modeling content can be support for organizational
goals (e.g., information lifecycle management) or technical goals (e.g., ECM
systems selection and customization). Examples of content modeling goals include
creating transparency in information management, documenting the reuse of
content, detecting shortcomings in the process of document creation, and elimi-
nating media disruptions. These goals must be clearly deﬁned at the outset of any
content modeling initiative because they largely determine the components a
content model later requires, particularly the elements that are used in the mod-
eling process. For example, while some implementation projects may demand
detailed descriptions of technical requirements (e.g., system functionality, meta-
data, user rights and roles), such requirements may be of minor relevance in
reorganization projects. The modeling language presented in this section, Enter-
prise Content Modeling Language (ECML), is explained with regard to two
general modeling goals: conceptually describing the reuse of content in different
documents and describing the creation and use of content by different users and
systems over the content’s lifecycle.
ECML features ten basic types of model elements, which are described by
means of an entity relationship meta-model in Fig. 1 (gray boxes). The model
elements, which are hierarchically structured, can be further speciﬁed according to
their attributes. The ﬁgure also shows the elements’ graphical notations (which are
connected with the element types by dotted lines). ‘‘Content Types,’’ describe
content at a general level; they can, as a function of granularity, be self-contained
(e.g., an image) or composed of other Content Types (e.g., a product description
that contains an image). In contrast, ‘‘Content Assets’’ represent speciﬁc content
(e.g., an image of a certain product), so Content Assets are always assigned to at
least one Content Type. As it is the case for Content Types, Content Assets may
DE
EN
Content
Type
Content
Asset
Document
Type
Document
Asset
(0,1)
(0,m)
(1,1)
(0,m)
(1,1)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,m)
Folder
Content
Folder
Document
Folder
D,T
(0,1)
(0,m)
(0,1)
(0,m)
(0,1)
(0,1)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,1)
(0,m)
Asset
D,T
Language
Version
Lifecycle
Phase
System
User
(0,1)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,m)
(0,m) (0,m)
(0,m)
Fig. 1 Entity relationship meta-model for ECML
244
A. Simons et al.

vary in terms of their granularity. In contrast, the granularity can be disregarded
for ‘‘Document Types’’ and ‘‘Document Assets,’’ which represent complete
information products, although they can otherwise be understood analogous to
Content Types and Content Assets. Accordingly, Document Types represent
general documents (e.g., sales catalogues), while a Document Asset represents a
speciﬁc occurrence of a Document Type (e.g., a sales catalogue of a certain year).
In addition, Document Types and Document Assets may be composed of a number
of Content Types and Content Assets (e.g., a sales catalogue that contains multiple
product descriptions and images). Both element types can be organized in
‘‘Folders.’’
The element types described so far can be applied to describe the reuse of
content. To do so, two general modeling contexts need to be distinguished:
‘‘Content Context’’ and ‘‘Document Context.’’ (See Fig. 2 for a ﬁctitious, sim-
pliﬁed example.) In the example above, the Content Context covers various pieces
Document Context
Content Context
Personal Pages
Team Pages
Team Pages Product Group A
Team Pages Product Group B
Team Page Product Y
Team Page Product X
Personal Image John Doe
Job Description John Doe
Job Description
Personal Image (external)
[…]
Personal Image John Doe
[…]
[…]
[…]
[…]
Images
Personal Images
Personal Image (internal)
Personal Image (external)
Personal Data
CV
CV Jane Doe
Job Description
Job Description John Doe
Job Description Jane Doe
Group Images
[…]
[…]
[…]
[…]
[…]
[…]
Personal
[…]
Web Pages
CV
Web Page John Doe
[…]
Web Page Jane Doe
CV John Doe
CV John Doe
Personal Image John Doe
Personal Image Jane Doe
Fig. 2 Example of an ECML model (1)
Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content
245

of personnel-related content that can be grouped into »Images« and »Personal
Data«. A distinction is made between »Personal Images« and »Group Images«
both of which may be used for either internal or external purposes. For example,
»Personal Image (external)«, is a self-contained Content Type that subsumes under
it a number of speciﬁc personal images (i.e., Content Assets, such as »Personal
Image John Doe« or »Personal Image Jane Doe«). »Personal Data« is a folder
under which »CVs« and »Job Descriptions« are organized and which are modeled
as composed Content Types (displayed by the ? symbols). Both Content Types
and Content Assets are reused in the Document Context, which, in the example,
describes the content of »Web Pages«, including »Personal Pages« and »Team
Pages«. The content model illustrates that a Document Type determines of which
Content Types an information product is generally composed (e.g., »Personal
Page« = »Personal Image (external)« ? »Job Description« ? »CV«) and speci-
ﬁes the concrete Document Assets that instantiate it (e.g., »Web Page John
Doe« = »Personal Image John Doe« ? »Job Description John Doe« ? »CV John
Doe«). However, Document Assets do not necessarily have to contain a model
element for each Content Type of which the represented Document Type is
composed (e.g., not all »Personal Pages« must contain a concrete »Job Descrip-
tion«). This is also true, of course, for composed Content Assets. In the example,
the reuse of content (e.g., »Personal Image John Doe«) in various documents (e.g.,
»Web Page John Doe« and »Team Page Product X«) is illustrated by dashed
arrows and by Content Assets written in italics.
However, content models cannot be used only to document the reuse of content
in organizations but can also help clarify which documents and content are used
by which individuals (‘‘Users’’) and with the help of which software products
(‘‘Systems’’). Such information can, for instance, support the selection and cus-
tomization of ECM systems. As documents and content are created and used by
means of a variety of systems over the documents’ and contents’ life spans (e.g., a
marketing brochure may be created by means of a graphics software, then
converted into a pdf ﬁle, and ﬁnally published on the Internet), ECML also dis-
tinguishes among several ‘‘Lifecycle Phases.’’ The combination of Lifecycle
Phases, Systems, and Users with speciﬁc Document Assets then describes who is
responsible for the creation, editing, and publication of a certain document and
what software is used in the process. Figure 3 provides another simple example,
extending the Content Context from Fig. 2 by the model elements mentioned.
Finally, ECML also allows languages and versions to be assigned to certain
documents and content. The assignment of ‘‘Versions’’ and ‘‘Languages’’ to
certain Document Assets and Content Assets, respectively, then represents a real-
world document or content asset (e.g., version 2.0 of the German user manual for a
certain product). Alternatively, attributes could be assigned to Content Assets and
Document Assets for this purpose. Examples of common attributes that may also
represent the metadata required for storage and retrieval, are »ID«, »Notes«,
»Status« (e.g., ‘‘in progress’’, ‘‘under review’’, and ‘‘in translation’’), »Creation
Date« and »Editing Date«, »Creator«, »Editor«, and »Owner«.
246
A. Simons et al.

Which model elements are relevant depends largely on the content modeling
goals. As many goals can be pursued, ECML may require adaptation (e.g., in the
form of additional element types and modeling rules). The next section provides an
application example of ECML from practice.
User Context
External Marketing
Internal Marketing
Graphics
[…]
Marketing
[…]
John Doe
Jane Doe
Communication
[…]
[…]
Lifecycle Context
Create
Edit
Lifecycle Phases
Store
Publish
[…]
Content Context
Images
Personal Images
Personal Image (internal)
Personal Image (external)
Group Images
[…]
Personal
Create
John Doe
Adobe Photoshop
Store
John Doe
Pixelboxx
Jane Doe
[…]
[…]
Personal Image John Doe
Personal Image Jane Doe
Publish
Jane Doe
TYPO3
[…]
Systems Context
Graphics Software
[…]
Vector Graphics
Imaging Software
Adobe Photoshop
GIMP
[…]
[…]
Personal Data
[…]
Fig. 3 Example of an ECML model (2)
Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content
247

Application Example and Evaluation
Project Overview
ECML was developed and evaluated during the course of a modeling project at
Hoval. Hoval, a manufacturer of heating and ventilation systems, operates in more
than ﬁfty countries and employs about 1,200 people (http://www.hoval.com).
Hoval operates ﬁve production sites in ﬁve countries: Liechtenstein (Vaduz),
Austria (Marchtrenk), the UK (Lincoln), Slovakia (Istebné), and China (Beijing)
(Hoval n.d.). Hoval has subsidiaries in thirteen countries, and the company’s
headquarter is in Vaduz, Liechtenstein. Hoval is a highly innovative company, and
the generation and processing of knowledge and information has always been a
central issue. Facing an increasing number of digital documents and an increasing
amount of content to be dealt with in their business processes, Hoval started
developing an ECM strategy at the beginning of 2009. The objectives of the
project were to document semi-structured and unstructured business information,
to increase information quality and process efﬁciency, to make document man-
agement more reproducible, and to meet information needs at the level of the
individual employee. At a basic level, ECM strategy development at Hoval can be
divided into seven phases: goal deﬁnition, delineation of tasks, as-is analysis,
development of possible solutions, scheduling, implementation, and monitoring
and evaluation. The results outlined in the following paragraphs are mainly related
to the third phase, the as-is analysis, in which the researchers had the chance to
participate as part of the project group.
Identiﬁcation and analysis of existing documents, content, information needs,
and systems was recognized early as a central issue of ECM strategy development
at Hoval. While the project group had planned to document the results of this
analysis in the form of tables, it became clear that this approach would be inef-
ﬁcient and would produce unstructured and confusing results. Therefore, con-
ceptual modeling was considered as a way to increase the efﬁciency of the analysis
and the clarity of the results. The primary goal of the modeling project was to
document the reuse of content in documents at a company-wide level.
The results presented here were established and evaluated based on several
sources of data. For example, we participated in four workshops (180–240 min
each) and four discussion sessions with the project lead (60 min each) and
conducted twelve semi-structured interviews (60–90 min each), each digitally
recorded and fully transcribed to allow for detailed analysis, with decision-makers
from several departments. The workshops and interviews primarily informed the
identiﬁcation and analysis of documents, content, systems, users, and potential for
improvement. They were also used to identify the requirements for content
modeling at Hoval, against which the developed modeling language was also
evaluated. Our sources of data further included corporate documents (e.g., minutes
and presentations from the workshops, existing document overviews).
248
A. Simons et al.

In sum, twelve content models for the company’s departments were developed
and integrated into a consolidated model. The models were designed by means of
H2-Toolset, a meta-modeling software for the speciﬁcation of hierarchical models
developed at the European Research Center for Information Systems (ERCIS).
One of these models is presented in the following section, after which evaluation
results are presented.
Application Example
The content model explained here was developed to document the reuse of content
in Hoval’s spare parts catalogue. The main data source for the design of this model
was a web-based platform named Internet Data Access. As this catalogue is
publicly available, no user rights and roles were modeled. Likewise, the modeling
of systems and lifecycle phases were out of the scope of this project.
The screenshot displayed in Fig. 4 shows the Content Context and the Docu-
ment Context in which the product-related content and documents are described
and grouped in the »Products« folder. Various Content Types and Content Assets
are distinguished in the Content Context, such as the »Front Pages« of »Operating
Instructions«, which contain the respective »Product Names« (1) and »Images«
(2). »Front Pages« represent composed Content Types, whereas »Product Name«
and »Image« both represent self-contained Content Types. For example, Content
Assets are the »Product Names« and »Images« for »Oil Condensing Boiler Mul-
tiJet (8–25)« and for »Oil Condensing Boiler UltraOil (35, 50)«. The described
content is reused in the Document Context. As the screenshot shows, »Operating
Instructions«, as a Document Type, are generally composed of various Content
Types (e.g., »Safety Information«, »Customer Service«, »Functional Principle«,
»Boiler System Control«, »Imprint«) (3). In turn, Content Assets (e.g., »Safety
Information Oil/Gas Boiler«, »Hoval Customer Service«) are reused in speciﬁc
Document Assets (e.g., the »Operating Instructions« for »Oil Condensing Boiler
MultiJet (8–25)«) (4). The screenshot also shows the possibility of describing
different versions (e.g., »00«, »01«) and languages (e.g., »DE«, »EN«) (5) and of
assigning attributes to model elements (e.g., »Number«, »Notes«, »Status«) (6).
In the course of the project, the functionality of H2-Toolset was extended by
two plug-ins, the use of which is also illustrated in the example. Document
Launcher is a plug-in that allows model elements to be connected to real-world
documents (i.e., to open documents directly from within H2-Toolset), and Reuse
Visualizer allows inquiries about the reuse of content (i.e., to determine in which
documents certain content assets are included). In the example, Reuse Visualizer
indicates which Document Assets need to be updated if, for instance, the product
name »Oil Condensing Boiler MultiJet (8–25)« is changed. (In the example, such
a change would affect the following documents: »Op. Instr. 2-MultiJet (8–25)
TT23S«, »Op. Instr. 2-MultiJet (8–25) M1.3«, and »Op. Instr. 2/3/4-MultiJet
(8–25)«) (7). Using Document Launcher makes it possible to get direct access to
Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content
249

Fig. 4 Application example of ECML
250
A. Simons et al.

documents in the model (e.g., the operating instructions for »Oil Condensing
Boiler MultiJet (8–25)«) simply by double-clicking on them (8). Therefore, a
»Document URI« has to be assigned to the respective model element (in this case,
a link to a Hoval Web page).
Evaluation Results
At Hoval, ECML was principally suited to model semi-structured and unstructured
information. While the evaluation results conﬁrm the practicability and effec-
tiveness of the modeling language, they show also that further research is needed.
This need is summarized using the requirements for content modeling from the
modeling principles in Becker et al. (1995), which also formed the basis of the
qualitative evaluation.
Correctness. The content model was assessed as being semantically correct;
that is, its structure was determined to be compliant with the object system rep-
resented. As ECML was implemented by means of H2-Toolset (which automati-
cally veriﬁes compliance with the deﬁned notation rules), the syntactical
correctness of the model was ensured. While this approach to developing and
maintaining the model was considered useful, a number of areas for further
improvement were identiﬁed that would increase the semantic correctness of the
model. For example, one recommendation was to implement a glossary to support
model users during data entry and content search. Another recommendation
referred to automated validation of the model with regard to its completeness, as
model users may not always be able to specify all of the information required.
Here, it was suggested that a testing mechanism be implemented that automatically
informs the persons in charge of the model’s maintenance about missing content or
content that needs to be revised. Finally, options were discussed for more speciﬁc
modeling of systems (e.g., release versions) and the business processes in which
documents and content are created and used.
Relevance. The relevance of the content model was appropriate, and abstraction
from users and systems in the content model was reasonable, although the level of
detail was an issue. Content modeling took place on both a general level of content
and document types and on the level of concrete instances, that is, content and
document assets. However, since content and document instances are frequently
modiﬁed, some model elements may be dated after just a short time. Therefore, the
effort required to maintain the model could be substantial, which could lead to
lower acceptance levels among its users. Stronger focus on the ‘‘type’’ level in
content modeling was determined to be able to counteract this danger, but what
level of detail ensures efﬁcient maintenance remains to be examined.
Efﬁciency. The proﬁtability of developing and maintaining the model was
assessed as being good. Automatic reuse and updating of model elements, which is
supported by H2-Toolset with Object Deﬁnitions and Object Occurrences, was
considered particularly beneﬁcial, and the usability of the H2-Toolset itself was
Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content
251

assessed as adequate. However, the project partner identiﬁed some areas for
improvement, such as the implementation of standardized dialogs that would
support users in the process of entering data and maintaining content (e.g., the
deﬁnition of mandatory content), and the consideration of inheritance principles
(e.g., the reuse of metadata). While the two plug-ins created the possibility of
using H2-Toolset for searching and maintaining documents and content (similar to
using a very simple document management system), implementation of more
efﬁcient search mechanisms (e.g., based on a glossary) was also suggested.
Clarity. The project partner assessed the clarity of the model as being high, with
particular emphasis on the hierarchical approach chosen as being adequate for the
modeling of content. The symbols used fostered readability of the model, and the
number of model element types was appropriate. A number of recommendations—
such as implementation of where-used lists to document the reuse of content
(which has been realized only prototypically by means of the Reuse Visualizer
plug-in) and use of examples and notes in the model (which has been realized only
rudimentarily by providing the ability to assign attributes)—were made to increase
the model’s clarity. The provision of general modeling guidelines was also an
issue.
Comparability of models, the ﬁfth modeling criterion considered, was not
assessed in the course of the project. Nevertheless, it can be assumed that the
development and maintenance of a glossary in particular would substantially
increase model comparability (e.g., to avoid the use of synonyms).
Summary and Outlook
This chapter presented ECML, a modeling language for electronic documents and
content that can support the implementation of ECM in organizations. Based on a
review of the academic literature in the ﬁeld, we explained the requirements for a
modeling language for electronic documents and content. We then explained the
ECML model elements based on a meta-model and summarized results from a
modeling project at Hoval.
While the results of the modeling project conﬁrm the practical relevance and
effectiveness of the proposed language, they show also that additional research is
needed. Future efforts should investigate the relevance of the ECML model ele-
ments, the level of detail of modeling, the possibility of assigning attributes to
content, and the efﬁciency of maintaining ECML models. An ECML modeling
method has already been developed and is to be evaluated in upcoming studies and
projects. In addition, because we assessed only the applicability of some modeling
approaches in this project, future research should investigate the suitability of
further modeling languages and methods for describing the creation and use of
content at an enterprise-wide level.
252
A. Simons et al.

Acknowledgments This chapter is an extension and revision of a paper originally presented at
the 14th Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS 2008) in Toronto, Canada (vom
Brocke et al. 2008). The authors thank the anonymous interviewees who assisted them in this
research and the review team from AMCIS 2008 for their constructive comments on earlier
versions of the paper.
References
Becker, J., Rosemann, M., & Schütte, R. (1995). Grundsätze ordnungsmäßiger Modellierung.
Wirtschaftsinformatik, 37(5), 435–445.
Boiko, B. (2002). Content management bible. New York: Wiley.
Clark, D. (2007). Content management and the separation of presentation and content. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 17(1), 35–60.
Fill, H.-G., Gericke, A., Karagiannis, D., & Winter, R. (2007). Modellierung für Integrated
Enterprise Balancing. Wirtschaftsinformatik, 49(6), 419–429.
Frank, U. (1997). Möglichkeiten und Grenzen einer objektorientierten Modellierungslehre.
In Fachkongress Smalltalk und Java in Industrie und Ausbildung (pp. 96–102). Erfurt.
Genero, M., Jiménez, L., & Piattini, M. (2000). Measuring the quality of entity relationship
diagrams. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Conceptual Modeling
(pp. 513–526). Salt Lake City, UT.
Hevner, A. R. (2007). A three cycle view of design science research. Scandinavian Journal of
Information Systems, 19(2), 87–92.
Hevner, A. R., March, S. T., Park, J., & Ram, S. (2004). Design science in information systems
research. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 28(1), 75–105.
Hoval. (n.d.). Von inneren Werten. Retrieved February 28, 2010, from http://www.waltherpartner.
ch/bilder/Kunden/hoval_image.pdf
Kesh, S. (1995). Evaluating the quality of entity relationship models. Information and Software
Technology, 37(12), 681–689.
Kung, C. H., & Solvberg, A. (1986). Activity modeling and behaviour modeling. In T. W. Olle,
H. G. Sol, & A. A. Verrijn-Stuart (Eds.), Information system design methodologies: Improving
the practice (pp. 145–171). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
March, S. T., & Smith, G. F. (1995). Design and natural science research on information
technology. Decision Support Systems, 15(4), 251–266.
Moody, D. L., & Shanks, G. G. (1994). What makes a good data model? Evaluating the quality of
entity relationship models. In P. Loucopoulos (Ed.), Entity-relationship approach—ER’94:
Business modelling and re-engineering (Lecture notes in computer science 881, pp. 94–111).
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
Munkvold, B. E., Päivärinta, T., Hodne, A. K., & Stangeland, E. (2006). Contemporary issues of
enterprise content management: The case of statoil. Scandinavian Journal of Information
Systems, 18(2), 69–100.
O’Callaghan, R., & Smits, M. (2005). A strategy development process for enterprise content
management. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Information Systems
(pp. 1271–1282). Regensburg.
Päivärinta, T., & Munkvold, B. E. (2005). Enterprise content management: An integrated
perspective on information management. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI.
Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M. A., & Chatterjee, S. (2008). A design science
research methodology for information systems research. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 24(3), 45–77.
Rockley, A., Kostur, P., & Manning, S. (2003). Managing enterprise content: A uniﬁed content
strategy. Indianapolis: New Riders.
Conceptual Modeling of Electronic Content
253

Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11(1), 647–659.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Guest editorial: Characterizing the
evolving research on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(6), 627–634.
vom Brocke, J., Becker, J., Simons, A., & Fleischer, S. (2008). Towards the speciﬁcation of
digital content: The enterprise content modeling language (ECML). In Proceedings of the
14th Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS 2008) (paper 403). Toronto.
vom Brocke, J., Seidel, S., & Simons, A. (2010). Bridging the gap between enterprise content
management and creativity: A research framework. In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., & Cleven, A. (2011a). Towards a business process-oriented
approach to enterprise content management: The ECM-Blueprinting framework. Information
Systems and e-Business Management, 9(4), 475–496.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., Herbst, A., Derungs, R., & Novotny, S. (2011b). The business
drivers behind ECM initiatives: A process perspective. Business Process Management
Journal, 17(6), 965–985.
Wand, Y., & Weber, R. (2002). Research commentary: Information systems and conceptual
modeling–A research agenda. Information Systems Research, 13(4), 363–376.
White, M. (2002). Content management: From vendor selection to successful rollout. Online,
26(6), 20–24.
254
A. Simons et al.

Justifying ECM Investments
with the Return on Process
Transformation: The Case
of an ECM-Driven Transformation
of Sales Processes at Hilti Corporation
Jan vom Brocke, Christian Sonnenberg and Christian Buddendick
Abstract Organizations are faced with an overwhelming amount of content to be
captured, organized, and archived efﬁciently. As a result, enterprise content
management (ECM) has emerged as a top business priority. Organizations may
choose from a variety of sophisticated ECM systems based on their speciﬁc
functional requirements. While such a choice must also be justiﬁed in terms of
economic beneﬁts, the current state of research lacks commonly accepted guide-
lines and methods for evaluating and justifying ECM system investments. This
chapter addresses this lack of methodological support and presents an evaluation
approach that is based on the concept of potentials modeling. This approach
reports economic beneﬁts by means of ﬁnancial measures and explicitly takes an
organization’s business process structure into account since implementation of an
ECM system causes signiﬁcant changes in work procedures. The feasibility and
potential usefulness of this approach is demonstrated at the example of an ECM-
driven transformation of sales processes at Hilti Corporation.
Introduction
More than ever, organizations are confronted with the challenge of efﬁciently
organizing a huge volume and diversity of digital information in support of their
business processes. Consequently, they are in need of concepts and technologies that
J. vom Brocke (&)  C. Sonnenberg
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-Josef-Str. 21,
9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein
e-mail: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li
C. Sonnenberg
e-mail: christian.sonnenberg@uni.li
C. Buddendick
Hilti Corporation, Feldkircher Str. 100, 9494 Schaan, Liechtenstein
e-mail: christian.buddendick@hilti.com
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8_15,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
255

support the management of their digital information assets (vom Brocke et al.
2011a). ECM addresses this particular need and is concerned with the ‘‘strategies,
tools, processes, and skills an organization needs to manage all its information assets
(regardless of type) over their lifecycle’’ (Smith and McKeen 2003, p. 648). ECM
takes into account all kinds of digital assets, including various types of documents,
web content, images, and e-mails. An organization’s adoption of an ECM initiative
may be triggered by efﬁciency considerations (e.g., reducing search times) or by
legal requirements (e.g., complying with reporting and documentation standards).
ECM initiatives build primarily upon a speciﬁc kind of information technology
(IT), usually referred to as ECM systems, and they can choose among a variety of
sophisticated ECM systems. The selection of a particular solution should be gui-
ded by two questions: ‘‘What functional requirements should be supported by an
ECM system?’’ and, ultimately, ‘‘What are the economic consequences/beneﬁts of
implementing and using the candidate ECM systems?’’ This chapter addresses this
second question by presenting an approach with which to assess the economic
consequences of an ECM investment by means of ﬁnancial measures.
The problem of justifying ECM investments is closely related to the general
problem of IT value assessments. Both IT value research (e.g., Davamanirajan
et al. 2006) and work in the ﬁeld of ECM (Tyrväinen et al. 2006; vom Brocke et al.
2011a) underpin the importance of a business process perspective for assessing the
economic impact of IT and ECM investment decisions. Consequently, the
assessment approach presented in this chapter builds on potentials models, which
link process models with ﬁnancial models. By means of these potentials models,
the impact of IT investment decisions can be traced to the business processes that
are expected to beneﬁt from these investments. The problem of how to build
potentials models has been discussed elsewhere (e.g., vom Brocke et al. 2009), so
this chapter focuses on how the information provided by potentials models can be
leveraged to assess the ﬁnancial performance of investments in ECM technology.
In particular, the assessment reports the return on process transformation (ROPT)
as a measure of the expected proﬁtability of a process transformation.
The next section reviews research on IT value assessments and positions our
ECM assessment approach in a process theory on IT value that explains how IT can
create business value on a general level. Subsequently, we introduce the concept of
potentials modeling and the ROPT, which are central to our ECM investment
justiﬁcation approach. We then demonstrate how this approach has been applied at
Hilti Corporation in an ECM-driven transformation of sales processes. We con-
clude the chapter with a short summary and an outlook on future research.
Theoretical Lens on Justiﬁcations of ECM Investments
Within the information systems discipline there are many studies that are con-
cerned with the problem of assessing the value of IT. Scientiﬁc studies related to
this problem have come to controversial conclusions, so research results on IT
256
J. vom Brocke et al.

value are sometimes ambiguous (Im et al. 2001). By the end of the 1980s,
researchers began to analyze the relationship of IT investment and productivity
systematically on a macroeconomic level. As a result, they pointed to the ‘‘pro-
ductivity paradox’’ (Brynjolfsson 1993), signifying a neutral or even negative
effect between IT investments and productivity measures. Carr (2003) even held
that IT investments generally would not contribute to generating competitive
advantage since IT had become a commodity accessible to every potential com-
petitor. However, current research acknowledges that IT can generate value at
several loci in an organization: (1) the local ﬁrm (2) the competitive environment,
and (3) the macro environment. [For an overview of related work see Melville
et al. (2004)].
Recent studies on IT value adopt a process perspective to analyze the value
impact of IT investments (Davamanirajan et al. 2006; Ray et al. 2007). Today, the
question is less whether IT contributes to business value creation, but how the IT
value added can be realized (vom Brocke et al. 2009). This question is particularly
valid in terms of ECM investments, as decision makers might be less concerned
with the technological possibilities of ECM systems than with how these possi-
bilities potentially affect business routines and practices and how current practices
can be transformed to improve organizational performance. For example, decision
makers could ask about the beneﬁts of having digital content tagged with metadata
and how a policy of compulsory generation and use of metadata would affect
business process performance and organizational performance. Would an accel-
erated search time justify the effort it takes to tag all digital content with metadata?
What potential economic beneﬁts can be leveraged by redesigning or streamlining
existing processes by making use of ECM systems? Ultimately, a decision maker
wants to understand how ECM investments translate into economic beneﬁts.
Several theories have been proposed to describe and explain how IT invest-
ments affect organizational performance. Figure 1 shows Soh and Markus’ (1995)
process theory, a synthesis of prior theories that aims at describing and explaining
how IT expenditures contribute to value creation in organizations. Soh and
Markus’ (1995) process theory can serve as a lens through which to evaluate
investment decisions regarding ECM systems. It assumes that IT investments and
organizational performance are related through a chain of three processes (cf. Soh
and Markus 1995): (1) the IT conversion process, (2) the IT use process, and
(3) the IT competitive process. More speciﬁcally, the theory speciﬁes events that
must occur and conditions that must be fulﬁlled in order to achieve some degree of
competitive advantage from IT investments.
Within the IT conversion process IT expenditures are transformed into usable
IT assets. Not all organizations are effective in performing this process (also
referred to as the process of IT management); some organizations create useful
application portfolios with more depth and breadth and establish more efﬁcient IT
infrastructures than others do (Soh and Markus 1995). Therefore, an IT expendi-
ture is a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition for obtaining useful IT assets. The
deployment and implementation of complex ECM systems is a good example of
such a conversion process. The implementation of a full-blown ECM system
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
257

requires a signiﬁcant investment in terms of technical infrastructures, training of
employees, and time, so productive use of ECM systems might not be realized
until months or even years after an investment decision is made, not primarily
because of technical complexities but often because of ‘‘soft’’ factors like resis-
tance to change or inappropriate IT applications to support speciﬁc tasks. In this
regard, cultural factors play an important role in the conversion process to manage
change. Examples from the ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) system domain
show that organizations often fail to master the IT conversion processes (see, for
example, Bingi et al. 1999; Hong and Kim 2002; Jarrar et al. 2000; Kim et al.
2005; Markus et al. 2000).
A successful conversion process is a necessary condition for obtaining useful IT
assets. The potential of IT assets to change work procedures and business pro-
cesses is exploited in the IT use process. IT impacts may depend on the quality of
the IT purchase decision and how well business activities are coordinated, new
products and services are created, business processes are (re-)designed, and
compliance with regulatory requirements is improved (cf. Soh and Markus 1995).
Assessment of direct impacts of IT assets on business processes is vital in the IT
use process, as the possession of potentially useful IT assets does not guarantee
that they have a positive impact on process execution with regard to cost, quality,
or time dimensions. Moreover, a successful IT use process requires employees
skilled and motivated to use quality IT assets appropriately, without whom process
performance is likely to remain unchanged or even to decline.
Having established an appropriate IT use process is a prerequisite for improving
organizational performance through the IT competitive process. In the IT com-
petitive process the direct IT impacts that materialize during the IT use process are
exploited and transformed into competitive advantage and improved organiza-
tional performance. The mere realization of IT impacts (e.g., better process per-
formance in terms of time, quality, and output) is not sufﬁcient to create
competitive advantage. For example, if IT impacts are exploited only after com-
petitors have realized similar impacts, then IT investments’ ‘‘potential bottom line
results might be competed away’’ (Soh and Markus 1995, p. 36).
Ultimately, IT assets affect how processes are executed, either directly or
indirectly, so it is not surprising that IT value research increasingly highlights the
IT
expenditure
IT
assets
IT
impacts
Organizational
performance
"IT  conversion
process"
"IT use
process"
"IT competitive
process"
•  IT management/
conversion activities
• Appropriate/
inappropriate use
• 
• 
Competitive position
 Competitive dynamics
Fig. 1 How IT creates business value: a process theory (cf. Soh and Markus 1995, p. 37)
258
J. vom Brocke et al.

signiﬁcance of a business process analysis for evaluating the economic conse-
quences of IT investments. For example, Davamanirajan et al. (2006, p. 67) hold
that IT assessments at the business-process level afford several beneﬁts: (1) they
account for the impacts of IT investments on the effectiveness of affected pro-
cesses, (2) they enable the tracing of process performance to individual IT assets,
and (3) ultimately IT investment decisions made at the process level.
Applying a process-level analysis to an ECM system investment requires
determining which processes beneﬁt from such a system, why they would beneﬁt,
how important these processes are in the organization (e.g., for achieving com-
petitive advantage or regulatory compliance), and which tasks the system is meant
to support. The importance of and need for process analysis notwithstanding, such
process-level analysis remains in its infancy (Davamanirajan et al. 2006).
The theoretical framework shown in Fig. 1 can inform a process-oriented eco-
nomic justiﬁcation of ECM investments by drawing a decision maker’s attention to
three areas of concern: (1) why to invest (generate economic impacts), (2) how to
leverage IT resources to generate economic impacts (via business processes), and
(3) what IT resources to acquire. Figure 2 presents an exemplary template that
corresponds to the theoretical framework in Fig. 1 and that can be used by decision
makers as either a pre-assessment tool for anticipating the economic potential of
ECM investments or as a tool with which to present a summary of an IT investment
proposal. The pre-assessment template requires a decision maker to explicate not
only required IT assets but also necessary investments on the process and corporate
levels. The framework highlights the central role of business processes since it
commands a decision maker to ﬁrst explicate the economic opportunities and
challenges that emanate from the processes affected by an IT investment.
Once a decision maker has assessed an IT investment on a high level of
abstraction, subsequent analyses can focus on calculating economic measures in
order to make the economic consequences of such an investment transparent. The
remainder of this chapter presents an evaluation method that uses potentials
models, a speciﬁc type of process model, to trace IT-level impacts on both a
process level and a corporate level. In particular, this method facilitates a detailed
analysis of the ﬁnancial consequences of an ECM investment in terms of the
ROPT. The next section introduces the steps to be taken to calculate the ROPT and
uses a case study of an ECM-driven process transformation at Hilti Corporation to
explain how the ROPT can be calculated.
Potentials Modeling and the Return on Process
Transformation
An element that is particularly challenging for IT value assessments on a process
level is that of determining the right to-be design—that is, explicating the IT
impacts in a process. What is most demanding in practice is not the description of
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
259

to-be models but the search for the desirable to-be state. How can one ensure that
one to-be process is superior to another? Conventional business process man-
agement (BPM) literature provides little guidance for this essential task. Likewise,
IT value literature provides little guidance with which to signify IT impacts in
to-be models. Most of the recommendations that are available are qualitative and
abstract; for example, the recommendation to avoid waste in the context of lean
management (Ohno 1988) helps to identify ideas on how to improve processes
incrementally. However, such recommendations provide little guidance for how to
compare alternative process designs in terms of their contributions to the expected
economic consequences.
Today’s decision makers (process designers, IT managers) face complex design
alternatives that must be evaluated but that are increasingly difﬁcult to understand
intuitively. How can a ﬁrm leverage cloud computing? How can a ﬁrm design
mobile applications? Finding the answers to such questions involves myriad partial
decisions with diverse relevant parameters. Hence, at least semi-formal decision
models must be designed in order to help decision makers design and calculate
Description of IT investment scope and targets
Direct effects on
IT infrastructure
Direct effects on
business processes
Indirect effects on
competitive advantage
Investments:
-   Hardware
-   Software
-   IT skill development
-   Planning and preparation of IT
    investment decision
Investments:
-   Employee training and skill 
    development
-   Planning and preparation of 
    aspired impacts of IT investment 
    decision on process behavior
Investments:
-   Planning and preparation of 
    aspired impacts of process 
    transformation on competitive 
    advantage
Expected benefits:
-   Expected increase of IT 
    performance measures in terms 
    of IT productivity, IT costs, IT 
    quality
Expected benefits:
-   Expected increase of process 
    performance measures in terms
    of time, costs, or quality
-   Expected increase in employee 
    satisfaction
Expected benefits:
-   Expected increase of competitive 
    advantage in terms of revenue, 
    costs, market share, product/
    service quality
-   Expected increase in customer 
    satisfaction
Opportunities and challenges of
IT-driven process transformations
(as-is situation)
Description of value creation through IT investment
Anticipated interdependencies:
IT
Anticipated interdependencies: 
processes
Anticipated interdependencies: 
corporate level
- Interference with existing
  solutions
- Pre-conditions that must be met
  prior to investment
- Interference with related work
  practices
- Pre-conditions that must be met
  prior to process transformation
- Interference or conflict with other
  corporate goals
- Impact on regulatory compliance
  issues
Fig. 2 Pre-assessment template for an initial justiﬁcation of IT investments
260
J. vom Brocke et al.

alternative process variants. The derivation of to-be process variants from as-is
models is seldom straightforward. Potentials models help in this regard and
facilitate evaluation of the economic consequences of alternative process designs
(vom Brocke et al. 2009).
Potentials modeling (Fig. 3) provides decision support in process-redesign
initiatives by integrating methods that facilitate the computation of the ROPT for
speciﬁc design alternatives, taking into account speciﬁc parameters of process
designs. Therefore, potentials models are process models enriched with informa-
tion on economic consequences and possibilities for process improvements. They
describe a set of feasible to-be models together with their potential impact on a set
of entities that are deemed to be relevant in a decision context.
A potentials model covers relevant design alternatives to be compared in terms
of their value propositions in a speciﬁc organizational situation. In terms of decision
theory, an alternative is one of multiple exclusive decision choices (Grob 1993). In
the course of an information systems (re-)design, several potentials models are
compared in order to identify the most beneﬁcial alternative. The concept of
potentials modeling distinguishes factual and value-oriented potentials as follows:
1. The factual speciﬁcation of design alternatives forms the foundation for further
analysis. To use an ECM example, factual speciﬁcation captures alternative
ECM system functionalities for supporting individual tasks and possibilities for
business process redesign based on an ECM system’s potential to reintegrate
certain tasks.
2. The economic consequences associated with the design alternatives are docu-
mented and consolidated in value-oriented potentials models (e.g., by means of
ﬁnancial measures).
3. On that basis the alternatives can be compared and design decisions can be
modiﬁed.
4. Such an evolutionary approach makes it possible to create, compare, and
modify potentials models until an alternative has been identiﬁed that is bene-
ﬁcial from the decision maker’s perspective. This alternative is the to-be model
for the subsequent implementation.
As-is-model
Factual
Value-oriented
Potentials models
To-be-model
4
1
2
3
Fig. 3 Finding to-be models via the evaluation of potentials models (cf. vom Brocke et al. 2009)
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
261

As a key measure, the ROPT can serve as an example with which to evaluate
the performance of an alternative process design (Fig. 4). The ROPT is a ratio
between (1) the expected proﬁt (or savings) of an investment plus the implied
interest on debt and (2) the investment outlay, consisting of internal and external
funds raised to ﬁnance the investment. In order to calculate the ROPT of an
alternative process redesign, the cash ﬂows resulting from both the potential return
and the required investment must be speciﬁed (Fig. 4):
• Assessing the return: To quantify the return from a process redesign or trans-
formation, total payments of process ownership (TPPO), both with (process p’)
and without (process p), are computed (level 0 and 1). The return is then
obtained by subtracting the TPPO of p from the TPPO of p’ (i.e., TPPOp’-
TPPOp). A special case occurs if the TPPO of process alternatives consists only
of out-payments (i.e., the expected cash ﬂow is negative for all periods in the
Process p
∑= TPPO (Total Payments of Process Ownership) p 
0
1
...
n
–
ROI (in Business Process Transformation)
 p -> p’
0
1
...
n
Result
TPPOp’  TPPOp –
TPPTp-> p’
TP (in Business Process Transformation) p -> p’
0
1
...
n
VOFI
ROI (in Business Process Transformation)
 p -> p’
0
1
...
n
Result
VOFI
ROI (in Business Process Transformation) p -> p’ 
0
1
...
n
Transformation
 p -> p’
0
1
...
n
1
∑ = TPPT (Total Payments of Process Transformation)p -> p’ 
0
1
...
n
1
2
...
Process p’
P’
0
1
...
n
∑ = TPPO (Total Payments of Process Ownership)
0
1
...
n
0
1
2
3
Re-organization
Series of payments of re-organization
Status quo
Performance measure of re-organization
p’
Fig. 4 Framework for calculating the ROPT
262
J. vom Brocke et al.

planning horizon, which is common in total cost of ownership analyses). In such
cases the difference between the two series of payments can be interpreted as the
potential savings that can be realized from a process transformation.
• Assessing the investment: The investment is operationalized by the total pay-
ments required to conduct the transformation from process p to p’—that is, the
total payments of process transformation (TPPT). The TPPT include, for
example, initial payments for licenses but also the cost of the effort entailed in
communicating and training new practices and maintenance of the technical
infrastructure.
In order to assess TPPO and TPPT, one must take into account long-term
economic consequences. Hence, a dynamic calculation must be carried out that
considers a planning horizon of multiple periods (typically around ﬁve years).
Summing the return (TPPOp’-TPPOp) and the investment in a process transfor-
mation (TPPT) computes a representative series of payments that are implied by a
potential redesign alternative (level 2).
This series of payments, called original payments, is the foundation for com-
puting the supplementary payments that result from ﬁnancing the series of pay-
ments. Supplementary payments include, for example, interest and tax rates. Since
the economic effects of the process transformation have been aggregated into one
representative series of payments, well-established methods from capital budget-
ing, such as the net present value (NPV), the pay off period, and the return on
investment (ROI), can be applied (Grob 1993; vom Brocke and Grob 2011). The
details of calculating a dynamic ROI based on the method of visualization of
ﬁnancial implications (VOFI) is presented in detail in the application section.
Various levels of detail can be applied to calculate the TPPO, but a two-stage
approach is often useful in practice in which a rough calculation based on expert
opinions is followed by detailed calculations of selected aspects of the assessment.
Process models can serve as a basis for the detailed calculation to analyze resource
utilization and the frequencies of certain process branches (vom Brocke et al.
2010b).
The principles underlying such a detailed calculation of the TPPO based on
process models are shown in Fig. 5. Input factors for both consumption and usage
must be distinguished in order to calculate the payments associated with a par-
ticular process. Factors of consumption are objects that are consumed by functions,
while factors of usage (also referred to as processors) are objects of input that serve
as resources for processing a function. Out-payments of a function consist of
payments resulting from usage of objects, as well as from the consumption of input
objects when executing a function. In order to calculate payments for input objects
the amount (and type) of the objects applied in the function must be accounted for.
In order to assess out-payments, the amounts are multiplied by the per-unit cost of
input objects. Payments for resource objects are calculated according to the fre-
quency-of-utilization principle—that is, resource utilization is deﬁned as a per-
centage or as a relationship between resource units that are used by a function and
the total sum of all resource units available in a period. Payments related to
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
263

functions are aggregated for each process and each period in the planning horizon.
In the case of process branches, the probability that particular branches will be
entered should be considered. To specify such probabilities, relative frequencies
can be estimated in which events recur when the process is instantiated multiple
times.
Prior research has provided models with which to evaluate the ROPT for a wide
range of process transformation projects, including leveraging outsourcing and
out-tasking (vom Brocke 2007) and setting up virtual communities in the context
of customer relationship management activities (vom Brocke et al. 2010c).
However, while the ROPT is an important measure for decision support in process
redesign, its information on the ﬁnancial implications of a decision should usually
be complemented with a wide range of quantitative and qualitative decision cri-
teria. Once a decision for a to-be process transformation has been made, the
calculation of expected original and supplementary payments can serve as a tool
for investment control and as a means to reassess continually the proﬁtability of a
process-transformation project.
The next section presents the calculation of the ROPT of an ECM systems
implementation at the Hilti Corporation, which shows how the company justiﬁed
investments in ECM technology to transform and improve sales processes. In
particular, it is demonstrated how TPPOs of process design alternatives are cal-
culated and subsequently aggregated according to the level structure shown in
Fig. 4. The calculation of the ROPT makes use of the VOFI capital budgeting
method (Grob 1993).
[Function]i
[Resource-
object]j
[Resource-
object]j+1
[Inputobject]p
[Resourceobject.Cost]j
[Resourceobject.Cost] j+1
[Resourceobject.Usage] i,j+1
[Resourceobject.Usage] i,j
i
Index for functions
p
Index for objects of input
j 
Index for objects of resource
g
Index for the excerpt of a process
[Function.OR]1
[Function.OR] 3
OR
OR
[Function.OR] 2
[Probability] 1
[Event]1
[Event]2
[Event]3
[Probability]2
[Probability]3
Calculating payments
Aggregating payments
[Process.Payment] g = Σ [Function.Payment] i · [Probability] i
n
i=1
Calculation
Symbols
Calculations
m
[Payment.Resourceobject] i= Σ [Resourceobject.Usage] i,j·[Resourceobject.Cost]j
j=1
[Payment] i =[Payment.Inputobject] i · [Payment.Resourceobject] i
 [Payment.Inputobject] i = Σ [Inputobject.Amount] i,p ·[Inputobject.Price] p
p=1
q
[Inputobject.Price]p
[Inputobject.Amount]i,p
Fig. 5 Principles for calculating and aggregating payments associated with a process design
(vom Brocke et al. 2010b)
264
J. vom Brocke et al.

Justiﬁcation of an ECM-Driven Transformation of Sales
Processes at the Hilti Corporation
Case Description
The Hilti Corporation is a leading company for products, systems and services for
the construction industry in more than 120 countries around the world. Hilti
evolved from a family company founded in 1941 in Liechtenstein to become the
Hilti Group, which has approximately 21,000 employees today. Hilti established a
business model which includes direct sales that serves ﬁve sales channels: (1) Hilti
centers, (2) territory salespersons, (3) customer service, (4) e-business, and (5)
Hilti ProShops. Hilti also established a high-level process to offer professional
services after sales like repair services and ﬂeet management. In fact, although it is
a leading manufacturer of power tools and accessories, in terms of headcount, Hilti
is a service company with the majority of its employees involved in direct sales or
customer service. As in many other companies, building sustainable customer
relationships is important, which is also reﬂected in Hilti’s mission statement: to
‘‘passionately create enthusiastic customers’’ (cf. vom Brocke et al. 2010a). In the
following discussion we refer to the processes subsumed under market reach and
professional services as sales processes.
Because of the signiﬁcance of its sales processes, Hilti constantly seeks oppor-
tunities for incremental process transformations (process improvements). As in the
case described here, process transformations at Hilti are frequently driven by
innovations in Hilti’s IT infrastructure (as reported in more detail in vom Brocke
et al. 2010a). In the case at hand, Hilti also sought to leverage further the economic
potential residing in the standard processes of handling proof of delivery and repair
orders within the order process (Fig. 6). Process instances differ only in the type of
document created and processed by individual process activities, so the order pro-
cess is considered a standard process in the Hilti centers, facilities where a customer
can buy tools or take tools for repair. The order processes are supported by the
SAPTM ERP system, where tool orders and repair orders are entered into the system.
Before the process transformation project began (i.e., the as-is situation), cus-
tomers were required to sign a printed document in the form of either a delivery
note or a repair order form after an order was created. Because of regulatory
compliance requirements, up to three printed copies of these signed documents had
to be created and archived: one copy was given to the customer, one was archived
and remained at the Hilti center (see process interface ‘‘Archive order documents
at Hilti center’’), and one was sent to the headquarters of the market organization
via postal mail and was archived there (see process interface ‘‘Archive order
document at headquarters’’). The process description in Fig. 6 also depicts the IT
resources used in the process, as well as the expected economic impacts on a
corporate level.
Expected economic impacts are speciﬁed in terms of time/costs, quality, and
economic commitments. These impacts occur at speciﬁc points in time in the
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
265

context of process events (cf. vom Brocke et al. 2011b). For example, direct labor
costs that are incurred when an employee executes an activity can be calculated by
determining the time between the start and end events of an activity multiplied by
a speciﬁc labor cost (see calculation scheme in Fig. 5). Likewise, the costs for
sending a printed order form copy to the headquarters is incurred when the copy is
sent, and printing costs are incurred when order forms are printed.
Relevant process quality impacts occur throughout customer interactions and
downstream order-processing activities. The most signiﬁcant economic impact
created by the process in Fig. 6 materializes in economic commitments. An eco-
nomic commitment denotes an intent to sacriﬁce or obtain a scarce resource at
some future point in time. The two commitments created in this process are the
customer’s commitment to pay for an order, and Hilti’s commitment to fulﬁll a
customer order. The signed proof of delivery and repair order document is of
particular signiﬁcance here since it documents these commitments and makes them
legally binding (i.e., a contract is created) for both parties. Based on these
Order is to be 
placed
Create order
AND
Order
document has 
been sent to 
headquarter
Archive order 
document at 
Hilti center
Order created
Print order 
documents
Order
documents have 
been printed
Sign order 
document
Order
documents have 
been signed
Send order 
document to 
headquarter
Archive order 
document at 
(customer
satisfaction)
headquarter
Order-
Processing
Customer 
order
Employee
at
Hilti Center
Customer 
order
Order form
Order form
Printed
order form
Employee
at
Hilti Center
Customer
at
Hilti Center
Order form
Order form
Printed
order form
Process level
IT level
SAP ERP
SAP ERP
Printer
Scan
solution
Corporate level
Commitment to 
pay
(customer 
commitment)
Commitment to 
fulfil order
(Hilti commitment)
Labour costs
Printing costs
Postal service 
costs
Labour costs
Labour costs
Quality of 
customer contact
(customer 
satisfaction)
Quality of order 
processing
Labour costs
Economic commitments (legally binding) are created in this process area
Fig. 6 As-is process for handling delivery notes and repair orders at Hilti centers
266
J. vom Brocke et al.

documents, Hilti has proof of delivery, stating that a particular customer has
received the goods and the customer has committed to pay for the goods. The
process depicted in Fig. 6 creates economic commitments but contains no event
that represents a fulﬁllment of these commitments, so downstream business pro-
cesses that create the events that denote the fulﬁllment of these commitments must
be ensured. The expected economic value of a commitment (ex ante value) can be
expressed in terms of accounting aggregates (accounts receivable, accounts pay-
able). It is assumed here that the expected economic impact of a commitment
equals its expected economic value, but the actual economic impact of a com-
mitment (ex post value) can deviate from the expected economic value if the
commitment has been only partially fulﬁlled at a speciﬁc point in time.
A closer look at the process model in Fig. 6 identiﬁes some potential areas of
improvement, the most obvious of which resides in the process related to the
document management activities. These activities are comprised of redundant
tasks that consume a signiﬁcant amount of resources for printing, sending, and
archiving (e.g., printing assets, archiving facilities, labor).
Another, more subtle, potential for improvement relates to the expected value
of economic commitments. Although order entries reside in the Hilti ERP system,
signed order forms are stored outside the ERP system, so information on economic
commitments is partially contained in the ERP system and partially in a physical
archive. The partial availability of information on economic commitments sig-
niﬁcantly affects the downstream fulﬁllment of interrelated commitments (e.g.,
detection of incomplete customer payments for a particular order, handling of
customer complaints that are due to erroneous order delivery notes). An ECM
solution could integrate the order document management activities with the ERP
system, thereby maintaining compliance and at the same time increasing the
efﬁciency of the document-handling activities.
The size of the potential for improvement by means of an ECM solution is
discussed in detail in the following section. Subsequent sections provide an
account of the monetary beneﬁts of the realized ECM-driven process transfor-
mation through a proﬁtability analysis.
ECM-Driven Process Transformation and Expected Beneﬁts
Documenting economic commitments and safeguarding compliance in the cus-
tomer service process depicted in Fig. 6 involves redundant manual archiving
activities at both the Hilti centers and the headquarters. Manual archiving is prone
to errors, and searching for physical documents in case of complaints, order
cancellations, or overdue payments in the downstream business process, ‘‘Order
processing’’, are time-consuming and sometimes fail, making it impossible to
fulﬁll a repair commitment or enforce payment commitments. In particular, lost
proofs of delivery can lead to cancellations of orders, decreasing expected revenue.
Manual archiving is also inconvenient from the customer’s point of view, as
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
267

missing documents increase the time required to handle customer requests.
Therefore, the process in Fig. 6 offers some potential for improvement in terms of
general quality measures like customer satisfaction and economic measures like
costs and revenue.
The improvements in the order process at the Hilti centers should be driven by
digitizing order documents (proof of delivery documents and repair orders) and by
inclusion of the customers’ biometric signature data into digital documents to
eliminate the error-prone manual archiving activities. The digital handling of order
documents should be facilitated by a document management server and a signature
pad solution, which could be integrated into the SAPTM ERP environment at Hilti.
Taken together, four types of potential improvements have been identiﬁed that
can be attributed to the ECM solution: (1) cycle time reduction by eliminating
postal services, (2) reduction of printing effort through digitalizing documents, (3)
reduction of order cancellations, and (4) maintaining compliance. Moreover,
productivity gains are expected through further standardizing the archiving process
by means of a standardized document format for delivery notes and repair orders
and by making the newly transformed order process mandatory throughout Hilti
centers worldwide. The to-be process structure is sketched in Fig. 7, while the
resulting to-be potentials model is shown in Fig. 8.
The process transformation reﬂected in the to-be process model (Fig. 7) sub-
stitutes the manual archiving activities with a single activity, ‘‘Archive order
documents.’’ Once an order is created, the delivery of the order is automatically
triggered through the ERP system and the order from is displayed on a signature
pad and a screen at the point of sale. The ‘‘Sign order’’ activity no longer requires
that paper be printed out (printing is optional). The customer signs on the signature
pad, which integrates the biometric signature data with the digital order document.
The relevant document-handling activities (signing proof of delivery or repair
orders, archiving signed order documents) are completely integrated within Hilti’s
ERP system (Figs. 7 and 8). The ECM solution ensures that digital order docu-
ments are directly related to an order transaction of the ERP system, mitigating the
risk of lost order documents and giving service personnel immediate access to
archived order documents in case of customer complaints or inquiries. The ECM
solution also increases the efﬁciency of the document-handling activities by
reducing the time spent in sending physical documents from Hilti centers to the
headquarters. Furthermore, Hilti can save costs related to printing order documents
and to sending and receiving documents via postal mail (Fig. 8).
Several transformation activities are required in order to leverage the envi-
sioned beneﬁts and implement the improved processes at all Hilti centers (Fig. 9).
Since the process transformation is mainly driven by an ECM solution, a signif-
icant part of the transformation effort is required on the IT level. For example, the
document server component must be implemented, integrated into the SAPTM ERP
environment, and tested, and hardware and software components (including
licenses) must be provided and installed in the Hilti centers. On a process level,
transformation activities include the design and roll-out of the redesigned pro-
cesses, and user training and process testing is required. Finally, on a corporate
268
J. vom Brocke et al.

level, transformation activities include planning and aligning the expected goals
for the process transformation across all market organizations.
Figure 9 summarizes the scope, targets, and expected beneﬁts of the process-
transformation activities by means of a qualitative pre-assessment. While no
signiﬁcant beneﬁts are expected on the IT level from an investment in this speciﬁc
ECM solution, beneﬁts are expected to occur on a process level, where the ECM
solution enables more efﬁcient processes, and on a corporate level. This phe-
nomenon that IT beneﬁts occur only indirectly through business processes can
often be observed in practice when IT investment decisions have to be justiﬁed.
The consideration that IT impacts are mediated through business processes is also
consistent with results of research on IT value. (See the discussion above and
Davamanirajan et al. (2006) and Melville et al. (2004).)
Order is to be 
placed
Create order
Order created
Display customer 
order
Order
documents are 
displayed
Sign order 
document
Order
documents have 
been signed
Archive order 
documents
Order-processing
Order
documents have 
been archived
Fig. 7 Simpliﬁed structure
of transformed process for
handling delivery notes and
repair orders
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
269

The pre-assessment in Fig. 9 also considers possible spill-over effects of the
ECM investment decision. However, as these effects are not easily attributable to a
single investment decision (particularly on a corporate level), they are excluded
from the subsequent analysis. The qualitative pre-assessment provides the cate-
gories for a detailed evaluation of the ECM-driven process transformation in
monetary terms on the IT, process, and corporate levels. The following sections
analyze in detail the expected ﬁnancial consequences and effect on proﬁtability of
this process transformation. The proﬁtability is reported as the ROPT.
Calculating the Series of Payments with Potentials Models
The relevant monetary effects of the expected series of payments that result from
the process transformation are calculated on the IT, process, and corporate levels.
In particular, the measurement includes payments associated with the investment
Order is to be 
placed
Create order
Order created
Display 
customer order
Order
documents are 
displayed
Sign order 
document
Order
documents have 
been signed
Order-
processing
Customer 
order
Employee
at
Hilti Center
Customer 
order
Employee
at
Hilti Center
Customer
at
Hilti Center
Customer 
order
Process level
IT level
SAP ERP
SAP ERP
Document 
server
Corporate level
Commitment to 
pay
(customer 
commitment)
Commitment to 
fulfil order
(Hilti commitment)
Labour costs
Labour costs
Quality of 
customer contact
(customer 
satisfaction)
Quality of order 
processing
(customer 
satisfaction)
Labour costs
Economic commitments (legally binding) are created in this process area
Display
SAP ERP
Document 
server
Signature
pad
Order
documents have 
been archived
Archive order 
documents
SAP ERP
Document 
server
Printing costs
Postal service 
costs
Signed 
customer 
order
Signed 
customer 
order
Fig. 8 To-be potentials model (factual) for handling delivery notes and repair orders at Hilti
centers
270
J. vom Brocke et al.

into the process transformation (TPPT) and the expected monetary beneﬁts of the
process transformation (TPPOp’–TPPOp).
Figure 10 provides an overview of the expected monetary consequences of the
process transformation. The payments and quantities shown in Fig. 10 do not
represent the real ﬁgures of the case for privacy reasons, but the order of magnitude
of these ﬁgures is comparable to the ﬁgures of the case. The subsequent calculations
reﬂect the investment decision made for seven pilot market organizations.
Payments related to investments on the IT, process, and corporate levels are
expected to occur in the initial period, 0. The calculation of the expected beneﬁts
on the process level was conducted according to the calculations scheme presented
in Fig. 5. The TPPT is comprised of all IT-level payments and payments attrib-
utable to the transformation effort on the process level. The TPPO is reported here
as expected savings realized from the new process.
An additional high-level activity, ‘‘Handling complaints’’, is considered on the
activity level. This activity is not contained in the process models in Figs. 6, 7, 8,
but complaint-handling activities are affected by the process transformation since
it is expected that the number of cancellations can be decreased because of the
improved availability of customer order data. A decrease in the number of can-
cellations directly translates into decreases in back-ofﬁce working hours at the
headquarters. It is assumed that human resource capacity for handling invoices is
Scope: Electronic customer signature capturing to replace all point of sale print and signing processes including 
secondary archiving processes
Target: Increase in retail profitability and customer satisfaction
Direct effects on
IT infrastructure
Direct effects on
business processes
Indirect effects on
competitive advantage
Investments
:
- Hardware, software,licenses
- Implementation, installation, 
testing
- Maintenance of IT solution 
(operational costs)
Investments
:
- Employee training and testing
- Process roll-out
- Monitoring of rolled-out 
processes (operational costs) 
Investments
:
- Meetings for planning, aligning 
and controlling transformation 
goals across market 
organizations (only in preparation 
phase)
- Productivity increase (measured 
in terms of operational cost 
savings)
Expected benefits:
- Improved customer satisfaction
(measured by means of customer 
service)
- Increased sales through 
avoidance of cancelled orders
Challenges
1) All customer documents printed out min. twice
2) Low cylce time due to physical transport of paper-based documents to back office
3) Document archiving processes are not standardized across market organizations
4) Archiving processes are not fully reliable
Description of value creation through IT investment
Anticipated interdependencies:
IT
- Signature pad solution only for 
rich client workplaces
- Replacement of desktop 
infrastructure in HIlti centers
Anticipated interdependencies :
processes
- All market organizations have to 
adopt transformed process
- Spill over effect of process 
transformation*: 
new archiving practice affects all 
processes that work with 
standard delivery notes or repair 
orders
Anticipated interdependencies: 
corporate level
- Spill over effect of investment 
decision*:
increased sales and customer 
retention due to increased 
customer satisfaction
Return on 
Process Transformation
- ROPT is expected to exceed investment 
specific reference interest rate i
ROPT  >  i
*) Spill over effects will not be accounted for in the subsequent ROPT calculation 
Expected benefits:
Expected benefits:
Fig. 9 Qualitative pre-assessment of the ECM investment for a particular market organization at
Hilti
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
271

increased by such time savings. Therefore, employee costs for the back ofﬁce are
treated as a variable in this particular situation. The same argument holds for the
calculation of labor savings for the ‘‘Archive order documents’’ activity.
The expected decrease in the number of invoice cancellations increases
expected sales and positively affects revenue. This effect is considered on the
corporate level.
As is clear from looking at the total series of payments, the investment into the
ECM solution is beneﬁcial, as the initial investment outlay of 227,800 € is
regained over the planning horizon of ﬁve periods (years). However, to provide a
rational basis for the investment decision and to make the expected performance of
the investment comparable to the organization’s competing alternative investment
projects, ﬁnancial performance measures must be calculated. This is presented in
the next section using the VOFI method (Grob 1993; vom Brocke and Grob 2011).
Series of payments for process transformation
Period
0
1
2
3
4
5
IT level
-  218'800
-  5'000
-  2'500
-  1'400
-  1'400
-  1'400
Hardware
-  131'100
Signature pad
price (EUR/unit)
-  240
* required units (for 7 market organizations)
190
= signature pad harware outlay
-  45'600
Desktop replacement
payment (per Hilti centre)
-  450
* required replacements (for 7 market organizations)
190
= desktop replacement outlay
-  85'500
Software
- 51'300
Signature pad
price (EUR/license)
- 270
* required licenses (for 7 market organizations)
190
= signature pad software outlay
- 51'300
Implementation
- 36'400
Installation
travelling expenses (per market organization)
- 5'200
* number of market organizations
7
= traveling exenses due to installation
- 36'400
Maintenance
-5'000
-2'500
Expected traveling expenses (for 7 market organizations)
-5'000
-2'500
Process level
Transformation effort
- 9'000
-4'000
-2'000
Training (expenses for workshops)
- 5'000
Roll-out (traveling expenses for coordination)
- 4'000
-4'000
-2'000
Activity-level payments
Sign order document
Savings for paper/printing
number of orders (in 7 market organizations)
* costs for print/order (incl. postal mail)
= savings
Archive order documents
Savings due to automatization
number of orders (in 7 market organizations)
* cost charge per hour for employee at head quarter
10
10
* time to archive order (in hours)
= savings
Savings due to reduced physical space for archiving
archiving service facility rate/month
* month per period
12
12
= savings
Handling complaints
Savings from reduced search effort for order documents
number of complaints in percent of orders (in 7 market organizations)
1%
1%
* number of orders (in 7 market organizations)
* cost charge per hour for employee at head quarter
= savings
Corporate level
Savings due to reduction of cancelled invoices
cancelled invoice value (in % of sales according to internal analysis)
* sales
= savings
Total:
-1'400
-1'400
-1'400
-1'400
-1'400
-1'400
- 9'000
49'600
'920
'356
'914
'599
'600
'920
'356
'914
'599
'000
'600
'230
'892
'586
120'000
126'000
132'300
138'915
145'861
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
'000.00
'600.00
'230.00
'891.50
'586.08
'200
'200
'250
'353
'510
120'000
126'000
132'300
138'915
145'861
0
0
0
0.0167
0.0167
0.0167
0.0167
0.0167
'000
'000
'050
'153
'310
0
0
0
0
0
12
12
12
'200
'200
'200
'200
'200
'400
'120
'876
'670
'503
1%
1%
1%
120'000
126'000
132'300
138'915
145'861
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
'400
'120
'876
'670
'503
'000
'900
'845
'837
'879
0.0090%
0.0090%
0.0090%
0.0090%
0.0090%
'000'000
'000'000
'500'000
'525'000
'101'250
'000
'900
'845
'837
'879
-  227'800
 62'600
 70'320
 76'801
 80'351
 84'079
Fig. 10 Series of payments for the ECM-based process transformation
272
J. vom Brocke et al.

Visualization of Financial Implications
The VOFI method (Grob 1993) is applied here to make the ﬁnancial consequences
of an investment decision transparent. Inputs to VOFI are the series of payments,
conditions of funding and re-investment, and tax conditions. With this additional
ﬁnancial information, VOFI aggregates the series of payments over time into
ﬁnancial performance measures like the NPV and the dynamic (multi-period) ROI.
The aggregation is done in a VOFI table (Fig. 11; Grob 1993).
Visualization of Financial Implications (VOFI)
Point in time
0
1
2
3
4
5
Series of payments
-227'800
62'600
70'320
76'801
80'351
84'079
Internal funds
  + initial balance
  -  withdrawal
  + deposit
Bullet loan
  + credit intake
  -  redemption
20'000
  -  debit  interest (6 %)
     ( incl. disagio 5% )
20'000
2'000
1'200
1'200
Loan in current account
  + credit intake
209'800
  -  redemption
32'400
21'348
48'941
56'375
  -  debit  interest (8%)
27'274
23'062
20'287
13'924
Financial investment
  -  re-investment
0
13'931
  + disinvestment
  + credit interest (6%)
0
Tax payments
  - tax due
1'727
4'709
7'574
10'052
12'816
 + drawback
Net funding balance
Balances
on bullet loan
20'000
20'000
on loan in current account
209'800
-229'800
-197'401
-156'052
-107'111
-50'736
-13'931
177'401
156'052
107'111
on financial investment
Net Balance
0
13'931
Calculation of tax due
Point in time
1
2
3
4
5
cash flow
62'600
70'320
76'801
80'351
84'079
  -  interest expenses
28'474
24'262
20'287
13'924
 +  interest yield
0
  - depreciation
26'220
26'220
26'220
26'220
26'220
  - depreciation on disagio
1'000
1'000
Tax base
6'906
18'838
30'294
40'207
51'263
drawback
tax due
1'727
4'709
7'574
10'052
12'816
Calculation of depreciation
Point in time
1
2
3
4
5
book value at the beginning of the year
131'100
104'880
78'660
52'440
26'220
depreciation
26'220
26'220
26'220
26'220
26'220
book value at the end of the year
104'880
78'660
52'440
26'220
Fig. 11 Visualization of the ﬁnancial implications (VOFI) of the ECM investment
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
273

The series of payments is listed at the top of the table, followed by the ﬁnancing
conditions. For each period the account balance must equal zero, so negative
payments (out-payments) in a period are compensated for with internal or external
funds. Positive payments (in-payments) in a period are used to serve loan interests,
to redeem loans, or to reinvest free cash ﬂows. At any point in time, the VOFI
reports on the current capital stock, which is comprised of raised funds or rein-
vested cash ﬂows. The net balance (the last row of the VOFI table) indicates the
ﬁnancial performance of an investment.
A periodic update of the capital stock must be calculated in order to aggregate
the series of payments from Fig. 10 over time by means of VOFI. Starting in
period 0, each period is calculated in a way that compensates for in-payments and
out-payments. The following example illustrates the basic procedure. In period 0,
an out-payment usually must be ﬁnanced. If the internal funds available are
insufﬁcient, a loan must be taken out. In this case, two conditions for loans are
available: a bullet loan and a loan in a current account. The bullet loan, which can
be raised only in period 0, has an interest rate of 6 %, it must be redeemed in
period 2, and a disagio of 10 % is applied on raising the loan. The loan in a current
account, which can be raised any time, has an interest rate of 13 %. Financial re-
investments have an interest rate of 4 %, which is the interest rate of the oppor-
tunity in this case. No internal funds are available to ﬁnance the investment, and
tax payments (or refunds) are calculated on the basis of a constant annual tax rate
of 25 %. In calculating the depreciation, it is assumed that all hardware purchases
are subject to depreciation (in this case, 131,100 € = 452,600 € (signature
pad) ? 85,500 € (desktop replacement)).
The VOFI in Fig. 11 indicates a net balance of 13,931 € in period 5, which is
equal to the terminal value of the ECM investment at the end of the planning horizon.
The pay-off period of the ECM investment is period 5 since the net balance is
positive for the ﬁrst time in this period. The dynamic ROI equals 8.16 %. (The
calculation is not shown here, and the procedure for calculating this ROI is discussed
elsewhere (Grob 1993)). Overall, the calculation conﬁrms that the ECM investment
contributes to creating monetary value, so it improves the ﬁnancial performance of
the analyzed processes within the planning horizon. Therefore, the decision to invest
in an ECM solution is justiﬁed from a ﬁnancial perspective. Because of the effects of
the assumed ﬁnancing and tax conditions, the positive effects of the process trans-
formation (the positive payments from periods 1–5) do not occur immediately but
only after a time lag. Therefore, although operational improvements are expected to
occur quickly, ﬁnancial value is created only after a period of ﬁve years in this case.
(The VOFI net balance is positive for the ﬁrst time in period 4.)
Summary and Outlook
This chapter presents the concept of potentials modeling and the ROPT to develop
an approach to assessing the economic value of ECM systems. The application to a
real-world example demonstrates its feasibility and potential usefulness for
274
J. vom Brocke et al.

justifying investments in IT, and ECM systems in particular. The approach pre-
sented here is process-oriented since it analyzes the economic consequences of
ECM system investments on a business-process level. This level of analysis is
considered appropriate since the beneﬁts of IT investments and ECM systems
emerge from their ability to support and facilitate the execution of business pro-
cesses directly or indirectly.
By presenting and applying a value-assessment approach for ECM investments,
we contribute to ECM research, which has received little attention in the IS
discipline (Tyrväinen et al. 2006). Furthermore, the approach presented here is not
restricted to the analysis of ECM investments but is a generalized framework that
is applicable to a wide variety of IT investments. Its unique characteristic is that
the assessment approach is centered on processes as the main unit of analysis. Our
process-oriented assessment approach facilitates the explication and modeling of
the potentials of a particular IT investment on a process level—that is, on the level
where the impacts of IT investments can be measured directly. The approach
allows one to assess IT investments both qualitatively (pre-assessment template)
and quantitatively (ﬁnancial measures, such as the ROPT). The chapter demon-
strates by means of a real-world case how the assessment approach presented can
been applied in practice and that it provides useful information for ﬁrms that need
to justify IT investment decisions.
Future research may focus on reﬁning the assessment approach in terms of
providing relevant data about process parameters in a particular decision model
(e.g., automatic provision of execution frequencies, provision of probability dis-
tributions, provision of relevant data on qualitative aspects) or with regard to
supporting different levels of detail when analyzing potentials models. A prom-
ising approach may be to make use of event logs, which can be fed directly into an
organization’s accounting information system for the purpose of process-oriented
proﬁtability analysis (cf. vom Brocke et al. 2011b).
All in all, an investment into ECM systems should be justiﬁed not only based on
functional requirements but also based on a performance analysis of the use
processes of ECM systems (i.e., the business processes). Decision makers and IT
managers concerned with IT investment decisions should not ask if IT creates
value (Brynjolfsson 1993; Carr 2003) but how and where IT can create value in
support of an organization’s business processes.
References
Bingi, P., Sharma, M. K., & Godla, J. K. (1999). Critical issues affecting an ERP implementation.
Information Systems Management, 16(3), 7–14.
Brynjolfsson, E. (1993). The productivity paradox of information technology: Review and
assessment. Communications of the ACM, 36(12), 66–77.
Carr, N. (2003). IT doesn’t matter. Harvard Business Review, 81(5), 41–49.
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
275

Davamanirajan, P., Kauffman, R. J., Kriebel, C. H., & Mukhopadhyay, T. (2006). Systems
design, process performance, and economic outcomes in international banking. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 23(2), 65–90.
Grob, H. L. (1993). Capital budgeting with ﬁnancial plans: An introduction. Wiesbaden: Gabler.
Hong, K. K., & Kim, Y. G. (2002). The critical success factors for ERP implementation: An
organizational ﬁt perspective. Information & Management, 40(1), 25–40.
Im, K. S., Dow, K. E., & Grover, V. (2001). Research report: A reexamination of IT investment
and the market value of the ﬁrm—An event study methodology. Information Systems
Research, 12(1), 103–117.
Jarrar, Y. F., Al-Mudimigh, A., & Zairi, M. (2000). ERP implementation critical success factors:
The role and impact of business process management. In Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE
International Conference on Management of Innovation and Technology (Vol. 1, pp. 122–127).
Kim, Y., Lee, Z., & Gosain, S. (2005). Impediments to successful ERP implementation process.
Business Process Management Journal, 11(2), 158–170.
Markus, M. L., Axline, S., Petrie, D., & Tanis, S. C. (2000). Learning from adopters’ experiences
with ERP: Problems encountered and success achieved. Journal of Information Technology,
15(4), 245–265.
Melville, N., Kraemer, K., & Gurbaxani, V. (2004). Review: Information technology and
organizational performance: An integrative model of IT business value. MIS Quarterly, 28(2),
283–322.
Ohno, T. (1988). Toyota production system: Beyond large-scale production. New York:
Productivity Press.
Ray, G., Muhanna, W. A., & Barney, J. B. (2007). The role of shared IT-business understanding.
Communications of the ACM, 50(12), 87–91.
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2003). Developments in practice VIII: Enterprise content
management. Communications of the AIS, 11(1), 647–659.
Soh, C., & Markus, M. L. (1995). How IT creates business value: A process theory synthesis. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Information Systems. Amsterdam.
Tyrväinen, P., Päivärinta, T., Salminen, A., & Iivari, J. (2006). Characterizing the evolving
research on enterprise content management. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(6),
627–634.
vom Brocke, J. (2007). Service portfolio measurement. Evaluating ﬁnancial performance of
service-oriented business processes. International Journal of Web Services Research, 4(2),
1–32.
vom Brocke, J., & Grob, H. L. (2011). Proﬁtability of business processes. In J. Becker, M.
Kugeler, & M. Rosemann (Eds.), Process management: A guide for the design of business
processes (2nd ed., pp. 421–446). Berlin: Springer.
vom Brocke, J., Petry, M., Sinnl, T., Kristensen, B. Ø., & Sonnenberg, C. (2010a). Global
processes and data. The culture journey at Hilti corporation. In J. vom Brocke & M.
Rosemann (Eds.), Handbook on business process management: Strategic alignment,
governance, people and culture (International Handbooks on Information Systems) (Vol. 2,
pp. 537–556). Berlin: Springer.
vom Brocke, J., Recker, J., & Mendling, J. (2010b). Value-oriented process modeling: Integrating
ﬁnancial perspectives into business process re-design. Business Process Management Journal,
16(2), 333–356.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., & Cleven, A. (2011a). Towards a business process-oriented
approach to enterprise content management: The ECM-blueprinting framework. Information
Systems and e-Business Management, 9(4), 475–496.
vom Brocke, J., Sonnenberg, C., & Baumöl, U. (2011b). Linking accounting and process-aware
information systems: Towards a generalized information model for process-oriented
accounting. In Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on Information Systems.
Helsinki.
vom Brocke, J., Sonnenberg, C., Lattemann, C., Stieglitz, S. (2010c). Assessing the total cost of
ownership of virtual communities—The case of the berlin stock exchange. In S. Murugesan
276
J. vom Brocke et al.

(Ed.), Handbook of research on Web 2.0, 3.0, and X.0: Technologies, business, and social
applications (pp. 699–719). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
vom Brocke, J., Sonnenberg, C., & Simons, A. (2009). Value-oriented information systems
design: The concept of potentials modeling and its application to service-oriented
architectures. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 1(3), 223–233.
Justifying ECM Investments with the Return on Process Transformation
277

Author Biographies
Jörg Becker
Full Professor, University of Muenster, European Research Center for
Information Systems, Germany.
e-mail: becker@ercis.uni-muenster.de
Prof. Dr. Jörg Becker is Director of the Department of Information Systems,
University of Muenster, Germany, where he is a Full Professor for Information
Management. In addition, he serves as Academic Director of the European
Research Center for Information Systems (ERCIS). His focal areas of research
include information management, information modeling, data management, retail
information systems, and e-Government. His work has been published in peer-
reviewed academic journals and presented on major international conferences. He
authored and co-authored several books on information management, business
process management, retail information systems, e-Government, and strategic IT-
management consulting. Jörg is one of the two founding Editors-in-Chief of the
international journal Information Systems and e-Business Management. He serves
regularly on various editorial boards such as for the journal Business &
Information Systems Engineering, and as a member of the program committees
of leading international Information Systems conferences. Since 2011, Jörg is
honorary professor of the National Research University Higher School of
Economics in Moscow, Russia. Additionally, he is partner of two university
spin-offs acting in the ﬁeld of BPM consulting for retail and e-Government.
Martin Böhn
Head of Research and Consulting ECM, BARC GmbH, Würzburg, Germany.
e-mail: mboehn@barc.de
Martin Böhn is a senior analyst at the Business Application Research Center
(BARC) in Würzburg and the head of research and consulting for ECM, including
related topics like document management, e-mail management, invoicing and
input management, output management, and process management. He has
managed national and international ECM projects in different business sectors,
and he helped companies to deﬁne their ECM strategy, analyze their requirements,
select the appropriate software and operate the systems successfully. Martin Böhn
is co-author of several in-depth software evaluations and market reports, and he
J. vom Brocke and A. Simons (eds.), Enterprise Content Management
in Information Systems Research, Progress in IS, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-39715-8,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
279

has written over 150 articles and papers for magazines and books. Since 2003, he
serves as a regular speaker at ECM business conferences and trade fairs.
Christian Buddendick
Hilti Corporation, Feldkircher Strasse 100, 9494 Schaan, Liechtenstein.
e-mail: christian.buddendick@hilti.com
Dr. Christian Buddendick is Head of Workplace Platform Services at Hilti
Corporation, responsible for the global provision of IT workplace services
including enterprise content management solutions. Founded in 1941, Hilti
Corporation supplies the worldwide construction industry with technologically
leading products, systems, and services that provide construction professionals
with innovative solutions and superior added value. In 2012, Hilti had global sales
of approximately US$4.5 billion. Christian obtained his PhD from the University
of Münster, Germany, where he did research in the area of information systems.
He is an active member of the Competence Center on Enterprise Content
Management (CC-ECM) at the University of Liechtenstein.
Dave Clark
Department of English, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.
e-mail: dclark@uwm.edu
Dave Clark is an Associate Professor of English at the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee, where he teaches in and helps administer the program in Professional
and Technical Writing. He has developed and taught technical communication
courses to a diverse population of students worldwide, using dozens of formats,
tools, and pedagogical approaches in academic, corporate, and nonproﬁt settings,
and is a 2013 recipient of the Society for Technical Communication’s Jay R.
Gould Award for Excellence in Teaching Technical Communication. His research
interests include writing pedagogy, the rhetoric of technology, and academic/
practitioner partnerships, and he has also published and presented frequently on
issues in content management.
René Derungs
Ivoclar Vivadent AG, Schaan, Principality of Liechtenstein.
e-mail: rene.derungs@ivoclarvivadent.com
René Derungs is IT Business Process Consultant at Ivoclar Vivadent AG, a
dental company. The company’s headquarter is located in Schaan in the
Principality of Liechtenstein, from where the company supplies its products to
more than 120 countries around the world. René has over 30 years of experience in
various ﬁelds of the dental industry, including sales & marketing, product
management, marketing communications, and information services. He has gained
considerable work experience abroad in countries such as Sweden, the USA and
Singapore. Currently, he is also a member of two competence centers on ECM and
BPM, which are both organized at the University of Liechtenstein.
280
Author Biographies

Stefan Fleischer
Institute of Information Systems, University of Muenster, Leonardo-Campus 3,
48149 Muenster, Germany.
e-mail: stefan.ﬂeischer@ercis.uni-muenster.de
Dr. Stefan Fleischer is Research Assistant at the Institute of Information
Systems at the University of Muenster, where he also did his Diploma in
Information Systems. During his PhD studies he developed a hierarchical meta-
modeling tool that supports the creation and analysis of conceptual information
models. His research interests are information management, business intelligence,
conceptual modeling, and software engineering.
Ivo Gonzenbach
Steffen Informatik AG, Fürstenlandstrasse 142, 9014 St.Gallen, Switzerland.
e-Mail: ivo.gonzenbach@steffeninf.ch
Ivo Gonzenbach is branch ofﬁce manager at Steffen Informatik AG, where he is
responsible for the market region of Eastern Switzerland. He received his BA in
Business Administration and MA in Information, Media, and Technology
Management from the University of St.Gallen in Switzerland. As an IT
consultant, he has considerable practical experiences in areas like cloud
computing and IT infrastructure sourcing.
Tobias Heide
Research Assistant, University of Muenster, European Research Center for
Information Systems, Germany.
e-mail: tobias.heide@ercis.uni-muenster.de
Tobias Heide is a research assistant and PhD student at the European Research
Center for Information Systems (ERCIS) at the University of Muenster. He holds a
Master’s degree and a Bachelor’s degree in Information Systems from the
University of Muenster. His research interests are research portals, knowledge
management, content management, business intelligence, and ERP. Tobias has
participated in several research projects on topics related to research portals and
content management. He teaches in the areas of application systems and project
management.
Andrea Herbst
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-
Josef-Strasse 21, 9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein.
e-mail: andrea.herbst@uni.li
Andrea Herbst is a Research Assistant and PhD Student of Information Systems
at the University of Liechtenstein. She holds a diploma in Political Economics
from the University of Augsburg in Germany, with a major in Information Systems
and in Economics of Information. Before her academic career, Andrea spent a
number of years in the engineering industries in Europe and in the USA, where she
worked in the areas of business process management, IT, and controlling. Her
main research areas are enterprise content management and business process
Author Biographies
281

management. Her research is published in academic journals (e.g., Business
Process Management Journal) and in international conference proceedings (e.g.,
European Conference on Information Systems, Mediterranean Conference on
Information Systems).
Sven Lässer
Specialised
Unit
for
e-Government,
National
Public
Administration,
Liechtenstein.
Web: www.feg.llv.li
Sven Lässer is Head of the Specialised Unit for e-Government at the National
Public Administration in Liechtenstein, which was established in the beginning of
2012. The Specialised Unit for e-Government is responsible for the strategic
planning, coordination, and implementation of e-Government initiatives at the
National Public Administration, and as such, the unit is also responsible for the
development of ECM. Sven Lässer did his graduate and post-graduate studies in
Human Resource Management and Leadership (‘‘Personal und Führung’’). He has
worked at the National Public Administration for around 20 years, where he
gained considerable practical experience in the areas of Human Resource
Management and Organizational Development.
Łukasz Lis
Consultant, viadee Unternehmensberatung GmbH, Germany.
e-mail: lukasz.lis@viadee.de
Dr. Łukasz Lis did his PhD at the Chair for Information Systems and
Information Management at the University of Muenster. His main research topics
have been research portals, conceptual modeling, business intelligence and content
management. At present, Łukasz works as an IT consultant at viadee, an IT
company based in Muenster and Cologne.
Ramon O’Callaghan
Nazarbayev University, Graduate School of Business, 53 Kabanbay Batyr
Avenue, Astana, 010000, Kazakhstan.
e-mail: ramon.ocallaghan@nu.edu.kz
Professor Dr. Ramon O’Callaghan is Dean of the Graduate School of Business
at Nazarbayev University. His research interests include Management of
Technology, Innovation Management and Knowledge Management. Over the
past 25 years he has participated in several research programs of the European
Commission (i.e. RACE, TEDIS and IST) on socio-economics aspects of
Information Technology. His more recent projects have focused on innovation
clusters, i.e. understanding behavior, governance, sustainability and constituency
drivers of networked clusters of SMEs in order to improve their ability to access
global markets and enable joint delivery of products and services. O’Callaghan’s
work has been published in books, journals, and conference proceedings, e.g., MIT
Press, Journal of Marketing, Journal of Information Technology, European
Journal of Information Systems, International Conference on Information Systems,
282
Author Biographies

and European Conference on Information Systems. His academic recognitions
include the best paper award in the Knowledge Management track at the Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, January 2006, and the best teaching
case award at the International Conference on Information Systems in Milwaukee,
December
2006.
O’Callaghan
holds
the
degrees
of
Doctor
of
Business
Administration from Harvard Business School, MBA from IESE Business
School, and MSc in Telecommunications Engineering from the Technical
University of Catalonia (UPC BarcelonaTech).
Tero Päivärinta
Computer and Systems Science, Luleå University of Technology, 971 87 Luleå,
Sweden.
e-mail: tero.paivarinta@ltu.se
Dr. Tero Päivärinta is Professor of Computer and Systems Science at the Luleå
University of Technology, Sweden. His PhD from the University of Jyväskylä,
Finland (2001), focused on enterprise document management. Tero has published
more than 70 refereed articles in international information systems conferences
and journals, including European Journal of Information Systems, Information
Systems
Journal,
Information
&
Organization,
Information
&
Software
Technology, JITTA, Communications of the AIS, Scandinavian Journal of
Information Systems, and Transforming Government. His current research
interests include systems and software development practices, enterprise content
management, preservation of digital information, e-Government, and computer-
supported collaborative learning. Throughout his career, Tero has worked with
close interaction and joint knowledge creation with practitioners, both in industry
and in the public sector.
Joachim Pﬁster
Department of Informatics, University of Zurich, Binzmuehlestrasse 14, 8050
Zuerich, Switzerland.
e-mail: pﬁster@iﬁ.uzh.ch
Joachim Pﬁster is a PhD student and research assistant in the University of
Zurich’s Information Management Research Group, which is led by Prof. Dr.
Gerhard Schwabe. His main research interests are dedicated towards personal
information management and how to overcome today’s information fragmentation
in daily life. Prior to his position at the University of Zurich, he has been a research
assistant at the University of Applied Sciences in Chur, Switzerland. He graduated
from the University of Hildesheim, Germany, with two Master’s Degrees in
International Information Management and in Information Technology.
Christian Russ
Corporate
Group
Services,
SoftwareONE
AG,
Richtistrasse
7,
8304
Wallisellen, Switzerland.
Dr. Christian Russ is CIO at SoftwareONE AG in Switzerland managing a
corporate IT organization for more than 65 countries and 80 locations. Before he
Author Biographies
283

was Senior IT Manager in several international companies heading different
positions in the Corporate IT departments. He owns a PhD in the area of
economical psychology and system theory and received his MS in Applied
Informatics with a specialization in artiﬁcial intelligence from the University
Klagenfurt in Austria. His research interest spans from the area of collective
behavior and mass phenomena on the Internet (‘‘Online Crowds’’) to knowledge
management, enterprise content management and learning organizations. He is
author of several journal papers and co-editor of books in the area of ICT &
security, social media and cloud adoption.
Theresa Schmiedel
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-
Josef-Strasse 21, 9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein.
e-mail: theresa.schmiedel@uni.li
Dr. Theresa Schmiedel is a Research Assistant at the Hilti Chair of Business
Process Management at the University of Liechtenstein. She holds a PhD in
Business Economics from the University of Liechtenstein and a Diploma in
Economics from the University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany, which she
conducted partially at York University, Toronto, Canada. She worked as a
Research Assistant at the Department for Sociology and Empirical Social
Research, University of Hohenheim, and at the Centre for Cultural and General
Studies, Universität Karlsruhe, Germany. Her research interests focus on the role
of social factors in the Information Systems discipline, particularly on the
interconnection of culture and business process management. Her work has been
published in the Business Process Management Journal and in academic books
and conference proceedings.
Gerhard Schwabe
Department of Informatics, University of Zurich, Binzmuehlestrasse 14, 8050
Zuerich, Switzerland.
e-mail: schwabe@iﬁ.uzh.ch
Since 2002, Prof. Dr. Gerhard Schwabe is the chair of the Information
Management Research Group at the University of Zurich’s Department of
Informatics. His research interests bridge the areas of information management
and collaboration technologies in service industries (ﬁnancial services, public
administration, and tourism industry). He is an active proponent of user-centered
design methods and an advocate for Design Science Research in the IS ﬁeld.
Gerhard is author and co-editor of numerous books, journals and conference
papers, and he loves oranges.
Judy E. Scott
University of Colorado Denver.
Email: judy.scott@ucdenver.edu
Judy E. Scott is an Associate Professor of Information Systems at the
University of Colorado Denver. Her teaching and research interests are in the area
284
Author Biographies

of
e-business,
enterprise
systems,
organizational
learning
and
knowledge
management. She serves on the editorial boards of Management Information
Systems Quarterly Executive, Information Systems Management, Information and
Management, and the International Journal of Strategic Information Technology
and Applications.
Stefan Seidel
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-
Josef-Strasse 21, 9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein.
e-mail: stefan.seidel@uni.li
Dr. Stefan Seidel is an assistant professor at the Hilti Chair of Business Process
ManagementattheInstituteofInformationSystemsattheUniversityofLiechtenstein.
His main areas of research include creativity and innovation management, green
information systems and sustainable development, business process management,
business transformation, and theory building in Information Systems Research. His
work has appeared in major international journals and has been presented at major
international conferences. Stefan is co-editor of the book Green Business Process
Management–Towardsthe SustainableEnterprise, a comprehensive resourceofstate
of the art knowledge on green business process management.
Alexander Simons
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-
Josef-Strasse 21, 9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein.
e-mail: alexander.simons@uni.li
Dr. Alexander Simons is Assistant Professor at the Hilti Chair of Business
Process Management at the University of Liechtenstein, where he also did his
PhD, which focused on enterprise content management. He received his BSc and
MSc in Information Systems from the University of Muenster in Germany. His
research interests are information and knowledge management, business process
management, and content management, and he teaches operations management
and operations research at the Bachelor’s and Master’s levels. Alexander is a co-
founder of the Competence Center on Enterprise Content Management (CC-ECM)
at the University of Liechtenstein.
Martin Smits
Tilburg
School
of
Economics
and
Management,
Tilburg
University,
Warandelaan 2, 5037AB Tilburg, Netherlands.
e-mail: m.t.smits@uvt.nl
Dr. Martin Smits is Associate Professor of Information Systems and
Management at Tilburg University. Martin has published more than 200
refereed papers in the proceedings of internationally perceived conferences and
established IS journals, including the Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
Electronic Markets, and the Journal of the Operational Research Society. He
serves on the editorial boards of the Health Systems journal and the health care
research track of the European Conference on Information Systems. His research
Author Biographies
285

focuses on the impact of IT on the performance of business processes in
organizations and business networks. Topics include business process redesign,
strategic information systems planning, information management, supply chain
management, and (group) decision making. He is particularly interested in process
models, governance models, and system dynamics models, in particular in the
health care sector (e-health), government (e-government), and the ﬁnancial
services sector.
Christian Sonnenberg
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-
Josef-Strasse 21, 9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein.
e-mail: christian.sonnenberg@uni.li
Dr. Christian Sonnenberg did his PhD at the Hilti Chair of Business Process
Management at the University of Liechtenstein. He holds a Master’s degree in
Information Systems from the University of Münster. Before joining the research
group at the University of Liechtenstein, he worked as a research assistant at the
European Research Center for Information Systems (ERCIS). His main research
interests are in the areas of business process analysis, business process
improvement, and accounting information systems. Christian has more than ﬁve
years of experience in BPM projects, and he served as an IT systems architect of
the EU Network of Excellence on Global Governance, Regionalisation and
Regulation (GARNET). Christian published his research in refereed journals and
presented it at internationally perceived conferences. Due to his BPM expertise,
Christian was invited to co-author an article in the special issue on BPM in the
renowned German management journal Zeitschrift für Management & Controlling
and to contribute to the second edition of Springer’s International Handbook on
Business Process Management.
Proscovia Svärd
Institute of Culture and History, Faculty of Humanities, University of
Amsterdam, P.C. Hoofthuis, Spuistraat 134, 1012 VB Amsterdam.
e-mail: p.svard@uva.nl
Proscovia Svärd is a Ph.D. researcher at the Institute of Culture and History,
Faculty of Humanities, University of Amsterdam. She has worked as an archivist
and research administrator for the program Post-Conﬂict Transition, the State and
Civil Society in Africa and as a coordinator for the project The Nordic
Documentation on the Liberation Struggle in Southern Africa at the Nordic
Africa Institute, Uppsala, Sweden (http://www.liberationafrica.se/). She has a BA
and a MA in Archives and Information Science, a BSc in Media and Information
Science, and a Licentiate degree in Data and Systems Sciences. Her Licentiate
thesis was published in 2011 under the title The Interface Between Enterprise
Content Management and Records Management in Changing Organizations. Her
286
Author Biographies

current research focuses on the impact of information culture on records man-
agement. Her research interests are enterprise content management, records
management, and electronic information management.
Jan vom Brocke
Institute of Information Systems, University of Liechtenstein, Fuerst-Franz-
Josef-Strasse 21, 9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein.
e-mail: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li
Dr. Jan vom Brocke is a professor of Information Systems and the Hilti Chair of
Business Process Management at the University of Liechtenstein, Director of the
Institute of Information Systems, and President of the Liechtenstein Chapter of the
AIS. Jan has published more than 200 refereed papers in the proceedings of
internationally perceived conferences and established IS journals, including MIS
Quarterly (MISQ). He serves on the editorial review board of the Journal of the
Association for Information Systems (JAIS) and is member of the editorial board of
Business & Information Systems Engineering (BISE). Jan is author and co-editor of
19 books, including Springer’s International Handbook on Business Process
Management and Green BPM—Towards the Sustainable Enterprise. He is a co-
founder of the Competence Center on Enterprise Content Management (CC-ECM)
at the University of Liechtenstein and serves as a trusted adviser for a wide range
of institutions including the Swiss Research Foundation and the European
Commission.
Laurent Wiltzius
Process Excellence Centre, Enovos International S.A., Esch-sur-Alzette,
Luxembourg.
e-mail: wiltzius.laurent@gmail.com
Laurent Wiltzius is a Process Manager at Enovos International S.A., the holding
of the energy supplier Enovos and the grid operator Creos. He is responsible for
the deﬁnition and the deployment of the methodology for business process
management in the Enovos group. He received his BA in Information Systems
from the University of Luxembourg and his MSc in Business Process Engineering
from the University of Liechtenstein, and he dedicated his master thesis to
enterprise content management.
Author Biographies
287

