ENTERPRISE
PERFORMANCE
MANAGEMENT
DONE RIGHT

ENTERPRISE
PERFORMANCE
MANAGEMENT
DONE RIGHT
AN OPERATING SYSTEM FOR YOUR
ORGANIZATION
Ron Dimon

Copyright 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other
damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the
United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some
material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in
print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the
version you purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For
more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
ISBN 9781118370759 (Hardcover)
ISBN 9781118420669 (ebk)
ISBN 9781118434352 (ebk)
ISBN 9781118417133 (ebk)
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


CONTENTS
FOREWORD
xi
PREFACE
xiii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xxi
CHAPTER 1 What’s Broken and What’s Possible
1
Strategy-Execution Gap
1
Buckets of Pain
5
The Promise of EPM
7
What Enterprise/Corporate/Business Performance
Management Is Not
7
‘‘Business Intelligence with a Purpose”
12
Notes
13
CHAPTER 2 An Enterprise Performance Management
Process
15
Context
16
Impact
17
Responsibility
17
Management Operating System
18
Macro and Micro
27
The Middle
28
Summary
29
Notes
30
CHAPTER 3 Gather: Turning Data into Information
31
Management by Exception
33
Your Point of View
35
Information Qualities
38
Information Delivery
40
Management and Statutory Reporting
44
vii

viii
CONTENTS
Sustainability Reporting
47
Enabling Technologies
51
Rationalization
53
Potential Quick Wins
54
Summary
54
Notes
55
CHAPTER 4 Understand: Turning Insights into Actions
57
Business Questions
58
Patterns and New Insights
63
Big Data and Predictive Analytics
71
Data Visualization
73
Enabling Technologies
75
Components for Your EPM Roadmap
75
Potential Quick Wins
75
Summary
77
Notes
77
CHAPTER 5 Debate: Turning ‘‘What If” into ‘‘What’s Next”
79
People
81
The Process
83
Scenarios
85
Resilience
88
Drivers: What Moves the Needle?
89
Debate Management
91
Enabling Technologies
94
Potential Quick Wins
95
Summary
96
Note
96
CHAPTER 6 Commit: Bringing Accountability and Focus
to the Enterprise
97
Accountability
100
Gaming the System
103
Enterprise Planning and Forecasting
104
Enabling Technologies
108

CONTENTS
ix
Ingredients for Your EPM Roadmap
108
Potential Quick Wins
108
Summary
109
Notes
110
CHAPTER 7 Execute: From Insight to Actions to Results
111
Everything Is Connected
111
Sales Performance Management
113
Sales Operations Performance
114
Order to Cash Performance Management
116
Supply Chain Performance Management
119
Marketing Performance Management
123
Summary
128
Notes
128
CHAPTER 8 Strategy: Aligned to the Right Outcomes
129
The Language of Strategy
129
Functional Value Maps
130
Optics: Line of Sight
132
Metrics Equal Focus
134
Proﬁtability
136
Strategic Flexibility
137
Closing the Gap
138
Summary
139
Notes
140
CHAPTER 9 Bringing It All Together
141
Alignment
142
A Common Business Language
149
Maturity Is in the Arrows
151
Return on Investment and Total Cost of Ownership
154
Standard Architecture
156
Your EPM Roadmap
156
Organizational Readiness: The EPM Center of Excellence
161
Paralyzed by Feuds?
161
EPM and Incentive Plans
162

x
CONTENTS
How Do You Get Started?
163
Summary
167
Notes
167
APPENDIX: AN EPM MATURITY MODEL
169
BIBLIOGRAPHY
175
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
179
INDEX
181

FOREWORD
I have been involved with what is now called Enterprise Performance Man-
agement (EPM) in one way or another my entire career, whether it was in
ﬁnancial reporting and analysis or formulating strategy for our global busi-
ness. I am a strong proponent of closing the gap between high-level strategy
and day-to-day decisions, and of completing the cycle from a decision to its
effectiveness. All too often we devise great plans and set out to execute them
and then get overcome by events or sidetracked without coming back to see
how relevant our plans were or how effective our decisions are.
Current economic demands and competitive pressure now require that
we pay more attention to this cycle of Strategy, Plan, Execute, Analyze, and
Improve. We must be more ﬂexible and adaptable and be able to react to
changing market conditions and customer preferences. And we must have a
new level of accountability at all levels of our organizations. And with more
mature and advanced EPM tools and the vast amounts of data at our disposal,
there is no reason we should not be using this to give us more insight into the
business and make faster, better decisions.
At Hyatt, we use our EPM capabilities to optimize all of our resources in
pursuit of our goal of becoming the most preferred brand in each customer
segment that we serve, not just for our guests but also for our managers,
associates, and investors. The general managers at our full-service owned and
managed hotels have an average tenure of more than 21 years at Hyatt. They
are supported by regional management teams that use information, planning,
analytics, and what-if modeling to support our general managers in achieving
their goals. EPM is one of the foundational elements of our success and helps
us focus on our mission of providing authentic hospitality.
EPM is not just another management fad or another technology buzz-
word. This is doing commonsense, fact-based management right. In this
book, Ron Dimon shows us a way to think about EPM holistically and
directly connects it to what’s important in the business: sustainably delivering
stakeholder value. The book provides a framework to hang your EPM
roadmap onto, and helps you prioritize what’s next on your journey to
managing and improving performance. I wish you luck on that journey.
Gebhard Rainer, EVP and CFO
Hyatt Hotels Corporation
Chicago, IL
November 2012
xi

PREFACE
Thank you for buying this book. It was a lot harder to write than I thought.
The main problem was removing content—there is so much to Enterprise
Performance Management (EPM), it’s not easy to make it be just about a
few things.
The genesis of this book is my career: For over 30 years I have been
involved in Finance Systems and Processes, from my ﬁrst job at Deloitte,
Haskins + Sells as a 19-year-old programmer writing the Journal Entry
subsystem for a trial balance program (called ATOM: Audit Techniques
On Microcomputers, originally written in dBase II), through Lotus 1-2-3,
Accpac, then custom-developed systems (like BOX, the Broker of Obligations
and Transactions that connected US Navy purchase cards with Citibank), to
nine years at Hyperion Solutions (later acquired by Oracle) where I helped
raise the EPM toddler (back then it was called BPM—Business Performance
Management.)
However, as they say, I am standing on the shoulders of giants with
the content of this book. My EPM epiphany came after watching so many
Hyperion professionals whiteboard the RAMP cycle (Report, Analyze, Model,
Plan)—which I initially thought was a great way to sell software—when I
started noticing clients’ visceral reaction to it: ‘‘Yes! That’s how I want our
business to be managed!’’ So I immersed myself in the EPM system and
started noticing all of the untapped business value. Later, I got to take that
whiteboard to a whole new level with senior business executives, mostly
CEOs and CFOs of name-brand companies, when I worked with Simon
Tucker at The Business Foundation. When we took out the technical jargon
and talked only in management processes, business value and strategy-to-
execution terms, they would experience a reaction similar to my Hyperion
clients: ‘‘I don’t care what you call it or what it costs, that’s what I want!’’
I’d like to think of this book as part sequel to Howard Dresner’s ﬁrst
book The Performance Management Revolution: Business Results Through Insight
and Action (John Wiley & Sons, 2007). I had a lot of fun working on that book
with Howard and this book delves into some of his ideas in more detail and
with less eloquence.
Who should read this book?
This book is for CFOs, CIOs, their direct reports, and any organizational
visionary or aspiring leader who wants to ‘‘bring it all together’’ and create
xiii

xiv
PREFACE
an actionable vision and plan for improving performance. The book is also
intended for managers who want to understand EPM and how it can help
them be better managers. My hope is that any student of EPM can learn and
apply at least a few ideas from this book.
If you think of your business as a giant computer, and all of your resources
including time, money, people, assets, products, and customers as the data
ﬁles and software applications on that computer, then what is the operating
system of your business? What is it that directs, guides, prioritizes, organizes,
and optimizes your resources? I call this, simply, your management operating
system.
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right is essentially about three
things to help you improve your management operating system:
1. A Framework. This is the management operating system for your
business and shows how all of the pieces of EPM work together as
one holistic process. It is most useful as a long-term, high-level EPM
vision.
2. Enabling Technologies. Within the framework, I show what pieces
you need to put into place to deliver on the necessary EPM processes.
3. A Fresh EPM Roadmap. This is insight on how to prioritize all those
potential EPM initiatives given your strategic business objectives, and
how they are supported by enabling technologies, eventually being
fulﬁlled on your aspirational EPM framework.
Overview of the Content
The book is organized into nine chapters.
Chapter 1: What’s Broken and What’s Possible. This chapter gives
you an overview of the promise of EPM. It helps you understand what
problems this domain was created to solve and how well it’s been solving
them.
Chapter 2: An Enterprise Performance Management Process. This
is the central idea of the book and of the model for ‘‘real’’ EPM. It’s a
straightforward management process that is enabled by EPM processes
and technology. It’s a closed-loop ‘‘uber’’ process that helps guide your
EPM roadmap and helps deliver on the promises of EPM.
Chapter 3: Gather: Turning Data into Information. One of the most
common elements of EPM is management reporting. It helps answer the
question ‘‘where are we and how are we doing’’ at a particular point in

PREFACE
xv
time. This chapter outlines how reporting has changed to be much more
dynamic, how it has to deliver more insight than ever, and how it cannot
live in isolation.
Chapter 4: Understand: Turning Insights into Actions. EPM decou-
ples analytics from reporting to become its own discipline, not just in
the hands of the few. This chapter addresses the ‘‘why.’’ Why did we
get what we got? It explores approaches to understanding through busi-
ness questions and includes the ideas behind ‘‘Big Data’’ and predictive
analytics.
Chapter 5: Debate: Turning ‘‘What If’’ into ‘‘What’s Next.’’ One of
the most overlooked cornerstones of EPM, modeling ‘‘what if’’ scenarios,
is the topic of this chapter. Enabling a robust, fact-based, open debate in
the company helps it prepare for a variety of possible futures and helps it
maximize the value of its assets and minimize risk.
Chapter 6: Commit: Bringing Accountability and Focus to the
Enterprise.
Enterprise planning is a topic many people confuse for
EPM itself. While certainly a critical part of EPM, there’s more to EPM
than planning. This chapter describes some better practices and shows
how planning should be connected to the other areas of the management
operating system.
Chapter 7: Execute: From Insight to Action to Results. Chapter 7
is a collection of EPM use cases across a variety of business functions,
including Sales and Marketing, Supply Chain, and Human Resources,
and processes like order-to-cash. From this chapter you’ll see how EPM
can be applied to any area of the business . . . not just Finance.
Chapter 8: Strategy: Aligned to the Right Outcomes. EPM works
when it’s aligned with, and in support of an organization’s strategic
objectives. Chapter 8 covers several topics on aligning EPM to strategy
including the ever-popular Proﬁtability Management.
Chapter 9: Bringing It All Together. Chapter 9 is all about developing
your next-generation EPM roadmap based on the concepts and practices
discussed in this book. It helps you sell EPM internally, ties up a few
loose ends, and addresses what it takes to become world class in EPM
adoption.
Appendix: An EPM Maturity Model. As you progress in your journey
to EPM sophistication, it’s useful to be able to grade yourself on where
you are and where you want to be. This EPM Maturity Model can be used
to facilitate discussions on agreeing on your roadmap and prioritizing
EPM initiatives.

xvi
PREFACE
So What?
Typically, EPM is thought of as solely a Finance or Information Technology
initiative and can easily be put in the ‘‘operational efﬁciency through automa-
tion’’ bucket of beneﬁts. Which is just a fancy way of saying a corporate
cost-cutting program. However, in order for EPM to really matter in the
business, it has to have a direct impact on more than just operating margins.
Ideally, it should provide your department, business unit, and company with
one or more competitive advantages in the areas of:
■Customer acquisition and retention
■Product innovation and proﬁtability
■People productivity
■Supply-chain efﬁciency
■Marketing effectiveness
■Overall sustainable execution of strategy
It is no longer an IT-led area but rather a joint IT, Finance, and Business
concern that impacts all of these performance areas.
Revenue Growth
One of the ﬁrst areas of the business to look at for ﬁnancial performance and
competitive advantage is revenue growth. There are a variety of ways EPM
can improve revenue growth, including:
■Better focus on sales productivity through more relevant, expedient
sales forecasting
■Better sales velocity by focusing efforts on the best-selling products,
bundles, and channels
■Maximized revenue by modeling product, bundle, and channel price
mixes
Operating Margin
Especially in a down economy, with the automatic reaction to cut costs, EPM
can help ensure you cut the ‘‘right’’ costs and that the removal of those costs
doesn’t adversely impact proﬁtable revenue or future market share. EPM can
impact this area in many ways, for example:
■Understanding customer and product proﬁtability allows companies
to focus on marketing and selling the products that give the best return

PREFACE
xvii
■Quickly modeling NewCo scenarios in a pending acquisition and
basing those models on historical data and actual constraints (by
product, by geo, by customer segment, etc.) can give a more
accurate picture of available synergies to set the expectations of
the street
Cash Cycle
Accelerating your cash cycle gives you more conﬁdence in working capital,
better opportunities for investments, and improves overall efﬁciencies. EPM
efforts can include:
■Gathering and sharing information on Days Sales Outstanding
(DSO), Days Payable Outstanding (DPO), and Days in Inventory
(DII)—delivered to the right people in the organization (and tied to
employee rewards)—can have a positive impact on cash cycle
■Cash-Flow forecasting and Working Capital analysis can help improve
the cost of capital, debt ratios, and can reduce risk
Asset Utilization
Ensuring that assets such as plants, production lines, or equipment, are being
employed in proﬁtable activities is the way of an efﬁcient organization. A
couple of ways that EPM can impact your return on assets include:
■Modeling capacity to ensure you have the right equipment availability,
manpower, and output or yield
■Scheduled versus unscheduled repair analysis to show how effective
your preventative maintenance programs are
Customer Satisfaction
Making sure customers are attracted to your company and products and then
retained for maximum lifetime value is one of the goals of most organizations.
EPM can help ensure that this happens by:
■Showing if there’s a correlation between customer satisfaction levels
and customer support stafﬁng
■Analyzing customer satisfaction scores by product and product
lifecycle over time, showing root causes for declines in product
satisfaction
■Tracking a plan to improve Net Promoter Score by department

xviii
PREFACE
Employee Engagement
With more awareness and accountability, employees at all levels of the
organization can make decisions to improve both the top and bottom lines.
■EPM helps show how what you’re working on is related to overall tar-
gets. For example, an A/R clerk can see how the velocity of receivables
under his or her control can impact DSO, working capital, and free
cash ﬂow
■EPM encourages more sharing and collaboration of plans, analyses
and results, and reduces the need to recreate the wheel every time
Organic Growth and Outperformance Management
Unfortunately, many people equate EPM with enterprise budgeting/
planning applications coupled with a statutory and management reporting
initiative—with a focus on compliance and control. The real goal of EPM
is to have a material impact on business performance, to standardize on
one management operating system across an organization—for better
performance
visibility,
execution,
accountability,
and
organizational
ﬂexibility. What if you had a stretch goal of using EPM not just for
performance management, but for OUT-performance management?
How would we use EPM to outperform your competitors on both revenue
growth and proﬁtability over the long term?
There are many ways to do this:
1. Organic growth is key—an intelligent investment in organic growth
may provide more value than growth through acquisition. EPM
supports organic growth in many ways:
a. Proﬁtability management with customer and market segmentation:
spending more effort marketing and selling the most proﬁtable
product/service offerings to the right people at the right time at
the right price (price modeling and analytics is a key component of
this).
b. Model, plan for, measure, and manage cross-selling and up-selling
efforts. Use analytics to understand which cross-selling and up-
selling initiatives work and how they can be replicated. Tie this into
the pricing models as well.
c. Look to adjacencies, for example, bundles with partner prod-
ucts/services (e.g., Nike + iPod). These can capture new markets
and pull along sales of your products. Including external parties

PREFACE
xix
(suppliers, partners, resellers) in your rolling revenue forecasting
process gives you more visibility into opportunities;
d. Market expansion: EPM includes multidimensional modeling of
different scenarios that can be risk weighted, so, for example, if
you want to expand to an emerging market, you can factor in
risk from currency ﬂuctuations, government regulations, and other
assumptions. Once you have debated and selected the right model,
you can use that as the basis for a capital expenditure plan, revenue
and expense budget, and workforce plan.
2. Other areas for EPM to contribute to out-performance include sup-
porting and interconnecting knowledge-intensive intangibles (intel-
lectual property [IP], patents, copyrights, strong brands) to ﬁnancial
and operational key performance indicators (KPIs)—thus linking
innovation to the entire business.
If you want a quick way to start using EPM to impact the top and bottom
line, simply add a new category to your revenue forecast: from ‘‘worst-case,’’
‘‘probable,’’ and ‘‘commit’’ to a ‘‘stretch’’ (upside) number, and start managing
to that.
EPM, as it is currently practiced, is still largely a collection of silos. It’s
time to bring it all together, to interconnect the processes, to build on a
common-rules and meta-data platform and to turn EPM into a sophisticated
management operating system.
My hope is that you embrace the Management Operating System and
use EPM to drive value for your people, your customers and vendors, your
markets, and all of your stakeholders.
My hidden agenda is to help move the EPM industry forward through
more sophisticated adoption and by showing more correlation to improving
performance. At a minimum, that would include:
■Making it a closed-loop process, not fragmented silos and initiatives
■Encompassing all areas of the business including Sales and Marketing,
Operations, and Development, not exclusive to Finance
■Including Business Intelligence and Business Analytics, not just Enter-
prise Planning and Reporting
■Using it as a platform for continuous improvement, better trans-
parency, collaboration, and what author Daniel Pink says truly moti-
vates us: Autonomy, Mastery, and Purpose1
Note
1. Daniel H. Pink, Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us (Riverhead Press, 2009).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
To my friend Simon Tucker from whom I have learned much and shared
many adventures and laughs. Much of the content for this book was formed
and validated while working with Simon on myriad clients.
Thanks to Gebhard Rainer for his foreword—I ﬁrst heard Gebhard speak
at a Hyperion event in 2004 and I realized just how much difference EPM
can make in a business.
To those who encouraged and supported me in writing this book:
Rick Cadman, Dawna MacLean, Nancy Belmont, Tony Mayo, and my
advisory board and brain trust in Tony’s Vitality, Service and Outstanding
Performance (VSOP) executive coaching group. A special thanks to Tony for
recommending Scrivener software, which doubled my productivity overnight.
To Howard Dresner and Frank Buytendijk, who made strategy fun.
To my early mentors from Deloitte in Toronto: John Gambles,
P. Howard Lyons, Jim Youldon, and Denman Lawrenson.
To Alan Slaight for letting me work on his book on Stewart James
(Stewart James in Print: The First Fifty Years [Jogestja, 1989]).
To friends and colleagues who reviewed the content, gave me feed-
back, and helped improve the overall quality of the book, especially Rich
Fluck, Nina Acosta, Kim Flaherty, Toby Hatch, John O’Rourke, and again,
Rick Cadman.
To Oracle Corporation and Tableau Software Inc. for their screenshots.
To my editors at John Wiley & Sons: Tim Burgard and Stacey Rivera,
with much gratitude for their vision and their patience.
To countless colleagues at Deloitte, ITG, Hyperion, Infosys, and Check-
Point Consulting, and all those clients through 30 years of consulting that
taught me their businesses and allowed me to contribute to their success.
And I want to acknowledge my family for their love, motivation, and joy.
Especially my sister, Marlene, for reminding me who I am.
Ron Dimon
Fairfax, VA
April 2013
xxi

C H A P T E R 1
What’s Broken and
What’s Possible
‘‘Finding what’s wrong and ﬁxing it’’ versus ‘‘seeing what’s possible
and going for it’’ give two very different lives.
—TONY MAYO
W
e are in the middle of an information deluge and an insight
glut.1
Our systems, processes, and information are still struggling to
escape silos when the economy is crying out for collaboration, efﬁciency, and
better results.
Folks are constantly reinventing the wheel at work and some lament
‘‘if only people in our company knew what everyone in our company
knows!’’2 Many companies can barely agree on the deﬁnition of a customer,
an employee, or sales ﬁgures, let alone agree on how to improve them.
With all this technology and information at our ﬁngertips, we are still
making decisions in the dark and relying on our best guesses.
Certainly some organizations are doing better than others when it comes
to closed-loop, fact-based decision-making, but the opportunity to take
advantage of all this data we have is barely being exploited.
Strategy-Execution Gap
What is it that thwarts a rigorous process of sustainably executing an orga-
nization’s strategy? As shown in Figure 1.1, some of the barriers include
those capabilities that are the responsibility of managers and leaders in the
organization.
In March 2010, Harvard Business Review (HBR) surveyed 1,075 HBR
readers about strategy and execution in their organizations.3 Only 37% said
their companies are ‘‘very good’’ or ‘‘excellent’’ at execution.
1
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

2
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
The Gap
Customer
Satisfaction
Revenue Growth
Sales
Marketing
R&D
Production
Operations
Shared Services
Finance
Communication
Collaboration
Accountability
Focus
Resource
Optimization
Change
Management
Performance 
Measurement
Operational
Efficiency
Asset Utilization
Cash Cycle Velocity
Employee
Engagement
Strategy
Execution
Figure 1.1
Barriers in the Strategy-Execution Gap
The HBR survey found that the top barriers to strategy-execution were:
■Making the strategy meaningful to front-liners
■Poor communication of strategy
■Lack of accountability
■Lack of clear and decisive leadership
■Too much focus on short-term results
■Everyone is too busy/not enough resources
■Resistance to change
■Strategy goals remain vague and pointless:
■
Leadership actions are inconsistent with strategy
■
Inability to measure impact
■
Business units with competing agendas
■
Too much uncertainty
In my consulting work, and being an employee for small, medium,
and large organizations, I’ve seen some of the barriers to effective strategy
execution including the following:
■No vetting of the strategy to see if it’s actually doable (do we have the
right capital, right products, right markets, right people?), and little
debate to reﬁne the strategy.
■Low agreement on what the strategy actually is—even among the
C-suite executives (it’s always a surprise to see this).
■Low connection between the corporate ﬁnancial and operational busi-
ness models (made in the vetting debate) and budgets, plans, and
forecasts.

WHAT’S BROKEN AND WHAT’S POSSIBLE
3
■Low buy-in to the budgets, plans, and forecasts (usually due to man-
agement overrides after a bottoms-up exercise), resulting in low buy-in
to the strategy from lower levels in the organization.
■Low agreement on what the right measures are to see how well we’re
doing, and no visible connection between those measures and strategic
objectives.
■Low belief that the numbers seen are accurate (or at least the same
version), as well as a lot of manual effort to get at the numbers.
■Low understanding of the root causes as to why the company achieves,
underachieves, or overachieves results.
■Little connection between root-cause analysis and tweaking the strat-
egy (‘‘hey, we are losing money on product X, and it’s not a loss-leader,
should we be in that business?’’).
■Low accountability for results. Some organizations don’t have targets
or owners for their key objectives.
When it does work, I’ve seen things like accounts receivable associates
having a Business Intelligence (BI) dashboard that shows how they have a
daily impact on days sales outstanding and cash collections which directly
impacts strategic objectives like proﬁtable revenue growth.
According to Roger Martin, Dean of the Rotman School of Management
at the University of Toronto, in his article ‘‘The Execution Trap,’’4 as
operational and front-line employees have to make decisions every day
involving customers and operations, they become de facto strategists. Or, in
my view, at least de facto strategy executioners, and I don’t mean they have
to kill the strategy!
Imagine if your number-one strategic objective is ‘‘proﬁtable revenue
growth,’’ and the target is 10% year-over-year improvement in both revenue
and operating margin. Also imagine that every employee knows this—they
even have it written on a laminated card they carry around in their wallets and
purses. And then one of your customer service reps gets a phone call from an
irate customer. Typically, the customer service rep is measured on customer
satisfaction including low call time, low time-to-resolution, high-marks on
the net promoter score scale for each interaction, and so on. But what if the
phone call from the irate customer was accompanied by a dashboard that
automatically popped up on the customer service rep’s screen that showed:
■Customer lifetime value (CLV) (how much the customers company
had spent on your products and services) was 50% lower than the
average CLV.
■Cost to serve (the amount spent on support, maintenance, returns, and
so on) was 50% higher than the average cost to serve.

4
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
■Overall customer proﬁtability was ranked in the bottom 10% (this
customer was very good at negotiating deep discounts on prices during
the end-of-quarter sales cycle).
What would your customer service rep do? Would you want them to
treat the irate customer as any other customer and invest the time and money
to solve their problem or concern? Or would you want the customer service
rep to forward the customer call on to a special help desk that, in line with
your number one strategic objective, would ‘‘ﬁre’’ this customer?
We need a better management process because business-as-usual is over.
In its place we have a faster-paced, rapidly changing world, including:
■A need to be more agile, more responsive, and more tolerant of
uncertainty
■Better-informed customers
■Changing market and business models
■Structural changes in the economics of business
■Regulatory revolution
■Growth through acquisition as the normal course of business
■Redeﬁning asset values
■Changing delivery channels
■Vast new information sources
■Compressed cycle times
And those compressed cycle times impact the entire business:
■Time to market for new products and services (concept to realization)
■Time to deliver to the customer
■Time to close the books
■Time to hire new staff
■Time to deploy new staff (on-boarding)
■Time for new staff to reach full productivity
■Time to make key decisions
■Time to complete major business transactions
■Time to obsolescence for equipment and products
■Time to integrate acquisitions
■Time to respond to competitive actions
■Time to return on investment (ROI) (especially for new technology
investments)
■Time to enter a new market5

WHAT’S BROKEN AND WHAT’S POSSIBLE
5
EPM was designed to ﬁll this strategy to execution gap. It’s the new
approach to management that makes strategy everyone’s job, that gives
them the tools and processes to execute based on focus, alignment, and
accountability.
Buckets of Pain
In working with my clients across a wide spectrum of business sizes, industries,
and geographies, when it comes to EPM, there are some ‘‘buckets’’ of pain I
have found common to them all:
■More time is spent on assembling the numbers than on analyzing
them—all this manual effort makes us inefﬁcient and not very scalable.
■People show up to meetings with ‘‘their’’ numbers, and we don’t know
how they got those numbers—there is not a lot of conﬁdence.
■Some people aren’t getting the reports or analyses we’re sending
out—it either gets lost in their email or the right people aren’t on the
distribution list (or they’re ignoring it).
■There is little alignment across functions (Sales, Marketing, Develop-
ment, HR).
■People aren’t following the prescribed processes, especially for sub-
mitting their plans and forecasts—they make different assumptions
and interpret what we want differently.
■The right people don’t have access to the right information, at the
right time.
■Sometimes the data is just plain wrong—it doesn’t include the latest
numbers or it’s an old version, or it’s missing parts.
■There is a frustrating amount of ‘‘reinventing the wheel’’ and lack of
coordination across teams—a group will create a process or system
without knowing that there’s already one in place.
■The reports are static and users can’t interact with them—there’s no
depth (drill-down) or slice-and-dice.
■Sometimes their reports, plans, analyses, and models are just too
complex to understand or believe—rules and transformations have
been added on over the years unchecked and unauditable.
■Some of their key measures don’t even have targets, so how will they
know how they’re doing? And where they do know, they’re not sure
who’s responsible for the variance.

6
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
■People are working off of different deﬁnitions (of customer, of
employee, of revenue) and different formulas making it difﬁcult to
compare apples to apples.
■They have data timing problems (e.g., daily sales, monthly expenses).
■They are living in ‘‘spreadsheet hell.’’
These buckets of pain can be further summarized as a lack of foundational
business elements as shown in Table 1.1.
Addressing this pain and implementing these foundations can be difﬁcult.
Some of the top barriers to EPM adoption include:
■Getting at, and believing in, the data. Too many managers still
‘‘torture’’ the data until it ﬁts their needs, so that its credibility is lost.
■Getting managers to take action based on the data.
■The political will at the top to embrace and adopt EPM: Sometimes
successful EPM implementations make careers, sometimes they break
them.
■Knowing only the cost, and not the value of the effort and capital it
will take to be an EPM-centric organization.
■Being complacent with some of the silo or point-solutions, like having
a good planning tool and stopping there.
■Conﬂicting priorities and limited resources mean many managers are
focused on short-term ﬁre drills and don’t spend the time to ﬁx the
root cause.
Table 1.1
A Summary of the Buckets of Pain
A lack of . . .
Believability
I don’t trust the numbers, also known as ‘‘one version of the truth’’ or
data quality issues.
Visibility
I can’t get to the numbers I need, when I need them, at the right level
of detail, or they aren’t fresh enough.
Focus
I have too much data and not enough actionable information.
Alignment
We are not on the same page regarding the drivers of the business.
Efﬁciency
Too much time spent manually extracting numbers, or on manual
tie-out, or on reinventing reports and analysis that already exist.
Deﬁnitions
We don’t agree on what numbers mean (e.g., Revenue—is that
booked? recognized? commissionable?)
Accountability
No one is ‘‘on the hook’’ for the number, or the targets don’t exist or
are meaningless. There is no closed-loop from decision to result: Was it
a good decision; did we achieve the return we imagined?

WHAT’S BROKEN AND WHAT’S POSSIBLE
7
The Promise of EPM
Back in 2001, Gartner Inc. coined the term Corporate Performance Man-
agement (CPM) which promised to address these concerns with a uniﬁed
management system.
What’s happened since 2001?
Somehow, EPM lost its way. And it’s been subverted to mean many
things. Some take it to mean:
■BI
■Enterprise planning
■Connecting reporting and planning
■Balanced Scorecards
The promise was to close the loop from plan to result, from insight to
action the reality is that CPM became business performance management
(BPM) now EPM and really consists of three silos:
1. Enterprise planning (budgeting, planning, and forecasting),
2. Statutory consolidation, close and reporting, and
3. Business Analytics.
Yet it’s much more than that.
What Enterprise/Corporate/Business Performance
Management Is Not
We still see confusion at client sites, in the press, on the Web, and from
vendors and consultants as to just what is EPM, CPM, BPM, or integrated
performance management (IPM). No wonder there’s confusion, we still can’t
even agree on what to call it! There are too many solutions that don’t tie back
to the vision and deﬁnition of EPM. Yet there are a number of good working
deﬁnitions; let’s look at two of them.
Lee Geishecker’s original deﬁnition in 2001 (when she was with Gartner)
was that CPM ‘‘is an umbrella term describing the methodologies, metrics,
processes and systems used to monitor and manage an enterprise’s business
performance.’’6
‘‘Monitor’’ is clearly in the domain of BI. It’s the ‘‘manage’’ which has
been open to interpretation. So let’s look at an updated deﬁnition from David
Axson:
[BPM] encompasses all the processes, information, and systems
used by managers to set strategy, develop plans, monitor execution,

8
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
forecast performance, and report results with a view to achieving
sustainable success no matter how success may be deﬁned.7
More encompassing, but still not embracing the key point. The real
purpose of EPM is to interconnect each of those areas (and a few more) that
Axson points out in order to align strategy with sustainable execution. So EPM
answers the questions: ‘‘What should we do, and how should we do it,’’ and
‘‘How did we do and why did it happen?’’ And it interrelates those answers.
Let’s have a quick look at what EPM is not:
■It’s not Balanced Scorecards. Bob Paladino’s book Five Key Principles
of Corporate Performance Management is essentially a scorecard book.
There is valuable information in that book about scorecards, and while
scorecards are certainly an ingredient of EPM, there is more to EPM
than scorecards.
■It’s not Enterprise Budgeting, Planning and Forecasting as most EPM
case studies will have you believe. Although Enterprise Planning is
considered the cornerstone of EPM, it alone is not EPM.
■It is not BI 2.0, and the primary components of BI are encompassed
in EPM.
■It’s not BPM or Enterprise Project Management. These are just
unfortunate collisions of acronyms.
■It’s not KPIs. But, of course, there are KPIs in EPM.
■It’s not management reporting. Just another ingredient. Same for
ﬁnancial consolidation and statutory reporting.
■It is not the HR process of performance reviews and compensation
generally referred to as performance management, they just got the
PM acronym ﬁrst.
I’ll talk more about the key interconnections that truly deliver on the
promise of EPM in Chapter 2.
This book shows a way to get back on track to the original vision of EPM
and to use it for competitive advantage and better business results.
I was delighted to be involved in the early conversations about forming
BPM at Hyperion Solutions, and was fortunate enough to be included in
writing and editing one of the ﬁrst books on the subject, On the Up and Up.8
Table 1.2 revisits the nine tenets of a performance-accountable organization
from that book to see where things stand.9

WHAT’S BROKEN AND WHAT’S POSSIBLE
9
Table 1.2
Nine Tenets of a Performance-Accountable Organization
The Aspiration in 2004
Where We Are Today
Finds truth in numbers—A single version
of the truth guides performance at all
levels of the organization.
There is still a constant struggle in
organizations to determine ‘‘whose
numbers are right?’’ This problem gets
worse as it gets easier to spin-off your own
‘‘spread mart’’ or database. Perhaps, as
Frank Buytendijk says, we need to focus
on one context of the truth.10
Sets accurate expectations—Every part of
the business is directed by a shared
commitment to strategic goals.
Much work has been done to
communicate targets internally, yet the
trend for publicly traded companies is to
shy away from external guidance.
Anticipates results—A thorough
understanding of business drivers and
performance indicators leads to an ability
to anticipate results.
More businesses are adapting driver-based
planning and are focusing on the top
dozen KPIs, not hundreds of metrics.
Plans with impact—Insight and dynamic
processes produce actionable plans that
continually guide the organization to
success in changing conditions.
Rolling forecasts and more frequent
planning cycles are in place at many
companies. Operational and Financial
planning are coming together.
Achieves on-demand visibility—A system
that combines data from existing
transactional systems across the enterprise
gives managers transparent access to
performance information anytime,
anywhere.
BI has taken off, yet there is much more to
be done for user adoption. Mobile BI is
helping that.
Delivers continuous improvement—
A commitment to knowledge and
understanding produces insight that
drives continuous performance
improvement.
This is the ripest area for exploitation in
EPM. Feedback from the planning cycle
sometimes makes its way into models and
scenarios, but, as one client says,
‘‘corporate has no memory.’’
Reports with conﬁdence—Detailed,
integrated and accessible ﬁnancial and
operational information enables
executives to personally certify business
results.
Sarbanes-Oxley attestation requirements
have done much to propel external
reporting standards. Yet fraud, waste, and
abuse abound!
Executes with conviction—Truth, clarity,
and conﬁdence forge a powerful link
between strategy, plans, and execution.
Fact-based decision-making is on the
rise.11
Stands up to scrutiny—A comprehensive
approach to Business Performance
Management meets the highest standards
of accountability and conﬁdence.
There is even more demand for
transparency.

10
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Think of ERP as ‘‘run the business,’’ and EPM as ‘‘manage the business’’
as shown in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2
Manage the Business versus Run the
Business
You run the business with all of the day-to-day transactions and processes
your company performs including:
■Order to cash
■Procure to pay
■Request to resolution/service to satisfaction
■Plan to stock
■Concept to product
■Acquire to retire (ﬁxed assets)
■Hire to retire (human resources)
You have probably invested a lot of time, energy, and money in ‘‘run the
business’’ with myriad transactional systems, including:
■ERP including general ledgers, accounts receivable, accounts payable,
ﬁxed assets and so on
■Customer relationship management (CRM)
■Supply chain management (SCM)
■Sales force automation (SFA)
■Human resource information systems (HRIS)
■Product lifecycle management (PLM)
And usually many more legacy or custom transactions systems to track
everything from contracts to commissions.
And on top of them all—I say ‘‘on top’’ to mean at a level of abstraction
above the details—are the decisions, processes, and information needed to
manage the business (see Table 1.3).

WHAT’S BROKEN AND WHAT’S POSSIBLE
11
Table 1.3
Differences between ‘‘Run the Business’’
and ‘‘Manage the Business’’
Run the Business
Manage the Business
Transactional
Consolidated
Detailed
Summarized
Real time
Periodic (weekly/monthly)
Tactical
Strategic
Front lines/back ofﬁce
Managers/executives
Having the distinction between run the business and manage the business
allows your organization, especially IT, to focus on the different processes,
technologies, and information that need to belong in both domains.
But why bother? What difference does EPM make in your business? You
can look at the beneﬁts of EPM in different ways:
1. Management Efﬁciency. EPM enables standard management pro-
cesses that every company must do well:
■
Budgeting, planning and forecasting
■
Financial consolidation and statutory reporting
■
Management reporting and business intelligence
■
Proﬁtability analysis, and
■
Other ﬁnancial and operational modeling, planning, analysis, and
reporting
EPM leverages the investment you have already made in Enter-
prise Resource Management, Customer Relationship Management,
Supply Chain Management, Sales Force Automation, and other trans-
actional systems.
2. Executing Strategy. EPM can help close the loop between what you
want to happen in the business (and how), and what actually happened
(and why):
■
Records and documents business model assumptions, constraints,
and drivers
■
Connects those models into your annual operating plans, budgets,
and forecasts
■
Monitors and alerts exceptional variances from actual to plan
■
Helps you understand the root causes of variance and plug that
corporate knowledge back into the business model and strategy
■
Ties it all together with a common business language and common
master data to improve visibility, focus, and alignment
■
Giving more stakeholder alignment

12
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
3. Improving Performance. EPM can have a material impact on the
top and bottom line, on the balance sheet, and on overall return on
capital:
■It can improve visibility into the key drivers of value in the business.
■It can show the cause and effect relationship of operational metrics
on ﬁnancial performance.
■It helps you focus on the right things in the business.
■It can bring agility to business models and organizational structures.
Giving better business decisions that are based on more timely
information
4. Reducing Risk. By improving transparency and the right access to
information, managers can see for themselves where the business is
and can test operational and ﬁnancial models to help make the best
resource deployment decisions:
■Global governance and compliance of data and reporting
■It adds a level of accountability for results
■Better preparation for change, increased predictability
■Fewer surprises through better collaboration and communication
5. Competitive Advantage. Organizations that get EPM right are more
nimble than those who don’t.
■Better strategy formulation and planning
■Less complexity and lower costs by unifying management informa-
tion
■Increased organizational ﬂexibility (mergers and acquisitions, orga-
nizational changes)
‘‘Business Intelligence with a Purpose’’
This was the phrase that Howard Dresner used to help describe EPM in the
early days.
Since BI is more prevalent in the vernacular of CIOs and business
managers, it’s a good term to use to help enroll people in the idea of decision
support, analytics, and reporting.
Some people that think EPM is really BI ‘‘plus’’ (the plus is usually
Planning), and some think BI is independent of EPM. Vendor product
strategies also ended up driving the deﬁnition of EPM: Those that have a BI
offering include it in the deﬁnition, those that don’t, well, don’t. Yet I don’t
think it matters what it’s called. What matters is the value it delivers, whatever
it’s called. As a business manager or technologist, if calling EPM ‘‘BI’’ helps

WHAT’S BROKEN AND WHAT’S POSSIBLE
13
enroll others in your organization about the possibility of using information
for better fact-based decisions, resource utilization and accountability, then
by all means use that term. However, I would suggest that once you have
enrolled them in the term, make sure they understand your point of view,
which, if this book does its job, will include a closed-loop management process
and the components of EPM in that vision.
If I were on an elevator12 with an executive of the company I worked at,
and was asked what I was working on, here’s what I would say:
I’m working on building a common business process we can all use
to execute our strategy. So we can agree on the results we’re getting,
who’s on the hook, and tying that together with our plans so we can
all focus on the right things, rowing in the same direction.
What would you say?
Notes
1. ‘‘Data, Data Everywhere,’’ The Economist, February 25, 2010, www.economist.com/node/
15557443, retrieved October 16, 2012.
2. I ﬁrst heard this expression from Godfrey Sullivan, then CEO of Hyperion Solutions. It’s
meant to express the frustration of information silos and the longing to unlock the value
of shared intelligence. For example, when pursuing a new prospect, wouldn’t it be good
to know how employees in your company may be connected to employees in the prospect
company?
3. ‘‘How Hierarchy Can Hurt Strategy Execution,’’ Harvard Business Review, July 2010,
http://hbr.org/2010/07/how-hierarchy-can-hurt-strategy-execution/ar/1, retrieved October
16, 2012.
4. Roger L. Martin, ‘‘The Execution Trap,’’ Harvard Business Review, July–August 2010,
http://hbr.org/2010/07/the-execution-trap/ar/1, retrieved November 16, 2012.
5. David Axson, Best Practices in Planning and Performance Management, John Wiley & Sons,
2007.
6. Lee Geishecker and Nigel Rayner, Corporate Performance Management: BI Collides With ERP,
Research Note SPA-14-9282, Gartner, Inc., December 17, 2001.
7. David Axson, Best Practices in Planning and Performance Management, John Wiley & Sons,
2007, p. 24.
8. Kathi Fox, Jeff Rodek, et al., On the Up and Up, Hyperion, 2004.
9. Ibid. p. 111.
10. Frank Buytendijk, Performance Leadership, McGraw-Hill, 2008, Chapter 6.
11. Tom Davenport and Jeanne Harris, Competing on Analytics: The New Science of Winning,
Harvard Business School, 2007.
12. I was once on the elevator with my client, the director of Financial Planning and Analysis,
who was in charge of EPM projects at a major health care company in Los Angeles. Lo and
behold, the CEO walks in to the elevator, notices her—and me with her—and he asks her
what she’s working on. Here’s her chance to elevate the EPM conversation to the strategic
import it deserves, to get the attention of the perfect EPM champion, and to ensure her
future EPM projects are supported and well-funded. To my shock and dismay, her reply
was: ‘‘Nothing.’’

C H A P T E R 2
An Enterprise
Performance
Management
Process
It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most
intelligent, but the one most responsive to change.
—CHARLES DARWIN
Y
ou have a lot of data. Tons of it. And you’re getting more every day.1
The trick is to turn that data into information that will help you take
some action to further your goals.
Data comes from a wide variety of places these days:
■Structured transactional systems (internal and external)
■
See the list under Run the Business in Table 1.3 in Chapter 1
■
Rate services (foreign currency rates, interest rates, economic
indicators)
■
Myriad ‘‘legacy’’ systems
■
Partner systems (e.g., a supplier’s inventory system)
■Unstructured internal systems
■
Email and calendars
■
Documents, spreadsheets, PowerPoint ﬁles
■
Notes, annotations, announcements
■Unstructured external systems
■
Twitter
■
Blogs and comments
■
Facebook
■
Newswires
■
Websites
15
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

16
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
So how do you make sense and meaning of it all? How do you make it
useful and work for you?
Context
First we need some context. A number doesn’t actually mean anything by
itself. 127 could mean anything. It’s not until you know more attributes about
the number that you can do anything about it.
Some of the most common attributes of numbers in EPM include:
■Units. This could be dollars, volumes, days, and so on. Let’s say 127
means dollars for this exercise.
■Account. For example, sales, travel expenses, headcount. So $127
could be your travel expenses.
■Currency. Especially for multinational companies, you need to know
which currency we’re talking about. Let’s say in this example, it’s
$CDN127.
■Time period. It could be for a year, a month, a week, a day. $CDN127
in travel expenses for February.
■Organization unit. That $CDN127 could belong to our marketing
organization or to a speciﬁc cost center or even right down to a person.
■Geography. While this can sometimes be part of the organizational
org. unit, it can also stand alone—especially when organizational units
are duplicated across geographies. Perhaps our $CDN127 is a travel
expense belonging to our Dutch marketing department—on a trip
from Amsterdam to Toronto, one of our product specialists took a
client to dinner.
■Product. Perhaps our product specialist focuses on a speciﬁc product
and all of her travel expenses relate directly to that product (as opposed
to general overhead).
■Scenario. Is this number the actual number, that is, the amount actually
incurred, or the budgeted number? Is it proforma U.S. generally
accepted accounting standards (GAAP), or International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS)?
■Other attributes. These include customer, channel, employee, and
so on.
So in our example, 127 can be the actual Canadian dollars our Dutch
marketing department spent to help sell product X to customer A. Now I
have a context for the number, but I still don’t know what it means—is it
good, or bad?
Good or bad depends on at least two things: what your expectations were
and what results were produced. If your budget for customer meals for the

AN ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
17
trip was $CDN500, then 127 is good—it’s under budget. However, if your
budget of $500 was expected to generate follow-on sales of $10,000 and that
did not happen with the customer you took out to dinner, you didn’t meet
your objectives and that’s bad.
This context is very important in all aspects of EPM. It gives us our point
of view on the information we are consuming and contributing yet allows us
to be part of the enterprise-wide collection of information and insights. We’ll
explore this multidimensionality of EPM later in Chapter 4.
Impact
So for all of that data we have, how do we weed through it and focus only on
the bad results that we have to do something about and the good results we
want to acknowledge and duplicate?
In order to do that, we have to ascribe value to the attributes of our data.
What makes your data important? Here are a few things to look at:
■Materiality. Does the data have a material impact on your busi-
ness? Examples include sales, gross margin, product quality, customer
satisfaction, labor expense, and so on.
■Volatility. Does the data change frequently and can it ﬂuctuate wildly?
Some commodity prices are highly volatile, while most employee satis-
faction survey results aren’t. Volatility can add urgency to importance.
■Variance. How does the data compare to what you planned the result
to be, and what is your tolerance for that variation? You may have a
plus or minus 5% tolerance on overhead expenses, and a 15% tolerance
on sales forecast (since sales forecasts are notoriously difﬁcult to reign
in, right?)
■Reach. Does the data need to be seen by many people in the organi-
zation? Data that is seen by more people needs to be more frequent,
of high quality, and tends to impact many business decisions.
■Affect. Does that data affect other data in the business? Our travel
expense affects our selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expense
and our operating margin. It may also affect end-of-month discre-
tionary spend and even variable compensation (we don’t get our bonus
if we exceed expense budgets for example).
Responsibility
Even if you understand the context of the data and it has impact on the
business, it may not be important to you because it’s not in your area of

18
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Table 2.1
A Business Function and Layer Matrix
Mar-
keting
Sales
Custo-
mer
Care
Research
and
Develop-
ment
Human
Resour-
ces
Infor-
mation
Techno-
logy
Finance
Strategic
Operational
Tactical
control or responsibility. As a territory sales manager, you are focused on
sales (and maybe margin), headcount, quota, and the like. You probably aren’t
that interested in commodity prices or days payable outstanding. A simple
and effective way to think about areas of responsibility is a functional matrix2
of the business as shown in Table 2.1.
People that work in the Marketing function at the Strategic layer, like
the Chief Marketing Ofﬁcer (CMO), care about different things than the
accounts receivable clerk who works at the Tactical layer of Finance. The
interesting thing is that the different things they care about may be more
related than they think—more on that later in Chapter 8 under Functional
Value Maps. This is also a useful way to look at things when we consider
EPM and BI tools (in Chapter 3, Table 3.3, Matching the Tool to the Type
of User), since people at different levels of the organization consume data
differently.
Management Operating System
Now that we’ve got context, impact, and responsibility out of the way, I can
introduce a framework for thinking about EPM and BI.
The genesis of this framework came from my days working at Hyperion
Solutions (later acquired by Oracle Corp.) and was reﬁned and expanded
when I worked with Simon Tucker at Business Foundation Corporation.
It’s been called a management ‘‘operating system’’ for your company
because, like the operating system of your computer, it helps govern input
and output and manage what applications (or decisions) are being run and
helps make the most effective use of resources (memory, disk space, CPU
cycles).
The closed-loop system is shown in Figure 2.1.
In order to describe it, let’s get into the details. You can start anywhere
on this closed-loop to tell the management operating system story, and I’ll
start with Gather—the most common part of the cycle.

AN ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
19
Figure 2.1
Management Operating System: High-Level
Gather
While you are busy running your business (Execute), you are generating data.
You gather that data into useful information (according to its context) and
deliver it to the right people (according to impact and areas of responsibility).
This is the place where managers consume reports about the results
of the business, as shown in Figure 2.2. Depending on your industry and
your business, there are generally two kinds of reports: mostly ﬁnancial and
mostly operational. The trend has been to combine ﬁnancial and opera-
tional information on one report, which is a good idea since the two are
Figure 2.2
Start of the Cycle

20
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
interrelated: ﬁnancial investments help drive operational results, and effective
operations help contribute to ﬁnancial performance.
Reports are delivered in a variety of formats with a variety of tools and
can be categorized as:
■Canned (static) reports
■Ad hoc or interactive reports
■Dashboards and scorecards
■Spreadsheets
Some examples include:
Primarily ﬁnancial in nature
■Quarterly business review packages
■Sales dashboards
■Line-of-business proﬁt and loss
■Accounts receivable aging reports
■Daily cash position
Primarily operational in nature
■Employee health and safety status report
■Open headcount report
■Customer returns
■Product failure report
■Utilization report
Where Are We?
Gathering all of this data into useful ﬁnancial and operational reporting helps
answer the question ‘‘where are we?’’ Reports give their readers a snapshot
of what results have been produced to date to help them gauge how close to
their goals and targets they are. In order for that to happen, reports generally
have to compare actual results to planned performance. Much more on this
later in Chapter 4.
Also, in order for readers to gauge where they are, the information on
the report has to be relevant. Relevance depends on a lot of variables, some
of which include:
■The right metrics (measures that matter to you)
■Timeliness (not giving sales managers weekly sales numbers from two
months ago)
■The right level of detail (appropriate to my role, and my needs to
answer business questions)

AN ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
21
■The right variance (actuals versus plan or versus forecast (or both),
actuals versus prior period, and so on)
■The right dimensions (e.g., monthly and year-to-date sales by product,
by region)
A great report will also help guide you on where you need to pay attention.
It will alert you to places where the variance is too far out of tolerance and
will have the most impact on the business.
Understand
Okay, you have gathered all the most useful data and turned it into reports
that deliver the right information to the right people at the right time. Now
you want to know what it means.
The next stage of the cycle is where you look more deeply into the results
reported and understand the causes and potential implications of the results
(see Figure 2.3).
Understand includes both ﬁnancial and operational analysis. Types of
analytics include:
■Benchmarking. Comparing results with internal benchmarks (those
produced by other lines of business within your company) and external
benchmarks (those produced by peers in your industry);
■Trending and Correlation. Showing whether your results are
improving or not over time and compared to related measures that
may be improving or not. For example, sales volume over the last
three months could be improving, but total revenue could be declining
because average selling price is declining;
■Seasonality. Comparing current results to prior results adjusted for
the selling seasons of the business (e.g., retail in December, hospitality
in summer);
■Statistical. Including regression analysis, ranking, correlation, and
time series analysis.
Figure 2.3
Understanding Your Results

22
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Why Did We Get What We Got?
Analytics is about unlocking the value of the data to give us new insights into
our organizations. Uncovering root causes and revealing correlations helps
answer the question: ‘‘Why did we get what we got?’’
One way to unlock value is to look for patterns in the data. These may
include:
■Outliers (deviations from the norm, anomalies)
■Repetition (e.g., high call volumes always occur weekdays at 14:00
GMT)
■Dependency relationships (when one thing happens or changes,
another thing happens or changes—in the same direction, or the
opposite direction)
■Clustering relationships (uncovering independent relationships)
■Changes from the norm (sudden change in direction, changes in
magnitude)
There are a variety of methods used to help uncover these patterns,
including:
■Data Visualization. Graphical representations of the data across
multiple dimensions and variables.
■Hierarchies. Establishing the parent/child relationships of data (this
is key to successful EPM, more on this later in Chapter 4, in the
discussion on multidimensional cubes).
■Drill down. The ability to move into further detail from the parent to
child relationships to help uncover root causes of anomalies.
■Slice and dice. The ability to pivot the dimensions of the data on-the-
ﬂy. For example, show sales by channel and by region and zoom into
the top performing region and show sales by product for that region.
■Segmentation. Grouping data with common attributes, especially
useful for things like customer segmentation by customer type (e.g.,
small business, enterprise business, government, etc.)
A popular application of EPM analytics is proﬁtability, such as in these
areas:
■Company proﬁtability
■Line-of-business proﬁtability
■Product proﬁtability
■Channel proﬁtability
■Customer proﬁtability
■Segment proﬁtability

AN ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
23
The beneﬁts and challenges of proﬁtability analytics will be discussed in
more detail in Chapter 8.
Predictive analytics is another branch of the Understand stage that takes
what we know has happened plus what we have seen happen in prior periods
or in peer organizations, and extrapolates possible future results. Predictive
analytics are especially useful for the next stage of the management cycle.
Debate
So by now we have gathered all of our data into useful information and
understood our results and we have found some new insights about our
businesses. Now what are we going to do about it? We want to choose the
best course of action to take to either ﬁx a problem or improve on a positive
result. What’s the best course of action? A robust management operating
system would have us conduct a collaborative, transparent, fact-based debate
about our options until we uncover and agree on the one that will give us
optimal results (see Figure 2.4).
We do this all the time. Sometimes we call it what-if (‘‘What if we drop
prices by 10%?’’ ‘‘What if we acquire company X?’’). Sometimes we call it
scenario planning, and sometimes we call it business modeling. The EPM
management operating system asks us to do this overtly, in a structured way,
with the same level of rigor and discipline that we do reporting.
The debate consists of a variety of ﬁnancial and operational models, or
scenarios, each with a set of interrelated variables, or drivers, that can affect
the outcome we want. The model contains business rules usually based on
observable facts from historical data (e.g., when we drop the prices of certain
Figure 2.4
Debate Possible Scenarios

24
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
products by 10%, the sales volume for those prices increases by 7%, and the
sales volume of cross-sell products increases by 12%).
Successful EPM what-if models have a few key ingredients:
■The business rules as mentioned earlier
■A blend of ﬁnancial and operational drivers
■Outcomes
■Assumptions
■Constraints
In Chapter 5 we’ll see how advanced EPM organizations have their
models continually learn from new results and insights obtained in all stages
of the management operating system.
So what are we debating and how do we pick the model?
What Do We Want to Happen?
The answer depends on what outcomes you want. Outcomes are initially
driven by the strategic objectives of the organization. For most of my clients,
I’ve noticed strategic objectives usually sound like operational targets and are
expressed in the following six categories:
1. Proﬁtable revenue growth
2. Operational efﬁciency (which is a euphemism for cost reduction)
3. Asset utilization
4. Improved cash ﬂow
5. Customer satisfaction
6. Employee effectiveness/productivity
After that, the next area that drives priorities is pain. Where is the
organization experiencing the most pain? Organizational pain usually equates
to areas where you are furthest off target in one or more of the six categories
just mentioned.
The most common pain I hear is about revenue growth—the top line
(and surprisingly not proﬁtable revenue growth). Let’s take a revenue growth
scenario through the ﬁrst three stages of the management operating system
to see how we tackle the debate.
Let’s say our quarterly sales report shows that our overall sales results
are 5% under where we forecasted them to be (Gather). We drill into the
details and ﬁnd that each sales territory is meeting its forecast except one,
our largest territory (Understand).We look into sales productivity measures
(sales by territory divided by quota carrying sales rep headcount by territory)

AN ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
25
and ﬁnd that for our largest territory that sales productivity lags the national
average by 20% (Understand). We go to the headcount report (Gather) and
ﬁnd a spike in unexpected attrition. Now we know the root cause: We have
lost a material number of sales reps this quarter. Usually this sort of problem
surfaces early in weekly sales calls, but in this example, the attrition was across
multiple, uncoordinated sales teams and wasn’t escalated to the territory VP
appropriately. Now we know the problem, what do we want to do about it?
First, we understand that we have to get sales revenue back in line to our
annual forecast and make up for the 5% shortfall this quarter. What are our
options?
1. Hire more sales reps immediately to replace the lost headcount
(however, there is a three-month ramp time to get a sales rep up to
speed to make quota).
2. Shift some quota to other territories (and stretch the rest of the sales
ranks).
3. Incent the channel to pick up the slack with new promotions.
4. Increase discounting and/or drop prices to increase sales velocity
(bring some expected sales from the next quarter into this one).
5. Improve cross-sell and up-sell incentives to motivate other sales reps
to overachieve their quota (pay to make up the difference in sales).
6. Reset investor expectations about the annual sales target (take your
medicine).
7. Acquire a competitor to ‘‘buy’’ revenue attainment (make a long-term
investment decision to satisfy short-term investors).
And I’m sure you can think of other options. The promise of EPM is to
make the debate fact-based and to quickly understand the impact of enacting
each one of these scenarios. Of course, to do that, you have to have modeled
each scenario with the right drivers, rules, constraints, and assumptions. We’ll
get to the ‘‘how’’ in Chapter 5.
Assuming the ‘‘right’’ scenario emerges that satisﬁes your objectives and
is doable and sustainable, the next thing the management operating system
tells us to do is instantiate that choice in a plan of action and deploy our
resources (human, ﬁnancial, market) appropriately.
Commit
The last part of the closed-loop management operating system is called
Commit. This is where the scenario you created in the Debate gets turned
into a set of actionable plans that have an owner, a target, and a timeframe
(see Figure 2.5).

26
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 2.5
Accountable Commitments
Commitments are entrenched in an organization’s ﬁnancial and operation
plans. The most popular kinds of plans include:
■Corporate budgets
■Annual operating plan (AOP)
■The sales plan and sales forecast
■The expense plan and expense forecast
■Workforce plan
■Compensation plan
■Commission plan
■Capital expenditure (CAPEX) plan
■Marketing plan
■Production plans
■Product lifecycle plans
■Cash-ﬂow forecast
Many consider enterprise planning to be the heart of EPM because
without a plan, how do you know how well you are performing? The details
on planning will be examined in Chapter 6.
How Will We Get It Done?
Plans tell you who is accountable to deliver what, by when. A sales forecast,
for example, shows each individual sales reps quota and estimated forecast
(sometimes ‘‘worst case,’’ ‘‘best case,’’ and ‘‘commit’’) and sometimes by
product for a given month. All reps roll up into territories, regions, and

AN ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
27
countries (or however the sales force is organized) for a ‘‘top of the house’’
forecast. So each sales rep knows what he or she is on the hook for in any
given month.
A plan helps us optimize our resources and document how we are
deploying our resources for a given period of time. Sometimes a plan is
dictated from the top (top down) and sometimes it’s built from the ground up
(bottom up), and sometimes it’s a hybrid of the two: A target is set from the
top and distributed down, what’s possible from the bottom-up is consolidated
and the two numbers meet in the middle. The ﬁnal plan is usually a negotiated
amalgam of the top-down and bottom-up.
So the next step in our management operating system is to go Execute
on our plan! Some of the activities that occur in execution include:
■Convert prospects to customers
■Sell products and services to customers
■Design, manufacture, and deliver new products and services
■Invoice and collect cash
■Make investments in property, plant, equipment
■Pay vendors
■Stock inventory
■Attract and retain the right workforce
■Recruit and ready sales channels and partners
■Serve customers throughout their lifecycle
When we Gather information and report on it, we are usually showing
a variance of actual results to plan or forecast. Depending on our tolerance
levels, some variances are ﬁne, and others are alerts for us to take action.
Macro and Micro
The management operating system or EPM process, as some have called it,
is an ongoing, closed-loop process—it doesn’t really start anywhere; you’re
constantly in it. The interesting thing about it is that it works at a variety of
levels in the organization. For example:
■At the corporate level for managing the business and for mergers,
acquisitions, and divestiture decisions, and for tracking the follow-on
synergies
■At the business-unit level for managing ﬁnancial and operational
performance to targets and for continuous improvement efforts
■At the department level for managing revenue, expense, headcount
and all the relevant drivers of proﬁtability

28
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
■At the team level for holding accountability for results, improving
resource deployment decisions, and improving managerial effective-
ness
■At the individual level for monitoring where you are against goals,
adjusting your forecasts, and testing assumptions for coming up with
new ideas and plans
Some clients have called it their decision management system, and I think
it’s more than that. Some have called it their performance intelligence system,
and one company has even given it its own acronym, GADDiE, which stands
for Gather, Analyze, Debate, Decide, Execute.3 This eventually became both
a verb and a noun in the company vernacular: ‘‘Did you GADDiE that plan?’’
and ‘‘Have you run that through a GADDiE?’’
If you’re like most of my clients, you’re already doing each of these
components in various places throughout the organization, to various degrees
of success:
■Reporting: You have lots of them (and an average of four to ﬁve tools
running them)
■Analytics: You have some smart people doing this through brute force
or using some advanced tools
■Modeling: Usually reserved for corporate development types or done
in spreadsheets throughout the company
■Planning: Maybe one system for the annual plan, and another for
forecasting, but most of you probably still use Excel
If there’s an EPM nirvana, it would be to join all of these processes, tools,
data, and people together to make a complete, closed-loop, management
system out of it all. And you can start anywhere.
The Middle
So that’s the value of the middle of the management operating system: to
bring together all of these disparate bits, to keep you from reinventing the
wheel, and to automate the processes of making management decisions that
impact the performance of your organization.
As shown in Figure 2.6, by bringing together the parts of the management
operating system you can start to build a common business language in your
organization (where everyone agrees on the deﬁnition and current actuals of
recognized revenue, for example). You can corral the ‘‘shadow’’ IT that has

AN ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
29
Figure 2.6
Bringing It All Together
built up to address shortcomings in centralized enterprise systems. And you
can start to collaborate on end-to-end business management.
The middle will be explored more in Chapter 9.
Summary
The real value of EPM depends on a new management operating system to
help unify all of the disparate pieces and point-solutions for making fact-
based resource optimized decisions. If ERP was the new discipline to run the
business, EPM is the new discipline to manage the business.
You are probably doing many of these pieces now. You have a lot of
reporting, you analyze results when you can, someone, somewhere in Finance
is running models, and you have plans. However, most of these are indepen-
dent processes running on disparate technologies (mostly spreadsheets), with
rampant reinventing the wheel and little collaboration or coordination.
With the management operating system framework as a way to guide
the integration of these pieces into an EPM ecosystem, less time will be
spent on gathering data and massaging it into useful information, or on
pointing ﬁngers, and more time will be spent on making better decisions,
more effectively deploying resources, and preparing to adjust to market and
economic changes.
In subsequent chapters, we’ll explore each part of this new discipline in
detail and give ideas and examples on the why and how to exploit EPM in
your organization.

30
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Notes
1. The Fifth Annual IDC Digital Universe Study in 2011 predicted that 1.8 zettabytes—or 1.8
trillion gigabytes—of data was created that year, and that data will grow by 50x in the next
decade.
2. This matrix was ﬁrst introduced to me by my friend and colleague Simon Tucker. It’s a
very useful way to show how information silos must be opened up if you want to improve
performance—it’s a holistic look at the organization.
3. This client changed Commit to Decide to emphasize that managers’ decisions have to be
aligned with the overall cycle and that some action has to be taken.

C H A P T E R 3
Gather: Turning Data
into Information
A good decision is based on knowledge and not on numbers.
—PLATO
T
he most common process in the management cycle from Chapter 2 is
Gather. Organizations spend an incredible amount of time gathering
data and trying to turn it into meaningful reports, dashboards, score-
cards, and spreadsheets. In other words, turning numbers into knowledge.
The purpose of all this activity is to ﬁnd out where you are performing well
and where you need to make some changes.
However, with the plethora of data we’re getting, and with the speed at
which change happens and transactions occur, it’s getting harder to ﬁnd out
exactly where you stand. How, when, where, and why we consume data is
undergoing a major shift, as shown in Table 3.1.
We have too much data and not enough information. As EPM prac-
titioners, our job is to help deliver better insights to the business, and the
starting place is useful information: on time, at the right level of detail, to
the person who can use it to make a decision that helps improve short and
long-term results.
If we look at the Gather process within the management operating system
in more detail, as shown in Figure 3.1, we see:
■Actuals.
Details come in from transactional systems and are cor-
related, ‘‘normalized,’’ consolidated, converted, and presented in a
consumable way.
■Gaps. Going through ﬁnancial and operational reporting, if aligned
with the drivers and metrics of the business, will expose gaps in
transactional data that need to be addressed in other systems (like enter-
prise resource planning [ERP], the general ledger [G/L], customer
relationship management [CRM], and so on).
31
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

32
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Table 3.1
Data Consumption Is Undergoing a Major Shift
From
To
Static
Dynamic
A big binder or a large PDF ﬁle
When and where you need it (online,
interactive, mobile)
Financial
Financial, operational, strategic
Lagging indicators
Leading indicators
Stale data
Real-time information
Fixed
Variable based on my role and my point of view
Passive
Actionable, guided
Grids of numbers
Graphical visualization
Pull (I have to go get it)
Push (it comes to me)
■Plan data. Rarely stored in transactional systems, budget, plan and
forecast data is married with actuals data here.
■Variance. Variance to plan, comparisons to prior periods or internal
and external benchmarks, and highlights of major (material) gaps are
visible in the Gather process.
■Financial and operational reporting interconnected. It is becoming
increasingly common to have both kinds of information blended in
the same report (e.g., productivity reporting includes revenue and
headcount).
■Analysis. The same data and metadata is used to analyze root-causes
and to see trends and other patterns (see Chapter 4). Usually one
Figure 3.1
Close-Up of Gather Process and Its
Inputs and Outputs

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
33
drills-down into these details directly from the Gather (reporting)
process.
■Self serve.
During an analysis, users will want more information
and can come back to the Gather process to ﬁnd and select relevant
information to aid in understanding results and variances.
Right now, most executives get the information they ask for. What they
usually don’t know is the level of effort—especially manual effort—that
goes into getting them the information they want. Managers and analysts
in Finance and IT know only too well how much time and work it takes
to assemble, verify, and deliver the needed information. I had one executive
describe the solution to the problem as either automating the transformation
of data into useful information, or ‘‘adding more gerbils’’ to spin more wheels
of the manual reporting factory!
Successful gathering transforms the raw data into useful management
information and lets you focus on what needs your immediate attention. With
all that data, how do you know what’s urgent and important versus what’s
interesting or worse, distracting?
Management by Exception
Most organizations have their standard ‘‘canned’’ reports that are reused
throughout the layers of the business every week, month, and year. These
are the reports that managers have identiﬁed as ‘‘meat and potatoes’’ for
managing the business. They might include, for example:
■Monthly sales variance report
■Proﬁt-center P&L report
■Shipment volumes by product
■Accounts receivable aging report
Instead of having to wade through a ﬁfty-page report and ﬁgure out
if you’re performing well or not, mature EPM organizations alert their
managers to the most material areas with the widest variances.
Managers also have their ‘‘soup-du-jour’’ reports that change depending
on the area of focus, the burning platform, or the problem to be solved this
quarter. While these can also be canned and centralized, they are more often
ad hoc, where a manager can interact with the data and build the report
on-the-ﬂy to satisfy the particular need.
For more on the ‘‘meat and potatoes’’ and ‘‘soup-du-jour’’ reports,
see Chapter 8.

34
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Push and Pull
In the case of canned reports and alerts, these are ‘‘pushed’’ out to the manager
on a periodic or real-time basis, whereas ad hoc reporting requires the manager
to ‘‘pull’’ the information out of repositories or systems for themselves.
One of the problems I’ve noticed with pushed reports is that there are
so many of them that aren’t used anymore. Resources are stretched thin
these days and many report requests are last minute, urgent, and sort of like
spaghetti thrown up against the wall (to see what sticks). Over time, after the
ﬁre has been put out, or a new ﬁre has taken its place, that report is no longer
needed. Yet there may not be a process for removing reports, so it just keeps
getting generated and pushed out.
Except for statutory reporting (which is discussed later in this chapter),
Pull is usually a better approach. It also goes by the term ‘‘self serve.’’
Self-serve reporting is:
■Interactive. Users can focus on speciﬁc areas of concern as business
questions require, choosing some columns and rows over others,
changing the point of view, and drilling into details where available.
■Adaptable. Reports change as the data changes, highlighting variances
that go beyond tolerances and automatically adding detail when they
do.
■Tailored. Reports can be speciﬁc to a user based on their security
settings and their proﬁles. For example, if the Mid-Atlantic sales
manager is using the system, only data for the Mid-Atlantic sales team
appears.
■Reusable. Once a self-serve report is ‘‘done’’ (the user has the right
information in the report), it can be saved for reuse later, shared with
other colleagues (without having to send all the data, just the structure
of the report, which will refetch the data when run by another user),
and copied as a template for another report.
Ingredients
To turn raw data into useful information that you interact with, you need at
least the following ingredients:
■A purpose or business question to answer (e.g., ‘‘What are our sales by
region?’’ or ‘‘Who are our top customers?’’)
■A point of view for the consumer of the information (board, corpo-
rate, strategic business unit, line of business, division, team, territory,
external)

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
35
■Built-in relationships—hierarchies, dimensions including time peri-
ods, apples-to-apples like currency translations, and context—year-
to-date, actual vs. plan, etc.
■The right level of detail (according to business questions and consumer)
■The right metrics—whether it’s a ﬁnancial account like revenue, or
an operational driver like headcount or a key performance indicator
(KPI) or a ratio like productivity, it has to ﬁt the business question
■Timelines—the information has to be delivered and consumed in time
to do something about it
■Some comparative information—a variance to the plan or to a prior
period or a benchmark
■The right way to deliver the information to the consumer (the right
tool and platform)
Your Point of View
Effective information consumption takes into account several interrelated
dimensions. In order to be useful, information must take into account:
■Who you are (your role in the organization)
■What you’re trying to do (either answering a business question or
giving you some actionable insight)
■What details you need including for which time periods you need them
To start turning data into useful information, we need to break it
out by appropriate audience. One way to think of this is by categorizing
groups of users into their personae. Instead of addressing each individual job
category in your organization chart, you can use the framework presented
in Chapter 2 as a way to classify personae. While not exhaustive, and
different for every organization, the personae in Table 3.2 is representative
of many organizations.
Table 3.2 shows the types of titles that ‘‘live’’ at the intersection of
a business function (Marketing, Sales, etc.) and the layer of the business
(Strategy, Operations, etc.).
So for example, in Table 3.2, the Chief Operating Ofﬁcer, Chief Devel-
opment Ofﬁcer, and VP of Manufacturing would all share one persona:
Strategic Management of Development and Delivery.
The fact that they live in the same intersection of the organization
assumes that they will need to consume information similarly.
So what’s different among these roles that you would need to
cater for?

Table 3.2
Example Roles throughout the Organization
Marketing
Sales
Development
and
Delivery
Human
Resources
Information
Technology
Finance and
Audit
Executive and
General
Management
Strategic
Manage-
ment
CMO
EVP, sales
COO
CDO
VP, mfg
VP, HR
CTO
CIO
CFO
CEO
President
Operational
Manage-
ment
VP product
mktg
VP corp mktg
VP direct mktg
VP advertising
VP corp com-
munications
Regional VP,
sales
director,
Sales ops
VP, product
develop-
ment
VP prod mgt
BU GM
Director of
quality
assurance
VP, R&D
HR directors
Facilities
director
Director,
learning
and devel-
opment
VP, end-user
computing
VP, security
Director,
software
engineer-
ing
Director,
apps
VP, tax
Director,
ﬁnance
Director,
investor
relations
Controller
Treasurer
Corp devel-
opment
VP, general
counsel
Tactical
Manage-
ment
Product
marketing
managers
Sales
directors
Engineering
operations
HR managers
End user
computing
managers
Manager
Financial
Planning
and
Analysis
(FPA),
Director,
budgeting
Special
projects
36

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
37
The ﬁrst difference in how information is needed by different roles is
the intersection of dimensions. In Chapter 2, I talked about context and
included items like product, customer, geography, and business unit (BU).
A product manager for product X would generally be interested in information
pertaining to product X, so the product dimension would be ﬁltered for that
product. For a sales manager, it might be by geography and customer type.
So the public sector sales manager in California would only want to see sales
numbers at the intersection of those two dimensions.
Another difference is in how the data is rolled up, also known as the
data hierarchies. Finance would like numbers rolled up by cost center/proﬁt
center and business unit. Marketing would like numbers rolled up by customer
segment, and product management would like numbers rolled up by product
family. Yet all of these numbers have to tie-out at the top level.
In general terms, you can think of the three layers of the organization
being interested or focused on different information domains as shown in
Figure 3.2.
Strategic consumers of information generally want to see a uniﬁed
view of information, aligned to strategic objectives. Operational types have
more of a subject-matter focus, and tactical consumers go into detailed
functional areas.
Figure 3.2
Volume and General Domain of
Reports by Organization Level

38
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Finally, different audiences generally consume information using different
tools. This will be discussed further in the Enabling Technologies section of
this chapter.
Information Qualities
When thinking about turning data into information, you have to consider all of
the different qualities of that information. The following list is not exhaustive,
but it’s more complete than we usually get when planning how and when (and
where) we gather our data and transform it into something people can use.
This list is especially useful when designing business intelligence systems and
planning on how to gather data and turn it into useable information.
Business Qualities of Information
■Accretion
■Dilution
■Velocity
■Risk weight
■Compounded annual growth rate (CAGR)
■Compliance: generally accepted accounting procedures (GAAP)/
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)/Pro forma
■Financial statement impact: proﬁt and loss, balance sheet, cash ﬂow
Scenario Qualities of Information
■Actual
■Budget
■Forecast
■Plan: short-range, long-range, workforce, capital expenditure
■Benchmark
■Historic
■Variance
■Trends
■Outliers
■Seasonality
■Exceptions
■Benchmarks
■Sparseness/density
■Alerts
Contextual Qualities of Information
■Dimensionality
■Hierarchy (roll-up)

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
39
■Periodicity
■Refresh rate
■Granularity (level of detail)
■Version
■Currency (local, converted, triangulated)
■Time (ﬁxed, year-to-date)
■Security, performance, dependence (tie-out)
Process Qualities of Information
■Goal setting
■Modeling
■Planning
■Monitoring
■Analyzing
■Reporting
■Collaboration
People Qualities of Information
■Ownership
■Role
■‘‘Believe-ability’’
■Contributor—they ‘‘read/write’’ information
■Consumer—they ‘‘read-only’’ information
■Executive sponsor
For example, if upper management says they want to focus and align on
variable compensation, you would have to consider as many of the information
qualities in the list as possible (or practical) to deliver a process and system
that can become part of the EPM ecosystem. Some highlights would include:
■When is variable compensation reported—when it is accrued, earned,
or disbursed (or all three)?
■Do we need to see variance between actual and planned variable comp?
■What level of detail do we need to drill down to—individual sales
transactions for quota-carrying sales reps?
■Do we want to benchmark variable comp internally and externally?
■Who will consume this information? Will there be a workﬂow of
approvals to track it?
Not everyone has the luxury to consider or investigate all of these qualities
of information that they want to use in their EPM system. At least there has
to be agreement on which qualities are most important to consider given your
time and resource constraints.

40
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 3.3
Generic Reporting Architecture
Information Delivery
In order to deliver the right information to the right people at the right time,
it has to be gathered and transformed from the most granular transactional
data, combined with related sources and presented in a useable way, based on
your role and your purpose for consuming the information.
The traditional architecture of that ﬂow is represented generically in
Figure 3.3.
Data ﬂows from the transactional sources at the bottom to reporting and
analysis repository layers and on to front-end systems where users interact
with the data.
Extract, transform, load (ETL) software is used to transport the data
between layers.
Transactional Sources
■Mentioned in Chapter 1, in The Promise of EPM, these are where the
day-to-day, minute-to-minute transactions are processed and stored.
■They are busy doing the real-time granular transactions throughout
the business and deal primarily in ‘‘actuals’’—not historical data, plans,
forecasts, or what-if scenarios.
Data Warehouse, Operational Data Store
■The key transactional data is combined and warehoused in either an
enterprise data warehouse (EDW) or, for select subject matters, a
subject data warehouse, such as a sales data warehouse.

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
41
■An operational data store is usually a copy of the transactional data,
duplicated in a repository to off-load reporting and analysis tasks from
the transactional systems.
■In either a data warehouse or operational data store, you can add in
plan and historical data.
■The goal is to off-load the burden of reporting, analysis, planning,
and what-if modeling from the transactional systems so they can do
what they do best and not get slowed down by the management
operating system.
Data Marts
■Data marts, using online analytic processing (OLAP) technology (dis-
cussed in Chapter 4), are generally aggregations of the transactional
data, and usually subject-matter speciﬁc.
■Data marts can be organized in a variety of different ways depending
on your reporting requirements, including:
■
Financial statement: A P&L cube, a balance sheet cube, a cash-ﬂow
cube
■
Dimension: A product cube, a customer cube, an employee cube
■
Purpose: A reporting cube, a planning cube, a history cube
Consumption
Information is consumed by people. People have job roles or personae. The
personae have unique points of view and key metrics they are concerned with.
These metrics are used to help answer business questions or ﬁnd new insights
in order to sustainably execute their objectives—which, hopefully, are aligned
with the company strategic objectives.
Typically, organizations are better at information delivery than they are
at understanding and assisting in information consumption.
Notoriously low business intelligence (BI) system adoption rates support
this observation: We can put out all the data and tools we want, but if
managers aren’t using them to make better decisions, so what?1
Two ways to improve information consumption are having the right tools
and the right metrics in place to support users. Table 3.3 shows how typical
BI tools are aligned with layers and roles in the organization.
There’s more on metrics in Chapter 8. For now, during the Gather
process of the management operating system, it’s a good idea to tie metrics
to roles.
The optimal number of metrics for each role is ﬁve to nine. The hard
part is choosing the right ﬁve to nine.

42
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Table 3.3
Matching the Tool to the Type of User
Layer in the
Organization
Example Roles
Information
Qualities
Typical BI Tools
Strategic
C-level (CEO, CFO,
CIO, etc.)
■
Highly
summarized
■
Monthly/quarterly
■
GAAP and
non-GAAP
■
Static
■
Executive
dashboard
■
Board-level book of
reports
■
Consolidated
management
reports
Executive or senior
VP
Managing director
Operational
VP
■
More detailed
■
Daily/weekly
■
Non-GAAP
■
Interactive
■
Cross-functional
■
Standard
management
reporting
■
Interactive query,
analysis, and
reporting
(web-based)
Senior manager
Manager
Tactical
Line manager
■
Very detailed
■
Near-real-time
■
Non-GAAP
■
Highly interactive
■
Function-focused
■
Spreadsheets
■
Interactive query,
analysis, and
reporting
(web-based)
■
Purpose-built BI
application
(including mobile)
Back ofﬁce
Front lines (sales
reps, customer
support reps, etc.)
Here’s a role-based way to apportion the ﬁve to nine metrics—for each
intersection in the matrix in Table 3.3:
■two or three strategy metrics
■two or three function-wide metrics
■two or three intersection metrics
Role-based BI solutions would deliver the most important drivers of value
in the business, from the perspective of where you live in the organization.
This gives focus, alignment, and accountability. Focus because it takes
into account your organizational perspective (business function and layer),
alignment by having visibility to your function’s (department’s) key drivers
as well as the company strategy, and accountability because everyone up and
down your branch of the organization chart can see your performance, and
you are rewarded on your performance.
The metrics, of course, need to be the right mix of ﬁnancial and oper-
ational, leading and lagging, tangible and intangible indicators, and need to
follow a value-chain hierarchy so you can ‘‘drill down’’ into the details. I will

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
43
say one thing about metrics prioritization: If you have too many to choose
from, pick those that are most material (have the potential for the biggest
ﬁnancial impact on the business) and the most volatile (have the potential for
the widest, fastest changes in the business).
Let’s look at an example using a generic software company. Let’s say
their strategic objectives this year are 10% revenue growth, 20% operating
margins, and improved year-over-year cash ﬂow.
Using the organizational matrix from Table 3.3, what are the role-based
metrics we would want delivered to Marketing Operations?
The strategic measures are: revenue growth, operating margin, and
cash ﬂow.
Some of the functional measures in marketing are: market share, net new
customers, and average selling price (ASP).
Using a role-based selection method, the marketing operations dash-
board, used by VPs in Marketing, would include:
■Revenue growth and margin (two strategy metrics)
■Market share, net new customers, and ASP (three function-wide
metrics)
■Customer conversion, sales by product by geo, price discounts (three
intersection metrics)
A particular focus on the last three can have a direct effect on the three
function-wide metrics, which in turn can have a direct effect on revenue
growth and margin (the two strategy metrics). For instance, success in
customer conversions drives net new customers, which in turn drives revenue
growth. More intelligent price discounts (or reduced discounts through better
product marketing) drives ASP, which in turn drives margin.
Contribution
Most data is created at the transactional level; however, in EPM, much data
can also be created in various management processes. This is especially true
of enterprise planning. Here are some of the kinds of information that are
generated by EPM systems and processes outside of transactional systems yet
may write-back to a transactional system:
■Budgets, plans, forecasts, scenarios, and targets
■Statutory adjustments including intercompany eliminations, currency
adjustments, reclassiﬁcations, and other journal entries
■Management overrides

44
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
■Audit adjustments (e.g., the difference between actual counted inven-
tory and what the inventory management system says, due to shrinkage
among other things)
Too much of this information is only captured and shared in spreadsheets.
To store it in an enterprise system allows for better scrutiny, sharing and
collaboration, auditability, and future reuse.
Classiﬁcation
An important distinction to keep in mind while designing and building your
management operating system is the classiﬁcation of information and reports
in the Gather process.
Classifying helps you assign the right process, tools, data, and resources to
information, reports, and the Gather process. Without an overt classiﬁcation,
you can end up delivering information inefﬁciently, or worse, incorrectly.
Here are some common classiﬁcations:
■Financial.
Usually relates to items found on the Proﬁt and Loss
statement, balance sheet, or cash ﬂow. Content can be at a detailed or
summary level.
■Operational.
Usually contains information about volumes, units,
headcount, inventory levels, and so on. Can also be at a detailed or
summary level.
■Executive. Typically cross-functional information at a summary level.
■Sustainability.
Information relating to environmental, health and
safety, and community and social issues.
■Management or Internal. Includes ﬂash reports. Typically contains
information managers need to make business decisions before being
transformed for external consumption.
■Statutory or External. Information that has been transformed accord-
ing to GAAP or other regulatory standards.
■Canned. Standard reports that are used over and over again.
■Ad Hoc.
Usually one-time information that’s situational and does
not need to be retrieved later—although if found useful across dif-
ferent audiences and at different times can quickly ﬁnd its way into a
canned report.
Management and Statutory Reporting
The majority of the Gathering process—ﬁnancial and operational monitor-
ing, reporting, and alerting—is done in aid of internal management of the

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
45
• Close 
Close
Subledgers
• Adjustments
Adjustments
• Internal/
Internal/
External
• Adjustments
Adjustment
• Disclosure
• Compliance
• Pro forma/
GAAP
• Eliminations
• Currency
Conversion
• Accruals/
Prepaids
• Closing
entries
Period Closing
Consolidation
Reconciliation
External
Reporting
Figure 3.4
End-to-End Financial Close Process at a High Level
business. There is a requirement for external reporting, primarily for publicly
traded companies, but also for government organizations, privately owned
companies (regulatory and bank reporting for example), nonproﬁts, and other
organizations.
In order to do this external reporting, there has to be a well-deﬁned
process in place that occurs monthly, quarterly, and annually. This process is
called the ﬁnancial ‘‘close’’ process or ‘‘closing the books’’ and includes the
steps shown in Figure 3.4.
Financial Consolidation
Most organizations have more than one ﬁnancial source system such as an
enterprise resource planning (ERP) or general ledger (GL) program. The
larger the organization is, or the more geographically dispersed, or more
active in mergers and acquisitions, the more ERP and GL systems they have.
At some point, the ﬁnancial data from all entities in an organization
have to be consolidated to create a company-wide ‘‘top-level’’ ﬁnancial view
that can be analyzed and reported. For externally reported ﬁnancial data,
additional transformations take place at the aggregated level to comply with
government and regulatory standards. At some point, foreign currencies have
to be converted into a standard currency or constant dollar. Surprisingly,
many organizations still do this consolidation in Excel or back in the ERP or
GL systems. This quickly gives rise to problems in transparency, auditability,
controls, and governance. The rise of purpose-built, comprehensive ﬁnan-
cial consolidation and reporting management systems is primarily due to
addressing these problems as well as the increased demand for additional
controls and regulations—like Sarbanes-Oxley in the United States and IFRS
internationally.
Alternate Hierarchies
In order to combine this external or statutory look at the business with
the way management looks at the business to do internal reporting and

46
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
make management decisions, these purpose-built consolidation systems
generally support multiple, simultaneous roll-ups or hierarchies. This is
done without having to reload the data from source systems for each ‘‘look’’ at
the business.
Some of the ways managers want to look at the business differently,
include:
■By legal entity
■By organizational BU or segment
■
A segment can be a territory, division, department, or even product
category
■Geographically for all products, all BUs (looking for territory effec-
tiveness)
■By product category for all geographies across all BUs (looking for
cross-sell effectiveness)
■By cost center for all BUs (looking for shared-service opportunities)
■Or by accounting treatment
■
US GAAP
■
Local GAAP
■
IFRS
■
Pro forma
Allocations
The transformation of information at the top level of the business typically
includes a variety of allocations, including the allocation of indirect costs,
such as overhead costs, to business units or product lines. Let’s say you were
interested in reporting on BU proﬁtability, yet all your business units used
the same shared services center including HR, Legal, Procurement, and IT.
How do you allocate the costs for those services back to each business unit?
There are a variety of allocation methodologies, including by:
■Revenue produced by each group
■Headcount of each group
■Square footage occupied by each group
Or some combination of these methodologies and your own method
unique to your business.
There are two points to be made about allocations when doing EPM
right. One is that the methodology selected must be fair, transparent, and

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
47
consistently applied for there to be buy-in across all business units and
functions. As long as there is agreement and people understand they are being
allocated costs fairly, there is more chance of success of those people buying
in to the numbers. The other is that your EPM system must automatically do
the allocation for you, based on the methodology you choose, and, ideally,
help you select the right methodology by modeling all relevant combinations
during the period of enrolling and debating with business units and functions
on getting agreement on what constitutes fair.
Another kind of allocation that EPM systems help with is the spreading
of numbers collected at one level into a more granular level. For example, to
calculate weekly proﬁtability where you collect daily revenue amounts, weekly
direct expenses, and monthly overhead expenses, you would roll up the daily
revenue to a week, apply the weekly direct expenses, and then spread the
monthly overheads back into each week based on the percentage of revenue
contained in each week. This isn’t always perfect, but if applied consistently,
it can be useful for comparing prior periods, understanding seasonality, and
other insights.
If the reporting, consolidation, allocations, and spreads are all done within
an EPM process and as part of a management operating system, there will be
better shared accountability, shared understanding, and shared focus.
Sustainability Reporting
As demands for more corporate transparency and concerns for environmental
and social responsibilities increase, more organizations are publishing publicly
available sustainability reports.
These reports help show the organization’s impact on a variety of areas
including:
The Environment
■Greenhouse gas emissions
■Waste production and management
■Water usage
■Energy consumption
Employee Well-Being
■Health
■Safety
■Working conditions
■Skills and Training

48
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Social Responsibility
■Community impact
■Charitable giving
■Compliance
In North America, sustainability reporting is not mandated by the govern-
ment, so organizations voluntarily choose to produce this kind of information.
However, companies are discovering that it makes good business sense to
be transparent in these areas as customers and consumers regularly make
buying decisions based on sustainability criteria, as do ‘‘socially responsible’’
investors. Most of my Fortune 500 clients produce some sort of corporate
social responsibility report in their annual report. In the rest of the world,
sustainability or ‘‘integrated reporting’’ itself, or elements of it, is becoming
mandatory. For example, in the United Kingdom by 2013, all companies listed
on the London Stock Exchange (about 1,600 companies) will be required to
report their greenhouse gas emissions.
As this is a newer area of corporate reporting, unlike ﬁnancial reporting,
there are relatively fewer reporting standards and requirements. The most
common format, from the Global Reporting Initiative, or GRI, has been
adopted by many hundreds of companies and will likely be the de facto
standard globally.
The GRI also provides almost one hundred key performance indicators
for sustainability reporting, organized in the following categories:
Economic
■Economic performance
■Market presence
■Indirect economic impacts
Environmental
■Materials
■Energy
■Water
■Biodiversity
■Emissions, efﬂuents, and waste
■Products and services
■Compliance
■Transport
Societal Performance: Labor Practices and Decent Work
■Employment
■Labor/management relations

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
49
■Occupational health and safety
■Training and education
■Diversity and equal opportunity
Societal Performance: Human Rights
■Investment and procurement practices
■Nondiscrimination
■Freedom of association and collective bargaining
■Child labor
■Forced and compulsory labor
■Security policies
■Indigenous rights
Social Performance: Society
■Community
■Corruption
■Public policy
■Anticompetitive behavior
■Compliance
Social Performance: Product Responsibility
■Customer health and safety
■Products and services labeling
■Marketing communications
■Customer privacy
■Compliance
Since 2000, the United Nations Global Compact has been tracking orga-
nizations that participate in publicly reporting their sustainability initiatives
and outcomes. There are over 6,000 businesses worldwide who participate.
Some of the best examples of sustainability reporting come from these
companies:
■Nike
■BMW
■BASF
■Nestl´e
■Ericsson
■BT
■AEP
One of the challenges of good sustainability reporting has been data
quality. Companies have not typically measured many of the transactional

50
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 3.5
Sustainability Reporting in Oracle Hyperion Financial Management
Courtesy of Oracle Corp.
elements that are found in the GRI categories listed. However, once they have
measured or derived actuals, there are a variety of EPM systems available to
report, as shown in Figure 3.5.
The next generation of corporate social responsibility and sustainability
is called ‘‘shared value’’ as described by Michael Porter and Mark Kramer.2
It promotes:
■Joint company and community value creation
■Improving economic and societal beneﬁts relative to cost
■Using social and environmental responsibility as a competitive differ-
entiator
■Contributing to the ‘‘triple bottom line’’ (integrated reporting on
people, planet, and proﬁt)
Just as you would include ﬁnancial and operational drivers and processes
in the management operating system to create real enterprise performance
management, you can include all of the components of sustainability reporting
in your models, plans, forecasts, reports, and analyses. In fact, corporate social
responsibility and creating shared value will be as important as ﬁnancial

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
51
– Initial £100m strategic investment programme within target range – overall 
 annualised post tax return of 12.2% for projects which are fully up and running
Operational highlights
Financial highlights
Corporate responsibility highlights
– Next phase £150m strategic investment programme on track
– The UK business delivered 6% revenue growth and UK Municipal PFI/PPP 
 contracts achieved 10% trading margins up from 6.4% last year
– The Organics business across all our markets delivered 28% revenue growth
 and trading margins increased from 13% to 18%
– Another strong performance from our Dutch Hazardous Waste business 
 with trading profit up 26% in the year
– Robust performance in challenging trading conditions
– Underlying profit before tax up 8% at constant currency
– Management actions delivered £11m of cost savings to offset challenging market
 conditions in our Solid Waste businesses
– Strong cash generation with underlying free cash-flow conversion at 81%
– Net debt to EBITDA ratio of 1.7 times versus our target of below 2.5 times
 and covenant of 3.0 times
– Reportable accident rate improved by 13%
– Overall recycling and recovery rate up to 78% from 77% last year
– 1.28 million tonnes of carbon avoided
– Local neighbourhood complaints fell by 32%
Group Highlights
Highlights
Figure 3.6
Shanks Group Plc 2012 Annual Report Page 1
Source: Shanks Group Plc
and operational results for investors, customers, partners, and employ-
ees, as the ﬁrst page of Shanks Group Plc 2012 annual report shown in
Figure 3.6 illustrates.
Enabling Technologies
The goals of the Gather process of the management cycle are not just
to spit out reports. They include transforming data into useful, actionable
information and delivering it to the right person at the right time. This
takes more than reporting tools. It also takes data management tools, data
integration and transformation tools, monitoring and alerting, and so on. The
typical high-level structure looks like Figure 3.7, with the data at the bottom,
being transformed and managed in the middle, and delivered to users at the

52
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Data
Management
and
Integration
Layers
Executive Dashboard
Financial Reporting
HR Reporting
Supply-Chain
Reporting
Mobile
User Layer
Data Layer
Meta-Data
Repository
Data
Ware-
house
UK Enterprise 
Resource 
Planning 
US Enterprise 
Resource 
Planning 
Extract, 
Transform, 
Load 
OLAP
Cube
Figure 3.7
Typical Reporting High-level Architecture
top. Obviously it’s a lot more complex than that in real life, but generally the
layers are the same.
There are a lot of ‘‘front-end’’ or user-experience tools you can use.
You probably use more of them in your organization than you know about.
In one EPM requirements client engagement, after interviewing multiple
ﬁnance and business-unit stakeholders, we uncovered thirteen reporting
tools that IT did not know about. And spreadsheets, while great for
quick ad hoc reporting and analysis, are not meant to be an enterprise
reporting tool.
Other tools used at the front end to deliver the information include:
■Executive dashboards
■Data visualization
■Scorecards
■Board-level books
■Consolidated management reports
■Flash reports
■Functional management reports
■Interactive query and reporting

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
53
■Spreadsheets
■Purpose-built applications
Tools used in the data management and integration layers include:
■Alerting
■Semantic layer
■An OLAP engine
■In-memory databases
■ETL
■Data quality
■Master data management, meta-data management
■Mobile platform
Rationalization
With the abundance of unused, and frankly useless, reports in any orga-
nization, and with the advances in information management and reporting
tools, many companies are embarking on a reporting rationalization program.
There are at least three ways of doing this. One is from the bottom up. By
going throughout the organization and taking an inventory of what reporting
processes and systems there are, and capturing what reports are out there
(using a classiﬁcation system like that presented earlier in this chapter), under
the ‘‘Classiﬁcation’’ heading, organizations can understand the entire scope
of reporting and begin to identify duplicative processes, redundant systems,
and unused reports. They can standardize the process of gathering data into
information and consuming it, consolidate front-end and data management
systems, and rationalize which reports are needed and which can be discarded.
Another way to do this is from the top down. By starting with strategic objec-
tives and key value drivers (more on this in Chapter 8), companies can align
systems, processes and information to those that support business require-
ments. And the third way is to do both—ﬁnd out what you have, ﬁnd out
what you need, and add what’s missing, delete what’s not needed, and make
changes to what’s close.
As you unify solutions to support the Gather process, there should
be emphasis and priority placed on self-serve reporting and the abil-
ity to accommodate changing data, metadata, and delivery methods. As
with most initiatives today, you have to remain ﬂexible, adaptive, and
cost-effective.

54
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Potential Quick Wins
Many vendors produce out-of-the-box information dashboards that connect
directly to your source systems through standard mappings from metrics
on the dashboard to data elements in the transactional systems. With min-
imal conﬁguration and tailoring, these solutions can quickly present the
information you have and highlight your gaps.
One way to get started is by doing a functional value map of the
organization, or a subset, to show how information is connected, what
drivers are important, and how it all interconnects. See Chapter 8 for more
information.
A scorecard is like a business checklist: put all the KPIs, ﬁnancial and
nonﬁnancial, in one place so you can check off where you are: Revenue
growth, check. Gross margin, check. Operating margin, check. And so on.
These are still popular at the executive level and help garner support for EPM
initiatives.
However, the Gather architecture cannot be designed and built in isola-
tion. It has to live with and integrate to the other components of EPM as we
will see in the next three chapters and ﬁnally in Chapter 9, Bringing It All
Together.
Summary
The Gather process is a key part of the EPM management operating system,
and some say it’s the starting place, since it answers the question ‘‘Where
are we right now?’’ It is designed to take all of the detailed data (scattered
throughout the organization) we have, gather it, and turn it into meaningful
information from which we can get new insights and begin to make better
decisions.
So how is getting better at the Gather process a competitive advantage?
Ideally, it improves your decision reaction time by letting people spend
more time on doing more with the numbers than collecting, massaging, and
proving the numbers. It improves conﬁdence in the numbers since there
is transparency on where they came from and how they were transformed
(not from a mysterious spreadsheet). It supports making fact-based decisions
since the numbers are based in reality—you still may need analyses to
help with the decisions, but you know those are populated with the same
numbers you looked at to ﬁnd out where you are. With better access to
relevant information, showing where the numbers come from and being
able to drill down into the details, and how what people are working on is
connected to overall company objectives, ﬁnancial literacy can improve in all

GATHER: TURNING DATA INTO INFORMATION
55
areas of the organization. Imagine giving all employees the ability to behave
like owners!
You may have everything you need at this point to take some action.
The next steps may be quite obvious, as with a wide variance to target with a
correlated cause—like one sales team is missing their sales targets for three
months in-a-row while every other sales team is meeting theirs, and this
particular sales team has an open headcount for the sales team manager.
However, the reason you got the results you got, may not be that obvious.
EPM can help you understand why.
Notes
1. Mark Smith, Ventana Research, ‘‘The Pathetic State of Dashboards,’’ August 2012.
2. Michael Porter and Mark Kramer, ‘‘Creating Shared Value,’’ Harvard Business Review,
January–February 2011.

C H A P T E R 4
Understand: Turning
Insights into Actions
To understand is to perceive patterns.
—SIR ISAIAH BERLIN
W
hat is the next step once you have all the data you need that not only
suits your role and your tasks at hand, but is also a good reﬂection
of reality? Understanding why you got the results you did can
potentially help you avoid them (if they’re negative) or help you duplicate
them (if they’re positive) in the future.
If we look at the Understand process within the management operating
system in more detail, as in Figure 4.1, we see:
■Drill down. Consumers of all that information will want to drill down
into the details.
■Point of View (POV). When users ‘‘slice-and-dice’’ the data, they
create a speciﬁc point of view. They look at speciﬁc products, by cus-
tomers, for certain time periods, compared to historical information.
And when they want additional reporting on their ﬁndings, they want
that speciﬁc point of view passed on to the Gather process.
■Financial and Operational Analytics. Including trending, bench-
marking, outliers, ratios, ranking, and visualization.
■Facts. Facts uncovered in the Understand process can be fed into the
models within the Debate process.
■Predictions.
When a what-if scenario is developed, you want to
analyze the probabilities of various predictions to see which is the most
likely to occur.
■Adjust. Using ﬁndings from the Understand process, you may want
to revise some strategies or strategic targets.
■Validate. You use the Understand process to help validate strategic
objectives.
57
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

58
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 4.1
Close-Up of the Understand
Process, and Its Inputs and Outputs
Business Questions
The usual starting place for trying to understand all that information is a
desire to answer a business question.
There are four foundational—or ‘‘starting’’ questions—as described in
Chapter 2:
1. Where are we right now compared to where we said we would be?
2. Why did we get what we got? What happened to give us those results?
3. What do we want to happen? What is possible in our industry, in this
economy? And what’s next?
4. How will we get it done? Who will do what, and by when?
These questions help us align our strategy, objectives, and initiatives with
our intended results. They help challenge our objectives and help generate
and reveal our assumptions, constraints, and value drivers. The answers to
these questions should validate our ﬁnancial and operational targets.
Some typical business questions include:
■‘‘Who are my top 20 customers and what are they buying this quarter?’’
■‘‘Are my sales people on track to meet quota?’’
■‘‘Why is it taking so long to ﬁll open headcount?’’
■‘‘Which marketing campaigns are generating the most leads?’’
■‘‘What’s the conversion ratio (from lead to sale) compared to last
year?’’
■‘‘What’s the current customer attrition rate, and top reasons for
leaving?’’
■‘‘Are products being delivered on time? Do we have the right balance
of inventory levels?’’

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
59
■‘‘What percentage of sales is coming from new products? Is this a good
measure of innovation?’’
■‘‘What’s our forecast accuracy, and when will it surpass the threshold
of reliability?’’
■‘‘How are raw material prices trending by region?’’
There are an inﬁnite number of questions. Some are the same week over
week, month over month, and some are needed only for a speciﬁc area of
concern until a problem is solved.
Business questions help break silos—to answer most of them, you’ll have
to incorporate both ﬁnancial and operational data and information from a
variety of business functions like Sales, Marketing, Operations, HR, Finance,
and so on. The questions are generally forward looking, yet they need
information from the past (although ‘‘past performance is not a guarantee of
future results.’’) Managers generally need some analytics in order to know
what to ask (or the right questions to ask). The answers to business questions
should help drive actions.
Let’s take the example of sales forecasts and walk them through the four
questions to illustrate how important it is to understand why you got the
results you got. Say you had a total sales plan—across all regions, channels,
and products—for this quarter of $1 million. It’s the end of the second month
in the quarter, so you would expect to currently be at $666,666 of actual
sales with a remaining forecast of $333,334. (By the way, it doesn’t really
work this way—rarely are sales results distributed that evenly across a quarter
and rarely, if ever, does the sales forecast match the gap in the plan!) You
gather all of the sales actual data from your contract system and all of the
forecast data from your customer relationship management (CRM) or sales
forecasting system. Your actual sales ﬁgure at this point is $500,000 and your
forecast for the rest of the quarter is $300,000. Immediately you see that you
will have a shortfall for the quarter of $200,000 unless something happens,
probably something drastic, in the last month of the quarter. This answers
the ﬁrst question: ‘‘Where are we compared to where we said we would be?’’
You could spring into action at this point and have all of your sales managers
read the riot act to each sales rep and insist on a revised (upwards) forecast
and that everyone pull out all the stops on selling to make up the potential
shortfall. Or you could ask the question ‘‘why?’’
When you ask why, you have to know something about how the informa-
tion you have is organized. The easiest organizing principal is the hierarchy
of the data, or how it is rolled up from each sales rep, through sales managers,
to regions and ﬁnally to the top number—which is where you noticed the
shortfall in the ﬁrst place. To get into the details of the forecast, you would

60
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
‘‘drill down’’ into the hierarchy. Let’s say you drill down into each region and
when you compare region to region, you notice that their quarter-to-date
actuals plus forecasted amounts are all off by about 20% from the plan for
each region. So no one region sticks out from the others as an anomaly, or
the cause of the shortfall. However, your forecast data also has a product
hierarchy since each rep forecasts sales by product. When you then drill down
into the product forecast you notice each product-family forecast is fairly close
to the plan except one: It’s 75% off of plan. You further drill down into that
product family and ﬁnd one product with very low actual sales quarter-to-date
and almost none forecast for the rest of the quarter. Let’s say that product
is ‘‘Consulting Services,’’ something you try to sell with every product sale
as a way for customers to implement what you’re selling them. If your sales
forecasting system captures such information, you could drill down right into
the forecast itself and see what reason codes were given for losing the sale of
Consulting Services to try and understand the root cause. If it doesn’t, you
can call a few sales managers to ﬁnd out what’s going on. Let’s say that what
you ﬁnd is that customers are unhappy with the skills and availability of your
consultants and choose to self-implement or ﬁnd help elsewhere.
At this point, you have found your root cause of the shortfall and you
understand why you got what you got. But we’re not done. What are you
going to do about it? You confer with the senior sales and product manager
and you brainstorm possible actions to take, and you come up with:
■Deeply discount consulting services rates to get consultants off the
bench and try and make-up the shortfall with volume.
■Increase product prices or remove discounts for the last month of the
quarter.
■Go back to all the customers in the pipeline and try to up-sell and
cross-sell product to make up the difference.
■Go into those secondary markets you have been avoiding and try and
get some net new customers by the end of the quarter.
■Work with your channel partners, deliver some rapid product training,
and engage them to perform the implementation services (and to mark
up their fees to help make up the shortfall).
What’s the best action to take? It depends on which course of action
gives us the best chance of making our number by the end of the quarter
(one of our desired results), yet not at the risk of upsetting the other
desired results of the business, including customer satisfaction, repeat sales,
reference-able customers, gross margin attainment, and so on. The second
part of Understand is to determine what’s next, which is going to require an
EPM-supported debate. I’ll come back to this in Chapter 5.

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
61
Root Cause
For now, let’s look at how we use analytics to help us understand the root
cause of a result. Referring back to Table 2.1, the business function and layer
matrix, a useful way to look at root cause is by using the business matrix
and metric decomposition. Using the previous example, it might look like
Figure 4.2.
Each business driver can be related to one or more drivers in different
areas of the business. For example, good quality consulting drives marketing
references that help make new sales. The relationships show paths to possible
root causes.
If we were not getting the desired level or quantity of references, we
would look into the following for possible root causes:
■Consulting quality
■Consultant availability
■Consulting rates
To do the root cause analysis, we’ll need to be able to drill in to the details
of the data. For this, we’ll need the data to be related through a hierarchy
structure. But before we jump into hierarchy, it’s interesting to notice in
Figure 4.2 just how many connections come into and out of References—it
Figure 4.2
Metric Decomposition within the Business Matrix

62
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
could be a key value driver. So the question to ask is, ‘‘Are we reporting,
analyzing, modeling and planning references?’’
Multidimensional Cubes
In Chapter 2, I talked about the context of information and how important it
is to EPM. This context, the intersection of all the ‘‘dimensions’’ of a piece of
data, is stored along with the data in a special database called a multidimen-
sional database, sometimes referred to as a ‘‘cube.’’ The technology behind
multidimensional databases, called online analytic processing (OLAP), is dis-
tinguished from regular transactional databases (like those used in your ERP,
G/L, Supply Chain Management [SCM], CRM, and other systems) because
it inherently aggregates data using a predeﬁned hierarchy or roll-up structure
as shown in Figure 4.3.
The major beneﬁt of the cube is that data is always aggregated and
‘‘pre-calculated,’’ meaning the sums (and products and other formulae) are
already applied at all levels of the hierarchy. When you drill down into the
details, the results are ready and waiting.
Having a business question and knowing the drill-path are good starting
places; however, you need more than that for understanding why you got
your results.
Product
100 (+) (Alias: Colas)
200 (+) (Alias: Root Beer)
300 (+) (Alias: Cream Soda)
400 (+) (Alias: Fruit Soda)
Diet (~) (Alias: Diet Drinks)
100-10 (+) (Alias: Cola)
100-20 (+) (Alias: Diet Cola)
100-30 (+) (Alias: Caffeine Free Cola)
200-10 (+) (Alias: Old Fashioned)
200-20 (+) (Alias: Diet Root Beer)
200-30 (+) (Alias: Sasparilla)
200-40 (+) (Alias: Binch Beer)
300-10 (+) (Alias: Dark Cream)
300-20 (+) (Alias: Vanilla Cream)
300-30 (+) (Alias: Diet Cream)
400-10 (+) (Alias: Grape)
400-20 (+) (Alias: Orange)
400-30 (+) (Alias: Strawberry)
100-20 (+) (Shared Member)
200-20 (+) (Shared Member)
300-30 (+) (Shared Member)
Figure 4.3
Sample Roll-Up in an OLAP
Database

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
63
Patterns and New Insights
There are things you already know about your industry, about your business,
about your customers and employees. And there are things that, if you don’t
know them, you know how to ﬁnd out. It’s those things that you didn’t even
know existed that are the most interesting insights. One way to uncover those
new insights is through the detection of patterns.
Patterns
A pattern can help us see the cause and effect relationship either directly or
indirectly. They can also cause us to ask more questions, and that’s ﬁne, so
long as those next questions lead on a path of discovery that gets you closer
to your answer. Let’s take a look at fourteen common analytic patterns and
how they help us learn and discover root cause.
Pattern 1: Time-Series
Probably the most common analyses done in EPM systems, because of
their roots in Finance, are time-series analyses. This is where information is
presented month by month, quarter by quarter, and year by year. Sometimes
they show monthly discrete totals and sometimes accumulated year- or
quarter-to-date totals, like the Income Statement in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4
Standard Time Series Financial Report

64
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Website Traffic
Weekly Analysis Click to filter Day of Week Analysis
Day of Week Analysis
100K
50K
92,188
15k
10k
Avg. Visitors
Conversion rate
5k
0k
35.0%
30.0%
25.0%
27.7%
Saturdays tend to have low traffic but
high conversion. Consider special
offers for Saturday visitors
30.1%
3.6
3,639
15,167
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
Pages views per visit
0.0
1.0
3.0
Page views per visit
2.0
4.0
3.2
25.1%
Week 5
Week 7
Week 9
Week 11
Week 13
Week 15
Week 17
Week 19
Week 21
Week 23
Week 25
3.8
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
34.3%
67,514
0K
35.0%
30.0%
Conversion rate
Visitors
25.0%
Legend
Page views per visit
Conversion rate
Visitors
Week:
(All)
Figure 4.5
Example of Multivariate and Comparison Patterns
Courtesy Tableau Software Inc.
Pattern 2: Multivariate
Organizations are complex, so visualizing and consuming information using
more than two variables is necessary. In Figure 4.5, you can see how conversion
rates and page views vary with the number of visitors and week number (left-
hand side), and how conversion rates vary with day of week (right-hand side)
and one possible test to deploy based on this insight.
Pattern 3: Comparison
Any dimension or variable can be compared: Current period to prior period,
to prior year, to history beyond prior year; actual to forecast, actual to plan,
actual to budget; Product 1 to Product 2; Region 1 to Region 2; and so on.
Also see Pattern 13, Variance Analysis—which is generally what you look at
when you compare things.
Pattern 4: Distribution
How your data deviates from normal distribution patterns can give you
insights into where to look for the root cause of problems or anomalies. For
example, in Figure 4.6, we quickly see that there is a very high number of
records (transactions) that have a $100 loss.

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
65
$900
500
1000
1500
Number of Records
2000
2500
Profit (bin)
0
$800
$700
$600
$500
$400
$300
$200
$100
$0
($100)
($200)
($300)
($400)
($500)
($600)
($700)
% of Total Running Sum of Number of Records
20%
60%
80%
100%
0%
40%
Figure 4.6
Distribution of Each Record that Falls within Each $100 Proﬁt Range
Courtesy Tableau Software Inc.
Pattern 5: From–To
On its own, a path between two points is usually uninformative. However,
when a collection of from and to points is plotted relatively to a central
starting point, or in combination with other from–to data, like those shown
in Figure 4.7, interesting patterns can emerge.
Pattern 6: Rankings
Ranking quickly give you possible areas of focus (e.g., top 20 or bottom 20
customers or regions). Also interesting are changes in ranking from a prior
period. If your number-one-selling product moves to number two next month,
and number four the following month, that’s a pattern worth investigating.

66
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Kobenhavn
220 km
227 km
Lo
OL
288 km
288 km
288 km
Hamburg
DENMARK
GERMANY
CZECH
REPUBLIC
CZECH
REPUBLIC
CZECH
REPUBLIC
CZECH
REPUBLIC
POLAN
UNITED
STATES
CANADA
AL
246 km
295 km
295 km
295 km
295 km
238 km
238 km
238 km
238 km
300 km
271 km
271 km
271 km
271 km
Essen
Koln
AINE
BAYERN
Vienna
Vienna
Vienna
Vienna
Praha
Praha
Praha
Praha
Mu chen
UK
MEXICO
MEXICO
BRAZIL
FRAN
FRAN
Figure 4.7
From–To Patterns: Deliveries Out of Berlin (Left), Gulf Coast Hurricanes
(Right)
Courtesy Tableau Software Inc.
Pattern 7: Outliers and Deviation
Looking at data that falls outside the norm can yield new insights. In
Figure 4.8, for that one data point on the far right, how did we get so much
program from a relatively modest size sale? How can we duplicate that success
elsewhere? And for that one point at the top, why did we get so little proﬁt
from such a large sale, and how can we avoid that in the future?
Pattern 8: Trends
Although past performance is no guarantee of future results, we can still learn
from our historical data. You have to know if the best ﬁt of a trend line will
be linear, logarithmic, or polynomial. For example, logarithmic trends may
be better for analyzing data over long time periods.
The richness of trends depends partly on how much historical data you
keep online (available for analysis). How much data to keep, and at what
level of detail, is different for each organization and is dictated by statutory
requirements for some. Figure 4.9 shows a variety of trend lines along with
their polynomial ﬁt for average discounts received from four suppliers over
the last four years.
Pattern 9: Correlation
Correlation is the degree to which two or more quantities are linearly
associated. Remember correlation does not equal causation, and it’s important
to know what could ‘‘move the needle.’’

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
67
0K
–10K
–5K
0K
5K
10K
15K
20K
20K
40K
60K
Sum of Sales
Sum of Profit
80K
100K
120K
140K
Figure 4.8
Outliers
Courtesy Tableau Software Inc.
For example, in Figure 4.10 you can see a correlation between a customer’s
age and the amount of money they spend in a transaction. To determine if
there is a particular price point that is attractive to a customer demographic,
you can test this hypothesis by altering prices, measuring results, and looking
for the correlation. See Chapter 5 for more on testing.
Pattern 10: Clustering
Clustering is a way to group data with common characteristics. For example,
in Figure 4.10, we see three distinct groups of customers based on age and
amount purchased. You could use this kind of clustering pattern to help
inform product pricing and promotions—to help target products to the
purchasing trends of various demographics.
Pattern 11: Segmentation
Segmentation, like clustering, is dividing a group into smaller parts based on
declared criteria.

68
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Columns
YEAR(Order Date)
QUARTER(Order D..
AVG(Discount)
Supplier
Rows
Supplier
2009
2010
2011
Order Date
2012
Fellowes
5.0%
0.0%
10.0%
5.0%
0.0%
5.0%
0.0%
10.0%
5.0%
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
10.0%
Discount
Discount
Discount
Discount
Hon
Newell
Sony
–
+
Figure 4.9
Multiple Trend Lines: Discount by Quarter/Year by Supplier
Courtesy Tableau Software Inc.
Most often, this grouping is done around customers and markets. Mar-
ket segmentation can be geographical (West, Central, East), company size
(enterprise, midsize, small business), company type (commercial, higher-ed,
public sector), industry (ﬁnancial services, manufacturing, retail), or other
criteria that match your business objectives. Customer segmentation can
include demographics (age, income, gender), buying patterns (repeat, one-
time, early-adopter), or, again, any criteria that you determine helps analyze
your business. Segmentation gives you another dimension to markets or
customers that lets you drill into and look for patterns and new insights.
Pattern 12: Geospatial
Seeing results displayed in their geography can give new insights about
markets, logistics, demographics, and so on. In Figure 4.11, you see a high
concentration of bicycle collisions at a certain intersection and you can take
action as a result—erect additional signage for example.

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
69
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
100
200
300
400
500
600
Purchase Amount by Customer Age
Figure 4.10
Dollar Purchase Amounts versus Customer Age Shows Three Distinct
Buying Clusters
Pattern 13: Variance Analysis
You can analyze many kinds of variance:
■Actuals versus plan and forecast
■Actuals versus prior period (prior year, month, quarter)
■Same product line, one geography versus another (for actuals versus
plan and/or actuals versus prior period)
■Variance among scenarios, and so on
A good way to report the cause of a variance is using a waterfall chart,
also known as a bridge chart, walk-chart, or causal chart. It shows the net
additions and subtractions (amounts and reasons) to account for the total
variance between one number and another. For example, in Figure 4.12, we
see a causal chart showing the variance in trading proﬁt from prior year (2011)
to current year (2012) for Shanks Plc in the United Kingdom.
Like any good analysis or report, this chart tells a story. I like this example
because it attributes most of the potential losses to the Market and most of
the proﬁt to Management Actions and Strategy—the folks at Shanks look
like heroes!

70
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
2,400
South Passage
Point Park
Good Turn
Park
About Tableau maps: www.tableausofware.com.map data
Avenue East
Bicycle Collisions Around Seattle
Number of Collisions
1 collision
2 collisions
3 to 4 collisions
5 to 7 collisions
Filter to
(All)
1 collision
2 collisions
3 to 4 collisions
5 to 7 collisions
2009 Households
EASTLAKE AVE E BETWEEN HARVARD AVE E AND FUHRMAN AVE E
Collisions: 6
Fatalities:
Keep Only
Exclude
0 to 340
340 to 441
441 ot 587
587 to 957
+
+
–
Northeast 40th Street
Northe
ast
P
acfic Stree
t
University
P-Patch
Sadako Peace
Park
Northeast Campus Parkway
Linooin Way
Cowitz Road
Brooklyn Avenue Northeast
Northlake
park
Eastlake Avenue East
N
o
r
t
h
e
a
s
t
N
or
th
la
ke
Pla
ce
Fuhman 
Way
Figure 4.11
Geospatial Example
Courtesy Tableau Software Inc.
Year on year trading profit causal
Market
£18.5m
Trading profit
2010/11
Cost
inflation
Net price
Recyclates
Volumes
Cost savings
Projects and
investments
Bid costs
Currency
Trading profit
2011/12
£2.5m
£6.8m
£9.9m
£10.9m
£9.9m
£1.2m
£0.8m
£53.4m
£49.7m
Management
Actions and Strategy
Figure 4.12
Waterfall Chart
Source: Shanks PLC Annual Report and Accounts, 2012

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
71
Pattern 14: Benchmarks (internal and external)
Some businesses used to rely on external benchmarks to help gauge the
effectiveness of their operations and results. The thinking was that, within an
industry, there was only so much operating margin to attain, or that the key
ﬁnancial ratios had to be within certain upper and lower limits. While popular
in the last ten years, this attitude or approach has changed. During times of
high growth, companies would ask why these limits were there and who was
to say our unique business model could break those limits? And during times
of low or no growth, companies would notice that the game had changed and
that new business models were necessary for survival.
Today, many of my clients discredit external benchmarks and don’t want
to compare themselves to the competition (external benchmarks). They would
rather compare themselves across business units (internal benchmarks) or
outside of their industries (so-called ‘‘best practices’’), or not benchmark at all.
Enrollment
An often-overlooked EPM skill is being able to communicate what the data,
information, and analyses mean. Using the ‘‘story’’ of the data, as mentioned
earlier, is a way to enroll other people in your insight or conclusion. Surely
you’ll have defensible facts on your side, however sometimes it requires an
emotional appeal and some passion1 to persuade your listeners enough to give
what you’re saying enough priority to take action above all the other priorities
they have.
Big Data and Predictive Analytics
To address the sometimes overwhelming volume, frequency, complexity, and
potential impact of new data, we needed a new way to describe it. The term
‘‘Big Data’’ was coined to differentiate the profusion of unstructured data,
social media data, machine-generated data, and so on from the ‘‘regular’’ data
that has been generated by transactional systems for years. The term wasn’t
coined just to describe the volume of data, but also the impact it will have.
This will be big. Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee say Big Data has the
potential to revolutionize management.2
Structuring Unstructured Data
The ﬁrst challenge of harnessing all that Big Data is to gather it and transform
it into meaningful insights. So you have to structure the unstructured. This
is done using a variety of approaches and proprietary ‘‘engines’’ that work on

72
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 4.13
Structuring Unstructured Data
deciphering the meaning of unstructured data and depositing it into subject
matter areas such as customer, product, company, market, employee, and so
on. Figure 4.13 shows the typical ﬂow of data from unstructured to structured
by way of a ‘‘black box’’ that contains the algorithms that transform the
data. On the other side of the transformation, the data becomes just another
source that can be used like any other data source—for reporting (Gather),
analytics (Understand), modeling (Debate), and planning (Commit) in the
management operating system.
Some Big Data use cases include those shown in Table 4.1.
Predictive Analytics
Predictive analytics is the part of EPM that deals with extracting patterns
from historical data and using them to predict possible future trends and
patterns. The accuracy of a prediction is dependent on how well the drivers,
constraints, and assumptions have been captured and used in the prediction.
While no one can predict the future with complete certainty or accuracy,
ranges of probability can be useful to govern resource deployment decisions
and expectations-setting. There are a variety of statistical techniques and
algorithms that can be used against the historical data you have, and the
one that works for your particular analysis is the one that comes closest to
what actually happens. So, again, another opportunity for testing using EPM:
Apply several methodologies for a predictive analysis, measure actual results,
and compare. Repeat to see if the closest methodology stands up over time
and over varying market conditions.
For example, Proctor & Gamble has a Business Sufﬁciency program that
gives insights about market share and other KPIs for up to 12 months in the

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
73
Table 4.1
Big Data Use Cases
Unstructured Data
Structured Data
Use Case
Twitter feeds mentioning
your company’s customer
service
Net promoter
score (NPS)
Alerting to any surge (positive or
negative) in NPS and correlated to an
event (like a product launch) can let
customer service management take
actions to address root causes
Facebook comments and
Likes for a particular product
in a particular geography
Product demand
forecast
Possible immediate up-stock of speciﬁc
products in speciﬁc regions/stores for
short-term burst of sales
A surge in documents
created on users’ computers
with the word ‘‘resume’’ in
the ﬁle name or content
Employee
satisfaction
index
Understand root cause to prevent a
surge in unwanted attrition
Multiple sources (twitter,
blogs, news feeds) citing
impending rise in fuel prices
Commodity cost
forecast
Revise time to deliver models
Revise price models
Adjust fuel hedge
Real-time usage data is
being captured on who is
using which EPM reports
and when
Usage patterns
by report
Retire unused reports
Provision IT infrastructure to support
peak demand
Provide additional training for reports
heavily used in one area and
infrequently used in another
Inform EPM Report rationalization
roadmap
future. Drivers in the predictive models include sales, shipments, advertising,
consumer trends, pricing, product mix, and so on. The models take into
account regional differences and in some cases go down to the product line
and store levels. Where P&G has taken it to a whole new level is the way
they present and interact with the models—they have developed ‘‘Business
Spheres’’—a self-contained meeting room wired with video conferencing
and digital displays that surround managers and executives in the sphere.
Remote participants see the same data on their iPads. They have over 40
interconnected Business Spheres around the world to facilitate interactive,
real-time EPM visualization experiences.
Data Visualization
According to Ben Shneiderman, co-author of Readings in Information Visu-
alization: Using Vision to Think, visual artifacts aid thought; in fact, they are

74
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
completely entwined with cognitive action. With the advances in high-quality
graphic data representation software, and the foundational work done by
Edward Tufte, Stephen Few, and others, data visualization and infograph-
ics are becoming some of the most accessible methods of communicating
and consuming data. The emergence of information visualization as a per-
formance management tool is becoming pervasive and is attracting more
business managers, students, and leaders to the ﬁeld of analytics. Ideally, this
new standard will extend to all areas of the management operating system to
create the discipline of ‘‘visual performance management’’ including:
■Interactive reporting and analytics visualization, like what you’ve seen
earlier in this chapter in the Patterns and New Insights section
■Visual modeling, predictive, and sensitivity analysis
■Visual planning and forecasting
■Visual strategy
Edward Tufte articulates the visual communication of information best.
He said, ‘‘What is to be sought is the clear portrayal of complexity. Not
the complication of the simple.’’ Graphical displays should help the business
user to think about what the data means. Some of his rules include a focus
on information density (many data points in a small space), making large
data sets accessible, encouraging comparison of dimensions and variables,
and providing different levels of detail (ﬁne-grained to summarized). He said
‘‘Above all else, show the data.’’ And, as exempliﬁed by the waterfall chart in
Figure 4.12, visualization helps your data tell a story.
Another way to visualize data and tell a story is to embed one literally
inside the other. For example, Figure 4.14 uses sparklines to emphasize the
adjectives (increase, fell) describing the data. This way you can see just how
much of an increase or how steep of a fall.
As expected, our revenue cycle follows its typical seasonality pattern this year with
one unusual spike at the end of Q3                          from our new channel marketing
campaigns. Costs were in line with our operating margin goals and we met our
monthly spend targets                         in-line with the forecast. Forecast accuracy
spikes near end of quarter as predicted                          and the more we improve that
the better uses we can make of discretionary spending.
Figure 4.14
Sparklines Embedded within Text

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
75
Enabling Technologies
EPM capabilities that are necessary to understand your data and information
include:
■Financial and operational analytics
■Proﬁtability analytics
■Predictive and statistical analytics
■Unstructured data inclusion
■Data consolidation and aggregation
■Data visualization
Components for Your EPM Roadmap
Not too dissimilar from the high-level architecture in Chapter 3 for reporting,
the analytic components are designed in, at least, three layers as shown in
Figure 4.15: the source data at the bottom, the data management and
integration layer in the middle, and the end-user or analytic consumer at the
top. The spider-web of connections from the front ends to the various analytic
sources such as data marts and OLAP cubes is meant to convey the blending of
subject matter in analytics. It’s not uncommon to include customer, product,
pricing, marketing, and supply-chain data in a single analysis.
Analytics is where OLAP engines shine. Their ability to pivot data across
multiple dimensions (slice-and-dice) and start at the summarized level and
drill into the details helps facilitate rapid analysis and faster time-to-insight.
An optional component in this architecture, which is just starting to gain
attention and momentum in organizations, is an in-memory analytic appli-
ance, for example Exalytics from Oracle or Hana from SAP, or smaller players
like Altibase, Terracotta, and VoltDB. These appliances—which consist of
bundled hardware and software—promise 10–100x faster performance of
reporting and analytics, and are not inexpensive.
Potential Quick Wins
Any analytic initiative should be undertaken to better understand your business
and to look for new insights to improve your results. This generally requires
a solid grasp of your business model, value drivers, economic indicators,
constraints and assumptions. Some business intelligence (BI) and analytic

76
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Data Visualization
Data Analytics
Interactive Analysis
Statistical
Analytics
User Layer
In-memory analytic
appliance
OLAP
Cube
OLAP
Cube
Data
Ware-
house
Data
Management
and
Integration
Layers
Data
Mart
ETL
Master
Data
Repository
ERP
CRM
Data Layer
SCM
SCM
Figure 4.15
Analytics Architecture
vendors supply prebuilt applications that take data from a variety of standard
source systems and present them ready to go ‘‘out of the box’’ with a minimum
of tailoring or customization. And there are some universal analyses that
should be easier to do than others. Some quick-wins could include:
Trending
■Historical actuals (sales, revenue, backlog, cost of goods sold [COGS],
selling, general, and administrative [SG&A] expense, labor costs)
■Historical variance
■Intraquarter variance (when does your forecast go beyond 90% accu-
racy?)
Ratios
■Revenue per head (also known as productivity)
■Costs per head
Ranking
■Top/bottom customers (by volume, by sales)
■Top/bottom products (by volume, by sales)

UNDERSTAND: TURNING INSIGHTS INTO ACTIONS
77
One approach to adopting a culture of understanding and ‘‘competing on
analytics,’’ is to get some of these quick-wins so people can begin discussing
the insights and asking more detailed questions—which will spawn a new
series of investigations, analysis, and understanding.
Summary
In one study, the effective use of data and analytics correlated with a 5–6%
improvement in productivity, and improved proﬁtability.3
Many organizations have collapsed Gather and Understand into simple
interactive reporting. This may work for some organizations, but with today’s
complexity, it is better to ‘‘un-collapse’’ these processes and provide enabling
technologies to both areas—interconnected, of course. In this way, more
powerful analytic capabilities can be brought to bear on the information you
have gathered, new patterns can be spotted, and new hypotheses can be tested
to ﬁnd better ways to improve your ﬁnancial and operational effectiveness.
EPM is where we debate those hypotheses, simulate those tests, and come up
with better ways of managing the business.
Notes
1. Jos´e Benk´ı, et al., ‘‘Effects of Speech Rate, Pitch, and Pausing on Survey Participation
Decisions,’’ University of Michigan Institute for Social Research, May 2011.
2. Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, ‘‘Big Data: The Management Revolution,’’ Harvard
Business Review, October 2012.
3. Erik Brynjolfsson, Lorin M. Hitt, and Heekyung Hellen Kim, ‘‘Strength in Numbers: How
Does Data-Driven Decision-Making Affect Firm Performance?’’ Social Science Research
Network (SSRN), April 2011.

C H A P T E R 5
Debate: Turning
‘‘What If’’ into
‘‘What’s Next’’
It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data. Insensibly one
begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts.
—SHERLOCK HOLMES
T
he promise of EPM is to provide a closed-loop framework for
decision making, resource deployment, fewer surprises, and new
insights. Most organizations are content with having EPM be
about planning, reporting, and analytics, which theoretically gives you
what you need. But there is a missing component, the most underused,
underconnected, underappreciated part of the cycle: a system and process for
facilitating, recording, communicating, and leveraging a robust debate about
what’s possible in the organization.
Looking into the Debate process in more detail, as shown in Figure 5.1,
we see:
■Goals.
The debate starts with the company goals and strategic
objectives.
■Optimize. A robust debate can help vet the goals and objectives and
make them more appropriate.
■Financial and Operational Models. What-if modeling should come
out of isolated spreadsheets and exposed and collaborated on by people
in all functions and layers of the business.
■Facts. Models are fed by historical trends, external facts, and other
data that reﬂects actual performance.
■Scenarios.
Multiple scenarios are generated and, in turn, vetted
through additional analysis.
79
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

80
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 5.1
Close-Up of the Debate Process,
and Its Inputs and Outputs
■Drivers and Targets. Robust, shared, fact-based models and debates
can uncover and prioritize the value drivers in the organization and
the doable targets for each.
■Constraints. New constraints learned from the bottom up can be
reused in ﬁnancial and operational models to make them more accurate.
Imagine your strategic objectives from on-high come with a set of
annual targets: ‘‘double-digit growth,’’ ‘‘operation efﬁciencies of $1 billion,’’
‘‘improve net operating margins by 5%,’’ ‘‘reduce headcount by 2,000.’’ How
did the powers-that-be derive those targets? Sometimes a rigorous study was
commissioned from a highly regarded consulting ﬁrm that did a detailed
time-and-motion and benchmark study, or perhaps some of your competitive
peers just accomplished similar results, or it just ‘‘felt right’’ to the strategic
planning committee. Sometimes it’s just about survival. But how do you know
it’s the right thing to do? How can you improve conﬁdence that it’s even
possible? How do you know it’s not even a stretch and that even more is
possible? And how do you ensure that changes in one target won’t adversely
affect other targets?
This next section of the EPM cycle allows you to prototype your
business. It’s where you model as many of the moving parts as practical
and systematically look at a variety of what-if scenarios to ﬁnally come to a
strategic plan that:
■Is doable
■Is based on the facts
■Takes into account past performance (which is no guarantee of future
results!)

DEBATE: TURNING ‘‘WHAT IF’’ INTO ‘‘WHAT’S NEXT’’
81
■Knows about your industry and seasonality
■Exploits known causes and effects
■Uses input and the expertise of a broad cross-section of your
organization
■Is translatable into an actionable plan for the month, quarter, and year
Usually, business modeling, scenario planning, or long-range strategic
planning are relegated to a select few analysts and advisors in Finance who
use it to help inform the annual plan, targets, and company direction-setting.
And there’s nothing wrong with that. But what if we involved all areas
of the organization, fed more internal and external data into the model,
used sophisticated statistical techniques, and encoded our business model
into scenarios? And what if we could quickly run hundreds of scenarios
with a wide variety of variables where in the past we only had time and
resources to run four or ﬁve simpler models? What if our models got smarter
over time?
That’s why I call it Debate: It engages more people throughout the
organization to help aim the business in the right direction. It lets us work out
the business model to help turn it into a plan that everyone can get behind.
We create a system and process for debating what’s possible.
People
As mentioned in Chapter 1, ‘‘If only people in our company knew what
everyone in our company knows!’’ Too many times corporate analysts and
planners have worked in a vacuum relying on macro-level reports and data to
build their models, when down the hall or in the next building resides ﬁeld
staff with ﬁrst-hand knowledge of what’s really going on. For example, an
analyst ﬁrm might predict that IT spending will be even for the remainder
of the year, but your salespeople are talking to customer IT managers who
are saying they are realigning their budgets to focus on products and services
your company sells. This is certainly information that can cause your sales
targets to go in two different directions: ﬂat or up. That, in turn, will impact
your sales headcount plan and variable compensation pool.
Many of your employees have details about customers, competitors,
product issues, and so on that are not being captured, quantiﬁed, and used as
a competitive advantage. In the past, it has been difﬁcult to capture and codify
this kind of information, but, as discussed in Chapter 4 in the Big Data and
Predictive Analytics section, with new tools around unstructured data capture,
semantic analysis, and technologies like ‘‘map reduce’’ (distributed, parallel
processing), this kind of information is much easier to use in the Debate

82
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
process. This now extends to information outside your four walls including
news, ﬁnancial information, social media, and so on.
Debate will produce relevant scenarios from which we choose the most
likely one—and we turn that into our short-term action plan. It could also
help inform how realistic our strategy is in the ﬁrst place, and help us alter our
strategy in the face of facts and fact-based predictions. In the Debate process,
we learn more about our business and what makes it tick. Ideally, we want to
learn about:
■Constraints. What are the lower limits of gross margin we need in
order to run the business and return value to stakeholders? What’s the
ramp time for a new quota-carrying sales rep?
■Assumptions. Where do we think fuel prices will go this year, next
year, and in ﬁve years? What do we think the cost of capital will be?
■Drivers. Do we know what those top drivers are that impact so many
other metrics and outcomes in our organization? Have we prioritized
them by materiality and volatility?
■Targets. Do we have baseline targets for ﬁnancial and nonﬁnancial
outcomes? Do we have stretch goals and worst-case targets?
■Patterns.
Repeating results that can be correlated to time (like
seasonality), external drivers (like a drop in sales volume as commodity
prices increase), internal drivers (on-time-delivery ﬂuctuations with
changes in inventory levels and working capital). See Chapter 4 for
additional patterns.
■Risk tolerance.
Have we identiﬁed the risk components of our
scenarios and quantiﬁed how they could impact results?
I once worked with a client in the energy sector who had multiple
operations around the globe. Their annual production targets were centrally
planned and decided at the corporate level. In a quarter with lean yields,
Corporate decided to accelerate access to reserves, causing reserves to be
depleted more rapidly than normal. They met their production targets that
quarter and the next, but in the following year, their reserves were not at
the levels expected by the board. When Corporate accused the regions of
mismanaging resources, the regions reminded Corporate of the decisions
made in the prior year, and the follow-on effects. The way the regional
operations executives described it was that ‘‘Corporate has no memory.’’ Had
Corporate built a scenario model called ‘‘accelerate access to reserves,’’ it
could have helped in several ways:
■Documenting the decision
■Documenting the assumptions
■Calling out the constraints

DEBATE: TURNING ‘‘WHAT IF’’ INTO ‘‘WHAT’S NEXT’’
83
■Showing the follow-on effects
■Showing the drivers that impact the outcomes
■Communicating expectations
The Process
So how does this work?
We need to look at four areas: the people, the process, the technology,
and the data. These areas should work in concert to drive toward a common
goal: developing the most realistic, probable model that helps you optimize
your resources and deliver on your strategic goals. In addition, you would
have a variety of models for different economic and competitive scenarios
ready at hand for when market conditions change.
For example, you could have a scenario that models a doubling of fuel
prices. It could predict a corresponding decrease in gross margin and a
requirement for price adjustments. It would model out new prices by product
given minimum margin targets for a period of time. Then, if fuel prices
actually did double, that scenario could be activated to push out a revised
quarterly sales plan using the new prices.
The model-building process usually starts with a brainstorming session,
armed with observations, insights, and information from the Gather and
Understand processes, to come up with possible alternatives and drivers of
a scenario. The scenario is based on, or supports, a strategic imperative or
objective that the company is having difﬁculty achieving or has concerns
seeing a path to its execution. One structure that we can use to record the
alternative scenarios is:
■Business Question/Outcome
■
Alternative 1: Name
■Drivers with targets or changes in direction
■
Alternative 2: Name
■Drivers with targets or changes in direction
For an example, let’s take ‘‘proﬁtable revenue growth’’ as the strategic
imperative and begin to brainstorm the alternative scenarios and drivers that
could emerge:
1. Question: How will we achieve our growth targets?/Outcome = 10%
year-over-year (YOY) revenue growth
a. Alternative: Organically
i. Increase volume
ii. Alter prices

84
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
iii. New products
iv. New services
v. Bundling
vi. Hire additional sales staff
vii. Hire additional support staff
viii. Increase number of leads
ix. Improve lead conversion ratio
b. Alternative: Through Acquisition
i. Competitors
ii. Adjacencies
c. Alternative: Through Channel Partners
i. Co-branding
ii. Co-marketing
d. Alternative: Through a blend of the previous three alternatives
2. Question: How will we achieve our margin targets/Outcome = 25%
net margin
a. Alternative: Reduce Direct Costs
i. Outsource
ii. Reduce inventories
b. Alternative: Reduce Indirect Costs/Overheads
i. Shared services
c. Alternative: Increase Prices
d. Alternative: Change our product mix (with more of a focus on
highly proﬁtable products)
e. Alternative: Blend of alternatives
3. Question our assumptions
i. Do we have the right strategy and targets?
ii. Have we taken into account economic and market drivers?
iii. What other events or impacts could happen, inside and outside of
our control?
We can adopt any variety of alternative scenarios or blends of approaches
in our models. Another example for revenue growth alternatives can be based
on the business question ‘‘Build, borrow, or buy?’’1:
1. How can we put our growth plans back on the right path? Out-
come = 15% higher annual revenue from prior with a 5% improvement
in operating margins and 2% improvement in gross margin.
a. Alternative: Build
i. People (number of full-time equivalents (FTE) by focus area by
pay-grade)

DEBATE: TURNING ‘‘WHAT IF’’ INTO ‘‘WHAT’S NEXT’’
85
ii. Skills (percentage advanced degree, percentage certiﬁcations,
number training hours per FTE)
b. Alternative: Borrow
i. Contracts (license fees, contingency coverage percentage, risk
weighted)
ii. Alliances (percent ownership in joint venture, number of points
of contact)
c. Alternative: Buy
i. Ramp-Up (time to integration)
ii. Talent (percent desirable staff retention)
For each of the drivers, we would select appropriate metrics, in paren-
theses beside each driver in the example. Of course, in order to see the effect
those drivers have on the outcomes, we’ll need to identify the intermediate
value drivers that impact the outcome. For example, in the Borrow alternative,
under Contracts, we’ll need to know the average contract value and expected
contract volume to get to a modeled revenue number.
Once we have identiﬁed the question, alternatives, drivers, and targets,
we review all relevant facts available to us, including our analysis of:
■Prior results, trends, and seasonality
■Product, customer, and market proﬁtability
■External/internal benchmarks
■Interconnections (Income Statement, Balance Sheet, Cash Flow)
■Balanced metrics (ﬁnancial, operational/process, learning and growth/
employee, customer)
Next, we use the predictive analytics at our disposal (see Chapter 4)
to look at patterns and predicted paths based on variables and constraints.
Finally, we iterate. Run the scenario, test the impact, measure the result,
and recalibrate the model. This ‘‘test and check’’ method should not be
discounted—a well-thought out set of assumptions and actions can yield new
insights and cause-and-effect relationships that weren’t known before.
So how do you select a scenario?
Scenarios
What-if scenarios are our attempts at making sense of what’s happening,
what can possibly happen, and of trying to minimize the impact of surprises.
They’re our way of being prepared for ‘‘eventualities’’ in business.

86
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
In A/B testing, you compare two possible scenarios, A and B. If A is
better than B, go with A. By ‘‘is better’’ I mean achieves the target outcomes
faster, more cost-effectively, and with appropriate risk. Then immediately do
another A/B test. This is an example of continuous improvement: looking
for appropriate alternatives, selecting one, implementing it, measuring the
outcome and doing it over again. Sometimes a small incremental change
can make a signiﬁcant difference. Let’s take some U.S. regional banks as
an example. Based on publicly available data from 2010, let’s look at RBS
Citizens Bank compared to four other banks of similar size (average assets
between $55 and $255 million):
■PNC Bank, NA
■Fifth Third Bank
■Suntrust Bank
■Comerica Bank
Using the techniques and tools from Chapter 4, we have done a bench-
mark analysis across seven KPIs (see Figure 5.2) and looked for areas of
opportunity and their potential impact on value in the business.
In Figure 5.2, the closer a bubble is to the line at 0, the more opportunity
there is to make a positive impact. And the size of the bubble tells us how
much impact can be made (value creation in $ million).
We can quickly see from the bubble chart that Citizens Bank is the
benchmark for Non Interest Expense (lower is better) at 2.4%. However,
there is much room for improvement, and potential value impact, in Non
Interest Income (revenue derived primarily from fees) and Net Interest
Income (revenue derived from interest less associated expenses).
As shown in the chart, if we brought Non Interest Income in line with
the benchmark company (Fifth Third Bank at 2.3%), then we could create
$981 million in value (a direct cash impact). And if we could bring Net
Interest Income in line with PNC Bank (the benchmark), we could create
an additional $1,064 million in value. That’s almost $2 billion in value if we
made enough improvements to do what Fifth Third and PNC do. However
Citizens bank is in different markets than Fifth Third and PNC with different
mixes of products and services, different strategies, with different people.
Let’s assume we cannot get to the benchmark. Rather, what if we could make
even a small dent in Non Interest and Net Interest Income? How much value
could we stand to gain?
Doing the math, improving both of those key performance indicators
(KPIs) by just 1% each could yield $49.9 million in value.
And we know 1% is possible in the industry since the competition is
already doing better in those areas.

DEBATE: TURNING ‘‘WHAT IF’’ INTO ‘‘WHAT’S NEXT’’
87
120
100
80
60
40
20
503
981
1,064
112
B
116
802
Performance to Benchmark
(Bubble Height)
Opportunity Value (Bubble Size)
RBS CITIZENS, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
PNC BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
FIFTH THIRD BANK
SUNTRUST BANK
COMERICA BANK
Value
Creation
Cash
Impact
0
−20
Company
Name
Int Inc
Non Int 
Inc
Net Int Inc
Non Int 
Exp
Cash
Loans
Deposits
3.6 %
0.9 %
1.1 %
2.4 %
3.7 %
68.6 %
65.5 %
75.3 %
78.1 %
68.4 %
3.4 %
3.4 %
57.2 %
1.9 %
3.3 %
2.7 %
2.1 %
2.3 %
1.8 %
4.1 %
1.4 %
69.7 %
77.6 %
4.4 %
503
503
981
981
1064
1064
0
0
112
1902
1978
13671
116
802
3.3 %
1.5 %
2.2 %
2.9 %
74.4 %
77.9 %
2.6 %
3.2 %
1.6 %
3.8 %
4.3 %
Figure 5.2
Benchmark Analysis for Citizens Bank, Q4 2010
So what do we need to do to improve Non Interest Income and Net
Interest income by 1% each?
I’m sure there are a lot of banking operations and organizational change
candidates to look at, but since this is a book about EPM, let’s see how
improving the management operating system of a bank can make at least a
1% positive difference in the business:
1. Better reporting (Chapter 3)
■
Alert branch management for accounts that perform below the
average non interest income and target those accounts with high

88
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
assets under management for additional cross-selling activity. Track
and report that activity.
■Provide a dashboard with net interest income by product (instru-
ment) and give visibility to performance up and down the manage-
ment chain.
2. Better analytics (Chapter 4)
■Perform customer proﬁtability analysis and see potential better
ways of segmenting customers (e.g., High Net Worth Individuals).
Increase fees for customers with low balances, low account activity,
or higher cost to serve.
■Perform root-cause analysis for underperforming investments.
■Model the effect of the lowest Non Interest Expense on Non
Interest Income—perhaps being the benchmark on Expense is not
the best thing for revenue growth!
3. Better modeling (Chapter 5—what we’re doing right now)
■Perform additional pricing scenarios to see if fees are optimized
(don’t forget the value chain effect on other drivers, like customer
attraction and retention).
■Perform inorganic growth scenarios using obvious M&A targets,
look at the effect on both Net Interest and Non Interest Income.
4. Better planning (Chapter 6)
■Add some speciﬁc targets to the drivers of Non Interest Income, for
example % cross-sell, and implement a sales program to incentivize
better cross-selling behavior (don’t forget to forecast and provide
variance reporting).
Even with conservative costs of $10 million to implement some or all of
those programs (consulting, software, training, and so on), that’s not a bad
return for a small investment and an incremental improvement.
Consider trying each of the initiatives as a test, one at a time. Then
measure the impact the initiative has on the two KPIs. The challenge for A/B
testing in this case is that it can be difﬁcult to correlate the test with the results
as causation. There are so many moving parts in the business and externally
that are uncontrollable in an A/B test scenario—and without controlling the
variables, you cannot prove that the initiative was the cause of the impact.
Resilience
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, having scenarios ‘‘ready at
hand’’ to turn into an operational plan when circumstances dictate, is one of

DEBATE: TURNING ‘‘WHAT IF’’ INTO ‘‘WHAT’S NEXT’’
89
the key elements of Debate and one of the most underused parts of EPM.
How do you determine what potential scenarios to create? For example,
which of these scenarios would be most relevant for your organization:
■Warehouse costs double
■Cost of capital declines (more investment opportunities)
■Competition halves their prices
■Health care costs triple
■Heavy unwanted workforce attrition
■Demand declines for most proﬁtable, most popular, stalwart, or ﬂag-
ship products
■You acquire your nearest competitor
Part of the debate process is to generate and select the most rele-
vant scenarios to model and then either test or keep ready at hand for
when a scenario becomes real. A great way to generate these is to ask not
only your employees, management team, and the board of directors, but
also your customers, suppliers, channel partners, industry analysts, competi-
tors, and anyone who is involved in your ecosystem. Of course, to make
any of these models meaningful, you’ll need to know and quantify the
underlying drivers.
Drivers: What Moves the Needle?
What drives value in your organization? You might say it’s your people.
Well, what drives the value of your people? It could be experience, skills,
training, and certiﬁcation. You might say your products drive value in your
organization. What drives the value of your products? It could be quality,
affordability, features and functionality, or uniqueness. Why do we need to
quantify value? Because it shows us a path from our tactical, day-to-day
activities and decisions, through our operational deployment of resources
(people, time, capital, brand), to our overall strategic objectives and right
down to the P&L statement, balance sheet, and cash ﬂow.
Uncovering and knowing these drivers helps us not only in building
models, but also in developing driver-based plans (Chapter 6), and in our
enterprise reporting of metrics (Chapter 3). In Chapter 8, I go into more
detail about metrics.
When we look at the constituent parts of each driver, or ask the question
‘‘what drives that,’’ we get closer to possible root causes of improvements or
performance hits—we go through a process of decomposing KPIs into their
value drivers.

90
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
So let’s take a look at drilling down through that value chain of drivers.
In Figure 5.3 we decompose revenue and customer satisfaction.
We see some value-drivers, like brand in Figure 5.3, have multiple con-
nection points, in this case, brand either drives, or is driven by, product
quality, price, perceived value, pipeline conversion rate, and campaign effec-
tiveness. With all these interconnections, and as one of the bridges between
revenue and customer satisfaction, you would think brand is an important
driver to measure, monitor, analyze, model, and plan for. Although metrics
are discussed more in Chapter 8, it’s worth noting here that one of the top
brand metrics is ‘‘unaided awareness.’’ An interesting analysis would be to
Figure 5.3
KPI Decomposition into Value Drivers

DEBATE: TURNING ‘‘WHAT IF’’ INTO ‘‘WHAT’S NEXT’’
91
look for correlations between brand recognition, pricing, and sales pipeline
conversion rates. And when a correlation is discovered, with rates, seasonality,
limits, and so on, those facts can be added to a variety of models: your pricing
model, lead generation models, sales models, marketing effectiveness models,
and so on.
Uncovering root drivers is one of the keys to making useful models.
In the sales commission model in Figure 5.4, the key drivers include quota,
commission rate, and base salary. Some of the algorithms built into this model
include estimated sales being based on prior achieved sales. Figure 5.4 is a
sensitivity model, so each of those key drivers can be altered in a scenario
to see the impact on outcomes. In this case the outcomes include estimated
sales and compensation costs, number and percentage of reps making quota,
and overall cost of sales. It also shows which reps will meet or exceed their
on-target earnings (OTE).
When uncovering drivers for your models, consider using external,
macro-economic indicators to help add the reality of market conditions. A
quick example for the model in Figure 5.4 might be to add an algorithm to
govern the estimated number of sales people—if the economy is growing,
perhaps this number will grow proportionately or it could shrink if you expect
sales people to leave when things start picking up—it might be a good idea
to add employee satisfaction as a driver.
Debate Management
So far we have uncovered the drivers and selected scenarios in a model-
building process and there’s more to enabling and managing a debate than
that. If we make good models, that’s interesting but not very useful. If we
make good models that keep getting better and help people throughout
the business understand how plans, actions, and decisions support overall
objectives, then we can help close the loop from strategy to sustainable
execution and continuous improvement. Once we have our ﬁnancial and
operational models, here are six management operating steps to use them to
manage the debate:
1. Assign targets and time horizons.
Some targets are given (e.g.,
those from the board), some are unknown, and some are dependent
on the outcome of the model. In multidimensional modeling tools,
multiple targets can easily be assigned and managed (e.g., upside,
downside, commit, stretch, etc.).Time horizons can be short term
(next month), all the way to very long term (ten years), or, as some
Japanese companies are purported to do—a hundred years.

92
Enter Quota, Commission Rate, and Base Salary to model your sales and OTE
Barbara Davis
OTE $$103,600
Estimated Sales
Estimated Compensation
Estimated Stats
Actual Stats, Previous Year
Betty Clark
Carol Allen
Charles Lee
Christopher Wright
Daniel Gonzalez
David Thompson
Deborah Adams
Donald Mitchell
Donna Walker
Dorothy Harris
Elizabeth Miller
Helen Rodriguez
James Williams
Sales ($)
Compensation ($)
$0K
No
Commission (adjustable)
Base (adjustable)
Yes
Achieved (variable)
Compensation Type
$500K
$1,000K
$0
$50,000
$100,000
# of Sales People 
41
# Hitting Quota 
27
% Hitting Quota 
1
% of Sales by Quota Hitters 
1
Quota $ 
11,825,000
Sales $ 
$15,602,877
Avg. Quota 
275,000
Avg. Sales per Person 
380,558
# of Sales People 
41
# Hitting Quota (est.) 
6
% Hitting Quota (est.) 
14.6%
% of Sales by Quota Hitters (est.) 
31.8%
Cost of Sales 
3,373,905
Cost of Sales (%) 
21.6%
Estimated Results with These Assumptions
600,000
10.6%
40,000
New Quota
Commission Rate
Base Salary
$15,602,877
$4,454,800
Sales Commission Model
Figure 5.4
Model with Drivers and Assumptions
Courtesy Tableau Software Inc.

DEBATE: TURNING ‘‘WHAT IF’’ INTO ‘‘WHAT’S NEXT’’
93
2. Debate and vet the model itself, understand and record the
assumptions, expose the algorithms, circulate it with subject
matter experts, and ‘‘certify’’ it according to your governance
methodology. Risk weighting and risk proﬁles can also be included
to add risk tolerance to the model.
3. Run sensitivity analysis and perform predictive analysis (Chapter
4), creating versions with various targets for each model:
■
Monte Carlo simulation may be an effective method for generating
a possible range of targets or outcomes.
■
The number of versions depends on how strong or divergent various
schools of thought are within your debate team. For example, one
camp thinks SKU rationalization is the highest priority, one camp
thinks price optimization is, so you do two models. The number
of versions also depends on how many you can build how fast,
for example using in-memory online analytical processing (OLAP)
technology can technically do hundreds or thousands of complex
multidimensional models quickly.
4. Debate what the model says, especially about the outcomes.
Circulate the models to various functional groups (sales, market-
ing, operations, and so on), and involve multiple levels of the
organization—from executives, through operational management,
and on to front-line and back-ofﬁce staff. To take this idea fur-
ther, there is a methodology called predication markets that involves
a wide variety of people voting (some have called it betting) on how
close the results will be to the model or forecast. This is an interesting
‘‘crowd-source’’ method for collecting sentiments and I’ll leave it up
to you to explore that idea further.
At this point, it may be useful to validate that the original strategic
objectives and targets are actually possible to achieve. The debate
process should help validate strategy and where there are material
disconnects, the strategy itself could be revised.
5. Agree on the ‘‘best’’ model. That is, the one that seems most doable
and most probable. Select it and turn it into a plan (more on this in
Chapter 6). Remember that perfect is the enemy of good enough, so
don’t wait until your models are perfect to test them.
6. When the plan goes out you get feedback, vet the feedback and
put it back into the model.
This can take the form of new or
more granular constraints communicated by the ﬁeld, renegotiated
or redistributed targets, additional assumptions, or more insights into
drivers. Then start the process over again.

94
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
And, keep in mind that models are not real, but they are sometimes
useful.
Enabling Technologies
There are a wide variety of modeling tools available today, ranging from
prebuilt statistical models, through complete modeling and simulation envi-
ronments that can be conﬁgured and tailored for your industry and your
business. Some of the key components of most EPM-enabled organizations
include:
■Financial modeling and scenario planning applications
■Statistical modeling packages
■Strategic Financial modeling (e.g., long-term P&L, balance sheet, and
cash ﬂow)
■Operational modeling (including activity-based management [ABM]
models)
■Scorecards and strategy maps for high level outcome modeling
■OLAP engines and In Memory OLAP
Statistical 
Modeling
Operational Modeling
Data Analytics
Financial Modeling
User Layer
OLAP 
Cube
Data 
Warehouse
Data 
Mart
In-Memory Analytic 
Appliance
ETL
Data 
Management 
and 
Integration 
Layers
Master 
Data 
Repository
Data Layer
ERP
CRM
SCM
OLAP 
Cube
Figure 5.5
High-Level Architecture for Modeling

DEBATE: TURNING ‘‘WHAT IF’’ INTO ‘‘WHAT’S NEXT’’
95
The key to managing and collaborating a wide variety of scenarios, each
with their own versions, and each version having multiple dimensions, is
OLAP technology. It also happens to be a popular technology for budgeting,
planning, and forecasting—so when the model is ready to move into a plan
of record, it can easily translate dimensions.
As shown in Figure 5.5, just like the other areas of EPM, the end user
modeling tools rely on the same data management layer and tools which, in
turn, get their data from source systems.
One big difference here, though, would be the presence of an OLAP
history cube in order to use prior data to help predict trends, seasonality,
growth rates, and so on.
Potential Quick Wins
The time it takes to build a model and run through the six stages of Debate
management can take weeks or months and is an ongoing process. To get
Table 5.1
Examples of Models that Support Strategic Objectives
Strategic Objective
Models to Support the Debate
Proﬁtable revenue growth
Sales comp model
Pricing and discount models
Cross-sell model
Pipeline conversion model
Operational efﬁciency
Selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) ratio model
Productivity models
Raw material purchase models
Shared-services models
Improved asset utilization
Preventative maintenance cycle models
Asset lifetime models
Production shift/hours models
Occupancy rate models
Improve cash cycle velocity
Inventory models
Receivables aging models
Credit risk models
Contract term models
Customer satisfaction
Call center stafﬁng models
Loyalty program models
Promotion models
Warranty models
Employee engagement
Undesirable attrition models
Employee training investment models
Beneﬁts models
Compensation models

96
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
started with the management operating system way of debating the business,
you can generate a simple model and pilot the six stages with a smaller
group of stakeholders to show the beneﬁts of exposing models and generating
collaborative debate on drivers, targets, constraints, and assumptions. The
possibilities of what to model are endless, and the best place to start is with
strategic objectives. Table 5.1 shows a composite sample of some models
clients have built in support of strategic objectives.
Summary
This is the one area of EPM that is the least exploited and possibly the best
positioned for competitive advantage. Most companies do reams of reporting,
a plethora of planning, and ample analytics, but when it comes to models
and what-if scenarios, they are usually ad hoc, sparse, hidden on someone’s
C drive, or hidden on someone’s wish list.
This part of the management cycle connects the past to the future. If all
of the reporting and analytics we do helps us understand where we are and
why we got what we got, this part of the cycle helps us sort out where we
want to go, and what’s possible.
Ideally, this area of EPM helps enable a robust debate in the business.
Hopefully, there is already plenty of debating in your organization amongst
teams: What’s the right course of action, what’s the best use of resources,
how much, how fast, when, and where? Yet many of these debates consist
of conjecture, opinion, agenda, and political positioning. What would it look
like if your debate was a process with some rigor enabled by data and systems?
Instead of operating in a vacuum, the entire business can be aligned on ‘‘what’s
possible’’ and ‘‘what’s next.’’
Note
1. Will Mitchell and Laurence Capron, Build, Borrow, or Buy: Solving the Growth Dilemma,
Harvard Business Press, 2012.

C H A P T E R 6
Commit: Bringing
Accountability
and Focus
to the Enterprise
Unless commitment is made, there are only promises and hopes; but
no plans.
—PETER F. DRUCKER
I
n any organization, how do you know who is ‘‘on the hook’’ for delivering
what results? You probably know what your objectives are, and those of
your team, and you may know the overall corporate objectives and targets
for the year or the quarter, but how much visibility do you have into who is
responsible to deliver what, by when? In many organizations, this is recorded
in budgets, plans, and forecasts.
The inputs and outputs of the Commit process (see Figure 6.1) include:
■Drivers and Targets. The real value drivers of the business are
exposed in the Debate process and the ‘‘right’’ scenario for success,
including validated targets, is used to create commitments.
■Constraints. The ﬁnancial and operational planning processes
uncover new constraints that will improve your models.
■Financial and Operational Plans. Interrelated, enterprise planning
covering all areas of the business are created, shared, and used to help
make decisions in all areas of the business.
■Decide/Execute.
Commitments (who will do what, by when and
where) guide decisions you make to execute your strategic objectives.
■Reforecast. Based on actual results, you may need to adjust your
forecasts and plans up or down. The faster and more accurately you
can respond to events will give you a competitive advantage.
97
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

98
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 6.1
Close-Up of the Commit Process,
and Its Inputs and Outputs
■Adjust. What you learn from gathering and understanding results may
prompt you to adjust your plans.
■Variance. How you track to budget, plan, and forecast, will cause
different actions in all business functions in the organization.
In general, the process works like this: The company has decided what its
high-level targets for the year and quarter are for revenue, expenses, capital
expenditures, headcount, and so on. Hopefully it has vetted these targets
during a robust, fact-based debate using historical information, external data,
market research, statistics, scenarios, and so on as described in Chapter 5.
Then the targets are parceled out to individual business functions, regions, and
teams to divide the targets into accountable groups. This is called ‘‘top-down’’
planning. Sometimes it stops there—the edict from on high—‘‘you will
deliver these numbers . . . period.’’ In more enlightened organizations, there is
a give-and-take process in three directions: top-down, bottom-up, and side-
to-side (see Figure 6.2). Once the targets are parceled out by region and by
quarter, those responsible for that region may further parcel out that subtarget
to their teams (sales managers for example) and ask them to consider how
doable that target is given their particular teams, market conditions, customer
base, and so on. If there’s an issue in one region, a manager can assign a higher
proportion of burden to a region that can absorb it. Side-to-side managers
consult with their counterparts in other areas of the business to tweak their
forecasts. For example, a sales manager in a region where product X is very
popular would consult with the product marketing manager for product X
to get more insight on upcoming features and release schedules, and might
also consult with delivery operations to see if there are any production or
inventory constraints to expect next quarter or even next year.
Those teams closest to the customer or the market have some valuable
knowledge that is usually locked away in their private spreadsheets that, if
unlocked, can help the company get smarter at planning and competing.

COMMIT: BRINGING ACCOUNTABILITY AND FOCUS TO THE ENTERPRISE
99
Figure 6.2
Top-Down, Bottom-Up, and
Side-to-Side Iterative Planning
If they believe that the target is unreasonable or not achievable, they can
communicate exactly why back up the chain to the top where the corporate
targets can be rebalanced across different teams or different time periods. It’s
those reasons why that provides valuable information that can be reused to
make the ﬁnancial and operational models better so that the next time you
run the Debate–Commit cycle, it’s more accurate or probable. Some of the
bottom-up information to capture that helps make your plans and models
better includes:
■New competition in a region can put new price pressures on deals.
■Open headcount on sales reps can be taking much longer to ﬁll,
delaying time to sales.
■New products, which may form a large part of the top-down plan, may
not be resonating with a particular market or customer type.
■Customers may be moving out of a territory.
■Economic issues may be causing deals to take much longer to close.
■Material costs or availability could be impacted adversely by weather
or economic conditions.
The goal is to capture those constraints and assumptions and learn from
them and continually improve the planning and modeling cycle.

100
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Accountability
The number (and type) of clients that do not have targets for each of their
ﬁnancial and operational objectives is surprising. Some will say they want to
improve operating margins but won’t say by how much. Some will say they
want proﬁtable revenue growth but won’t specify how much proﬁt or what
rate of revenue growth. Or if they do, it’s just a top-line number. ‘‘5% revenue
growth and 5% improvement in operating margin’’ is great, but is that just
across the board or a blended number based on faster revenue growth from
some products in some regions to make up for ﬂat or no growth from other
products or regions?
The goal of planning is to provide an appropriate level of accountability
throughout the organization while remaining nimble enough to make resource
deployment changes to react to changes in the market. Coming back to our
multidimensional concepts from Chapter 2, a plan must include all of the
right dimensions of the business, but not too many. It must include the right
level of detail: not too much, not too little—although most clients I’ve seen
could stand to do with less granular planning. The most common standard
dimensions to plan to include:
■Time (an annual plan broken up into months/quarters is usually
sufﬁcient for revenue and expense)
■Accounts (sales, operating expenses, headcount, and so on)
■Business units/geography (down to regions or territories)
After those top three, it depends on a few things. It depends on what
you are planning and it depends on how your business works. You might also
organize your plan by:
■Product line (perhaps down to product, hopefully not down to SKU
level)
■Customer type (large, medium, small enterprise; public sector, but
hopefully not down to named customer)
■Channel (direct sales force, partner sales, on-line, values at risk
[VARs], etc.)
There is a trade-off between the number of dimensions and level of detail
you plan for and the value they give the organization. If you get to too low
a level of detail, or you have too many dimensions, people will spend an
inordinate amount of time on the planning process with little corresponding
beneﬁt.

COMMIT: BRINGING ACCOUNTABILITY AND FOCUS TO THE ENTERPRISE
101
Annual Sales Plan
Rep: Marlene Reid
Account
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
FY13 Total
Quota
600,000
400,000
400,000
600,000
2,000,000
Travel and
Entertainment
expense
12,000
6,000
8,000
12,000
38,000
Figure 6.3
A Simple Plan
For example, here’s a sales plan for a single sales rep in a software
company. The ﬁrst view (Figure 6.3) is a high-level plan, and the second view
(Figure 6.4) is at a more detailed level with more dimensions.
The high-level plan (Figure 6.3) is easy and fast to do, and shows the same
level of overall accountability as the detailed plan (Figure 6.4). If you have
500 sales reps, this may be the right level of information to communicate up
the chain, and let the reps individually manage how they get to their quarterly
number.
The detailed plan, however, takes more time and thought by each rep
to put together. It adds two levels of detail: monthly quota (instead of
quarterly) and includes a product dimension. It may make sense to plan quota
by product—reminding the rep that they are accountable for driving sales
in multiple product areas. However, it may not make sense to plan travel
and entertainment (T&E) expense by product area, as sales trips are usually
made to a customer regarding multiple products. So we end up with sparse
information around travel expenses.
The additional detail in the monthly spread lets us take into account
historic seasonality patterns acknowledging that the plan isn’t evenly spread
within the quarter.
What do we get from all the extra details in the plan? It usually matters in
at least two areas: resource planning and shortfalls. By knowing what the sales
levels will be for each month, sales managers from other areas (e.g., presales
support and marketing) can plan sales engineering, proposal writing, and ﬁeld
marketing events to coincide with the level of activity indicated by the quota
plan. It also lets each product manager know roughly how much to produce
each month.
Where there is a material shortfall to the plan, uncovered during a
forecast perhaps, sales management will want to drill down into the details to
ﬁnd out the source of the shortfall. In the detailed example in Figure 6.4, you
could drill down into a particular month or even at a product level.

102
Annual Sales Plan
Rep: Marlene Reid
Product
Account
Jan
Feb
Mar
Q1
Apr
May
Jun
Q2
Jul
Aug
Sep
Q3
Oct
Nov
Dec
Q4
FY13 Total
Core
Software
Quota
60,000 120,000 100,000 280,000 30,000
90,000
60,000 180,000 30,000
90,000
60,000 180,000
60,000 120,000 100,000 280,000
920,000
T&E
expense
6,000
4,000
2,000
12,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
6,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
6,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
12,000
36,000
Ancillary
Software
Quota
15,000
30,000
25,000
70,000
7,500
22,500
15,000
45,000
7,500
22,500
15,000
45,000
15,000
30,000
25,000
70,000
230,000
T&E
expense
—
—
—
—
—
Implemen-
tation
Services
Quota
30,000
58,000
50,000 138,000 15,000
58,000
30,000 103,000 15,000
58,000
30,000 103,000
30,000
58,000
50,000 138,000
482,000
T&E
expense
—
—
—
—
—
Training
Services
Quota
9,000
18,000
15,000
42,000
4,500
13,500
9,000
27,000
4,500
13,500
9,000
27,000
9,000
18,000
15,000
42,000
138,000
T&E
expense
—
—
—
—
—
Mainten-
ance Fees
Quota
15,000
30,000
25,000
70,000
7,500
22,500
15,000
45,000
7,500
22,500
15,000
45,000
15,000
30,000
25,000
70,000
230,000
T&E
expense
—
—
—
—
—
Total
Products
Quota
129,000 256,000 215,000 600,000 64,500 206,500 129,000 400,000 64,500 206,500 129,000 400,000 129,000 256,000 215,000 600,000
2,000,000
T&E
expense
6,000
4,000
2,000
12,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
2,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
12,000
38,000
Figure 6.4
A More Detailed Plan

COMMIT: BRINGING ACCOUNTABILITY AND FOCUS TO THE ENTERPRISE
103
Accountability, expressed in an organization’s plan, should include the
following three components:
1. What is being committed (dollar level, volume, percentage change)
2. By whom (business unit, country/region, territory/team, individual
rep)
3. By when (monthly, quarterly)
Since planning and forecasting aren’t exact, some leeway is given, espe-
cially on ranges of the plan or forecast. In EPM, these ranges are captured
in versions of the plan. For each of the cells (i.e., intersection of product,
account, and month for each rep) in Figure 6.4 there could be three plan
versions, thus giving management some insight into a range of possible values
so they can plan accordingly. Of course, it’s more work to capture the plan
at that level of detail; however, it may be worth it. Some common plan or
forecast versions include:
1. Downside
2. Upside
3. Commit
Gaming the System
Did you know that all sales people are bilingual? They speak their native
language and at least one other: salesese. You’ve probably heard some of
it: sandbagging, long-shots, bird-dogs, low-ball, slam-dunk, spiff, seymore,
smoke screen, spray-and-pray, stall, sleevies.1 This lingo has evolved over the
years to try and overcome just how difﬁcult it can be to describe where you
are in a sales cycle and where you think you’re going. If you’re going to make
your number, as a company, a territory, or even an individual rep, you have
to speak a common language in order to engage in a debate with the right
people, at the right time, to determine the right actions to take to reach a
speciﬁc target—and then you have to record that commitment in a shared,
collaborative system that integrates the numbers, assumptions, and drivers.
These commitments not only show how you’re going to achieve the
results you agreed on, they also help you take corrective action. A rigorous,
standard planning methodology helps reduce ﬁnger pointing and blame by
showing direct cause and effect of variance. A shortfall could be due to a
rep, a product line, and entire territory, higher discounting, lack of spend
management, and so on. When the root cause is determined, that information
can be fed back into the model that the plan was derived from, so the model is

104
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
better for the next cycle. Also, when more people have visibility to variance to
commitments, there is generally more accountability as an entire community
(a sales team, a product marketing team, a customer service team) can see and
share in the variance and help the team out to make up shortfalls. This is true
not only for sales planning, but all of the planning you do in your organization.
Enterprise Planning and Forecasting
There are many kinds of plans in any organization. The kind of plan depends
on what the plan is trying to accomplish, who the audience is, and how
frequent and granular the plan needs to be. Here are the most common types
of EPM plans:
Strategic Planning
■Annual budget
■Long-range plan/strat plan
■Cash-ﬂow forecast
■Balance sheet plan
Finance Planning
■Annual operating plan (AOP)
■Revenue and expense plan
■Sales plan
■Capital expenditure plan
Operational Planning
■Workforce plan
■Project ﬁnancial plan
■Marketing plans (including category plan, campaign plan, etc.)
■Demand plan
Forecasts
■Sales forecast
■Expense forecast
■Demand forecast
■Project forecast
Many of these plans are interrelated and components from one can and
should feed another as shown in Figure 6.5. For example, the total planned
salary and beneﬁts expenses from the workforce plan can feed the AOP
and the expense plan—at different levels of detail if required, by team, by
geography, or by individual if required.

COMMIT: BRINGING ACCOUNTABILITY AND FOCUS TO THE ENTERPRISE
105
Figure 6.5
Integrated Plan Types
Integrated sales and operational planning (S&OP), developed by Oliver
Wight in the 1980s is another type of plan that connects manufacturing
output with expected sales levels and can be enabled by EPM.
Driver-Based Planning
All plans can be considered driver-based if you single out volume and rate
as drivers. But modern day driver-based planning is more than that. It’s
about uncovering the key drivers that ‘‘move the needle’’ of the top line and
bottom line. What drives volume? And what drives rates? The same processes
used to decompose metrics in Chapter 5 (in the Drivers: What Moves the
Needle? section) and also shown in Chapter 8 (in the Functional Value Maps
section) is used to uncover those key drivers used in a driver-based plan.
Drivers take out some of the gaming from plans and forecasts since the plan
is based on historical rates, known patterns (like seasonality), and forward-
looking assumptions for each key plan driver. For example, a sales plan for
next quarter based on key drivers could have each rep enter the following
information:
■Number of planned face-to-face meetings: 24
■Number of planned demos: 10
Knowing that in the past the average sale conversion happens after three
face-to-face meetings and two demos, the rep would be expected to close ﬁve

106
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
sales (10 demos/2 demos per sale). An average selling price in that region of
$5,000 gives a quarterly forecast for that rep of $25,000. This leads to a few
interesting ideas:
■The rep will work towards fulﬁlling the behavior that drives the
outcome—they will work to book 24 meetings and 10 demos.
■Constraints are exposed—in this case, demos are limiting the possible
number of sales since, on average, a sale is made with three face-to-face
meetings, the rep could have eight sales, but can’t (or isn’t) planning
to do enough demos—six more would be needed. Is the constraint
presales resources? Time in the demo lab?
In the real world, management still has the prerogative to override a
driver-based plan. They may have insights that may not be quantiﬁable about
a particular rep or region and want to temper the plan accordingly. However,
it would be worth a look to see if any of that information can be quantiﬁed.
For example, the sales manager knows the rep is capable of a higher plan
than $25,000 for the quarter and would override it to $30,000. Yet looking at
the historical data for that rep it’s noticed that she consistently achieves 10%
above plan, so why not let the planning system override the inputted plan to
$27,500?
Forecast Accuracy
Organizations have always had a concern with forecast accuracy, but it’s being
felt more keenly now.
So how does EPM help address forecast accuracy concerns? Here are
nine areas to look at:
1. Have a formal forecast process in place—companies are trending
towards rolling sales and expense forecasts.
2. Use a multidimensional tool so that forecasts can roll up by geo,
product, customer type, and so on as the business demands. Multi-
dimensional tools also let you add weighting, bias, and probabilities
(multidimensional databases are discussed in Chapter 4).
3. Improve the quality of the data—if forecasts are based on prior period
actuals, make sure the basis of your forecast is reliable.
4. Measure and report forecast errors—expose the causes of the problem,
and take action to ﬁx them. Use data mining tools to locate sources
and trends of errors.
5. Senior management must make a commitment to improving forecast
accuracy. Their variable compensation should be tied to it.

COMMIT: BRINGING ACCOUNTABILITY AND FOCUS TO THE ENTERPRISE
107
6. Communicate the impact of poor forecast accuracy to everyone in
the organization who has anything to do with forecasting, including
opportunities lost with mismanaged discretionary spending as well as
the impact on stock price caused by a wide miss or revised earnings
estimates to the market.
7. Make assumptions follow the forecast. In other words, fully expose the
assumptions that make up the forecast by quantifying the assumptions
or, at a minimum, including narratives with each forecast—to the
most granular level manageable (many forecasting tools now let you
do cell-level annotation, for example).
8. Look at new methodologies such as risk-weighting, predictive models
and prediction markets.2
9. Continuously learn about best practices in forecasting.3
Rolling Forecasts
Many organizations are doing away with the annual budget and replacing it
with a continuous planning and forecasting process. With a rolling forecast
the number of periods forecasted remains constant. For example, if you do a
ﬁve-quarter rolling forecast at the end of the current quarter, a new forecast
is added for ﬁve quarters out. So you are always forecasting for ﬁve quarters.
In this way, we’re not waiting for Q4 before we have a plan or forecast for
next year.
Resource Optimization
All of this shared, coordinated, and integrated planning is useful only if it
helps us make better decisions on where to focus our attention and where to
spend our time and money. This is true for:
■When, where, and how much to deploy our people
■When and where to focus our marketing efforts, and at what level of
investment
■Where to invest capital, hedge, and leverage debt
■What products to focus on and which ones to retire
■Which clients to pay more attention to
Let’s illustrate how enterprise planning helps us optimize resource deci-
sions with another sales example. Perhaps your sales forecast is behind your
revenue plan by a wide margin. You investigate the pipeline and look for the
largest deals, furthest along in the sales cycle, with the highest probability
of closing. You would then focus your presales or technical resources on

108
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
spending additional time with those clients helping them see the value of
your wares through better demos or proofs of concepts. Simultaneously, you
refocus your marketing efforts and marketing spend on those products being
considered by that narrowed list of top prospects to help provide air cover
and support to the sales team. You also revise the demand plan accordingly
so production is able to supply new concentrations of speciﬁc products given
the new mix expected by the end of the quarter.
Having an integrated planning and forecasting process and system that
cover ﬁnancial, operational, and strategic drivers lets you react faster and
more effectively to constantly changing business circumstances.
Enabling Technologies
Since EPM planning systems generate their own data, the budget, plan,
and forecast data, they need their own repository. This is usually stored
in a combined multidimensional (online analytical processing [OLAP]) and
relational store speciﬁcally for plans. You don’t want to store your plan data
back in your transactional systems since they are stored at different levels of
detail, at different times, and with multiple versions.
Ingredients for Your EPM Roadmap
Figure 6.6 shows the common components of an enterprise planning system
and their relation to transactional and ‘‘actuals’’ data repositories. Just like
other EPM components, planning systems use different front ends to match
the audience and purpose of the plan. More applications now are including
mobile components that let ﬁeld representatives update forecasts in real time
from the ﬁeld on their tablets and smart phones.
Potential Quick Wins
While you’re refreshing your EPM roadmap (see Chapter 9), you can at least
replace all those spreadsheets and all that manual consolidation and tracking
with an automated cloud planning system. Think of this as a prototype for
an enterprise-level integrated planning system. The setup is quick and it gets
your planning contributors and forecasters to start thinking about the process,
about multidimensionality, and about real-time consolidation.

COMMIT: BRINGING ACCOUNTABILITY AND FOCUS TO THE ENTERPRISE
109
Strategic Planning
Meta-data
repository
OLAP
Repository
Actuals
Data Layer
ETL
US ERP
UK ERP
Data
Ware-
house
Financial Planning
Operational
Planning
Forecasting
Mobile
Enterprise Planning
System
User Layer
Data
Management
and
Integration
Layers
Figure 6.6
High-Level Planning Architecture
For example, a cloud-based sales compensation planning system took two
days to prototype, another two days to reﬁne the allocation and spread logic
behind the scenes, and a week to deploy and train users on how to enter
their plans on the Web (and from mobile devices).The forecast is always
consolidated so that sales management can see in real time how the forecast
is shaping up. One of the newest cloud platforms that does this is Anaplan.
Summary
As former U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower said, ‘‘Plans are worthless.
Planning is essential.’’ I might disagree that plans are worthless, so long as we
remember they are inaccurate predictions used to document our debate about
what we want to happen. Of course the process of planning is invaluable—it
helps you question assumptions, understand constraints, prioritize resources,
and shape decisions. Enterprise planning has been called the cornerstone of
EPM, and it’s usually the ﬁrst initiative that EPM organizations undertake.
EPM done right means that your plans are based on a model built in a debate
that was fed by facts about the business, and it shares common business rules,

110
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
formulae, and master data with the phases of the management operating
system.
Notes
1. I recently heard the term ‘‘sleevies’’ from a sales manager who uses it to describe those
opportunities that reps keep ‘‘up their sleeves’’ and not in the pipeline.
2. Christoph Hueglin and Francesco Vannotti, http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=502512
.502578 and Ren´ee Dye, www.mckinseyquarterly.com/Strategy/Strategy_in_Practice/The_
promise_of_prediction_markets_2114_abstract
3. E.g., see the International Institute of Forecasters, http://forecasters.org

C H A P T E R 7
Execute: From
Insight to Actions to
Results
Vision without execution is hallucination.
—THOMAS A. EDISON
L
et’s take a look at the management operating system in action. You
can break down the ‘‘E’’ in EPM to any part of the enterprise: sales,
marketing, order to cash, supply chain, workforce, and so on. You can
even follow the chain to organizations you partner with. When you focus on
each of these parts, they follow the same closed-loop cycle, work off the same
data, metadata, and rules, and are enabled by the same technology. The more
you unify these components for each part of the enterprise, the less you spend
on reinventing the wheel, reworking reports, plans, models, and analyses, and
the more you can agree on the numbers.
Everything Is Connected
In Chapter 2, in the Macro and Micro section, I mentioned how the cycle can
exist at many levels of the organization. The cycle works at the corporate level,
the business-unit level, the business-function level, and the team level. And
each level can be interrelated. For example, in Figure 7.1, the commitments
at the corporate level can feed the debate at the business-unit level, or can just
become the commitment at the business-unit level, and what the business-unit
level gathers and understands can feed into the corporate gathering process.
To extend that thinking beyond the four walls of your organization, into
your value ecosystem, as shown in Figure 7.2, the cycle can extend to your
suppliers, customers, and other partners.
111
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

112
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 7.1
The Management Operating
System Works from Corporate to Business-Unit
Levels
In advanced uses of EPM, organizations invite entities beyond their
control to participate—to consume and contribute information—in the
management operating system. Some examples include:
■Letting customers enter expected demand levels for future time peri-
ods, which feeds into your demand forecast
Figure 7.2
EPM Outside of the Four Walls of
Your Organization

EXECUTE: FROM INSIGHT TO ACTIONS TO RESULTS
113
■Letting suppliers see a summarized, sanitized (anonymous) version of
your demand forecast or pipeline to know how to stock raw material
levels to meet potential demands
■Letting stafﬁng companies know about upcoming vacancies or over-
time requirements to help staff to expected levels of work
Sales Performance Management
In his easily accessible book What the Customer Wants You to Know, Dr. Ram
Charan says that companies need to focus on the customer rather than their
own product or service’s features and beneﬁts, and change the way they sell.
You have to understand your clients’ business and strategic objectives, he
says, in order to work backward and see how your wares can positively impact
those objectives. Most salespeople show how they will reduce their prospects’
costs, and don’t touch on improving revenues, margin, brand, market share,
cash ﬂow, and so on. So how would EPM work inside your organization to
help manage the soon-to-be-transformed world of sales?
It’s useful to keep in mind what the top sales-management priorities are (so
that you can link sales analysis back to strategy). These top sales-management
priorities can each be enhanced and enabled by EPM:
1. Optimize the pipeline—from generating leads to converting pros-
pects to customers
2. Improve sales processes and team structures
3. Align sales and marketing more closely
4. Improve pricing effectiveness
5. Analyze customer buying patterns
6. Automate sales operations
7. Improve channel effectiveness
8. Add customer relationship management (CRM) analytics on top of
your CRM system
9. Enhance sales team focus and alignment
10. Revise compensation and commission programs1
So, from that list, you can see a sales performance management (SPM)
dashboard having the following tabs:
■Marketing (including lead generation)
■Customer (including sales stages)
■Channel (including pipeline)
■Team (including compensation)

114
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Taking it a step further, and making SPM more holistic (part of EPM),
you could also include tabs for:
■Development (visibility into the product pipeline, and launch dates)
■Support (a look at the most common customer issues, customer
satisfaction, etc.)
■Finance (how each sales rep/team contributes to revenue, margin, cash
ﬂow, days sales outstanding)
■Operations (time to delivery, etc.)
And based on Dr. Charan’s comments, if I were a sales manager, I would
want to keep my eye on some of these operational sales metrics:
■Time spent on prospect research and peer benchmarking
■Number of features directly matched with prospect objectives
■Rank of importance of key business indicators (revenue growth, mar-
gin, cash cycle, etc.)
■Cash and recurring beneﬁt available to prospect company with 1%,
5%, 10% improvement on two or more ﬁnancial measures using the
proposed solution (see the Scenarios section of Chapter 5).
Sales Operations Performance
How do you measure and plan for the success of sales operations? While some
companies use sales ops as the reporting and analysis arm of sales, others are
transforming sales ops to be a strategic partner in the sales, marketing, and
customer satisfaction functions: bridging activities and results across those
three areas of the business. So how do you measure success for a smart sales
operations team?
Let’s divide sales operations performance drivers (these could be metrics,
key performance indicators [KPIs], measures, or processes—any of which is
a key driver of value in sales operations) into three categories: strategic (at
the top level of the organization), operational (where planning and resource
allocation live), and execution (the tactical layer of the business). Here are
some of the more popular drivers:
Strategic
■Sales revenue
■Forecast accuracy
■Territory design effectiveness
■Quota

EXECUTE: FROM INSIGHT TO ACTIONS TO RESULTS
115
■Productivity
■Compensation
■Average selling price (ASP)
■Time to revenue
■Open headcount
■Pipeline
■Product and channel mix
■Customer acquisition efﬁciency
■Demand planning
■Channel efﬁciency
■Selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expense
■Net operating proﬁt
Operational
■Product training hours
■Contract quality
■Request for Quote/Proposal quality
■Order management
■Product certiﬁcation
■Collateral effectiveness
■Commission management
■Sales entity reviews
■Sales training hours
■Methodology usage
■Reference quality
■Competitive intelligence
■Sales certiﬁcation
■Sales meeting effectiveness
■Award programs
■Sales behavior
Execution
■Sales force automation system usage
■Expense management
■Territory management
■Sales activities
■Customer relationship management system usage
■Channel conﬂict
■Dispute resolution
■Customer face time
■Quota accuracy
■Commission accuracy

116
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
■Sales initiatives
■Sales call prep
■Forecast accuracy
■Deal registration quality
■Sales incentive overspend
■Customer intelligence
For those drivers that are most material and most volatile—meaning they
make the biggest difference and change frequently, so you want to keep an
eye on them—you run them through the management operating system to
look for your top sales operation performance management initiatives. More
on this in Chapter 9.
Order to Cash Performance Management
As with any transactional process used to run the organization, EPM sits on
top to help manage the process and the overall organization. Order to cash
is no different. Improving the cycle time and amount of effort to get from an
actual sale to cash in the bank can have a material impact on the business. Let’s
take a look at a standard order-to-cash transactional process in Figure 7.3.
This process is:
■Transactional
■Granular (detailed)
■Daily
■May have multiple versions (per different business units or countries)
■May store its data in a variety of systems (general ledger, CRM, credit
system, contracts)
When you connect the management operating system on top of all of
this transactional data, it might logically look like Figure 7.4
Credit Risk
Credit Reviews
Order Ship/Hold
Dun and
 Bradstreet
Interface
Scoring
New Customers
Changes
Merges
Cash In
 Advance and
 Terms
Accounts
 Receivable
 220 Reconciliation
Pricing
Pricing
Components
 and Options
Disputes
Discounts
ACM Strategies
Dunning
 Promises
Email and
 Reprint
Credit Memo,
Debit Memo,
 and
 Adjustments
Credit Card
Payments
Custom
 Workflows
Reporting
Apply Cash
AutoCash
Create
Chargebacks
Credit Card
 Payments
Credit Management
Customers Management
Price Admin
Collections
Dispute Resolution
Dispute Resolution
Figure 7.3
Standard Order to Cash Process

117
Modeling
Planning
Reporting
Analytics
Strategic Plan
Scenarios
What-If
P and L,
Balance Sheet,
C/F
Trending
Variance
Profitability
Root-Cause
Management
Consolidation
Statutory
Consolidation,
Flash
Drivers
Annual Plan
Forecast
Workforce
CAPEX
Constraints
Self-serve, POV
Drill down, slice 
and dice
Common Rules
Common Definitions
Common Hierarchies
Automated Tie-Out
Credit Risk
Credit Reviews
Order Ship/Hold
Dun and Bradstreet
Interface
Scoring
New Customers
Changes
Merges
Cash In Advance
and Terms
Accounts Receivable
 220 Reconciliation
Pricing
Pricing
Components and
Options
Disputes
Discounts
ACM
Strategies
Dunning
Promises
Email and Reprint
Credit Memo,
Debit Memo,
and Adjustments
Credit Card Payments
Custom Workflows
Reporting
Apply Cash
AutoCash
Create
Chargebacks
Credit Card Payments
Credit Management
Customers Management
Price Admin
Collections
Dispute Resolution
Dispute Resolution
Figure 7.4
Management Operating System on Top of Order-to-Cash Transactions

118
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Some common order-to-cash performance management initiatives could
include:
■Credit risk analysis (including customer segmentation)
■Receivable analytics (aging, days sales outstanding [DSO], billing error
rate, cycle times, cost per invoice)
■Backlog variance
■Bank reconciliation (automated reconciliation management)
■Cash conversion efﬁciency trends
■Cash-ﬂow forecasting
■Pricing/discount analysis
For one client, their order-to-cash performance management roadmap
included, along with broader EPM initiatives, initiatives aligned to the
corporate priorities as shown in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1
EPM and Order-To-Cash Performance Management Initiatives
Corporate
Priority
Enterprise
Performance
Management
Order-To-Cash
Performance
Management
Improve earnings before
interest, taxes,
depreciation, and
amortization (EBITDA)
margin
Selling, general and
administrative (SGA)
expense, and cost of goods
sold (COGS) analysis
Workforce planning
Credit risk analysis
Customer proﬁtability
Align pricing with value
Demand planning
Price/mix modeling
Discount analysis
Pricing analysis
Invest in the business
Strategic ﬁnance models
Capital expenditure
(CAPEX) planning
Customer/product
proﬁtability
Improve and manage
demand
Demand planning
Variance analysis
On-time delivery analysis
Transportation cost
analysis
New product development
priority
Percentage of sales from
new product analysis (and
cross-sell analysis)
Invoice terms models
Customer ﬁnancing
models
Manage debt
Balance sheet modeling,
planning and forecasting
Cash-ﬂow forecast
Improve working capital
Days payable outstanding
(DPO) reporting and
analysis
Days sales outstanding
(DSO), Days in inventory
(Dll) reporting and analysis

EXECUTE: FROM INSIGHT TO ACTIONS TO RESULTS
119
Supply Chain Performance Management2
Managing the performance of your suppliers, a critical component of overall
supply and demand chain management, can have a material impact on your
company’s revenue growth and operating margin. Not investing in how you
manage supplier performance, especially in a down economy, can have a
negative impact on your proﬁts, assets, and cash ﬂow.
Starting with the overall EPM framework, I have found that it works
well to focus on supplier performance or any dimension of the supply chain.
The goal of the framework is to help manage the process of strategy to
execution. You already have overall company strategic objectives: a certain
level of revenue growth at a particular target margin, or an expected level
of market share and brand recognition, for instance. Within those corporate
objectives, you have speciﬁc supplier performance objectives: a certain level
of material quality, cycle times, inventory levels, and so on. The challenge is
to ensure that you efﬁciently—and sustainably—execute on those objectives
and continuously improve your fact-based decision-making capabilities that
get you closer to realizing your strategy.
To do this, you must be able to rigorously answer these questions: ‘‘What
do we want to happen with suppliers, and how do we want it to happen?’’ and
‘‘What actually happened, and why did it happen?’’ The supplier performance
management operating system that helps answer these questions is shown
in Figure 7.5.
The framework says that you take your strategic supplier objectives and
you debate them. Are you able to achieve those objectives? Do you have
sufﬁcient capital, people, customers, and markets? What if you negotiated
different terms with suppliers? What if you acquired some of your suppliers?
What if you outsource more logistics services? What if fuel costs become even
more unpredictable? Should you buy or build a certain component? This is
where you build ﬁnancial and operational models to record constraints and
vet your assumptions about suppliers. Instead of a few spreadsheets run by a
few analysts, this is an open process by the executive management team from
all business functions—sales, marketing, procurement, and customer and
supplier operations—with multiple scenarios recorded in a multidimensional
system. It includes historical performance data as well as internal and external
benchmarks to address questions such as ‘‘How do we do better than last
time?’’ and ‘‘How do we do better than industry averages?’’ Once the most
likely scenario is agreed upon (after a healthy and rigorous debate), this model
forms the basis of your suppler plans.
Those plans form the basis for how you decide how and when you are
going to deliver products and services to customers and consume materials
and resources from suppliers. It’s the commitment your managers, sales reps,

120
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 7.5
Full Supplier Performance Management Operating System
Source: Originally appeared in the December 2008 edition of Supply Chain Executive
Magazine. Reprinted with permission.
and developers make to execute on the plan (which was based on the models
that were based on the strategy). It includes ﬁnancial plans such as rev-
enue forecast (by product and/or by geography and/or by day/week/month),
expense and cost-of-goods-sold budgets, cash-ﬂow forecast, and other plans.
It also includes operational plans such as your production plan, materials
purchasing plan, workforce plan, and even your capital expenditure plan.
Having a systematic debate that informs your decision helps prevent the
institutional amnesia that occurs when results aren’t delivered as expected
and senior management asks why the bar was set too high or too low. When
plans are consolidated from each function and each business unit around
the company, more constraints and assumptions are uncovered—and those
should be fed back into the models so that the next model (next week, next
month, next quarter) is even better than before.
While you are busy buying materials and services from suppliers, mak-
ing products and services, and delivering to customers, you continually
gather information about the business. This includes ﬁnancial and operational
reporting such as management reporting, product quality reporting, vendor-
managed inventory reports, third-party logistics (3PL) reports, customer

EXECUTE: FROM INSIGHT TO ACTIONS TO RESULTS
121
satisfaction reporting, and so on. This involves taking the raw transactional
data (purchase orders, invoices, bills of lading) and turning them into useful,
actionable information.
Once we have gathered believable information (by ‘‘believable,’’ we refer
to high data quality and common deﬁnitions and rules), we want to understand
why we got the results we got. If we are spending more with one supplier than
expected, what was the cause? Could it be we needed more raw materials or
more ﬁnished-goods storage than we expected, and if so, what was the cause?
Did we do a poor job of forecasting demand? Did we have a pricing promotion
that production didn’t know about? We want to get to the root causes of
variances and problems—also known as ‘‘surprises’’—and take action to ﬁx
them now and prevent them from happening in the future.
Most businesses are doing some form of each of these processes today.
And they generally do them in silos: Manufacturing has its direct relationships
with suppliers, while procurement is brought in to work on contracts; HR
isn’t often brought in for manufacturing stafﬁng issues until the need is ‘‘right
now’’ or until contract labor overtime is too burdensome; and sometimes
different parts of the business use the same vendors under different contracts
without leveraging them for better prices and terms. By using different
technologies, unshared data, and business rules, with low or no sharing and
collaboration across all four areas of the framework—not to mention low
or no alignment with strategy—companies get low visibility into supplier
performance, low believability in the numbers, and low accountability for
results and corresponding actions. Supplier performance management is
about bringing together all of the Gather, Understand, Debate, and Commit
processes, technology, and people into a uniﬁed system.
Why Does Uniﬁed Sales Performance Management Matter?
The best way to illustrate the business beneﬁt of a uniﬁed supplier performance
management system is to show the potential ﬁnancial impact on a company.
Let’s look at a case study using the computer hardware industry.
I picked Lenovo Group as our target company. Lenovo is the largest IT
enterprise in China and acquired IBM’s Personal Computing Division in 2005.
The company manufactures and distributes brands such as ThinkPad and has
manufacturing, distribution and support clusters in Raleigh, N.C., Beijing,
Mexico, Brazil, Scotland, Hungary, India, Japan, Australia, and Singapore.
I benchmarked Lenovo to the following competitors:
■Apple, Inc.
■Dell
■Gateway

122
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Company
Lenovo Group
Apple, Inc.
Dell
Gateway
Industry Top 2%
COG S
85.50%
64.50%
80.70%
93.70%
68.50%
DPO
–62
–56
–67
–58
–49
Figure 7.6
Financial Impact of
Supplier Performance Management
on a Company
Source: Originally appeared in the
December 2008 edition of Supply
Chain Executive Magazine. Reprinted
with permission.
Using only publicly available generally accepted accounting procedures
(GAAP) data for the last four quarters for each company, I looked at a variety
of results and focused in on two: COGS as a percentage of revenue, and DPO
as shown in Figure 7.6.
For cost of goods sold as a percentage of revenue, where a lower
percentage means they spend less on raw materials and on the design,
manufacture and distribution of products, Lenovo Group ranks fourth out
of ﬁve. For days payable outstanding, an indicator of how long a company is
taking to pay its vendors and other trade creditors, they were second out of ﬁve
(longer is generally—but not always—better for DPO, since the company
can earn on the cash it owes trade creditors).
With only a 2% improvement in COGS and a 2% improvement in DPO,
these incremental improvements would produce $167.7 million in cash as
well as $239.7 million in recurring beneﬁts for Lenovo. And we know 2% is
possible in their industry since the competition is achieving results beyond
2%. So how can supplier performance management impact COGS and DPO
by 2%?
To start, one of Lenovo’s strategic objectives is to pursue operational
excellence, which is about streamlining and improving their global supply
chain and logistics network. Some of the initiatives already undertaken to
improve the supply chain include:
■Operating its own facilities closer to their customer base in key
geographies
■Expanding the reach and impact of its Lean Six Sigma application
within the global supply chain; and
■Continuing to improve its logistics network
Some of the potential initiatives around supplier performance manage-
ment, using the framework described earlier, that can have a direct impact

EXECUTE: FROM INSIGHT TO ACTIONS TO RESULTS
123
Table 7.2
Potential EPM Initiatives for Lenovo Group
Cost of Goods Sold
Days Payable Outstanding
DEBATE
Financial Models
Supplier M&A, joint-venture
investment models
Variable supplier terms based
on performance/geography
Operational Models
Model/SKU rationalization,
harmonization
Supplier
consolidation/distribution
models
COMMIT
Financial Plans
Internal forecast accuracy
Supplier forecast accuracy
Operational Plans
Materials management
planning
Connecting contract labor
suppliers to overtime
forecasting
GATHER
Financial Reporting
Product proﬁtability reporting
3PL service level agreement
variance reporting
Operational Reporting
Connecting suppliers to
demand management
reporting
Vendor invoice accuracy
reports
UNDERSTAND
Financial Analytics
Material cost analysis
Supplier cost benchmark
analysis
Operational Analytics
Product transition process
analysis
Supplier delivery cycle time
analysis
Source: Originally appeared in the December 2008 edition of Supply Chain Executive Magazine. Reprinted
with permission.
on the cost of goods sold and/or days payable outstanding, include those
in Table 7.2.
Any combination of those initiatives could potentially improve COGS
and DPO by at least 2% by giving Lenovo better visibility, believability, and
accountability into supplier performance. And an investment in improving
those processes and technologies is worth $167.7 million in cash, not to
mention the recurring ﬁnancial beneﬁt.
Marketing Performance Management
Here are the management cycle components for a name-brand consumer
goods company that engages in the design, marketing, and distribution

124
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
of lifestyle products including apparel, accessories, leather goods, and
home products.
Strategic objectives
■Brand: build and extend the brand
■Focus on specialty retail
■Expand international presence
■Continue cost-management efforts
Debate
■Financial models
■
Investment money
■
Store
■
Market
■
Working capital
■
Raw materials money
■
License acquisitions
■
Brand acquisitions/adjacencies
■
Price
■
Long-term proﬁt and loss, balance sheet, cash ﬂow
■Operational models
■
New product/category introductions
■
Volume
■
Capacity (factory, transportation)
■
Number of store openings/closings/renovations
■
Merchandise mix
■
Market share/percent expansion
■
Inventory growth/timing (by brand, by region, by channel, by
season, by SKU)
Commit
■Financial plans
■
Sales plan
■
Revenue and expense plan
■
Marketing plan
■
CAPEX plan
■Operational plans
■
Store plans
■
Inventory plans

EXECUTE: FROM INSIGHT TO ACTIONS TO RESULTS
125
■
Production plans
■
Demand plans
■
Workforce plan
Execute
■Areas of the business
■
Retail
■
Wholesale
■
Licensing
■
eCommerce
■
Design
■
Production
■
Merchandising
■
In-store presence
Gather
■Key ﬁnancial reports
■
P&L by brand, comparable store, geography, channel
■
Comparable store sales
■
Returns, discounts, markdowns
■Key operational reports
■
Customer satisfaction survey report
■
Consolidated inventory report
■
Overtime reports
Understand
■Financial analytics
■
Brand/product proﬁtability
■
Return on Marketing Investment (ROMI)
■
Store Proﬁtability
■
Comparable Store Sales Trends
■
COGS Trends
■
DSO Trends
■Operational analytics
■
Productivity gains on incremental distribution
■
Conversion rates
■
Sell through rates by customer type, by price point
■
On-time delivery
■
Forecast accuracy

126
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
The Middle
■Master data management
■
Of product
■
Of accounts (chart of accounts)
■
Of store/geography
For this business, marketing performance management means continu-
ously improving marketing effectiveness while delivering on as many strategic
objectives and targets as possible.
For many years, there was a mad scramble at quarter-end to see how
the sales forecast was shaping up. If the sales targets overachieved, additional
discretionary funds were released to the corporate marketing department to
spend at the end of the quarter for more print and web ad placements. This
last-minute buying meant that ads were more expensive due to lack of lead
time and pricing negotiation.
With a new EPM process in place, the company had more visibility into
the sales, revenue, and expense forecast—including an assessment of forecast
accuracy and probability—that allowed marketing to get more lead time on
end-of-quarter investments. ROMI went up and advertising volume went
up, meaning overall costs were reduced and the brand was strengthened (as
Table 7.3
EPM Components by Business Impact Area and Decision
Revenue
Growth
Operating
Margin
Cash
Cycle
Asset
Utilization
EPM Tool/
Process
GATHER
P&L variance
reporting
Customer/
product
proﬁtability
dashboard
DSO, DPO,
DII
Dashboard
Downtime
dashboards
and
reporting
Management
reporting
Statutory
reporting
dashboard
UNDER-
STAND
Sales by
channel
trends
Same store
sales
Brand
proﬁtability
Inventory
turns
3PL efﬁciency
(on-time
delivery)
Financial and
operational
analytics
scorecard
DEBATE
Store
expansion
rate models
Headcount
scenarios
Receivable
collection
accelera-
tion
models
Capacity
planning
Financial and
0perational
modeling
Predictive
analytics
COMMIT
Weekly sales
forecast
Annual
operating
plan
Collections
forecasting
CAPEX
planning
Budgeting,
planning and
forecasting

Table 7.4
EPM Initiatives by Industry by Management Process
Industry
Banking
Insurance
Health care
Retail
Energy
High Tech
GATHER
Retail branch
proﬁtability
reporting
Noninterest
income by product
and segment
Compliance and
disclosure (Basel II)
Claims
management
reporting
Claims executive
dashboard
Proﬁtability
reporting
Compliance
scorecard
Departmental P&L
Fraud and abuse
reporting
Category
management
Store performance
reporting
Loss/shrink
alerting
Site operations
dashboard
Variance reports
and alerts
Site and shift
rankings
Employee skill
reporting
Product P&L
Customer
satisfaction
dashboard
UNDERSTAND
Product
proﬁtability
analysis
Pricing
behavior/hyper-
segmentation
Credit risk analysis
Straight-through
processing analysis
Claims
procurement
analysis
Claim value chain
analysis
Accounts
receivable analysis
Patient lifecycle
analysis
Diagnosis Related
Group (DRG)
analysis
Customer
segmentation
Item proﬁtability
Stock-out analysis
Campaign and
loyalty analysis
Cost applicable to
sales analysis
Global
procurement
trends
Efﬁciency analysis
Sales cycle time
analysis
Employee turnover
trends
Marketing
campaign
effectiveness
DEBATE
Household pricing
alternatives
M&A Models
Customer
segmentation
scenarios
Risk scenarios
Underwriting
models
Distribution
efﬁciency models
Pricing alternatives
Preventative care
modeling
M&A models
Pricing alternatives
New store
openings
Promotion models
Acquisition model
Debt modeling
Price (in and out)
modeling
Product/price mix
model
M&A models
Debt modeling
COMMIT
Channel forecast
Event campaign
planning
Relationship
forecast
Line of business
P&L Forecast
Channel planning
Agent Workforce
planning
Reimbursement
planning
Capital
expenditure
planning
Workforce
planning
Price and
promotion
planning
Merchandise
planning
Workforce
planning
Production
forecast
Capacity planning
Capital expense
planning
Revenue and
expense forecast
by product
Workforce
planning
Channel forecast
127

128
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
measured by unaided awareness)—two of the key strategic objectives for
the company.
Summary
Table 7.3 takes a quick look at how EPM initiatives can be aligned to each
stage of the management cycle, and each area of strategic objectives and
outcomes.
There is almost no limit on the number of EPM initiatives that can
be designed and developed which can have a positive impact on the busi-
ness. Table 7.4 shows some industry-speciﬁc EPM initiatives organized by
management decision step.
By the time you get to the end of Chapter 9, you should see how you’ll be
able to identify the top EPM initiatives in your organization that help build
out your EPM roadmap.
Notes
1. Adapted from Barry Trailer and Jim Dickie, ‘‘Understanding What Your Sales Manager Is
Up Against,’’ Harvard Business Review, July–August 2006.
2. This section, ‘‘Supply Chain Performance Management,’’ originally appeared in Supply
Chain Executive Magazine, December 2008. Ron Dimon and Simon Tucker, Reprinted with
permission.

C H A P T E R 8
Strategy: Aligned to
the Right Outcomes
However beautiful the strategy, you should occasionally look at the
results.
—WINSTON CHURCHILL
S
o far we’ve covered how the management operating system helps
validate organizational strategy by testing the objectives through a
series of ﬁnancial and operational what-if models (Chapter 5), which
are fed by facts uncovered from actual and variance data (Chapter 4). More
often than not, that turns out to be a ‘‘snapshot’’ or health-check type of
exercise, done once during the corporate strategic planning cycle, or done
quarterly to true-up the objectives. However, EPM helps make this strategy
alignment an ongoing process. It can help organizations be more ﬂexible and
responsive in strategy setting, strategy execution, and the overall business
model. This chapter will explore the strategy components of the management
operating system and exactly how EPM helps align the entire organization to
the ‘‘right’’ outcomes.
The Language of Strategy
It’s useful to take a minute and differentiate some of the components that
make up a company strategy:
■Mission. The purpose of the organization
■Vision. An aspirational, conceptual future state of the organization
■Values. Overall organizational priorities that are aligned with the
mission and vision
■Goals. Measurable end results that support the mission and vision and
are compatible with the values. Goals are usually longer term, and have
a speciﬁc time-frame, for example ‘‘three to ﬁve years.’’
129
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

130
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
■Objectives. Speciﬁc activities with outcomes that support the goals
(usually shorter term).
■Corporate Strategy. According to Michael Porter, corporate strategy
is about competitive differentiation: deliberately choosing a different
set of activities to deliver a unique mix of value.1 Your deﬁnition of
strategy may differ, and that’s okay, so long as your senior management
team agrees on that deﬁnition. For further reading on the subject, I
highly recommend Strategy Safari: A Guided Tour Through the Wilds of
Strategic Management by Henry Mintzberg et al.
■Marketing Strategy. How and when marketing resources, including
pricing, products, promotion, and place (the ‘‘4 P’s’’), will be deployed
in support of the overall corporate strategy.
■Sales Strategy. The approach to account management, lead identiﬁ-
cation, qualiﬁcation, and conversion to support the organization’s sales
quotas or targets.
And so on through each business function—how they will approach
supporting the company strategic objectives that they own, contribute directly
to, or can inﬂuence.
While each functional leader, CMO, CIO, CFO, and so on, will deﬁne
their functional strategy, they have to align with the overall company strategy,
or, better yet, be integrated into one holistic organizational strategy. In
this chapter, we’ll look at how this is done in the management operating
system and how EPM supports the development and alignment of the holistic
strategy.
Functional Value Maps
The traditional approach to holistic strategy description is through Strategy
Maps popularized by Kaplan & Norton.2 These are organized by the four
perspectives of the Balanced Scorecard:
1. Financial
2. Customer
3. Internal processes
4. Learning and growth
Figure 8.1 is a good example of a strategy map showing loose connections
among each of the perspectives all the way up to long-term shareholder value
and somewhat divided into a two strategies: productivity (left-hand side) and
growth (right-hand side).

STRATEGY: ALIGNED TO THE RIGHT OUTCOMES
131
Figure 8.1
Strategy Map for Manufacturing Business
Functional value maps take the four (or more) balanced perspectives
and map them into the organization structure of the business. This gives
more clarity around accountability, ownership, and consumption. It makes a
stronger case for removing information silos in an organization and promoting
sharing and collaboration. It also shows potential drill-paths for root-cause
analytics. Finally, it’s a way to prioritize drivers for driver-based planning and
metrics for reporting and analytics.
Functional value maps place the drivers of value in each business function
according to which layer of the business owns the results, using a matrix
like Table 2.1 from Chapter 2 and Figure 4.2 from Chapter 4, and then
interconnects them to show cause-and-effect relationships. For example,
using portions of the strategy map in Figure 8.1, a functional value map would
look like Figure 8.2.
Now you can see how the strategic objectives are aligned to the key
value drivers and among those you see which naturally prioritize based on
the number of connections in and out. For example, notice the impact of
customer acquisition at the intersection of Operations and Sales. This is

132
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 8.2
Functional Value Map based on the Strategy Map in Figure 8.1
where sales management is accountable for net-new clients and is distinct
from customer acquisition at the tactical layer of marketing, which is where
lead generation happens. So many drivers impact customer acquisition in
sales, such as price, quality, functionality, leads, and so on, and it directly
impacts sales growth—so it is a highly prioritized driver of value in the
organization, yet it is practically buried in the strategy map. Having more
visibility and accountability of customer acquisition rates and volumes would
certainly be aligning the right outcomes to strategy. Of course prioritization
is also governed by the materiality and volatility of the value driver, as
mentioned in Chapter 2 in the Impact section. A high-impact approach to
connecting EPM initiatives to strategic objectives is to run each high-priority
value driver through the management operating system. This will be further
explored in Chapter 9, in the Your EPM Roadmap section.
Optics: Line of Sight
Business optics is the practice of being able to see what matters in the
business. It means visually digesting information in a way that helps guide
you to new insights and helps you make better business decisions. Optics can
include reports, scorecards, dashboards, alerts, and other data visualization

STRATEGY: ALIGNED TO THE RIGHT OUTCOMES
133
tools. Ideally, optics are delivered to you in a way that ﬁts your role in the
organization. They should be:
■The right metrics
■At the right level of detail: from summarized to very granular
■At the right time: real-time, daily, monthly, etc.
■At the right periodicity: for example, daily sales delivered weekly
■Versus the right target: variance to plan, budget, forecast, benchmark,
or other relevant target
■Having the right drill path: when you click on it, it takes you to the
most relevant drivers and root-causes
■Having other qualiﬁers you may need to know: risk weighting, data-
quality grade, ‘‘freshness date,’’ and so on
Usually these qualities of data are packaged to appeal to certain roles in
the organization. For example, an executive dashboard gets the ‘‘big button’’
look-and-feel with highly summarized, color-coded current results versus
plan or versus prior period (‘‘red is bad, green is good’’) and a large arrow
showing trending (‘‘up is good, down is bad’’). A ﬁnance analyst gets a blank
grid where she drags the dimensions to be analyzed into rows and columns
and ‘‘slices and dices’’ interactively until a result, insight, or root cause is
revealed. You want people at all levels of the organization to be able to see
how what they are working on contributes to overall success. So optics for an
accounts receivable clerk would show how aged receivables impacts days sales
outstanding which impacts working capital and free cash ﬂow.
While optics are relevant for your role in the organization, you may want
to share your insight with a colleague or group of people to show them what
you’ve discovered, persuade them to your point of view, justify a decision, or
enroll them into an idea. Ideally, you want what you see to be easily seen by
others and easily recreated in the future. Saving and sharing a particular view
on data is important; however it’s just as important to be able to convey the
context of that view along with the view.
As with any business system or process, there are traps to be avoided,
including:
■Skewed or misleading views: perhaps only sales from the last week of
the quarter are used to show sales-rep productivity, while showing the
entire quarter gives a different picture
■Nonsense views: showing accounts receivable balances compared to
travel and entertainment expenses may not yield any insights
■Distracting views: monitoring the number of Web hits may not be the
best use of time for a product development manager

134
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 8.3
Balanced Scorecard System.
Courtesy Oracle Corp.
■Measuring the wrong things: monitoring metrics simply because the
data is available (conversely not monitoring the right metrics because
the data is not available), monitoring metrics because that’s the way
you’ve always done it, or not questioning what you measure
Balanced scorecards are a good example of management-level optics.
Figure 8.3 shows a typical Balanced Scorecard screenshot showing traceability
from drivers at different levels (perspectives) to the overall goals, one of which
is Improve Financial Results in this case.
Metrics Equal Focus
Why do you need more focus? Because of change. As the market, the economy,
technology, our customers, and our competitors all change, so must you. We
can look at all the different areas of change:
■Speed. Things are getting faster, like business cycles, time to market,
and logistics.
■Volume. In some areas more is being demanded and produced, and in
other areas, less.

STRATEGY: ALIGNED TO THE RIGHT OUTCOMES
135
■Resilience. We want to protect market share, customer loyalty, intel-
lectual property.
■Quality. As customers become smarter, and competition increases,
we have to make products better, train people more.
■Impact. More transparency is demanded, concerns for community
and the environment have become customer buying criteria.
■Cost. The ﬂatter world has given us cheaper labor, competition can
drive down price, and global shortages can erode margin.
‘‘EPM done right’’ means having a focus on the most important levers, or
value drivers, in your organization. It means paying attention to what matters.
Metrics are not only reporting objects, they are also the drivers of driver-
based planning—they have targets, owners; they are the levers of the business
that you pull in order to move the right performance needle.
There is still some debate as to the deﬁnitions of a measure, a metric, a key
performance driver (KPD), a key value driver (KVD), and a key performance
indicator (KPI). I generally go with the following: a metric is a type of
measure, usually reserved for business activities, and a KPI is more closely
tied to the strategy of the business and includes comparison to a target. And
to avoid the debate altogether, I generally talk about ‘‘what drives value.’’ In
that way, I don’t actually care if something is a measure, metric, KPI, lever,
or so on—I care that that thing helps drive value in the business. So in a
‘‘metrics’’ discovery session with business users, I will record value-drivers
and later, when designing a solution with IT professionals, I’ll get into the
metrics, measures, and KPIs.
Metrics can be:
■Financial/operational/strategic
■Internal/external
■Tangible/intangible
■Short term/long term
■Leading/lagging (although a case can usually be made for many metrics
to be both)
As discussed throughout this book, their relative importance is guided by:
■Materiality
■Volatility
■Proximity to strategic objectives
■Alignment through the value chain to the strategic objective
■Number of connections to other value drivers
■‘‘Popularity’’—meaning number of times it’s used, mentioned,
asked for

136
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
It’s also useful to keep in mind that there are ‘‘meat and potatoes’’ metrics
—a steady diet that gives you a basis for year-over-year comparison and trends.
These you try to keep standard so you can compare apples to apples—unless
the business changes dramatically and makes the metric irrelevant. And then
there are the ‘‘soup du jour’’ metric—a series of changing yet important
metrics that help bring attention and focus to issues and initiatives of the day
(or the month or quarter). One meat and potatoes metric that rarely goes
away—although how it gets calculated may change—is proﬁtability.
Proﬁtability
Almost every commercial organization I have served has had some element
of proﬁtability as part of their strategic objectives. Some simply declare
‘‘proﬁtable revenue growth’’ as their objective; others might be more speciﬁc
and call out components of overall proﬁtability, including:
■Customer proﬁtability (this can be named customer, customer industry,
or customer type)
■Product proﬁtability
■Channel proﬁtability
■Market proﬁtability (this can be geographic or demographic)
■Seasonal proﬁtability
Yet it is still a challenge to many organizations to accurately measure
proﬁtability. Part of the problem has been identifying and applying the best
cost allocation methodology as discussed in Chapter 3, in the Management
and Statutory Reporting section. But once you have solved that concern
and begin to track proﬁtability by the dimensions that make sense for your
business, then what? What actions would you be willing to take when you
know what your proﬁtability is?
The process of calculating and exposing proﬁtability should connect
directly to your strategic objectives. It should also help you articulate your
business model, tolerances, and standard operating procedures around proﬁt.
Table 8.1 shows some example strategic decisions that have been made
once true proﬁtability has been included in the management operating system.
EPM is the perfect environment for managing proﬁtability: you take
proﬁtability through the entire management operating system and debate it:
What’s a possible stretch goal for overall proﬁtability? And what would the
working capital and headcount requirements be to achieve it? Once the best
scenario is selected, the modeled components generate the expense plan, rev-
enue plan, headcount plan, and capital expenditure (CAPEX) plans—where
all levels of the organization are held accountable to their commitments. As

STRATEGY: ALIGNED TO THE RIGHT OUTCOMES
137
Table 8.1
Actions That Can Impact Proﬁtability
Proﬁtability Component
Strategy Impact
Customer proﬁtability
Fire your most unproﬁtable customers
Start tracking customer lifetime value, offer new incentives
Product proﬁtability
Declare deliberate loss-leaders, develop new bundles
Revise pricing strategy
Channel proﬁtability
Offer free training to the channel
Segment marketing promotions differently (e.g., let the
indirect channel own small/medium size enterprises where
the cost of sales does not support the price point)
Market proﬁtability
Invest in new markets
Exit unproﬁtable mature markets
Seasonal proﬁtability
Tune stafﬁng plans
Tune working capital and inventory plans
you execute the plans you keep your eye on all dimensions of proﬁtability and
get alerted to customers, products, channels, markets, and weeks that miss
the target or the proﬁtability tolerance. Then you drill into the root cause to
understand the miss and act accordingly: redeploy resources, revise targets,
and revisit assumptions and constraints. Depending on the impact of the miss,
you go back to the debate, see what’s changed, and adapt to new realities and
declare what’s next. Once you start seeing repeating proﬁtability patterns,
you have a new debate—one that could lead you to alter your strategy.
Strategic Flexibility
One of the keys to growth is maintaining strategic ﬂexibility: not being rigidly
tied to goals that were set in one set of circumstances, using one set of
assumptions, when those circumstances have changed. According to William
Duggan in his book Strategic Intuition, instead of setting goals ﬁrst, you are
well advised to watch for large-payoff/low-cost opportunities ﬁrst and then
set goals.3 In an EPM world, you would have those opportunity models ready
at hand and ready to turn into operating and ﬁnancial execution plans.
One way to use the EPM model to accomplish this is with a rigorous
debate in the business about future scenarios. This includes capturing ﬁnancial
and operational models based on possible futures. For example, having a
complete set of ﬁnancial statement models (including cash ﬂow) that includes
a variety of assumptions about the following drivers:
■Competitive landscape (a ‘‘Coke/Pepsi’’ scenario could show what
would happen if your two biggest competitors merged, market by
market).

138
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
■Customer retention (the ‘‘Mattel’’ scenario could show what the P&L
would look like if there was a massive product recall in your industry).
■Economic shift (your ‘‘Merrill Lynch’’ scenario would show what
would happen to cost of capital and proﬁtability should there be a
rapid downturn in the credit markets).
■Rapid new product innovation (your ‘‘Apple’’ scenario would show
predicted revenue and margin growth should your new product get to
market faster and enjoy accelerated brand recognition).
Just going through the process of creating these models—in a holistic
enterprise way, not just by an analyst in ﬁnance—will create some useful
debate in the business on where resources are best deployed and which model
yields the best returns. Hatch and Zweig published a paper in 2001 that is still
relevant today.4
They say that the ability to effect strategic change is a result of:
1. Entertaining multiple options
2. Improving competitive intelligence
3. Improving the customer experience
4. Improving the employee experience
5. Maintaining the appropriate level of overhead
6. Flexible systems and processes
7. Few decision-makers at the top
Each of these levers can be modeled, planned-for, reported on,
and analyzed in an EPM framework. Employees at all levels can share and
collaborate on their creation, have visibility into results and variance, and
mine for new insights and opportunities.
Closing the Gap
Let’s go back to the management cycle and take a look at how strategy
relates to the Debate and Understand processes. In Figure 8.4, we see a
two-way arrow from Strategy to Debate, and a two-way arrow from Strategy
to Understand.
The arrow from Strategy into Debate tells us that the strategic objectives
are what lead the debate. If the objective is 5% year-over-year revenue growth,
the debate includes a model of sales, customers, headcount, new products,
economic indicators, and so on. If your model tells us it’s not possible to
achieve that level of growth knowing what you know, the arrow points back
to strategy: You may have to revise your objectives—or at least your targets.

STRATEGY: ALIGNED TO THE RIGHT OUTCOMES
139
Figure 8.4
Strategy in the
Management Operating System
Conversely, if your model tells you that 7% is not only possible, but quite
probable, then you update your strategy accordingly.
The arrow from Strategy to Understand tells us that when we are
formulating or revising our strategy, we want to go back into an analysis of
the facts to support our direction and objectives. For example, let’s look at
a trend of sales, costs, average selling price, volume, market size, and so on,
and look for patterns that support our strategy. Likewise, while doing our
analyses to understand the business, we may have a unique opportunity to
alter our strategy to take advantage of changing circumstances (e.g., we may
notice a sustained spike in sales of a particular product line to a particular
demographic, and revise our strategy to focus on that demographic).
The Debate and Understand EPM processes are adjacent to Strategy for
a reason: They are there to help organizations be more ﬂexible in direction
and approach and base strategy on what’s actually happening and on what’s
possible given the facts.
Summary
What if strategy was everyone’s business? Instead of being handed down
from on-high, what-if strategy formulation and execution were collaborative,
fact-based processes that everyone had visibility to and could possibly make

140
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
a contribution to? The management operating system addresses the gap
between strategy and sustainable execution by asking ‘‘what’s possible’’ or
‘‘what’s next’’ and ‘‘why are we getting the results we’re getting?’’ By question-
ing, modeling, and testing our assumptions, constraints, and drivers of value,
we can continuously test our strategy collaboratively and transparently—and
continuously get better at the strategy process itself. One of the keys is
having visibility into what drives strategy, especially proﬁtability. And then,
once seen, determining what to do about it and assigning responsibility and
accountability to the results.
Notes
1. Michael Porter, Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors, Free
Press, 1998.
2. Robert Kaplan and David Norton, Strategy Maps: Converting Intangible Assets into Tangible
Outcomes, Harvard Business Review Press, 2004.
3. William Duggan, Strategic Intuition: The Creative Spark in Human Achievement, Columbia
University Press, 2007.
4. Jim Hatch and Jeffrey Zweig, March/April 2001, ‘‘Strategic Flexibility—The Key to Growth,’’
www.iveybusinessjournal.com/topics/strategy/strategic-ﬂexibility-the-key-to-growth#.
UKVOhYUmRt4, retrieved November 16, 2012.

C H A P T E R 9
Bringing It All
Together
Organizations that have implemented Performance Management
more broadly are nearly four times more likely to be among the most
competitive organizations in their industry.
—BRIAN MCDONOUGH
Research Manager, Analytics and Data Warehousing Software, IDC,
Financial Performance and Strategy Management Survey
of Buyer Priorities for 2011, Doc #226261, Dec. 2010
E
PM done right is really about bringing together all those EPM-like com-
ponents that you probably already do in silos, in part, in spreadsheets,
or are hoping to do if you had the time. It’s about bringing together:
■Modeling, planning, reporting, and analytics
■Finance and Operations
■Strategy and execution
■Data, master data, and information
■Rules and deﬁnitions
■The past, the present, and the future
■Decisions, actions, and results
The culmination of these components, working together, is the EPM
management operating system cycle and has been the framework for this
book. The cycle is shown in its entirety in Figure 9.1.
Just like EPM is bringing together all those components of the manage-
ment operating system, Chapter 9 is about bringing together the concepts
and practices of EPM done right.
141
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

142
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
What do we want to
happen? 
How will it happen (who,
what, by when?)
Annual Plan
Forecast
Workforce Plan
CAPEX Plan
Strat Plan
What-If
Scenarios
P&L, Balance Sheet,
Cash Flow
Constraints
Drivers + Targets
Commit
Debate
Common Rules
Common Definitions
Common Hierarchies
Automated Tie-Out
Variance
Reforecast
Predictive
Fact-based
Understand
Trending
Variance
Profitability
Root-Cause
Management
Consolidation
Gather
Drill Down, Slice/Dice 
Self-Serve, Metrics
Statutory 
Consolidation,
Flash 
What happened?
Why did we get
what we got? 
Figure 9.1
The EPM Management Operating System
Alignment
The Random House Unabridged Dictionary1 deﬁnes alignment as ‘‘a state of
agreement or cooperation among persons, groups, etc., with a common cause
or viewpoint.’’ It’s easy to see how EPM enables this ‘‘state.’’ Ideally, EPM
provides an environment of cooperation (for purposes of modeling, planning,
and reporting and analysis), which supports agreement (one version of the
truth) among the various persons and groups within the organization. And it
helps those users take action in pursuit of their ‘‘common cause’’: achieving
performance targets, executing company strategy, and delivering value to
stakeholders.
But EPM doesn’t just enable alignment; it also demands it. Alignment is
one ingredient that’s critical to success if you want to use EPM to help you
execute on your strategy, survive these difﬁcult times, and be fully prepared
to emerge in a stronger position when the economy recovers. You can
have the most advanced technical infrastructure, the latest business process
management (BPM) tools, pristine data, executive sponsorship, and well-
deﬁned EPM processes, but unless these are ﬁnancially and operationally
aligned—across functions and through all layers of the business—with your

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
143
organizational ecosystem and your overarching strategy, you won’t achieve
the best return on your EPM investment.
Business/IT Alignment
Harvard Business Review advocates that business and IT shouldn’t just be
aligned, they should be ‘‘forged together.’’2 One way the authors say you
can do this is by having the CIO report directly to the CEO or COO, not
the CFO. While we have seen this reporting structure in many of our client
organizations, it does not automatically mean that IT and the business are
forged together, or even aligned for that matter.
Certainly the business analyst (BA) role has done much for crossing
the chasm, in both directions, for IT and the business. And where we
see the most successful ﬁnancial systems implementations are where the
ﬁnance/information systems (IS) role acts as the BA. But this is still not a
guarantee for a meeting of the minds between business and IT.
I propose ﬁve ‘‘better’’ practices for closer IT/business alignment based
on my client engagements over the last 30 years.
1. Start with corporate strategy and objectives. It sounds all well and
good, but many IT organizations miss this. We must directly correlate
any and all IT initiatives with the overall corporate strategy. IT should
be able to show a ‘‘drill path’’ from strategy, through objectives, into
initiatives and on to metrics and data. For example, let’s say your
company objective is 15% year-over-year proﬁtable revenue growth.
This is a meaty one with several parts:
■
Revenue growth (sell more stuff)
■
Proﬁtable revenue growth (sell more stuff and make money doing it)
■
Continuous proﬁtable revenue growth (do the same year-over-year)
So how does one or more (hopefully many) IT initiatives help
promote selling, product expansion, reducing cost of goods, and
supporting a pipeline of innovation to feed future years? If you show
multiple correlations from many systems to many strategic objectives,
you are more aligned.
2. Take a holistic view. Usually, one part of the business, a function
such as Marketing, Operations, or HR, comes to IT with a business
problem to solve. For example, Sales would ask, ‘‘We need more
visibility into customer proﬁtability to ﬁnd out if any customers are
costing us money.’’ It is IT’s job to take the enterprise-wide view of
this problem. Who else needs to see this information (Customer Sup-
port, Product Development, Marketing)? How will this information
be made ‘‘actionable’’ so we can watch trends over time, adjust for

144
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
seasonality, compare with forecasts, and eventually ﬁre our unprof-
itable customers? When Sales approaches IT, IT takes the request as
an enterprise request, not a Sales request.
3. Highlight the requirements gap. IT organizations usually do a very
good job of gathering user requirements, data models, source system
availability, and so on. These are bottom-up requirements. Many times
we see a lack of insight into top-down requirements: What are the line-
of-business owners and functional executives looking for? Business/IT
alignment happens when the BA looks into the gap between bottom-
up and top-down. We did a large enterprise-wide ﬁnancial system
implementation for a Fortune 500 holding company—it was grueling,
but in the end it worked according to spec and added tremendous value
to the company (it had a net positive impact on earnings per share
[EPS]). When we went to the CFO to tell him we were in production,
he wanted to know where his spend-analysis was. This was never in
the spec. Big gap, low alignment.
4. Have a long-term roadmap into which short-term initiatives
ﬁt. Designing, building, and rolling out systems (and processes for
that matter), without a long-term IT roadmap is a recipe for more
information silos, more redundant systems, more extract, transform,
load (ETL) complexity, and so on. The roadmap should make some
simple distinctions, such as the layers of information-value in the
organization, for example (top-down):
■Knowledge
■Actionable information
■Value-added information (and business rules)
■Consolidated, summarized, hierarchical master data
■Transformed data
■Operational data (or data warehouse)
■Transactional data
It should also layer applications in the overall system architecture,
such as:
■Information delivery/Front-end apps
■Value-added apps
■Information gathering/Operational apps
■Transactional apps/Real-time apps
The management operating system described in this book is a
guiding business process framework onto which you can hang your IT
roadmap and portfolio of initiatives.
5. Accountability.
The ﬁnal ‘‘better’’ practice I’ll share has to do
with accountability. This is the idea of making sure all levels and all
functions of the business are working on their part of executing the

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
145
corporate strategy. How do I know, as an accounts receivable (A/R)
clerk for example, how what I am doing impacts proﬁtable revenue
growth? IT systems should be tailored for the appropriate intersection
of layer and function (tactical ﬁnance in this case) in an organization
and should come with visibility and insight into my contribution.
Without that (and a public measurement system), there will be low or
no enterprise accountability.
How do you prioritize your IT portfolio of initiatives in this economy?
If you’re like most enterprises, you have a backlog of IT initiatives lined
up on the heels of your work in progress (WIP). You may also have some
new pressure to take a harder look at costs and potentially trim or reprioritize
your WIP and your backlog.
So how do you decide what stays and what gets put on hold (or cancelled)?
And for what stays, how do you reorder your efforts to make sure IT is
delivering the best return on investment?
As I mention a bit further on in this chapter, return on investment (ROI)
(including total cost of ownership [TCO]) analysis is a good acid test for
IT projects, but it’s not the only ingredient nor the primary consideration
for green-lighting or keeping an initiative—especially a strategic systems
initiative (one that will give you a competitive advantage in the market).
Here are some of those other ingredients that you should use:
1. Show how the initiative helps drive strategic objectives. Drive is
the operative word here. Many systems will help you measure strategic
objectives—Balanced Scorecards for instance—but they may not pass
the ‘‘so what’’ test. You have to not only measure the objective, but
also analyze why the measurement came out the way it did (cause and
effect) and update your models and scenarios with that new learning
and ﬂow that into your revised or rolling forecasts, ultimately helping
managers make a decision and take some action that will move you
closer to the objective.
2. Show the materiality of the initiative. Priority should be given to
those initiatives that have the most material impact on the business.
You could be working on a reporting rationalization and consolidation
initiative that would save the company 5% of selling, general, and
administrative (SG&A) expense—great stuff! But if you also had an
initiative on deck to show product, customer, and channel proﬁtability
that would allow sales and marketing managers to sell more proﬁtable
products and services as well as cross-sell and up-sell that would
increase revenue growth by 5%, which would have a higher priority?
(This is a trick question, by the way—the CFO will have you do both!
Hopefully this will displace projects that aren’t as material).

146
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
3. Show how the initiative improves visibility into the business and
collaboration across business functions. Among other things, orga-
nizational effectiveness is grounded in fact-based decisions, account-
ability for those decisions (and results), and every person having line of
site that shows how what they are working on impacts the bottom-line.
Breaking down functional silos is key to improving collaboration and
sharing of information—if your initiative can improve visibility and
collaboration, it will probably lead to number 1 and number 2.
Finally, looking at the management operation system in Figure 9.1
I have noticed that ‘‘the business’’ (operations, sales and marketing,
production) generally starts from the left side, from strategic objectives
into the Debate and Understand areas, IT starts from the right side
(tactical execution, transactional systems) into Gather, and Finance
usually lives in the middle (it ‘‘owns’’ the numbers) and the Commit
areas. So the management operating system cycle is a good way to
bring together all parties in an organization to agree on improving
performance.
Strategy/Operations/Tactical Alignment
How do you know whether people at all levels of the organization are working
in unison towards strategic objectives? And how do they know if they are on
track? The need for a clear drill path from day-to-day activities and outcomes
to strategy is a key tenet in enterprise accountability. If you’re an A/R clerk
and you can easily see the impact of days sales outstanding (DSO) on corporate
cash ﬂow or on investors’ valuation of the company, you are more likely to
want to improve that measure. And if company leaders want to drive more of
that behavior, they can connect bonuses to job-speciﬁc measures and targets.
An EPM scorecard or dashboard is the perfect way to monitor alignment
up and down the organization. The built-in ability of EPM systems to work
with a variety of hierarchies helps you to see how the business rolls up from
different perspectives: by entity, by geography, by product line, or by chart of
accounts. From the bottom up, our A/R clerk gets to see the value of his or
her contribution. From the top down, executives get to see the most material
contributors to, and detractors from, results.
Amazingly, many companies don’t know which measures truly drive value
in the business. They can’t answer the simple question: What are the key
drivers (key performance indicators [KPIs], metrics, etc.) that have the biggest
material impact on strategic objectives?
For example, we once worked with a high-tech client in Silicon Val-
ley. We interviewed all of the top executives and senior leaders in this
4,000-employee organization to determine the most important drivers of

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
147
value. We talked to the CEO, the COO, the executive vice president of sales,
the vice president of HR, and even the chairman of the board. We expected
that the consensus would identify such measures as proﬁtable and sustainable
revenue growth, high operating margins, or customer satisfaction.
But it turned out that the primary driver of value was employee skills.
Employees with advanced degrees, professional certiﬁcations, and industry
experience were the key generator of value for this organization. They kept
the customers happy, they developed superior products, and they captured
revenue.
Yet this company didn’t have a single measure around employee skills.
Management didn’t capture that information, or even plan for it in the budget.
Recognizing this anomaly was an enlightening experience for the com-
pany’s leadership. If they wanted to put their money where their mouth
was—and put some meaning behind statements like ‘‘people are our most
important asset’’—they would have to create measures for employee skills
and build them into their models, forecasts, and management reporting and
analysis processes and systems.
Doing so would not mean that they were giving HR too much say in the
strategic planning process. After all, every function—including Operations,
Marketing, Sales, and Development, and in the operating units as well as
at corporate headquarters—clearly had a stake in actualizing the ‘‘people as
assets’’ philosophy. Measuring and improving employee skills was vital to
generating customer and stakeholder value.
And the initiative would need to be coordinated and companywide.
As Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton note in their book Alignment,
if a company wants to capture economies of scale and scope, ‘‘corporate
headquarters needs a tool to articulate a theory for how to operate the
multiple units within the corporate structure to create value beyond what the
individual units could achieve on their own.’’3
Financial/Operational Alignment
Senior management creates targets based on ﬁnancial measures—let’s say,
10% year-over-year revenue growth. When these targets are delivered to the
operations side of the business, they are quickly translated into operational
targets (so many additional units at a certain price). The farther down into
Operations you go, the more granular the drivers get; for example, more
volume might mean more productivity, more work shifts, or more headcount.
Once the operational results are in, managers have to translate them back
into ﬁnancial terms to communicate them to senior management. When this
is done right, you can easily see the cause-and-effect relationship between
operational drivers and ﬁnancial results.

148
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Most ﬁrst-generation EPM initiatives do a good job of this translation in
areas such as driver-based planning and operational business intelligence. But
there’s another area that I think is ripe for exploitation in the next generation
of EPM initiatives: connecting the budgeting, planning and forecasting
processes back to the ﬁnancial and operational models that link strategy to
plans. For example, when senior managers debate which objectives and targets
are achievable, they should be able to record their assumptions, constraints,
and drivers in an EPM tool with a governance (review and approval) process.
The agreed-upon operational model, with its ﬁnancial targets, then forms
the basis of the annual operating plan and subsequent budgets. As plans
and forecasts bubble up from the lower levels of the organization, new
assumptions, constraints, and drivers will arise (new regional competitors may
change the business outlook, for instance.) These can be fed back into the
corporate operational model so that the next cycle is closely aligned with
reality. As one of my clients put it, ‘‘Numbers drive dollars and dollars drive
numbers.’’
Cross-Functional Alignment
Even though every function has a stake in a company’s outcomes, many
organizations underperform because critical information is trapped in silos.
For example, if marketing launches a new promotion, sales needs to know
the projected impact on leads, which then (depending on the sales conversion
drivers) turns into sales and revenue. Manufacturing needs to know how
much volume to expect so that it can update production schedules and alert
suppliers that they may need to buy more raw materials. Finance needs to
release working capital and prepare to extend more customer credit. It’s not
hard to imagine the disaster that might unfold if the marketing effort scores
a big success, but the company can’t deliver.
So a business needs to be horizontally event driven; it needs to understand
how a course of action adopted by one function impacts other functions. This
is a balancing act. In the previous example, let’s say Finance declares that there
won’t be enough working capital available in the time needed for the sales
projected. What does the business do now? Most likely, sales and marketing
efforts will have to be scaled back to match capital availability.
EPM software supports horizontal alignment by giving the various corpo-
rate departments visibility into plans, actuals, and variances based on business
goals rather than business functions. In the example, rather than relying
on a marketing dashboard or a sales dashboard, the company might deploy
a campaign-to-cash dashboard that could be accessed by marketing, sales,
operations, and ﬁnance, all of which have a ‘‘common cause’’ and need to
establish a ‘‘state of agreement and cooperation’’ for the initiative. EPM is
the glue for that collaboration.

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
149
Internal/External Alignment
Many EPM-enabled businesses are tightly focused on alignment within their
own four walls, but the ongoing evolution of EPM is enabling companies to
extend modeling, planning, reporting, and analytics to the entire value chain.
For example, you can use EPM to give customers and suppliers insight into
your inventory and delivery times, and even your quality metrics. Alignment
with the external ecosystem helps your company understand exactly what’s
important to the people you do business with.
Consider including external users in your EPM plans, especially in
forecasting and business intelligence initiatives. We’re seeing more and more
activity and thought-leadership in this area. For example, Whole Foods
recently announced plans to enable its suppliers and vendors to view sales
data for their product lines through an EPM application. Many of our clients
are opting to include suppliers and customers in the scope of our foundational
requirements discovery method. As detailed in Chapter 7, a specialized area
of EPM called supplier performance management is starting to emerge. And
performance networks, which include all related parties in EPM, will be an
important part of the next level of performance management.
A Common Business Language
When you interconnect all of the management operating system processes,
you get ‘‘The Middle.’’ The middle is where you can create a common
business language through:
■Common data and metadata
■Common deﬁnitions, algorithms, and formulae
■Common hierarchies
■Common business rules
■Common security
By bringing together all of the components of EPM into one system,
as shown in Figure 9.2, you get to improve the quality and believability of
information coming out of transactional and analytical systems. You also get
better control in that you can audit where numbers came from, how and when
they were changed, and by whom. You could say that EPM governance lives
in this middle.
Without this common ground, you will continue to have difﬁculties
agreeing on the deﬁnitions of things instead of what to do about them. There
are many organizations that don’t have one deﬁnition of a customer, of sales,
or even what constitutes a full-time equivalent employee. Think of EPM as

150
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Figure 9.2
The Middle of the Management Operating System
the new ‘‘middle management’’—managing to the same focus, alignment,
and accountability throughout the organization.
Let’s look at Peter Drucker’s summary of what managers do:
■Set objectives
■Allocate and organize resources
■Measure and communicate results
■Develop and motivate people4
This really has not changed that much in the ﬁfty years since he wrote
it. And this is not a ‘‘to-do’’ list. These are the components of an ongoing,
closed-loop system that is designed to improve with every iteration. However,
what motivates people at work is changing. Taking liberties with Daniel Pink’s
assertion of what motivates us at work, EPM can directly support employee
engagement:5
1. Autonomy. EPM systems let you act more autonomously by making
fact-based decisions and having more transparent access to targets,
plans, and results.
2. Mastery. Mastering ‘‘the great game of business’’6 needs visibility
into how things work and accountability of my part of the whole.
3. Purpose. Everything comes back to mission, vision, value, and strat-
egy. EPM lets me see how what I do has an impact on what the
organization is up to.
Along these lines, some say that a results-only work environment
(ROWE) gives the same sense of autonomy, mastery, and purpose. Where
better to design, track, and deliver results than EPM?
EPM is a discipline that lets managers manage the business and helps all
members of an organization speak the same language and motivate themselves
to deliver performance.

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
151
Maturity Is in the Arrows
In August 2012, I helped organize an EPM user forum in Chicago where
Finance and IT attendees from 25 companies were represented. All of these
companies had implemented parts of the management operating system and
represent the complete spectrum of EPM maturity. I took the opportunity to
do a survey of EPM usage across the entire management operating system of
88 ﬁnance and IT EPM practitioners, and I organized the results into three
company sizes based on annual revenue (small = < $100 million, medium =
$100 million to $1 billion, large = > $1 billion).
The survey itself (see Figure 9.3) took a bit of time to explain, and I
had presented the management operating system to the group so the diagram
would mean something to them.
After a couple of questions and answers it got sorted out. The results were
very interesting to me. Here’s what the survey completed by one organization
(over $1 billion in annual revenue) in Figure 9.3 says:
■Modeling, 3/10. ‘‘We don’t do ‘what-if’ modeling very well and we
really need it.’’
5
9
5
9
2
9
8
10
6
6
3
5
6
4
6
10
2
9
7
9
5
5
1
7
1
9
2
10
EPM Cycle Survey: In each circle, enter a numerator (top number) of how well you do the thing—on a scale of 1 (don't do it) to 10
(do it very well), and enter a denominator (bottom number) of how much you need the thing—on a scale of 1 (don't  need it) to 10
(must have it). E.g., 1/10 means we don't do it and we really need it, 8/2 means we're pretty good at it, but don't need it that much.
Strat Plan
What-If
Scenarios
P&L, Balance Sheet,
Cash Flow
Modeling
Planning
Common Rules
Common Definitions
Common Hierarchies
Automated tie-out
Analytics
Reporting
Management
Consolidation
How well you
connect
management
reporting
with statutory
reporting
Statutory
Consolidation,
Flash
Trending
Variance
Profitability
Root-Cause
Fact-based
Reforecast
Predictive
Annual Plan
Forecast
Workforce
CAPEX
Drivers and Targets
Constraints
Self-Serve, metrics
Drill Down, slice/dice
3
10
Variance
Figure 9.3
Completed Management Operating System Survey, August 2012

152
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
■Drivers/targets, 5/9. ‘‘We’re not bad, we do some driver-based plan-
ning and we have targets for most things, and it’s a very important to
get better at this.’’
■Constraints, 1/9. ‘‘Learning from our planning and analysis pro-
cesses, and feeding-back constraints into our models would make a big
difference to the business and we don’t do it.’’
While no means scientiﬁc or complete, it is a good starting place to have
a debate among IT, Finance, and the business units of where to spend time,
money, and organizational resources in the short and long-terms.
You can divide the numerator by the denominator for a ratio of impor-
tance: how ‘‘good’’ we are today versus how much we need it. A ratio of 100%
means we’re spot on and we’ve matched our capabilities with our business
needs. A low ratio, say 10–20%, might mean we should debate doing this
sooner rather than later, and it’s probably a priority for our EPM roadmap.
Figure 9.4 shows the aggregate results for the 12 large organizations
(revenue > $1 billion) in the sample of 88 attendees (note that more than one
person from each organization could submit results, and company numbers
were then averaged). Blanks are respondents who chose not to answer.
The ﬁve EPM components that scored the lowest, and therefore have the
most potential for impact are:
1. Constraints
2. Drivers and targets
3. ‘‘The middle’’ (data relationship management [DRM], etc.)
4. Planning
5. Modeling
A few other interesting observations include the range of company
scores went from 49% (company 9) to 107.8% (company 8). Company 8 is
‘‘overachieving’’ in a number of areas including management and statutory
consolidation and reporting, self-serve reporting and working with the right
metrics, and using facts learned in analytics to feed what-if models. This means
they are putting more effort and resources into things that are either already
taken care of or don’t have as much impact on the business as other areas do.
Notice that company 8 is suffering in ‘‘the middle’’—and probably doesn’t
have common master data for its plans and all the areas it’s overachieving on.
I’m guessing that there’s a lot of manual effort in that organization spent on
managing metadata.
Company 5, which is the example I used for Figure 9.3, has a total
‘‘score’’ of 57.2%—there is certainly much room here for improvement on
EPM adoption.

153
Modeling
14.3%
30.0%
33.3%
80.0%
80.0%
80.0%
70.0%
60.0%
80.0%
100.0%
71.4%
30.0%
65.0%
65.0%
20.0%
75.0%
75.0%
125.0%
60.0%
50.0%
80.0%
80.0%
80.0%
60.0%
80.0%
40.0%
50.0%
30.0% 50.0%
80.0%
 70.0%
 40.0%
  57.1%
60.0%
 70.0%
70.0%
70.0%
 33.3%
 33.3%
 33.3%
22.2%
22.2%
80.0%
52.8%
 30.0%
60.0%
50.0%
80.0%
70.0%
70.0%
60.0%
85.7%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
70.0%
100.0%
100.0%
70.0%
81.0%
133.3%
66.7%
80.0%
37.5%
37.5%
100.0%
70.0%
100.0%
80.0%
114.3%
100.0%
77.8%
85.7%
57.1%
100.0%
82.7%
50.0%
40.0%
40.0%
33.3%
66.7%
66.7%
300.0%
100.0%
300.0%
10.0%
250.0%
33.3%
250.0%
66.7%
10.0%
107.8%
30.0%
37.5%
20.0%
40.0%
85.7%
50.0%
37.5%
100.0%
28.6%
37.5%
60.0%
44.4%
44.4%
70.0%
49.0%
100.0%
87.5%
100.0%
66.7%
100.0%
100.0%
133.3%
100.0%
75.0%
75.0%
100.0%
100.0%
116.7%
125.0%
70.0%
96.6%
90.0%
80.0%
80.0%
90.0%
70.0%
88.9%
75.0%
100.0%
77.8%
75.0%
70.0%
60.0%
50.0%
80.0%
77.6%
85.7%
20.0%
20.0%
70.0%
200.0%
77.8%
80.0%
75.0%
60.0%
60.0%
22.2%
25.0%
25.0%
25.0%
33.3%
58.6%
58.6%
55
2
1
4
12
12
10
10
14
14
11
11
15
15
7
9
8
13
13
6
3
51.0%
51.0%
57.8%
82.4%
75.9%
102.3%
79.8%
107.9%
60.7%
74.3%
67.2%
87.5%
60.3%
55.3%
55.6%
11.1%
55.6%
22.2%
80.0%
100.0%
 60.0%
 150.0%
  60.0%
 22.2%
77.8%
 100.0%
14.3%
20.0%
57.2%
11.1%
37.5%
80.0%
100.0%
80.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
20.0%
20.0%
83.3%
83.3%
80.0%
65.0%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
AVG
RANK
Drivers/Targets
Constraints
Planning
Reforecasting
Variance
Management Consolidation/Report
Connecting Management/Statutory
Consolidation/Report
Statutory Consolidation/Report
Drill Down, Slice/Dice
Self-Serve/Metrics
Analytics
Fact-Based into Models
Predictive Analytics
Company Score (AVG)
The Middle (Data Relationship
Management, Data Warehouse)
Figure 9.4
Aggregate Results of EPM Survey for Large Companies, August 2012

154
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Return on Investment and Total Cost of Ownership
There was a sidebar in an issue of CIO magazine addressing return on
investment (ROI) versus total cost of ownership (TCO).7
It said ROI quantiﬁes both cost and beneﬁt of projects and TCO includes
only costs. In their survey (of 225 technology managers), about 60% said ROI
inﬂuenced project justiﬁcation and 40% said TCO helped justify the decision.
I don’t think it’s one or the other: It’s both. The total cost of ownership
needs to be included in the cost side of the ROI equation. ROI is ‘‘simply’’ the
difference between how much something costs and how much cash it brings
in the door (adjusted over time). I say ‘‘simply’’ because the devil is in the
details of cost and cash in.
Here are some of the ‘‘total’’ cost ingredients to consider when developing
your ROI for EPM:
■Cost to build or acquire the system (hardware, software, network
costs)
■Don’t forget the ancillary costs to the above (e.g., a system may
require an add-on license for a relational database management system
[RDBMS] or middleware)
■Cost of capital
■Cost to operate, maintain, and upgrade
■Training costs (administrators and users)
■Cost to install and implement
■Cost to upgrade or troubleshoot and ﬁx any impact the system will
have on other existing systems
■Potential consulting cost to reengineer processes that are being auto-
mated
■Cost to temporarily back-ﬁll any headcount that has been ‘‘seconded’’
for this initiative
■Labor components of all of the above (procurement staff, IT staff,
new-hire administrators, trainers, consultants, and so on)
And here are some of the cash-in-the-door ingredients to consider:
■How many net new customers will we acquire by having the new
or updated system that we wouldn’t otherwise have, and what’s the
average lifetime revenue per customer?
■How many more products or services can we sell?
■Will the system let me improve my prices or price/volume mix?
■Will the system make my margin improve . . . measurably?
■Will the system increase the velocity of cash ﬂow?
■Can I improve cross-sell and up-sell opportunities?

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
155
And in a subtle twist: Look at less cash out the door:
■Will the system make me more efﬁcient and produce more with fewer
resources (measurable productivity)?
■Is there a direct headcount reduction associated with this initiative?
■Can I reduce inventory costs? Raw material costs? Transportation and
storage costs?
■Will it reduce my selling, general, and administrative expenses?
■Can it reduce debt and/or improve our cost of capital?
One approach to reduce the reliance on nebulous ROI is to create several
layers of IT investments each requiring a different approach to justiﬁcation.
For example:
1. Infrastructure and ‘‘lights on’’ operations. This is the ﬁxed cost
that it takes to run the business effectively and efﬁciently. It includes
the network infrastructure, servers and desktops, ofﬁce productivity
and messaging software and the staff to administer them. This is the
ﬁrst part of the annual IT budget. ROI may be a known quantity or
even a nonissue.
2. Tactical business systems. These are your General Ledger (G/L),
enterprise resource planning (ERP), time and expense—supply-chain
systems that generate, track, and reconcile day-to-day business trans-
actions. This is the second part of the annual IT budget, with some
allowance for unexpected CAPEX. ROI is case by case.
3. Strategic systems.
These are the systems that you may or may
not have on your roadmap, but get introduced or accelerated due
to competitive pressures. You are convinced that this system (or
upgrade) will give you a measurable advantage in the market and will
help you outperform your competitors. Sometimes, the ROI will not
be quantiﬁable.
ROI has always been a nebulous tool for justifying IT investments. While
an ROI case should be included in making a decision (around upgrading, new
systems, training decisions, etc.) it may not be the primary consideration.
Furthermore, EPM can help you get better at estimating and tracking
ROI of any project, just run it through the management operating system:
■Model the investment and expected returns, include all the costs in the
TCO list.
■Add targets to the right scenario.
■Turn the right scenario into a plan (perhaps include project planning
in your Commit cycle).

156
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
This is where many organizations have heartburn. Many projects are
sold on their potential reduction in headcount, but few are held accountable
to those reductions. Putting it in a plan and monitoring the variance holds
managers accountable. Some steps to do that include:
■Report on the current spend, gains, and milestones, communicate the
variance to all stakeholders.
■Analyze why you got the results you got and ﬁnd out if you’re on
course to meet the expectations you modeled or if you need to readjust
commitments (on both the cost and beneﬁt sides).
■Get better at doing ROI estimates, accountability, and assessment.
■Call it ‘‘Return on Investment Performance Management.’’
Standard Architecture
If we take all of the enabling technologies presented, add the most common IT
enablement or governance capabilities, and put them into one ‘‘Information
Architecture,’’ it might look like Figure 9.5.
Many of these components are available as cloud services today, more
so in the transactional platform area, but cloud services in the EPM space
are arriving quickly. Having agreement in IT on this construct allows for the
separation of responsibilities into various domains.
Your EPM Roadmap
There are a myriad ways to impact business results using EPM tools and
processes. To design the most impactful initiatives, start with company or
organizational unit strategic objectives, and then go through the steps outlined
and summarized in this checklist:
1. Choose a business impact area (revenue growth, operating margin,
cash cycle, asset utilization, etc.).
2. Select the business function(s) that are most accountable (Marketing,
Sales, Operations, R&D, Shared Services, Finance, etc.).
3. Identify one or more decision process steps that lack visibility (Gather,
Understand, Debate, Commit).
4. Select one or more roles within functions (strategic, operational,
tactical execution).
5. Identify the top value drivers/KPIs for that role.
6. Select an EPM process and/or tool that matches the decision process.

157
From Data to Information
End-User
Experience
Business Process Management and Collaboration
Applications
Platform
Enterprise Performance
Management Platform/Apps
“Manage the Organization”
Transactional Platform/Apps
“Run the Organization”
Messaging Platform/Apps
"Connect the Organization"
Enterprise
Planning
Score-
cards
Financial
and
Operational
Modeling
Close
and
Consoli-
dations
Analytics
Activity Based
Costing/ 
Activity Based
Management
Enterprise
Resource
Planning
Customer
Relationship
Management
Supply
Chain
Management
Sales
Force
Automation
Human
Resource
Information
System
Other/
Legacy
Data
Warehouse/
Mart
Master and
Meta-Data
Management
Content
Management
Relational Database
Management
Systems and
Online Analytical
Processing
Data
Management
Data
Integration
Data
Unstructured
Data
External
Data
Data Profiling and Quality
Extract, Transform, Load
Transaction
Sources
Legacy
Sources
Data
Stewardship
Project
Management
and
Planning
Portfolio
Management 
Email
Calen-
daring
Instant
messaging,
Voice-over
IP, etc
Competency
Centers
IT
Governance
Enterprise
Architecture
Business
Alignment
Data
Security
Physical
Security
Application
Security
Information Technology Enablement
End-
User
Security
Dashboard
Portal
Interactive
Query and
Reporting
Operational
Reporting
Statutory
Reporting
Data Mining
and
Visualization
Office
Integration
Web Forms
Alerts
Data Entry
Figure 9.5
Standard EPM Architecture

158
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Your EPM roadmap should address building a foundation to support the
four main questions (see the Business Questions section in Chapter 4).
1. What do we want to happen in the business?
■Financial modeling and scenario planning (e.g., enterprise planning)
■Strategic Finance (long-range Income Statement, Balance Sheet
and Cash-Flow forecasting and modeling)
■Operational modeling (like activity-based costing [ABC], activity-
based management [ABM])
■Scorecards, strategy maps
2. How do we want it to happen?
■Enterprise budgeting, planning and forecasting
■Workforce/resource planning, project planning, CAPEX planning
■Operational planning (e.g., demand planning)
3. What actually happened in the business?
■Financial reporting
■Operational reporting
■Management reporting
■Statutory consolidation and reporting
■Dashboards, scorecards
4. Why did it happen?
■Financial and operational analytics
■Proﬁtability analytics
■Predictive analytics
And then a way to bring the data and relationships together in a mean-
ingful way:
■Master data management
■Data quality management
To develop or refresh your EPM roadmap, think big and start small.
Thinking big is done with the management operating system. Starting small
is done with all of the initiatives that ﬁt into the management operating
system. These steps should help you articulate the business value of EPM and
align it to your roadmap:
1. Do the functional value mapping exercise from Chapter 8 and look
at the top drivers. Make sure the initiatives address those drivers. For

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
159
Figure 9.6
Value Chain
example, let’s say you document the value chain in your organization
and part of it looks like Figure 9.6.
At the top of the chain, the most relevant, material, volatile driver,
is productivity.
2. Now we walk productivity through the management operating system:
■
Debate: Productivity model and training investment scenarios
■
Commit: Workforce Plan
■
Gather: Productivity dashboard, by department
■
Analyze: Productivity correlated to number of training hours
■
Middle: Master data management of employee
3. Crosswalk the relevant technologies through each initiative:
■
Productivity model and training investment scenarios: Financial
and operational modeling
■
Workforce plan: Operational planning
■
Productivity dashboard, by department: Operational reporting
■
Productivity correlated to number of training hours: Operational
analytics
■
Master
data
management
of
employee:
Data
Relationship
Management
4. This gives the list of initiatives. Some clients tend to name each initia-
tive and give it an identity in order to discuss it and debate it better:
1. The do-more model
2. Workforce planning
3. Productivity dashboard
4. Productivity cube
5. One employee

160
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
5. Plot each initiative on two axes: Business Value versus Ease of Imple-
mentation.
■Consider your organizational readiness (ease of implementation)
to develop and adopt the initiative. Here are some elements to
consider:
■
Time. Is the need urgent or can it wait? If it can wait, how long:
a quarter, a year, two years?
■
Money. Can you afford it? Think of the total cost of ownership,
and also think of value rather than pure dollars: What’s the ROI?
■
Resources. Do you have the staff to manage this initiative? Do
your users have the bandwidth to participate?
■
Risk. Are you willing to take the risk to deploy? Are you willing
to take the risk to do nothing?
■
Culture. Do you have the executive sponsorship and political
will to get it done?
■Business Value = the most material drivers that are most closely
connected to strategic objectives.
6. Stratify your initiatives into waves that are achievable. For example,
see Figure 9.7 which shows both the plotting of each initiative and the
division into waves.
Medium Priority
Pipeline Funnel
Hiring Planning
Customer Lifetime Value
Variable Compensation Models
Segmentation
Cross-Sell Plan
Marketing Planning
Customer Profitability
Loyalty Program Return
on Investment
Master Data
Management of Customer
Master Data Management
of Channel
Productivity Reporting
Highest Priority
Selling, General and
Administrative Forecast
Low Priority
Ease of Implementation
Business Value
Hard
Easy
Low
High
Conversion Rates
Figure 9.7
Initiatives Organized into Achievable Work Packages

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
161
Organizational Readiness: The EPM Center of Excellence
IT, Finance, Operations, and Shared Services all share the same goals of the
business while their points of views can differ. IT can focus on standards,
solutions, and security, while Finance can focus on the P&L, balance sheet
and cash ﬂow, Operations on customer care, and Shared Services on cost
improvements. Each of them comes back to, for example:
■Proﬁtable revenue growth
■Operational efﬁciency
■Asset utilization
■Customer satisfaction
■Product quality
It’s this common ground of business results that allow them to come
together in a Center of Excellence (sometimes referred to as a Competency
Center) and help design, deliver, and support EPM initiatives.
The scope of the EPM Center of Excellence can include:
■Driving out requirements
■Owning the roadmap
■Training users/managers/developers
■Practices and standards for EPM process and tools
■Facilitate change management
■Roles and responsibilities for the management and ownership of
EPM and master data
■Visibility, transparency, and access to master data (related properties
and hierarchies)
■Communicate governance issues and decisions
■Delivery (solutions, analysis, reporting)
Refer to Chapter 7 of Howard Dresner’s book The Performance Man-
agement Revolution for additional details.8 The analyst ﬁrm Gartner, Inc. has
some good information on EPM and BI competency centers as well.
Paralyzed by Feuds?
There may be at least three ‘‘management system’’ camps in your organi-
zation: the ERP camp, the data warehouse/BI camp, and the performance
management camp. Some are run by IT, some by Finance, and still some by
Operations (or key business units [BUs]). Each camp thinks they have the

162
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
solution to the enterprise information systems strategy, yet each could be
contributing to building silos, splitting environments, and wasting resources.
This can be a paralyzing situation when each group starts to compete for
senior management attention and funding.
One thing I have found is that these groups have more in common than
they think: they all have a concern for master data, for one version of the
truth, for ETL, for the end-user experience . . . and for funding. By coming
together and determining how they complement each other, they will be
able to share infrastructure, resources, and deliverables. They will be able to
prioritize their combined portfolio based on the business demands: market
share, proﬁtability, cash ﬂow, and so on.
Instead of ‘‘duking it out,’’ the three groups must come together and
align their missions (and desired outcomes) with each other, and—more
importantly—with the strategic objectives of the company as a whole. What
does the company demand that they do?
I was recently working with a large division of a Fortune 500 holding
company. They have told Wall Street that their three priorities are: cost
reduction (to react to a market downturn in their product areas), productivity
improvement (to further improve margins), and price changes (to capture
additional revenue). Meanwhile, they are embarking on four distinct IT
programs: BI, Integration, Shared Services, and CRM. While a case can be
made on how each program can have an impact on each corporate priority, no
one is looking at how aligning the four initiatives can have even more impact
on those priorities.
Our advice, in a nutshell, is to form an EPM advisory group to bring
together the teams (IT, Finance, and Operations) and the four initiatives to:
1. Remove any duplication of efforts (especially in ETL)
2. Validate the alignment of each effort to the three strategic priorities
3. Consolidate project plans (including software vendor selection) to get
the fastest time to implementation and the most bang for the buck
4. Give the advisory group the authority to review budgets and spends
and to perform a ‘‘gate review’’ of each subinitiative
For this to work, they have to pick one senior executive to own EPM. In
this case, it’s the CFO—still working closely with the CIO—but the buck
stops with the CFO. This single point of accountability provides a bias for
action and helps alleviate the paralysis.
EPM and Incentive Plans
Executing on your corporate goals depends on the behavior of your people.
You want your incentive plans to drive that behavior. You want different

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
163
behaviors in different parts of the organization (I think of it in eight distinct
functions, in three different layers—strategic, operational, and tactical). And
the drivers of behavior at all 24 of those intersections (eight functions times
three layers) must align with your corporate objectives.
So for example, some of the key drivers could be:
■Innovation and quality in your products group
■Revenue and forecast accuracy in the sales group
■Inventory and margin in the distribution and supply chains
■Brand awareness in Marketing
These drivers are directly ‘‘inﬂuence-able’’ by the people that live in
each of those intersections—they are not nebulous, or out of reach like
corporate earnings before interest taxes, depreciation, and amortization
(EBITDA). Employees want to know they have some control over their
variable compensation. Of course, the farther up the chain you are, the more
accountability you have for overall earnings.
So while it is more complex to track 24 different ‘‘bonus plans,’’ you
will get the granular level of detail you need to have all the moving parts
working toward the same goals. And there is decent technology for modeling,
budgeting, and tracking these plans. EPM is a great way to include those
measures and plans in the overall management system of the organization.
When you go through the exercise of discovering what those drivers are
at each intersection, you may come up with some new insights that you will
want to bonus people on. For example, when I did this exercise for a large
beverage company, the new insights were product-line proﬁtability (should
we expand or contract brands/containers?) and retail stockouts. Yours could
be in the areas of training, campaign effectiveness, or other areas.
As for the percentage contribution, the most common plan is x% for
individual goals (management by objectives [MBOs], or tactical metrics), y%
for department/function goals, and z% for corporate attainment. As you go
higher in the food-chain, your z percentage increases.
Also ask yourself if you have the company culture that would welcome
or shun a scorecard that shows where people (roles, actually), departments/
functions, and the company are at a given point towards meeting/exceeding
goals. It could create some healthy competition (or some resentment!) and
eventually, EPM becomes every manager’s job.
How Do You Get Started?
If you can see the beneﬁt of bringing together the four strategy-to-execution
processes (Debate, Commit, Gather, and Understand) speciﬁcally for EPM,

164
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
and your calculations tell you that there can be a positive ROI, then how do
you get started with this new discipline? Follow these seven steps:
1. Enroll the business: Show this framework to your team, to IT, and
to your senior management. Help them see a vision for the discipline
around managing performance and executing on strategy. I have found
that drawing it live on a whiteboard, giving examples along the way
and highlighting connections that don’t currently exist makes a big
difference (bigger than showing the framework as a PowerPoint slide,
for example).
2. Find your speciﬁc drivers of value that materially affect suppler objec-
tives (like we did in the example for Lenovo in Chapter 7 with cost of
goods sold [COGS] and days payable outstanding [DPO]).
3. Map the value chain of those drivers of value right across the organiza-
tion and down through the layers so your executive management team
can see the impact that suppliers have in areas other than production
and procurement. This becomes your supplier value map. Also show
them how those drivers relate to overall company strategic objectives.
4. Work with your IT team and inventory the current systems (process
and technologies) in each area of the framework. Also, understand IT’s
current roadmap for systems that relate to the value drivers mapped
in Step 3.
5. Map the current systems and roadmap systems to the value drivers and
focus on the gaps: What are you not measuring, monitoring, analyzing
or planning for that drives supplier performance? Also, cut out the
noise: Prioritize those outputs (reports, analyses, etc.) that have the
greatest impact on the business.
6. Realign the IT roadmap and current systems with those areas that
have the most material impact on the value drivers that affect supplier
performance. Then begin the project of updating the current initiative
or implementing the new initiative.
7. Periodically review the systems and processes with the value map you
created earlier to see if you are on track or if course corrections are
required.
The enrollment and discovery steps above are necessary to align pro-
cesses and IT initiatives with supplier strategy and corporate strategy. While
going through these steps, companies have found additional side beneﬁts that
they weren’t expecting. For example, one client in the energy sector uncov-
ered 13 technology-related initiatives being undertaken by different business
units and departments that the CIO and his team did not know anything
about—each one was duplicating the effort of getting at the data, using a

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
165
Table 9.1
How EPM Supports Nature’s Rules for Survival
Nature’s 10 Rules for Survival
Supported by the Discipline of EPM
1.
Diversify across generations.
In the Debate about strategic objectives
(especially revenue growth), build ﬁnancial and
operational models that include scenarios for
mergers, acquisitions, and divestitures of
products; customers; geography; and
capabilities. Continue to optimize your models
by connecting them to learning done in the
Commit process—especially drivers,
constraints, and assumptions from budgets,
plans and forecasts (and actuals).
2.
Adapt to the changing
environment, and specialize.
Base your analysis (Understand) on what you
learn from Gather (actuals, variances, events) as
well as what you created in Debate (e.g.,
forecast accuracy, actual ROI, and so on).
Assign accountability to changes in Commit via
enterprise planning (workforce plans, for
example).
3.
Celebrate transparency. Every
species knows which species will eat it
and which will not.
When you interconnect all parts of the
performance management framework to a
common business language, common data,
deﬁnitions, meta-data, and master data, and
you use performance management tools to
give visibility to the organization, you create
transparency—not just for results, but also for
the cause and effect of those results as well
as the reasons why you were after those results
in the ﬁrst place (strategic objectives, targets,
models, and plans).
4.
Plan and execute systematically, not
compartmentally. Every part of a plant
contributes to its growth.
This whole framework is predicated on
systematic planning for the enterprise: ﬁnancial
and operational.
5.
Form groups and protect the young.
Most animals travel in ﬂocks, gaggles,
and prides. Packs offer strength and
efﬁcacy.
Packs, or work teams, divisions, strategic
business units, projects, and so on, generally
live at the intersection of a business function
and a layer in the business (strategic,
operational, or tactical). Have the performance
management framework honor their unique
perspectives, yet interconnect with the rest of
the organization. Help ‘‘protect’’ the pack with
the right HR KPIs.
6.
Integrate metrics. Nature brings the
right information to the right place at
the right time. When a tree needs water,
the leaves curl; when there is rain, the
curled leaves move more water to the
root system.
Measure the right things.
Cut out the noise.
Focus and align on the most material and
volatile drivers of value in the business.
Turn the data into actionable information.
(Continued)

166
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT DONE RIGHT
Table 9.1
(Continued)
Nature’s 10 Rules for Survival
Supported by the Discipline of EPM
7.
Improve with each cycle. Evolution
is a strategy for long-term survival.
The whole cycle fosters continuous
improvement (as in the Commit to Debate
example above). Performance management
maturity comes by interlinking (in both
directions) each component of the framework.
8.
Right-size regularly, rather than
downsize occasionally. If an organism
grows too big to support itself, it
collapses; if it withers, it is eaten.
A part of your continuous Debate is around
resources (full-time equivalent; property, plant,
and equipment, etc.)—what is the optimal
level of the workforce, of facilities, of capital, to
deliver on our strategic goals? Agree in the
Debate and execute via plans in the Commit.
9.
Foster longevity, not immediate
gratiﬁcation. Nature does not buy on
credit and uses resources only to the
level that they can be renewed.
A balance of short-term and long-term targets
are required to execute beyond just the
quarter.
10. Waste nothing, recycle everything.
Some of the greatest opportunities in
the 21st century will be turning
waste—including inefﬁciency and
underutilization—into proﬁt.
Measures and results around efﬁciency,
productivity, waste, utilization, and so on are
all baked in to the performance management
cycle. Benchmark yourself internally and
externally to see what’s normal and give
yourself ‘‘exceed’’ scenarios in your forecasts to
overachieve.
Adapted from Adam Werbach, ‘‘Nature’s 10 Simple Rules for Business Survival,’’ Strategy for
Sustainability: A Business Manifesto. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press, 2009.
variety of front-end tools, and did not include controls or data governance in
their projects. The CIO, with the CEO’s support, then used the value map as
the ‘‘North Star’’ for the entire IT portfolio.
An insurance provider’s CFO discovered a plethora of metrics that were
being reported monthly for no other reason than ‘‘it was easy to get at the
data.’’
When ﬁnished with the exercise, one health care CEO declared that
the value map (the entire business on one sheet of paper) would be his
‘‘accountability’’ map to make sure all layers of the business were working on
executing strategy.
Hopefully, you can use this new framework to bring discipline to your
supplier performance management and you will certainly get beneﬁts (known
and unknown) from the previous seven steps.

BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
167
Summary
By now I hope you can see how EPM done right helps facilitate:
■Managing change
■Managing points of view
■Managing the debate
■Managing information
■Managing resources
Ultimately, the management operating system for your organization is
not just an EPM process, but also, an overall management discipline that could
very well be the foundation of your organization’s survival. I’ll leave you with
this comparison of Nature’s 10 Rules for Survival9 and how it’s directly
supported by EPM and the management operating system as a discipline (see
Table 9.1). And, more than survive, my hope is that you thrive with EPM and
be among the most competitive organizations in your industry.
Notes
1. Random House Unabridged Dictionary. New York, New York: Random House Reference,
2nd Revised Edition, 1994.
2. David M. Upton and Bradley R. Staats, ‘‘Radically Simple IT,’’ Harvard Business Review,
March 2008.
3. Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton, Alignment, Harvard Business School Press, 2006.
4. Peter Drucker, The Practice of Management, Harper, 1954.
5. Daniel Pink, Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us, Riverhead Books, 2011.
6. Bo Burlingham and Jack Stack, The Great Game of Business: Unlocking the Power and Proﬁtability
of Open-Book Management. New York: Doubleday, 1992.
7. Kim S. Nash, www.cio.com/article/331763/TCO_versus_ROI, retrieved October 23, 2012.
8. Howard Dresner, The Performance Management Revolution: Business Results Through Insight
and Action. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2007.
9. Adam Werbach, Strategy for Sustainability: A Business Manifesto. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business Press, 2009.

APPENDIX: AN EPM
MATURITY MODEL
Maturity models are useful tools to help you understand what your capabilities
are now and where you want them to be in the future. They are not ‘‘the
truth’’ about how things should be, they are useful models to help engage your
stakeholders in a debate about your aspirations and roadmap for improving
your competence in a given area.
There are several good maturity models related to EPM and business
intelligence (BI); for example, those from Gartner, The Data Warehouse
Institute (TDWI), and others. Typically they go from an ad hoc or lagging
level of maturity to world class. It’s useful to peg your organization’s current
state and to discuss your aspirations. Not all companies want to be world class
since there’s a cost associated with that.
The EPM Done Right maturity model is based on the management
operating system described in this book. At a very high level you could say
that the journey to EPM maturity starts with the four corners (Planning,
Reporting, Analytics, and Modeling). Once those are relatively mature, the
next stage in the journey is the middle: bringing together the four corners
and sharing common data, metadata, master data, rules, and so on. And the
last leg of the journey would be the arrows, or connections, among each of
the cornerstones. This is when EPM becomes an overall management and
continuous learning process in the organization. Of course, your journey
won’t be that sequential nor will it be neat and tidy—there will be missteps,
do-overs, and possibly some project failures. And you may focus on one or
two cornerstone areas until they are highly mature before venturing out to
the complete cycle. However you approach it, this model is a good way to set
direction and track progress.
As mentioned, using the management operating system components, the
model comprises the cornerstones, the middle, and the connectors, as shown
in Figure A.1. I’ve also added a section for Governance since this is a critical
success factor in any EPM project.
As described in Chapter 9, each circle in Figure A.1 gets a score: how well
you do the thing divided by how much you need the thing. A current state
assessment would measure how well you do the thing now and how much you
need the thing now. A desired future state plan would score based on how
well you want to be able to do the thing and how much you think you will
need it given potential future circumstances. You can use Table A.1 to help
169
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

170
APPENDIX: AN EPM MATURITY MODEL
EPM Cycle Survey: In each circle, enter a numerator (top number) of how well you do the thing - on a scalw of 1 (don't do it) to 10
(do it very well), and enter a denominator (bottom number) of how much you need the thing – on a sclae of 1 (don't  need it) to 10
(must have it). E.g., 1/10 means we don't do and we really need it, 8/2 means we're pretty good at it, but don't need it that much.
Strat Plan
What-If
Scenarios
P&L, Balance Sheet,
C/F
Modeling
Planning
Common Rules
Common Definitions
Common Hierarchies
Automated Tie-Out
Analytics
Reporting
Management
Consolidation
How well
you connect
management
reporting
with statutory
reporting
Statutory
Consolidation,
Flash
Trending
Variance
Profitability
Root-Cause
Annual Plan
Forecast
Workforce
CAPEX
Drivers + Targets
Fact-based
Predictive
Constraints
Self-Serve, Metrics
Drill Down, Slice/Dice
Figure A.1
EPM Maturity Model Scoring Sheet
label your level of maturity. Notice how the connections are within each of
the cornerstone columns the more mature the organization.
The scope of each column in Table A.1 can include the following:
Gather includes
■Financial and operational management consolidation and reporting
■Statutory consolidation and reporting
■The bridge between the two (reconciliation)
■Metrics
■Self-serve (interactive reporting)
■Drill down/slice and dice
Understand includes
■Financial and operational analytics
■Uncovering facts to be used in models and decisions
■Predictive analytics

Table A.1
Maturity Model Assessment Components
Gather
Understand
Debate
Commit
The Middle
Governance
World Class
> 90%
Business rules
suggest a
response/action.
On demand
delivery of the
right information
to the right person
at the right time.
Big data and
predictive
analytics covering
Customer,
Product, and
Market domains
Unlimited
big-data scenarios
Models inform
company strategy
Uniﬁed enterprise
planning,
including cash
ﬂow, workforce,
capital
expenditure, and
the balance sheet
Global MDM
Global standard
CoA
Shared Service
EPM CoE and
corporate
governance body.
There is a closed
loop in the
management
operating system
Advanced
80–90% total
score
Laser focus with
drill-paths
Predictive
analytics
Models are fed
from results and
variance
Rolling forecasts
Multiple
dimensions are
governed (e.g.:
Accounts,
Product,
Customer)
Shared Service
EPM CoE and
business-unit
governance body
Progressive
70% total score
Management by
exception with
alerting
Guided analytics
and self-serve
analytics
Long-range
strategic ﬁnancial
models with
multiple scenarios
Driver-based
planning, easy to
reforecast
One dimension,
usually accounts,
is completely
governed in MDM
to EPM and ERP
(and beyond, like
CRM)
Center of
Excellence for one
or more
cornerstones
(usually starting
with Reporting)
Average
40–60% total
score
A good balance of
ﬁnancial and
operating drivers,
leading and
lagging indicators
A Revenue and
Expense Cube for
P&L analytics
Scenarios
generated on
Spreadsheets.
Not shared
Too much detail
in plans. Low/no
workﬂow
One or more
dimensions is
governed by
MDM within EPM
processes
Audit compliance,
still some
duplication of
effort in reporting
and analysis
Lagging
< 40% total score
More than ﬁve
reporting tools,
high manual effort
All done in
spreadsheets
Finger in the air
method
Annual budget
done in
spreadsheets
Complete silos.
High manual
effort.
Free for all,
low/no controls
171

172
APPENDIX: AN EPM MATURITY MODEL
Debate includes
■Financial and operational modeling
■Drivers and targets
■Constraints
Commit includes
■Financial and operational planning
■Variance
■Reforecast
The Middle includes
■DRM
■Governance
■Extract, transform, load (ETL)
Governance includes
■Roadmap
■Ownership
■EPM Policies and adherence
■Stafﬁng and organization structure
■Communication and exception processing
You can take the scores from each component of each area and average
them (or further weight them) to arrive at an overall column score. See
Table A.2 for an example showing scores in Debate.
Table A.2
Sample Maturity Scoring
How well we do it (x)
(Scale of 1–10)
How much we need it (y)
(Scale of 1–0)
Score (x/y)
× 100
Financial and
Operational
Modeling
6
8
75
Drivers and
Targets
4
10
40
Constraints
1
5
20
You would then take an average of 75, 40, and 20 and score yourself
at 45.
An assessment could look like the one in Figure A.2, which attempts to
quantify and highlight the gaps.

APPENDIX: AN EPM MATURITY MODEL
173
Governance
Middle
Commit
Debate
Understand
Gather
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Area for
improvement
Area for
improvement
Figure A.2
Example Assessment Score
I would suggest that you tailor this maturity model to your own situation
and revise it periodically. Compare it to peers and other EPM organizations
you meet at user, industry, and vendor conferences. When you own it and
communicate it, all parts of the organization can align to move up the scale
to your desired future state.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Axson, David J. Best Practices in Planning and Management Reporting: From Data to Decisions.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2003.
Aziza, Bruno, Joey Fitts, and Jim Bond. Drive Business Performance: Enabling a Culture of
Intelligent Execution. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2008.
Bardoliwalla, Nenshad, Stephanie Buscemi, and Denise Broady. Driven to Perform: Risk-
Aware Performance Management from Strategy Through Execution. New York: Evolved
Technologist Press, 2009.
The Form of Facts and Figures: Design Patterns for Interactive Information Visualization,
Masters Thesis by Christian Behrens, Potsdam University of Applied Science, 2008.
Bogsnes, Bjarte. Implementing Beyond Budgeting: Unlocking the Performance Potential. Hobo-
ken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2009.
Bossidy, Larry, Ram Charan, and Charles Burck. Execution: The Discipline of Getting Things
Done. New York: Crown Business, 2002.
Bossidy, Larry, and Ram Charan. Confronting Reality: Doing What Matters to Get Things
Right. New York: Crown Business, 2004.
Broadbent, Marianne, and Ellen Kitzis. The New CIO Leader: Setting the Agenda and
Delivering Results. Gartner, Inc., 2005.
Brown, John Seely, and Paul Duguid. The Social Life of Information. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press, 2002.
Burlingham, Bo, and Jack Stack. The Great Game of Business: Unlocking the Power and
Proﬁtability of Open-Book Management. New York: Doubleday, 1992.
Buytendijk, Frank. Performance Leadership: The Next Practices to Motivate Your People, Align
Stakeholders, and Lead Your Industry. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Buytendijk, Frank. Dealing with Dilemmas: Where Business Analytics Fall Short. Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2010.
Capron, Laurence, and Will Mitchell. Build, Borrow, or Buy: Solving the Growth Dilemma.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press, 2012.
Stuart K. Card, Jock Mackinlay, Ben Shneiderman (Editors), Readings in Information Visuali-
zation: Using Vision to Think. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
Charan, Ram. What the CEO Wants You to Know: How Your Company Really Works. New
York: Crown Business, 2001.
Charan, Ram. What the Customer Wants You to Know: How Everybody Needs to Think
Differently About Sales. New York: Penguin Group, 2007.
Cokins, Gary. Performance Management: Integrating Strategy, Execution, Methodologies, Risk
and Analytics. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2009.
Collins, Jim. Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap . . . and Others Don’t. New
York: HarperCollins, 2001.
Collins, Jim, and Jerry Porras. Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Companies. New
York: HarperCollins, 1997.
Davenport, Tom and Jeanne Harris. Competing on Analytics: The New Science of Winning.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School, 2007.
De Bono, Edward, Atlas of Management Thinking. Pelican, 1983.
de Geus, Arie. The Living Company. Longview Publishing, Ltd., 2002.
de Waal, Andre. Quest for Balance: The Human Element in Performance Management Systems.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2002.
175
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

176
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dresner, Howard. The Performance Management Revolution: Business Results Through Insight
and Action. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2007.
Dresner, Howard. Proﬁles in Performance: Business Intelligence Journeys and the Roadmap for
Change. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2009.
Drucker, Peter. The Practice of Management, Harper, 1954.
Duggan, William. Strategic Intuition. New York: Columbia University Press, 2007.
Drucker, Peter, and Joseph Maciariello. The Effective Executive in Action: A Journal for
Getting the Right Things Done. New York: HarperCollins, 2005.
Few, Stephen. Now You See It: Simple Visualization Techniques for Quantitative Analysis.
Oakland, CA: Analytics Press, 2009.
Fraser, Robin, and Jeremy Hope. Beyond Budgeting: How Managers Can Break Free from the
Annual Performance Trap. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2003.
Hamel, Gary. The Future of Management, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press,
2007.
Hope, Jeremy. Reinventing the CFO: How Financial Managers Can Transform Their Roles and
Add Greater Value. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2006.
Kaplan, Robert S. The Balanced Scorecard. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press,
1996.
Kaplan, Robert S., and David Norton. Alignment: Using the Balanced Scorecard to Create
Corporate Synergies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2006.
Kaplan, Robert S., and David Norton. Strategy Maps: Converting Intangible Assets into
Tangible Outcomes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2004.
Kaplan, Robert S., and David Norton. The Strategy-Focused Organization: How Balanced
Scorecard Companies Thrive in the New Business Environment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business School Press, 2001.
Malone, Thomas. The Future of Work: How the New Order of Business Will Shape Your
Organization, Your Management Style and Your Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business
School Press, 2004.
Mankins, Michael, Steele, Richard. ‘‘Turning Great Strategy Into Great Performance,’’
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Review, 2005.
Marr, Bernard. Strategic Performance Management: Leveraging and Measuring your Intangible
Value Drivers. Burlington, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2006.
Marr, Bernard. The Intelligent Company. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2010.
McGee, Kenneth G. Heads Up: How to Anticipate Business Surprises and Seize Opportunities
First. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2004.
Mintzberg, Henry, et al. Strategy Safari: A Guided Tour Through the Wilds of Strategic
Management. New York: Free Press, 1998.
Neely, Andy, Chris Adams, and Mike Kennerly. The Performance Prism: The Scorecard for
Measuring and Managing Business Success. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Financial
Times Prentice Hall, 2002.
Paladino, Bob. Five Key Principles of Corporate Performance Management. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2007.
Paladino, Bob. Innovative Corporate Performance Management: Five Key Principles to Accelerate
Results. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2011.
Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Robert Sutton. Hard Facts, Dangerous Half-Truths and Total Nonsense:
Proﬁting From Evidence-Based Management. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School
Press, 2006.
Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Robert Sutton. The Knowing–Doing Gap: How Smart Companies Turn
Knowledge into Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2000.
Pink, Daniel. Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us, Riverhead Books, 2011.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
177
Porter, Michael. Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. New
York: The Free Press, 1985.
Porter, Michael. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors.
New York: The Free Press, 1980.
Ranadive, Vivek. The Power to Predict: How Real Time Businesses Anticipate Customer Needs,
Create Opportunities, and Beat the Competition. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Rodek, Jeff, and Kathi Fox. On the Up and Up. Sunnyvale CA: Hyperion, 2004.
Schoemaker, Paul, and Robert Gunther. Proﬁting from Uncertainty: Strategies for Succeeding
No Matter What the Future Brings. New York: Free Press, 2002.
Schwartz, Peter. The Art of the Long View: Planning for the Future in an Uncertain World.
New York, New York: Currency Doubleday; Reprint edition, 1996.
Senge, Peter. The Fifth Discipline: The Art & Practice of The Learning Organization. Double-
day, 1990.
Shapiro, Carl, and Hal Varian. Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1998.
Stifﬂer, Mark. Performance: Creating the Performance-Driven Organization. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2006.
Tapscott, Don, and David Ticoll. The Naked Corporation: How the Age of Transparency Will
Revolutionize Business. New York: Free Press, 2003.
Tufte, Edward. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics
Press, 2001.
Werbach, Adam. Strategy for Sustainability: A Business Manifesto. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business Press, 2009.
Zaffron, Steve, and Dave Logan. The Three Laws of Performancen Rewriting the Future of
Your Organization and Your Life ( J-B Warren Bennis Series). New York: Jossey-Bass,
2009.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
For over thirty years Ron has been involved in Finance Systems and Processes,
from his ﬁrst job at Deloitte, Haskins + Sells as a 19-year-old programmer
writing the Journal Entry subsystem for a trial balance program, through
Lotus 1-2-3, Accpac (now Sage), and custom-developed systems (like BOX,
the Broker of Obligations and Transactions that connected US Navy account-
ing systems with Citibank purchase cards), to nine years at Hyperion Solutions
(later acquired by Oracle) where he helped raise the toddler now called Enter-
prise Performance Management. Today, Ron helps organizations understand
and realize the business beneﬁts of EPM processes and technologies.
Always focused on making tangible contributions to his clients, Ron
consults with passion, integrity, and transparency. Originally from Toronto,
Canada, his furniture is in Northern Virginia.
179
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

INDEX
A
Accountability
and alignment of outcomes and strategy,
132
and BI tools, 42
for EPM initiative, 162
and incentive compensation, 162, 163
and planning, 25–27, 100, 101, 103, 104
and proﬁtability, 136, 137
tenets of performance-accountable
organization, 9
Activity-based management (ABM), 94, 158
Ad hoc reports, 33, 34, 44
Alignment, 5, 6, 8, 42, 47, 129, 132, 142–149,
161, 162
Alignment (Kaplan and Norton), 147
Altibase, 75
Analytics. See also Understand stage of
management operating system
(analysis)
architecture, 76
ﬁnancial, 57, 75
in-memory analytic appliances, 75, 76, 93,
94
online analytic processing (OLAP)
technology, 41, 53, 75, 93–95, 108
operational, 57
patterns. See Patterns
predictive, 23, 72–75, 85, 93, 126, 158
proﬁtability, 22, 23, 75
root-cause analysis, 3, 22, 32, 60–62, 88,
103, 131, 133, 137
statistical, 75
types of, 21
Anaplan, 109
Asset utilization, 2, 24, 95, 126, 156, 161
Assumptions for models, 11, 58, 140, 148
Average selling price (ASP), 21, 43, 106, 115,
139
Axson, David, 7, 8
B
Balance sheet, 12, 38, 41, 44, 85, 89, 94, 104,
105, 124, 158, 161
Balanced Scorecard, 7, 8, 130, 131, 134, 145.
See also Scorecards
Benchmarking, 21, 32, 35, 38, 39, 57, 71,
85–88, 114, 119, 121, 123, 166
‘‘Big Data’’ (unstructured data), 71–73, 81
Brynjolfsson, Erik, 71
Buckets of pain, 5, 6
Budgets and budgeting, 2, 3, 7, 11, 16, 17, 26,
32, 38, 95, 97, 98, 104, 105, 107, 108,
120, 126, 148, 155, 158, 162, 163
Business drivers, 61, 82–85. See also Drivers
Business Foundation Corporation, 18
Business function and layer matrix, 18, 61, 131
Business Intelligence (BI), 3, 7, 8, 12, 13, 18,
41, 42, 75, 76
Business modeling, 23, 24, 79–81. See also
Models and modeling
Business performance management (BPM), 7, 8
Business process management (BPM), 142,
157
Business questions, 20–22, 24–27, 58–60
Business/IT alignment, 143–146
‘‘Canned’’ (standard) reports, 33, 34, 44
C
Capital expenditure (CAPEX) planning, 26,
105, 118, 124, 126, 136, 142, 155, 158
Change, 134, 135, 138
Charan, Ram, 113, 114
Cloud services, 108, 109, 156
Commit stage of management operating
system (planning)
about, 25, 26
accountability, 25, 26, 100, 101, 103, 104
actionable plans, 25, 26
automated cloud planning system, 108, 109
bottom-up planning, 27, 98, 99
capital expenditure (CAPEX) planning, 26,
105, 118, 124, 126, 136, 142, 155, 158
dimensions, 100–103
driver-based planning, 105, 106
enabling technologies, 108
EPM roadmap components, 108
execution, 27
forecasts. See Forecasts
goal of, 100
initiatives by industry, 127
inputs and outputs, 97, 98
integrated sales and operational planning
(S&OP), 105
organization of plan, 100–103
overview, 109, 110
process, 98, 99
quick wins, 108, 109
181
Enterprise Performance Management Done Right: An Operating System for Y  our Organization.   Ron Dimon
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

182
INDEX
Commit stage of management operating
system (planning) (continued)
and resource optimization, 107, 108
and sales planning, 103, 104
side-to-side planning, 98, 99
strategic planning, 80, 81, 104, 105, 109,
129, 147
top-down planning, 27, 98, 99
types of EPM plans, 104
Common business language, 11, 28, 29, 149,
150, 165
Constraints for models, 11, 58, 140, 148
Corporate Performance Management (CPM),
7
Corporate social responsibility, 48, 50, 51. See
also Sustainability reports
Corporate strategy, 130. See also Strategy
Cost allocation, 46, 47, 136
Cross-functional alignment, 148
Customer lifetime value (CLV), 3, 137, 160
Customer relationship management (CRM),
10, 11, 31, 40, 59, 62, 76, 94, 113, 115,
116, 157, 162
Customer satisfaction, 3, 4
Customers, participation in EPM, 112
D
Dashboards
Business Intelligence, 3
and business optics, 132–134
and EPM roadmap, 158, 159
executive, 52
monitoring alignment, 146–148
productivity, 159
sales performance management, 113, 114
use of in gathering stage, 20, 31, 43, 52, 54,
126, 127, 159
Data
‘‘Big Data’’ (unstructured data), 71–73, 81
context (attributes), 16, 17, 37, 62
ﬂow of between organizational layers, 40, 41
and forecast accuracy, 106
gathering, 19, 20, 31. See also Gather stage
of management operating system
hierarchies, 22, 37, 46, 62
management level sources of, 43, 44
operational data store, 40, 41
qualities of information, 38, 39
responsibility for, 17, 18
sources of, 15
and sustainability reporting, 49, 50
value of, 17
Data management and integration layer,
51–53, 75, 76, 94, 109
Data marts, 40, 41, 75, 76, 94
Data visualization, 22, 52, 73–75, 132–134
Data warehouses, 40, 41
Debate stage of management operating system
(modeling), 23, 24
drivers, identifying and quantifying, 89–92
engaging people, 81–83
goals of, 82
initiatives by industry, 127
models, use of. See Models and modeling
overview, 96
predictive analytics, 85, 93, 126. See also
Predictive analytics
process, 79–81
quick wins, 95, 96
scenarios. See Scenario modeling; What-if
scenarios
steps for managing debate, 91, 93, 94
and strategy, 138, 139. See also Strategy
Dresner, Howard, 12, 161
Drill-down, 5, 22, 39, 42, 57, 58, 60, 62, 101,
142, 151, 153
Drivers
business drivers, 61, 82–85
driver-based planning, 105, 106
and functional value maps, 131
identifying and quantifying, 89–92, 97
key performance drivers (KPDs), 135
key value drivers (KVDs), 135
sales operations performance, 114–116
value drivers, 80, 89, 90, 131, 132, 135, 164
Duggan, William, 137
E
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 109
Enabling technologies, 51–53, 75, 77, 94, 95,
108, 156, 157
Enterprise data warehouse (EDW), 40
Enterprise Performance Management (EPM)
and alignment, 142–149. See also Alignment
barriers to adoption, 6
beneﬁts of, 11, 12, 167
buckets of pain, 5, 6
and Business Intelligence. See Business
Intelligence (BI)
Center of Excellence (Competency Center),
161
cloud services, 156
collaboration, 161, 162
and common business language, 11, 28, 29,
149, 150, 165
deﬁnitions of, 7, 8
described, 7–12, 141
getting started, 163, 164
and incentive plans, 162, 163
and nature’s rules for survival, 165, 166
organizational readiness, 160, 161
process. See Management operating system

INDEX
183
return on investment (ROI), 154–156
roadmap, 75, 108, 109, 156, 158–161
side beneﬁts, 164, 166
survey of users, 151–153
total cost of ownership (TCO), 154, 155
Enterprise planning, 7
Enterprise Project Management, 8
Enterprise resource planning (ERP), 8, 10,
29, 31, 45, 62, 76, 94, 109,
155, 161
EPM roadmap, 75, 108, 109, 156, 158–161
Exalytics (Oracle), 75
Execution stage of management operating
system
about, 27
and interaction with parties outside of
organization, 111–113
marketing performance management,
123–128
order-to-cash performance management,
116–118
and organizational levels, 111, 112
overview, 128
sales operations performance, 114–116
sales performance management, 113, 114,
121–123
supply chain performance management,
119–123
Executive reports, 44
Extract, transform, load (ETL) software, 40,
144
F
Few, Stephen, 74
Financial modeling, 11–12, 23, 24, 79–80, 91,
93–94, 99, 119, 123–124, 137, 139,
148, 158, 159, 165
Financial objectives, 100
Financial plans and planning, 26, 104
Financial reports and reporting, 12, 19, 20, 31,
32, 44, 52, 63, 120, 123, 158
Financial statement models, 137, 138
Financial/operational alignment, 147, 148
Five Key Principles of Corporate Performance
Management (Paladino), 8
Flash reports, 44, 52
Focus, 2, 5, 6, 11–13, 29, 42, 47, 107, 108, 113,
119, 134–136, 149, 150, 161, 165
Forecasts
accuracy, 103, 106, 107
adjusting, 97
real-time updating, 108
and resource optimization, 107, 108
rolling, 9, 107, 145
sales, 17, 26, 27, 59, 60, 104, 107, 126
types of, 104
Functional value maps, 54, 131, 158, 159, 164,
166
G
GADDiE (Gather, Analyze, Debate, Decide,
Execute), 28
Gartner, Inc., 161
Gather stage of management operating system.
See also Reports and reporting
about, 19, 20
ad hoc (‘‘soup du jour’’) reports, 33, 34, 44
allocations, 46, 47
‘‘canned’’ (standard) reports, 33, 34, 44
classiﬁcation of information and reports, 44
dashboards, use of, 20, 31, 43, 52, 54, 126,
127, 159
data, turning into information, 31, 33–35,
38, 51
delivery of information, 40–44, 51, 53
executive reporting, 44
ﬁnancial close process (closing the books),
45
ﬁnancial information, consolidation of, 45,
46
ﬁnancial reporting, 19, 20, 31, 32, 44
initiatives by industry, 127
management (internal) reporting, 44–46
operational reports, 19, 20, 31, 32, 44
overview, 54, 55
point of view, 35–38, 57
process, 31–33
qualities of information, 38, 39
quick wins, 54
self-serve reporting (pull approach), 33, 34,
53
standardizing, 53
statutory (external) reporting, 34, 44, 45
sustainability reports, 44, 47–51
tools for, 51–53
Geishecker, Lee, 7
General ledger (GL), 10, 31, 45, 62, 116, 155
Generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP), 16, 38
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), 48–50
Goals, 129, 137
H
Hana (SAP), 75
Hierarchies, 22, 37, 46, 62
Hyperion Solutions, 8, 18
I
Incentive compensation, 162, 163
Income statement. See Proﬁt and loss
statement (P&L)
Infographics, 74

184
INDEX
In-memory analytic appliances, 75, 76, 93, 94
Integrated performance management (IPM), 7
Integrated sales and operational planning
(S&OP), 105
Internal/external alignment, 149
International Financial Reporting Standards
(IFRS), 16, 45, 46
K
Kaplan, Robert S., 147
Key performance drivers (KPDs), 135
Key performance indicators (KPIs), 8, 54,
86–90, 114, 135
Key value drivers (KVDs), 135
Kramer, Mark, 50
L
Lenovo Group, 121–123
M
Management efﬁciency, 11
Management operating system
about, 18
analysis, 22, 23. See also Understand stage of
management operating system
(analysis)
as closed-loop system, 18, 27, 28
commit stage. See Commit stage of
management operating system
(planning)
common business langauge, 11, 28, 29, 149,
150, 165
debate stage. See Debate stage of
management operating system
EPM initiatives by process and by industry,
127
execution stage. See Execution stage of
management operating system
extension of process to suppliers, customers,
and other partners, 111–113
gather stage. See Gather stage of
management operating system
overview, 29, 141, 142
reports, 20, 21. See also Reports and
reporting
strategy, 24, 25. See also Strategy
understand stage. See Understand stage of
management operating system
(analysis)
use of at different organizational levels, 27,
28, 111, 112
Management (internal) reports, 44–46
Marketing performance management, 123–128
Marketing strategy, 130. See also Strategy
Martin, Roger, 3
Master data, 11, 53, 76, 94, 110, 126, 141, 144,
152, 158–162, 165
McAfee, Andrew, 71
Meta-data, 32, 52, 53, 109, 111, 149, 152, 157
Metrics
in business modeling, 85
and business optics, 133, 134
functional information consumption, 41–43
and functional value maps, 131
metric decomposition, 61
operational sales, 114
proﬁtability, 136, 137
and relevance of information, 20
sales operations performance, 114
strategy, 134–136
Mission, 129
Modeling tools, 94, 95
Models and modeling
assumptions. See Assumptions for models
assumptions for, 11, 58, 140, 148
business modeling, 23, 24, 79–81. See also
Debate stage of management operating
system
constraints for, 11, 58, 140, 148
ﬁnancial modeling, 11, 12, 23, 24, 79, 80,
91, 93, 94, 99, 119, 123, 124, 137, 139,
148, 158, 159, 165
ﬁnancial statement models, 137, 138
metrics, 85
model-building process, 83–85
modeling tools, 91, 94, 95
operational modeling, 11, 23, 24, 79, 80, 91,
93–94, 99, 119, 123, 124, 137, 139,
148, 158, 159, 165
predictive models, 73, 107
scenario modeling. See Scenario modeling;
What-if scenarios
tools, 94, 95
Multi-dimensional cubes. See
Multi-dimensional databases
Multi-dimensional databases, 62, 119. See also
Online analytic processing (OLAP)
technology
Multi-dimensional modeling, 91, 93, 106, 119
Multi-dimensionality of EPM, 17, 100
N
Net promoter score (NPS), 3, 73
Norton, David P., 147
O
OLAP. See Online analytic processing (OLAP)
technology
On the Up and Up (Fox, Rodek, et al.), 8
Online analytic processing (OLAP)
technology, 41, 53, 75, 93–95, 108

INDEX
185
Operational modeling, 11, 23, 24, 79, 80, 91,
93–94, 99, 119, 123, 124, 137, 139,
148, 158, 159, 165
Operational objectives, 100
Operational plans and planning, 26, 104. See
also Commit stage of management
operating system (planning)
Operational reports, 19, 20, 31, 32, 44
Operational targets, 24. See also Strategic
objectives
Oracle Corp., 18, 75
Order-to-cash performance management,
116–118
Organizational culture, 163
Organizational levels, 27, 28, 35–37, 111, 112
Organizational readiness, 160, 161
Organizational strategy. See Strategy
P
Paladino, Bob, 8
Patterns. See also Predictive analytics
clustering, 67
comparison, 64
correlation, 66, 67
distribution, 64
from-to, 65, 66
geospatial, 68, 70
multivariate, 64
outliers and deviation, 66, 67
rankings, 65
and scenario modeling, 82
segmentation, 67, 68
time-series, 63
trends, 66
uncovering, methods for, 22
understand stage, 63–71
variance analysis, 69
Performance improvement, 12
The Performance Management Revolution
(Dresner), 161
Planning. See Commit stage of management
operating system (planning)
Point of view (POV), 17, 34–38, 57, 58
Porter, Michael, 50, 130
Prediction markets, 93, 107
Predictive analytics, 23, 72–75, 85, 93, 126, 158
Predictive models, 73, 107
Proctor & Gamble, Business Sufﬁciency
program, 72, 73
Proﬁt and loss statement (P&L), 33, 38, 41, 44,
85, 89, 94, 124–127, 138, 158, 161
Proﬁtability analytics, 22, 23, 75
R
Readings in Information Visualization: Using
Vision to Think (Shneiderman), 73
Reports and reporting
ad hoc, 33, 34, 44
business optics, 132, 133
‘‘canned’’ (standard reports), 33, 34, 44
and dashboards, 88
executive, 44
ﬁnancial, 19, 20, 31, 32, 44
ﬂash reports, 44, 52
formats for, 20
management (internal), 44–46
operational, 19, 20, 31, 32, 44
as part of EPM, 8
rationalization for, 53, 54
relevance of information, 20, 21
self-serve reporting (pull approach), 33, 34,
53
statutory (external), 34, 44, 45
sustainability, 44, 47–51
Resilience, 88, 89, 135
Return on investment (ROI), 154–156
Revenue growth, 3, 24, 25, 83, 84, 88, 95,
100, 119, 126, 136, 138, 143–147,
161, 165
Risk reduction, 12
Risk tolerance, 82, 93, 160
Risk-weighting, 38, 85, 93, 107, 133
Rolling forecasts, 9, 107, 145. See also Forecasts
Roll-up structure, 38, 46, 47, 62, 106. See also
Hierarchies
Root-cause analysis, 3, 22, 32, 60–62, 88, 103,
131, 133, 137. See also Patterns
Running versus managing the business,
10, 11
S
Sales and operational planning (S&OP), 105
Sales force automation (SFA), 10, 11, 115
Sales operations performance, 114–116
Sales performance management, 113, 114,
121–123
Sales strategy, 130. See also Strategy
SAP, 75
Scenario modeling, 23, 24, 79, 81–85, 89, 91,
94, 95, 119, 137, 138, 145, 155, 158,
165, 166. See also What-if scenarios
Scorecards
Balanced Scorecards, 7, 8, 130, 134, 145
business optics, 132–134
as EPM tool, 8, 94, 126, 127, 146, 158,
163
use of in gather stage, 20, 31, 52, 54
Seasonality, 21, 38, 47, 81, 82, 85, 91, 95, 101,
105, 144
Segmentation, 22, 67, 68, 118
Sensitivity analysis, 74, 91, 93
Shanks Group Plc, 51, 69

186
INDEX
Shared value, 50, 51
Shneiderman, Ben, 73
Slice and dice, 5, 22, 57, 75, 133
Sparklines, 74
Spreadsheets, 20, 44, 52, 53, 98, 108, 141
Statistical analysis, 21, 72, 75, 76
Statistical models, 94
Statutory (external) reports, 34, 44, 45
Strategic Intuition (Duggan), 137
Strategic objectives, 24, 95, 96, 130–132,
136–139
Strategic planning, 80, 81, 104, 105, 109, 129,
147
Strategy
and business optics, 132–134
components of, 129, 130
corporate, 130
executing, 11
ﬂexibility, 137, 138
and functional value maps, 130–132
marketing, 130
and metrics, 134–136
organizational, 1, 129, 130
overview, 139, 140
proﬁtability, 136, 137
relation to management cycle, 138,
139
sales, 130
strategic objectives, 24, 95, 96, 130–132,
136–139
strategic planning, 80, 81, 104, 105, 109,
129, 147
strategy-execution gap, 1–5
sustainable execution, 1, 8, 129,
140
Strategy Maps, 130
Strategy/operations/tactical alignment, 146,
147
Suppliers, participation in EPM, 112
Supply chain management (SCM), 10, 11, 62,
111
Supply chain performance management,
119–123
Sustainability reports, 44, 47–51
T
Terracotta, 75
Total cost of ownership (TCO), 154, 155
Transactional databases and systems, 10, 11,
15, 31, 32, 40–43, 54, 62, 71, 108, 116,
117, 121, 144, 146, 149, 156
Trending and correlation, 21, 38, 57, 66, 68,
76, 139
Tucker, Simon, 18
Tufte, Edward, 74
U
Understand stage of management operating
system (analysis)
about, 10, 19, 21–23
‘‘Big Data’’ (unstructured data), 71–73
business questions, 58–62
data visualization, 73, 74
enabling technologies, 75
EPM roadmap, 75
initiatives by industry, 127
overview, 77
patterns, 63–71
predictive analytics, 23, 72–74. See also
Predictive analytics
process, 57
quick wins, 75–77
and strategy, 138, 139. See also Strategy
United Nations Global Compact, 49
Unstructured data, 71–73, 81
V
Value drivers, 80, 89, 90, 131, 132, 135, 164
Values, 129
Vision, 129
VoltDB, 75
W
What the Customer Wants You to Know (Charan),
113
What-if scenarios, 23, 24, 40, 57, 79, 80,
85–89, 96. See also Scenario modeling
Wight, Oliver, 105

