eBOOK
Entering the cloud fray
How telcos and service providers can build successful cloud strategies in an evolving market
DEPLOYMENT
STABILITY
SCALABILITY
COST EFFECTIVE

Entering the  
cloud fray
2
Tweet this
This ebook addresses a dilemma that’s peculiar 
to IT and telecoms providers targeting the 
enterprise sector: you need to deliver reliable, 
massively scalable cloud services that you 
can back up with SLAs, but without incurring 
prohibitive software licensing costs. 
If you’re involved in the strategic, commercial 
or technical decisions currently facing such 
businesses, this ebook is for you. It explains 
how, with the right partner, open source cloud 
infrastructure can offer you a third way: the 
ease of deployment, stability and scalability 
you need, without the runaway licence costs 
you don’t.
Is this ebook 
right for me? 
THE RIGHT 
PARTNER
OPEN SOURCE CLOUD 
INFRASTRUCTURE
OFFERS YOU
A THIRD WAY

Entering the  
cloud fray
3
Tweet this
In a shifting market, the traditional revenues 
of telcos and service providers are under 
threat. Voice revenues are at an all-time low, 
while high wireless data costs are impacting 
margins negatively. As an additional challenge, 
many enterprises are moving low-value 
workloads and applications to public clouds 
such as Amazon, eroding traditional managed 
hosting revenues.
To overcome these challenges and remain 
profitable, telcos and service providers 
must build cloud computing into their service 
delivery strategies. This makes it possible 
to launch new cloud-based IT services that 
drive additional broadband traffic over 
their networks, helping them increase 
core revenues and access new commercial 
opportunities. 
An industry disrupted 
by the cloud 

Entering the  
cloud fray
4
Tweet this
The cloud makes it possible, for example, 
to deliver new compute and storage 
services, launch new machine-to-machine 
(M2M) services such as automated asset 
management and deliver converged 
communications and IT services backed up 
by enterprise-grade SLAs. Many providers 
are also brokering third-party cloud services 
to their customers, providing hot-swapping 
between cloud providers based on business 
rules for cost and performance.

Entering the  
cloud fray
5
Tweet this
It’s not about whether to adopt 
the cloud. It’s about which cloud 
to adopt. 
If you work in the telecoms or IT service 
provision sectors, your business is ideally 
positioned to capitalise on the many 
commercial opportunities the cloud offers. 
You may already own or control the networks 
needed to connect your customers with cloud 
services, and have the skills and experience 
to deliver end-to-end data security and 
governance. Critically, while public cloud 
providers offer lower compute and storage 
prices for start-ups, established enterprises 
still require the more robust services and SLAs 
of a telco or service provider.
The wide-ranging opportunities of cloud-based 
delivery mean the question for telcos and 
service providers is no longer whether to adopt 
cloud-based delivery strategies, but how. 
Successful cloud deployment depends on 
a number of factors, from an operator’s 
choice of cloud technology, to engaging 
the right deployment support and technical 
support from cloud experts. In this paper, 
we discuss how to build a successful cloud 
strategy  and how open-source technology 
can help. Specifically, we discuss which open-
source technology is best for building telco 
and service provider clouds, introducing the 
next generation of open-source cloud, pre-
integrating all the infrastructure, systems, tools 
and services telcos and service providers need.

Entering the  
cloud fray
6
Tweet this
Chris is responsible for the commercial success 
of Ubuntu in both public and private cloud. He 
is responsible for Canonical’s direct and channel 
business around Ubuntu Openstack as well as 
Canonical’s global partnerships with the likes 
of IBM, HP, Cisco, Dell, Amazon Web Services, 
Microsoft Azure. The Canonical Telco Cloud 
practice has been involved in hundred’s of 
OpenStack projects. 
Follow Chris on Twitter: @ChrisKenyonEU
Chris Kenyon
Senior Vice President, 
Cloud Sales & Business 
Development
Mark Baker
Product Manager, 
Ubuntu OpenStack
Mark is tasked with making sure the development 
of Ubuntu OpenStack is driven by the needs of 
its users in the enterprise and among service 
providers and mobile network operators. 
This necessitates close involvement with the 
management and development of OpenStack.
Follow Mark on Twitter: @markabaker
Meet the authors 

Entering the  
cloud fray
7
Tweet this
The objectives of a succesful cloud strategy	
08
Choosing the right cloud infrastructure	
09
Achieving open-source cloud success	
13
Conclusion	
15
About Canonical 	
16
Contents

Entering the  
cloud fray
8
Tweet this
To maximise margins for cloud-based services 
and provide the greatest possible value for 
stakeholders and subscribers, you need to 
minimise the cost of your cloud-computing 
infrastructure. As well as building the cloud 
on commodity hardware and low-cost 
software, every element of service delivery 
must be automated to reduce management 
costs, from resource provisioning and service 
orchestration, to usage monitoring and billing.
Your cloud infrastructure must also be ‘carrier-
grade’ by definition: capable of delivering 
the high levels of performance, availability 
and security today’s enterprise customers 
demand. It should also be highly resilient, 
properly supported and totally secure, with 
logical separation of customer systems and 
data in the multi-tenant environment.
To support the IT and communications 
requirements of enterprise customers, cloud 
infrastructure must be extremely flexible 
and able to handle any kind of application or 
workload. Your customers need the power 
to scale resources up and down on demand 
to meet the fluctuating requirements of their 
own customers and end users, paying only for 
the resources they use.
The objectives of a 
successful cloud strategy
CARRIER
GRADE
SECURE
SUCCESSFUL 
CLOUD STRATEGY
SUPPORTED

Entering the  
cloud fray
9
Tweet this
The pitfalls of proprietary clouds
Many proprietary software vendors offer 
packaged cloud solutions that are fast and 
simple to deploy. Yet most are expensive for 
telcos and service providers in terms of both 
licensing and support, making it practically 
impossible to achieve the margins needed to 
deliver services profitably.
Proprietary cloud technologies carry 
a number of other risks, including:
Vendor lock-in
Any business deploying proprietary cloud 
infrastructure may be tied into costly forced 
software upgrades. In addition, proprietary 
technologies invariably limit the flexibility 
of any cloud strategy, making it difficult or 
impossible to migrate workloads to other 
private or public cloud platforms in the future, 
even if it would otherwise make commercial 
sense to do so.
Choosing the right 
cloud infrastructure
Inability to scale due to high software costs
One of the major issues with proprietary 
clouds is that additional licenses are required 
to add new physical and virtual servers to the 
environment. This increases the risk that the 
cloud will not be able to scale cost effectively to 
meet the needs of hundreds, or even thousands 
of enterprise customers in the future.

Entering the  
cloud fray
10
Tweet this
Costly, inflexible support contracts
In a mission-critical enterprise environment, 
effective cloud support is a key success 
factor. However, support agreements with 
proprietary cloud vendors are typically 
highly inflexible and expensive, requiring 
all machines across the environment to 
be supported under the vendor’s terms. 
This may increase costs and impact margins 
on cloud services.
Limited cloud features
Proprietary cloud software evolves quite 
slowly, with only a small number of developers 
working on new code. This means that new 
functionality is typically only delivered with 
new releases of software, and that customers 
may be kept waiting for the features they 
request and need.
High hardware costs
Some proprietary cloud technologies are 
only certified for a small number of hardware 
platforms. This limits your procurement 
options: low-cost commodity hardware may 
not be available to support your choice of 
cloud software – which often means higher 
overall hardware costs

Entering the  
cloud fray
11
Tweet this
The benefits of open-source 
cloud technologies
Service providers can mitigate these risks 
by choosing to deploy open-source cloud 
infrastructure. This provides a number of key 
benefits, from lower infrastructure costs and 
comprehensive cloud feature sets, to regular 
updates delivered through a coordinated, 
worldwide development effort. 
Open-source technologies are also able to 
give service providers the scalability they 
need, enabling them to add servers to their 
environments at will with no additional 
licensing costs. With no licenses to buy, 
and no proprietary software to update and 
maintain, operators can maximise margins 
on cloud services and ensure that their 
cloud business is profitable from day one.
Open by nature as well as name, the best 
open-source cloud infrastructure uses de facto 
industry standard APIs, giving service providers 
the flexibility to port workloads between 
different private and public cloud platforms 
at will. By building flexibility into their cloud 
strategy in this way, open-source technologies 
help service providers adapt their clouds 
seamlessly to meet changing business needs.
Yet another benefit of open-source cloud 
technology is certification for a wide array 
of hardware. The best open-source offerings 
can be deployed on all brands of servers, and 
support different technology architectures, 
including X86 and ARM.
FLEXIBILITY TO PORT 
WORKLOADS BETWEEN PRIVATE 
AND PUBLIC CLOUDS

Entering the  
cloud fray
12
Tweet this
Open-source cloud-building 
challenges
While open-source cloud infrastructure has 
clear flexibility and cost advantages over 
proprietary alternatives, deployment of 
open-source clouds can be complex and time 
consuming. Specialist technical skills are 
needed, for example, to deploy, integrate 
and manage different open-source cloud 
components and interfaces. What’s more, this 
complexity can make migration from the lab 
into full production a daunting proposition.
Some of the challenges associated with 
open-source cloud building include:
•  Integration requirements with multiple, 
disparate components needed to build 
a comprehensive, production-ready cloud 
solution
•  Extensive testing to ensure seamless scaling 
from ‘test’ clouds to live operations
•  Lack of a comprehensive toolset to 
automate cloud deployment processes, 
from bare metal provisioning to service 
orchestration – which increases complexity, 
manual administration and overall costs
•  Manual development and deployment of 
security policies to ensure customer systems 
and data are protected in the multi-tenancy 
environment
•  Lack of enterprise-class support, with 
users left to rely on community help and 
documentation – not an appropriate level 
of support for mission-critical enterprise 
applications
The manual work typically required to 
build and deploy open-source clouds can 
jeopardise hosting providers’ cloud strategies 
and increase time to market. There is also 
a risk that cloud services will not translate 
well from the lab into production and that 
they will ultimately fail to meet customers’ 
expectations.

Entering the  
cloud fray
13
Tweet this
To overcome the challenges associated with 
deploying open-source clouds, you need 
the right mix of infrastructure, tools and 
enterprise-class support. The result will be 
a ‘production-ready’, open-source cloud 
environment that is engineered specifically 
to meet the needs of operators. This should 
pre-integrate:
Enterprise-class cloud 
infrastructure
Telcos and service providers need cloud 
infrastructure components that can meet 
enterprise-class requirements for availability, 
performance and uptime.
One example of such infrastructure is Ubuntu 
OpenStack, the leading cloud infrastructure 
platform based on open source project 
OpenStack, which provides all the compute, 
storage and network components needed to 
build a production cloud, allowing for end-to-
end service automation, seamless scalability 
and high availability configurations.
A stable, full-featured operating 
environment
To ensure success, you need to build your 
cloud on a stable, secure, open-source 
operating system that is synchronised with the 
underlying cloud infrastructure, both in terms 
of development and release cycle, to ensure 
all the latest cloud features are supported. 
It helps to choose an operating system with 
a strong cloud heritage such as Ubuntu.
Achieving open 
source cloud success

Entering the  
cloud fray
14
Tweet this
Innovative cloud deployment 
and configuration tools
Tools like Juju and MAAS will speed up the 
process of configuring bare metal servers, 
deploying and orchestrating OpenStack cloud 
components, and deploying and orchestrating 
individual workloads and applications in the cloud.
Cloud monitoring and 
management tools
To maximise margins on cloud services, 
monitoring and management processes 
must be highly automated. Tools for managing 
cloud infrastructure centrally through a single, 
centralised console like Landscape will help here. 
Deployment and technical 
support services
You need end-to-end deployment support 
and ongoing technical support for their 
open-source cloud projects. The Ubuntu 
Advantage cloud support service gives 
telcos and operators 24-hour access to our 
skilled cloud support engineers, who are 
there to resolve technical issues quickly and 
effectively, maximising uptime for your services. 
Subscriptions include access to Landscape, 
Canonical’s cloud management platform, as 
either a hosted service or a dedicated server in 
your datacentre. Ubuntu Advantage subscribers 
also have access to the world’s leading experts 
on Ubuntu and Ubuntu OpenStack.

Entering the  
cloud fray
15
Tweet this
Service providers around the world are 
investing in cloud strategies and infrastructure 
to increase revenue-generating traffic on their 
networks and bring new cloud-based services 
to market. When it comes to deploying cloud 
infrastructure to support these services, many 
operators are attracted to open-source cloud 
technologies, which offer very low cost of 
ownership, seamless scalability and full service 
automation.
Despite the benefits of open-source cloud 
technologies, however, there is still a perception 
that open-source clouds are complex and time 
consuming to deploy and manage, requiring 
specific skills which may not be available in your 
organisations.
To help telcos and service providers overcome 
this obstacle – and deploy open-source cloud 
infrastructure quickly with minimal risk – a new 
generation of open-source cloud is needed. 
This should pre-integrate all the infrastructure, 
software, tools and services required to build 
a successful cloud strategy from day one.
For more information on the issues discussed 
in this paper, or to find out more about the next 
generation of open-source cloud for telcos and 
service providers, please visit ubuntu.com/cloud
For a free, no-obligation consultation, please call 
+44 20 7630 2400, or email cloud@ubuntu.com
Alternatively, you can request more information 
at ubuntu.com/cloud/contact-us
Conclusion

Entering the  
cloud fray
16
Tweet this
Leading telcos and service providers depend 
on Canonical to assist, guide and support 
them in making the most of their production 
cloud offerings. Based on our experience of 
helping seven of the top 10 operators deploy 
production clouds, we have created tightly 
integrated cloud technologies that minimise 
deployment risk and speed time to market.
Ubuntu pre-integrates all the infrastructure, 
software, tools and services that telcos and 
service providers need to achieve cloud 
success. With a tried-and-tested reference 
architecture and deployment methodology, 
we can help operators deploy clouds faster, and 
ensure that cloud services meet customers’ 
requirements for performance and availability.
As an integrated element of the Canonical/
Ubuntu proposition, Canonical supports every 
stage of cloud deployment, from design and 
implementation, to ongoing technical support. 
We provide telcos and service providers 
with an efficient, production ready and cost 
effective route to the open-source cloud.
About Canonical

