
 
 
 
Pearson New International Edition
Enterprise Resource Planning
Mary Sumner
First Edition

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsoned.co.uk
© Pearson Education Limited 2014 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the 
prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark 
in this text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such 
trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any afﬁ liation with or endorsement of this 
book by such owners. 
ISBN 10: 1-269-37450-8
ISBN 13: 978-1-269-37450-7
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 10: 1-292-03980-9
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-03980-0

Table of Contents
P
E
A
R
S
O
N
 
C
U
S
T
O
M
 
L
I
B
R
A
R
Y
 
I
1. A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
1
Mary Sumner
2. Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
17
Mary Sumner
3. Planning, Design, and Implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
39
Mary Sumner
4. ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
59
Mary Sumner
5. ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
75
Mary Sumner
6. ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
91
Mary Sumner
7. ERP Systems: Human Resources 
107
Mary Sumner
8. Managing an ERP Project
119
Mary Sumner
141
Index

◆
THE EMERGENCE OF ENTERPRISE RESOURCE 
PLANNING SYSTEMS
A Foundation
for
Understanding
Enterprise
Resource
Planning
Systems
Objectives
1. Develop an understanding of how ERP systems can improve the effectiveness of
information systems in organizations.
2. Understand the business benefits of enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems.
3. Understand the history and evolution of ERP.
In the past several years, many organizations have initiated Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) systems, using such packages as SAP, Peoplesoft, and Oracle.The ERP
market is one of the fastest growing markets in the software industry. In research con-
ducted by APICS, 34.5% of companies with revenues over $1 billion who were APICS
members planned to purchase or upgrade an ERP system (Umble, Haft, and Umble,
2003). AMR Research predicts that the sales of ERP software will reach $180 billion
by 2002 (Kalling, 2003).According to one study, the ERP market may reach $1 trillion
by 2010 (Bingi, Sharma, and Godla, 1999).
Enterprise resource planning systems are a major investment. Companies have
invested between $50,000 and hundreds of millions of dollars in ERP software, using
a variety of business justifications, including the replacement of numerous legacy
From Chapter 1 of Enterprise Resource Planning, First Edition. Mary Sumner. Copyright © 2005
by Pearson Education, Inc.All rights reserved.
1

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
systems, reduction in cycle times from order to delivery, and reduction in oper-
ating costs. The on-line, real-time operational data that ERP systems provide enable
managers to make better decisions and improve responsiveness to customer needs
(Ross, Vitale, and Willcocks, 2003). There is evidence that organizations are satisfied
with ERP. Based upon a sample of 117 firms in 17 countries, the Conference Board
reports that 34% of the organizations were satisfied with ERP, 58% were somewhat
satisfied, 7% were somewhat unsatisfied, and only 1% were unsatisfied (McNurlin,
2001).
WHAT IS ERP?
ERP systems are the software tools used to manage enterprise data. ERP systems help
organizations deal with the supply chain, receiving, inventory management, customer
order management, production planning, shipping, accounting, human resource man-
agement, and other business functions (Somers and Nelson, 2003).
According to Deloitte Consulting, an ERP system is a packaged business software
system that allows a company to “automate and integrate the majority of its business
processes; share common data and practices across the enterprise; and produce and
access information in a real-time environment.” ERP systems are different from legacy
systems in that organizations use ERP to integrate enterprise-wide information sup-
porting financial, human resources, manufacturing, logistics, and sales and marketing
functions (Shanks, Seddon, and Willcocks, 2003). An ERP system provides an enter-
prise database where all business transactions are entered, processed, monitored, and
reported.
One of the most challenging issues associated with ERP systems is that the soft-
ware imposes processes on the organizations that implement it.The issue of whether to
make modifications or not is a significant challenge that every organization imple-
menting ERP must face.
To be competitive, organizations must improve their business practices and share
information with their suppliers, distributors, and customers.An ERP system introduces
“best practices,” which are defined as “simply the best way to perform a process.” The
biggest mistake made in implementing ERP, especially in a manufacturing environ-
ment, is to redesign the new system to work in the old environment (Honig, 1999).
THE EVOLUTION OF ERP
In the 1960s, most software packages included inventory control capability. Material
Requirements Planning (MRP) systems, which were introduced in the 1970s, used a
master production schedule and a bill of materials file with the list of materials needed
to produce each item (see Table 1). Later on, MRP systems were enhanced by adding
tools for sales planning, customer order processing, and rough-cut capacity planning—
which provided input into production scheduling, known as closed-loop MRP (Somers
and Nelson, 2003). In the 1980s, MRPII systems incorporated the financial accounting
system along with manufacturing and materials management systems (Somers and
Nelson, 2003).
MRPII led the way toward an integrated business system that developed the mate-
rial and capacity requirements for production and translated these requirements into
2

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Types of Systems
Time
Purpose
Systems
Reorder point 
1960s
Used historical data to
Designed to manage high-
systems
forecast future inventory
volume production of a 
demand; when an item falls
few products, with 
below a predetermined
constant demand; focus 
level, additional inventory
on cost
is ordered
Materials requirement
1970s
Offered a demand-based
Focus on marketing;
planning (MRP) 
approach for planning
emphasis on greater 
systems
manufacture of products 
production integration
and ordering inventory
and planning
Manufacturing 
1980s
Added capacity planning;
Focus on quality;
resource planning 
could schedule and 
manufacturing strategy
(MRP-II) systems
monitor the execution of
focused on process control,
production plans
reduced overhead costs,
and detailed cost reporting
MRP-II with
1990s
Provide ability to adapt
Focus on the ability to 
manufacturing
production schedules to
create and adapt new 
execution (MES)
meet customer needs;
products and services on a 
systems
provide additional feedback
timely basis to meet 
with respect to shop floor
customers’ specific needs
activities
ERP (enterprise
Late 1990s
Integrate manufacturing 
Integrates supplier,
resource planning)
and onward
with supply chain processes 
manufacturing, and 
systems
across the firm; designed to
customer data throughout  
integrate the firm’s business
the supply chain
processes to create a 
seamless information flow 
from suppliers, through 
manufacturing, to
distribution to the customer
TABLE 1
Historical Evolution of ERP Systems
financial information. By the 1990s, ERP systems provided seamless integration of all
information flows in the company—financial accounting, human resource, supply chain
management, and customer information (Somers and Nelson, 2003).
THE “INTEGRATED” SYSTEMS APPROACH
ERP systems impose an “integrated systems” approach by establishing a common set
of applications supporting business operations. In fact, successful implementation of an
ERP system typically requires re-engineering business processes to better align with
the ERP software (Brown and Vessey, 2003; Dahlen and Elfsson, 1999). Limited cus-
tomization makes it simpler to upgrade the ERP software as new versions and add-ons
emerge over time. As you can see from Table 2, an ERP system overcomes the ineffi-
ciencies of independent systems and non-integrated data by providing integrated data
to support multiple business functions.
3

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Before ERP
After ERP
Information systems
Stand-alone systems
Integrated systems
Coordination
Lack of coordination among 
Supports coordination across
business functions (e.g., manu-
business functions
facturing and sales)
Databases
Non-integrated data; data 
Integrated data; data have the
have different meanings 
same meaning across multiple
(e.g., customer); inconsistent  
functions
data definitions 
Maintenance
Systems are maintained on a 
Uniform maintenance;
piecemeal basis; inconsistencies 
changes affect multiple systems
result; it is costly to maintain 
separate legacy systems
Interfaces
Difficult to manage interfaces 
Common interfaces across
between systems
systems
Information
Redundant, inconsistent 
Consistent real-time 
information
information (e.g., about  
customers, vendors)
System 
May not be state of the art
Relies on a client-server 
architecture
model
Processes
Incompatible processes
Consistent business processes 
which are based upon an 
information model
Applications
Disparate applications  
Single applications  
(e.g., many different purchasing 
(e.g., a common purchasing 
systems)
system)
TABLE 2
Before and After ERP: Systems Standpoint
◆
BUSINESS BENEFITS OF ERP
From an overall business standpoint, an ERP system achieves a number of important
objectives, including maximizing throughput of information, minimizing response time
to customers and suppliers, pushing decision making down to the lowest appropriate
level, and providing timely information to decision makers. Most important, an ERP
system integrates information throughout the supply chain. From a business stand-
point, this means cost reduction, inventory reduction, and improved operating perfor-
mance (see Table 3).
ERP systems are designed to provide business benefits in sales and distribution,
manufacturing, costing, field service, and accounting. Surveys of U.S. and Swedish man-
ufacturing firms show that ERP benefits include timely information, increased interac-
tion across the enterprise, and improved order management (see Table 4).
In sales, increased efficiency leads to the ability to provide lower quotes, reduced
lead times, and improve overall responsiveness to customers’ needs. In manufactur-
ing, concurrent engineering means faster product design and production. In field
4

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Before ERP
With ERP
Cycle time
Costly bottlenecks
Time and cost reduction of 
business processes
Transactions 
Multiple transactions use 
Faster transactions, using 
processing
multiple data files
common data. Reduces the time
and cost of multiple updates
Financial 
Increased cost of excess 
Improves operational 
management
inventory, cost of overdue 
performance (e.g., less excess 
accounts receivable
inventory, reduction in accounts
receivable)
Business 
Proliferation of fragmented 
Re-engineering around a business
processes
processes with duplication of 
model that conforms with “best 
effort
practices”
Productivity
Lack of responsiveness to 
Improvements in financial
customers and suppliers
management and customer service
Supply chain 
Lack of integration
Linkages with suppliers and 
management
customers
eBusiness
Web-based interfaces support 
Web-based interfaces are 
isolated systems and their 
front-end to integrated systems
components
Information
Lack of tactical information for 
Allows cross-functional access to
effective monitoring and control 
the same data for planning and
of organizational resources
control. Provides widely available
information
Communications
Lack of effective communications 
Facilitates organizational
with customers and suppliers
communications with customers
and suppliers
TABLE 3
Before and After ERP: Business Standpoint
ERP Performance Outcomes
Sweden Average*
U.S. Average* 
Quickened information response time
3.81
3.51
Increased interaction across the enterprise
3.55
3.49
Improved order management/order cycle
3.37
3.25
Decreased financial close cycle
3.36
3.17
Improved interaction with customers
2.87
2.92
Improved on-time delivery
2.82
2.83
Improved interaction with suppliers
2.78
2.81
Reduced direct operating costs
2.74
2.32
Lowered inventory levels
2.60
2.70
*scale: 1 (not at all) to 5 (a great extent)
Sources: Mabert, Soni, and Venkataramanan, 2000; Olhager and Selldin, 2003.
TABLE 4
Benefits of ERP
5

service, data on customer service histories and parts under warranty are available
to show charges are accurate. Suppliers are paid more rapidly because accounts
payable systems are responsive and accurate. Overall, the level of operational excel-
lence throughout the business is optimized, from customer order through distribution
and service. Case studies from organizations implementing ERP illustrate the business
benefits noted in the surveys (Mabert et al., 2000; Olhager and Selldin, 2003).
Table 5 shows the tangible benefits of ERP are lower inventory levels,
improved on-time delivery, and decreased financial closing cycles. In addition to hard-
dollar savings, such as reduced procurement costs and increased manufacturing
A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
ERP Performance Outcomes
Examples
Quickened information 
• Responses to customer billing inquiries occurred in
response time
real-time as opposed to 15–20 minute response time at
IBM Storage Products Company (Jensen and Johnson,
1999)
Increased interaction across 
• Simplification of processes at Boeing (Jensen and 
the enterprise
Johnson, 1999)
• Growth in interfacility coordination at Owens Corning
(Palaniswamy and Frank, 2000)
• Real-time access to data across the organization at
Diebold (Palaniswamy and Frank, 2000)
Improved order management/ 
• 90% reduction in cycle time for quotations from 20 to
order cycle
2 days at Fijitsu (Jensen and Johnson, 1999)
• Faster, more accurate order processing at Valenite
(Palaniswamy and Frank, 2000)
• Time for checking credit upon receiving an order was
reduced from 15–20 minutes to instantaneous at IBM
Storage Products Company (Jensen and Johnson, 1999)
Decreased financial close 
• 50% reduction in financial closing time from 10 days to
cycle
5 days at Fijitsu (Jensen and Johnson, 1999)
Improved interaction with
• Lead times to customers were reduced from 6 weeks to
customers
2 weeks at Par Industries (Bingi,Sharma,and Godla,1999)
Improved on-time delivery
• On-time product delivery rate increased to 90% at
Earthgrains (Bingi, Sharma, and Godla, 1999)
• Delivery performance improved from 80% on-time to
more than 90% on-time at Par Industries (Bingi, Sharma,
and Godla, 1999)
Reduced direct operating 
• Operating margins improved from 2.4% to 3.9% at 
costs
Earthgrains (Bingi, Sharma, and Godla, 1999)
Lowered inventory levels
• Inventory levels were reduced significantly at Owens
Corning (Palaniswamy and Frank, 2000)
• Lower levels of inventory at Valenite (Palaniswamy and
Frank, 2000)
• Work-in-process inventory dropped almost 60% at Par
Industries (Bingi, Sharma, and Godla, 1999)
TABLE 5
Business Benefits of ERP
6

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
throughput, ERP systems provide soft-dollar benefits, including increased sales and
revenues, improved margins, and improved productivity (Laughlin, 1999). ERP can
speed up business processes, reduce cycle time, and reduce the cost of business
processes, such as credit checking (Piturro, 1999; Davenport, 2000).
ERP systems offer many advantages from a systems standpoint. They eliminate
legacy systems that maintain incompatible data and cause fragmentation. Integrated
systems provide shared information across the organization, and this information can
be used to monitor business performance (Davenport, 2000; Oliver, 1999). In addition,
ERP systems are a foundation for eBusiness because they provide the back-office
functions that enable customers to place and to track orders via the web (Davenport,
2000). Additional applications such as Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
rely on the foundation of ERP (Oliver, 1999).
In surveys of the motivation to implement ERP in Sweden (Olhager and Selldin,
2003) and the United States (Mabert et al., 2000), some of the major motivations
include the need to replace legacy systems, the need for standardization, the impor-
tance of gaining a competitive advantage, and the need to improve interactions with
suppliers and customers (see Table 6).
◆
ERP MODULES
The major ERP vendors, including SAP, Oracle, and Peoplesoft, support the major
functional areas of the business, including sales order processing, purchasing, produc-
tion planning, financial accounting, management accounting, and human resources.
Vendors addressing the mid-cap market (e.g., $50 to $400 million in sales) include
Microsoft’s Great Plains ERP software. In an analysis by Mabert et al., the most
popular modules which are implemented by firms in the United States are the financial
Company’s Motivation to Implement ERP
Swedish Average*
U.S. Average*
Replace legacy systems
4.11
4.00
Simplify and standardize systems
3.67
3.85
Gain strategic advantage
3.18
3.46
Improve interactions with suppliers, customers
3.16
3.55
Ease of upgrading systems
2.96
2.91
Link to global activities
2.85
3.17
Restructure company organization
2.70
2.58
Solve the Y2K problem
2.48
3.08
Pressure to keep up with competitors
2.48
2.90
*scale: 1 (not important) to 5 (very important)
TABLE 6
Company’s Motivation to Implement ERP
7

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Function
SAP
Oracle
PeopleSoft
Sales Order 
Sales and
Marketing Sales
Supply Chain
Processing
Distribution (SD)
Supply Chain
Management
Purchasing
Materials 
Procurement
Supplier Relationship
Management (MM)
Management
Production Planning
Production Planning (PP)
Manufacturing
Financial Accounting
Financial Accounting (FA)
Financials
Financial Management
Systems
Management 
Controlling (CO)
Accounting
Human Resources
Human Resources (HR)
Human Resources
Human Capital
Management
Source: Vendor Websites
TABLE 7
ERP Modules Supported by Vendors
◆
ERP DESIGN ALTERNATIVES
In evaluating ERP, most organizations consider alternative design options and each of
these options has its own price as well as its own advantages and disadvantages. A
“vanilla” ERP implementation, which is the complete implementation of a vendor
ERP system, is costly and time-consuming but offers the benefits of total integration
and re-engineering of business processes. Implementation of selected ERP modules,
such as the financial and accounting modules, is less costly and time-consuming but
lacks the benefits of total integration of data across multiple functional areas of the
business.This alternative is less costly but the benefits are not as great.
Building an in-house ERP system is the most time-consuming and expensive alter-
native, and it poses considerable risks.The advantage of this approach is that the orga-
nization can build a software system based upon its own unique processes, and its soft-
ware will not be shared with its competitors as with the “vanilla” ERP alternative.
However, management can argue that operational processes, such as financial account-
ing, production planning, and materials management, do not necessarily provide a
competitive advantage, and the substantial investment involved in developing and
implementing a customized system cannot be justified.
Finally, another alternative is to maintain current legacy systems.The problem with
this approach is the organization could be putting itself into a competitive disadvan-
tage by not having an ERP system in place when its competitors do.An ERP system is
built upon the re-engineering of business processes around “best practices” and pro-
vides the advantages of data integration and standardization. By implementing an
ERP, an organization can keep up with its competitors.
and accounting modules (Mabert et al., 2000). Most firms implement a single ERP
package rather than selecting different modules from different ERP vendors.
8

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Based upon a number of factors, including data integration, cost-effectiveness,
competitive environment, business impact, and time, most organizations conclude
vanilla ERP implementation or partial ERP implementation are preferable to
in-house development or maintaining the legacy system. Table 8 provides possible sce-
narios for ERP implementation in “Fortune 500” type corporations.
In two surveys of ERP implementation in the United States (Mabert et al., 2000)
and Sweden (Olhager and Selldin, 2003), the authors note that implementing a single
ERP package was the most common approach (see Table 9).
Option
Cost and Time
Advantages 
Disadvantages
Vanilla ERP 
$150 million 
Complete 
Competitors have access
implementation
over 5 years
standardization of 
to the same system
business processes 
Disruption of operations
based upon vendor’s 
over 3–5 years
“best practices”
Partial ERP 
$108 million 
Partial changes in
Disruption of operations
implementation 
over 2–3 years
business processes
over 2–3 years
(e.g., selected 
modules)
In-house 
$240 million 
Custom-designed
Long-term analysis and
development
over 7–10 years
ERP system—unique 
design process; high 
from competitors
expense
Status quo
No cost but 
No business process 
May provide a competitive
no gain
change; little disruption 
disadvantage because 
of operations
competitors have an ERP 
system
TABLE 8
Menu of ERP Alternatives
Implementation Approach
Swedish %
U.S. %
Single ERP package
55.6
39.8
Single ERP package with other systems
30.1
50
Multiple ERP packages with other systems
6.5
4.0
Best-of-breed from several ERP packages
3.9
3.9
Totally in-house developed
2.0
0.5
In-house plus specialized packages
2.0
1.0
TABLE 9
Implementation Approach
◆
THE BUSINESS CASE FOR ERP
One of the major requirements in justifying the acquisition of an ERP system involves
an assessment of the tangible (e.g., hard-dollar) and intangible benefits.According to a
survey of 62 Fortune 500 companies by Benchmarking Partners, Inc., for Deloitte
9

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Tangible Benefits
% of Companies
Inventory reduction
32
Personnel reduction
27
Productivity improvement
26
Order management improvement
20
Financial close cycle reduction
19
IT cost reduction
14
Procurement cost reduction
12
Cash management improvement
11
Revenue/profit increase
11
Transportation/logistics cost reduction
9
Maintenance reduction
7
On-line delivery improvement
6
Source: Fryer, Bronwyn,“The ROI Challenge,” CFO,
September, 1999, p. 90.
TABLE 10
Tangible Benefits with ERP
Intangible Benefits
% of Companies
Information/visibility
55
New/improved processes
24
Customer responsiveness
22
Integration
13
Standardization
12
Flexibility
9
Globalization
9
Y2K
8
Business performance
7
Supply/demand chain
5
Source: Fryer, Bronwyn,“The ROI Challenge,” CFO,
September, 1999, p. 90.
TABLE 11
Intangible Benefits with ERP
Consulting, the most important tangible benefit realized after the ERP system went
live was inventory reduction (Fryer, 1999).The survey results in Table 10 showed these
tangible benefits:
In terms of intangible benefits, information availability is a big factor (see
Table 11). Information can enable managers to make better decisions about how to
allocate resources effectively. In addition, improved customer responsiveness, process
integration, and increased flexibility, though intangible, can lead to tangible benefits
10

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
ERP Cost Component
Swedish %
U.S. %
Software
24.2
30.2
Hardware
18.5
17.8
Consulting
30.1
24.1
Training
13.8
10.9
Implementation team
12.0
13.6
TABLE 12
ERP Cost Components
because they put the organization in a better position to win contracts and to generate
increased revenues by cost reduction (Fryer, 1999).
COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS FOR ERP
The decision to implement an ERP system is a business investment decision, similar
to the decision to build a new warehouse, hire a new executive, or invest in a training
program.As such, the ERP investment decision must create measurable business ben-
efits that justify the acquisition costs and the costs of system implementation. As you
have learned in this chapter, the business benefits of ERP include streamlining busi-
ness processes, providing web-based access to information resources, reducing inven-
tory and personnel, and improving overall productivity. The costs of implementing an
ERP include the hardware, software, technical support, project management, internal
team commitment, external consultants, and training.
In their analysis of the cost components of ERP, both surveys of ERP implementa-
tion in the U.S. (Mabert et al., 2000) and Sweden (Olhager and Selldin, 2003), indicate
that software cost and consulting costs are major cost components (see Table 12).
One method of conducting a cost-benefit analysis of an ERP project is to use net
present value. Net present value takes into consideration the time value of money.The
time value of money can be understood through a simple example. If you invested
$1,000,000, assuming an interest rate of 10%, you would expect to receive a return of
$1,610,510 in five years. In determining the net present value of a capital budgeting
decision, the time value of money is taken into account. A five-year timeframe is
appropriate in evaluating an ERP project since a minimum of three years will be spent
in actual implementation. In a large-scale project, the timeframe for evaluating returns
on the investment in ERP might be as long as ten years.
In Table 13, you will see a cost-benefit analysis for an ERP project, using the net
present value method of evaluating the project proposal. Costs are non-recurring, or
start-up costs, and recurring costs.The start-up costs include the original investment in
the ERP software. In this case, the software cost is $2,420,000. The original hardware
investment is $1,850,000, which includes servers and networking capability in a client
server environment. The other non-recurring costs include consultants’ time in
installing and configuring the software, which is an additional $3,000,400. Project man-
agement time, internal team time, and project steering committee time is estimated to
be $400,000, and initial training time is $1,280,000. These figures are in line with
research on ERP implementation costs conducted in the United States and Sweden
(Olhager and Selldin, 2003; Mabert et al., 2000).
11

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Year 0
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Software 
2,420,000
Software Licenses
220,000
220,000
220,000
220,000
220,000
Hardware
1,850,000
Consulting
3,000,400
Training
1,280,000
Implementation 
400,000
400,000
400,000
400,000
Team
Total Costs
8,950,400
620,000
620,000
620,000
220,000
220,000
Savings
0
Reduced Inventory 
Costs
2,750,000
2,750,000
2,750,000
2,750,000
2,750,000
Reduced Adminis-
1,250,000
1,250,000
1,250,000
1,250,000
1,250,000
trative Costs
Intangible Benefits
Total Savings
0
4,000,000
4,000,000
4,000,000
4,000,000
4,000,000
Net Balance
8,950,400
3,380,000
3,380,000
3,380,000
3,780,000
3,780,000
DCF Factor
1.000
0.909
0.826
0.751
0.683
0.621
Discounted Bal.
8,950,400
3,072,420
2,791,880
2,538,380
2,581,740
2,347,380
Cumulative 
8,950,400
5,877,980
3,086,100
547,720
2,034,020
4,381,400
Discounted Bal.
TABLE 13
Net Present Value of an ERP Project
In our example, the recurring costs (i.e., costs which recur over time) include the
costs of software licenses, maintenance agreements, project management time, internal
team time committed to the project, and consultants’ time used on a recurring basis.
For example, ongoing software licenses represent 10% of the original software cost,
which is $220,000 per year.The time spent by the implementation team will continue to
be budgeted for $400,000 per year.
The benefits of the ERP project will not take place until the system is in opera-
tion. Assuming that project implementation takes three years at a minimum, the
benefits will not accrue until the project’s fourth year. In our example, the measur-
able, or tangible, business benefits include inventory reduction, which represents a
savings of $2,750,000 per year. In addition, personnel reduction represents an addi-
tional savings of $1,250,000 per year. Intangible benefits might include improved
employee morale, improved customer satisfaction, and less duplication of effort in
maintaining multiple databases, but these intangible benefits are not recorded in the
spreadsheet.
As you can see from Table 13, the proposed ERP project will have a positive dis-
counted balance in Year 1, and the company will break even on its software investment
in ERP in Year 4, when the cumulative discounted balance is $2,034,020. Based upon
this analysis, the investment in an ERP system is a wise investment.
12

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
CAN ERP PROVIDE A COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE?
Ultimately, for the return on investment in ERP systems to be realized, these systems
should yield a strategic advantage. In many industries, however, all the major compa-
nies have an ERP system. If an entire industry is adopting ERP systems, as in the case
of industries such as oil, chemicals, consumer products, and computers, then the basis
for attaining a competitive advantage is unrelated to implementing the ERP. The basis
for achieving a competitive advantage shifts to implementing the ERP system better
than anyone else (Davenport, 2000). Another way to achieving a competitive advan-
tage is to migrate to new software versions more quickly than competitors do
(Kremers and Van Dissel, 2000).
Another source of gaining competitive advantage through ERP implementation is
to use vanilla ERP modules to support core operations and to build customized mod-
ules to support unique processes which provide a competitive edge (Holland, Light,
and Kawakek, 1999).The increased availability of operational data and the use of data
for analysis may also provide companies with an advantage (Mabert, Soni, and
Venkataramanan, 2001).
Even if ERP implementation may not provide a competitive advantage, compa-
nies which do not implement ERP may still find themselves at a competitive disadvan-
tage, particularly in industries in which ERP implementation is widespread. Companies
using ERP will be able to take advantage of best practices in running their businesses
to reduce cycle time, to improve the speed and accuracy of information, and to attain
better financial management (Davenport, 2000).
◆
THE CHALLENGE OF IMPLEMENTING AN ERP SYSTEM
ERP systems projects involve considerable time and cost, and it may take some time
to realize ERP’s benefits. Research by Standish Group illustrates that 90% of ERP
projects are late or over budget. Meta Group survey data, based on 63 companies,
showed that average implementation cost of ERP was $10.6 million and took
23 months to complete (Stein, 1999).
The successful implementation of ERP requires a multi-stage approach (Markus,
Axline, Petrie, and Tanis, 2000; Parr and Shanks, 2000; Holland and Light, 2001), and
the benefits of ERP may not occur until later stages. Markus et al., proposes three
stages: the project phase, the shakedown phase, and the onward and upward phase.
The ERP software is introduced during the project phase and is implemented into the
firm’s operations during the shakedown phase. It is not until the onward and upward
phase, during which the ERP modules are successfully integrated with operations, that
the organization can achieve the actual business results, such as inventory reduction
(Markus et al., 2000).
Parr and Shanks identify four phases: a planning phase, a re-engineering phase,
a design phase, and a configuration and testing phase (Parr and Shanks, 2000). They
note that re-engineering business practices around the ERP software is critical to suc-
cessful implementation. In their stage analysis, Holland and Light (2001) suggest the
benefits of ERP occur when ERP modules are implemented successfully and when
13

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Questions for Discussion
◆◆◆Case
Business Research
You are a business analyst for MPK Industries, a
consulting firm that tracks worldwide trends in
information technology. Using suggested on-line
databases and Internet resources, provide
answers to the following questions:
1. What is the expected future growth of the
ERP marketplace in terms of overall
sales?
a. Break this down by sales in the United
States and international sales.
b. Break this down by Fortune 500 compa-
nies and mid-cap companies (e.g., mid-
cap companies are defined as having
sales between $50 and $400 million per
year).
2. What is the relative market share of the
major ERP vendors?
a. Break this down by sales in the U.S. and
international sales.
b. Break this down by Fortune 500 compa-
nies and mid-cap companies.
1. Use on-line library databases to identify articles in trade publications that provide case
studies of ERP implementations.These articles may provide some insight into each of these
questions:
a. How widespread is the use of ERP across certain industries? 
b. What are the benefits reported from implementing ERP?
c. What are its limitations?
2. Research and learn about the implementation of ERP. Use trade publications and on-line
library databases (e.g., ABI Inform, ProQuest, First Search, Wilson Select Plus, available
through your library) to conduct a search for articles.
a. Find a success story of ERP implementation.What factors contributed to the success of
this implementation?
b. Find a story of problems encountered with an ERP implementation.What factors con-
tributed to the encountered obstacles?
◆
SUMMARY
In summary, organizations have a business justification for implementing ERP sys-
tems.The business benefits of ERP include improved accessibility of information, real-
time access to data across the organization, improved cycle time for orders, decreased
financial close time, reduced operating costs, and lowered inventory levels. In addition,
ERP systems provide the opportunity to re-align business processes with best practices
and to integrate enterprise-wide information supporting financial, human resources,
manufacturing, and sales and marketing functions.
organizations can use the ERP foundation to add advanced modules such as customer
relationship management (Holland and Light, 2001).
14

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
References
Beard, Jon W., and M. Sumner. 2004.“Seeking
strategic advantage in the post-net era:
Viewing ERP systems from the resource-
based perspective.” The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems 13: 129–150.
Bingi, P., M. Sharma, and J. Godla. 1999.“Critical
issues affecting ERP implementation.”
Information Systems Management 16: 7–14.
Brown, C.V., and I.Vessey. 2003.“Managing the
next wave of enterprise systems: Leveraging
lessons from ERP.” MIS Quarterly Executive
2: 65–77.
Dahlen, C., and J. Elfsson. 1999.“An analysis of
the current and future ERP market—With a
focus on Sweden.” Master’s Thesis.
Stockholm, Sweden:The Royal Institute of
Technology. http://www.pdu.se/xjobb.pdf.
Davenport,T. 2000. Mission Critical: Recognizing
the Promise of Enterprise Systems. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Fryer, Bronwyn. Sept. 1999.“The ROI
challenge.” CFO 85–90.
Holland, C., B. Light, and P. Kawakek. 1999.
“Beyond enterprise resource planning
projects: Innovative strategies for
competitive advantage.” Proceedings of the
7th European Conference on Information
Systems, J. Pries-Heje, C. Ciborra, K. Kautz,
J.Valor, E. Christiaanse, D.Avison, and
C. Heje (Eds.), Copenhagen Business School,
288–301.
Holland, C., and B. Light. 2001.“A stage
maturity model for enterprise resource plan-
ning systems use.” Database for Advances in
Information Systems 35: 34–45.
Honig, Susan. 1999.“The changing landscape of
computerized accounting systems.” CPA
Journal 69: 14–20.
Jensen, R., and R. Johnson. 1999.“The enterprise
resource planning system as a strategic
solution.” Information Strategy 15: 28–33.
Kalling,T. 2003.“ERP systems and the strategic
management processes that lead to
competitive advantage.” Information
Resources Management Journal 16: 46–67.
Kremers, M., and  H.Van Dissel. 2000.“ERP
system migrations.” Communications of the
ACM 43(4): 53–56.
Laughlin, S. P. 1999.“An ERP game plan.”
Journal of Business Strategy 20: 32–37.
Mabert,V. M.,A. Soni, and M.A.
Venkataramanan. 2001.“Enterprise resource
planning: Common myths versus evolving
reality.” Business Horizons 44: 269–276.
Mabert,V. M.,A. Soni, and M.A.
Venkataramanan. 2000.“Enterprise resource
planning survey of U.S. manufacturing firms.”
Production and Inventory Management
Journal 41: 52–88.
Markus, M. L., S.Axline, D. Petrie, and C.Tanis.
2000.“Learning from adopters’ experiences
with ERP: Problems encountered and success
achieved.” Journal of Information Technology
15: 245–265.
McNurlin, B. 2001.“Will users of ERP stay
satisfied?” Sloan Management Review
42: 13.
Olhager, Jan, and Erik Selldin. 2003.“Enterprise
resource planning survey of Swedish
SUGGESTED RESOURCES FOR ON-LINE RESEARCH
Web site
What It Provides
www.amrresearch.com
Results of vendor surveys
www.technologyevaluation.com
Market research
www.computerworld.com/softwaretopics/erp
Links to useful ERP sites, articles,
publications, and chat rooms
www.erpfans.com
Links to support groups for many vendors
www.apics.org/resources/magazine/current
Link to current APICS news
15

A Foundation for Understanding Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
manufacturing firms.” European Journal of
Operational Research 146: 365–373.
Oliver, R. 1999.“ERP is dead. Long live ERP.”
Management Review 88: 12–13.
Palaniswamy, R., and T. Frank. 2000.“Enhancing
manufacturing performance with ERP
systems.” Information Systems Management
17: 43–55.
Parr,A., and G. Shanks. 2000.“A model of ERP
project implementation.” Journal of
Information Technology 15: 289–303.
Piturro, M. 1999.“How midsize companies
are buying ERP.” Journal of Accountancy
188: 41–48.
Plotkin,H.March 1999.“ERP:How to make
them work.”Harvard Management Update 3–4.
Ross, Jeanne, Michael Vitale, and Leslie
Willcocks. 2003.“The continuing ERP
Revolution: Sustainable lessons, new models
of delivery,” in Second-Wave Enterprise
Resource Planning Systems. Graeme Shanks,
Peter Seddon, and Leslie Willcocks (Eds.),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2003. pp. 102–132.
Shanks, Graeme, Peter Seddon, and Leslie
Willcocks. 2003.“Introduction: ERP—the
quiet revolution,” Second-Wave Enterprise
Resource Planning Systems. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
pp. 1–23.
Somers,Toni, and Klara Nelson. 2003.“The
impact of strategy and integration mecha-
nisms on enterprise system value: Empirical
evidence from manufacturing firms.”
European Journal of Operational Research
146: 315–338.
Stein,T. 1999.“Making ERP add up—
companies that implemented enterprise
resource planning systems with little regard
to return on investment are starting to look
for quantifiable results.” Information Week
24: 59.
Umble, Elisabeth, Ronald Haft, and M. Michael
Umble. 2003.“Enterprise resource planning:
Implementation procedures and critical
success factors.” European Journal of
Operational Research 146: 241–257.
16

Re-engineering
and Enterprise
Resource
Planning
Systems
Objectives
1. Recognize the factors associated with the evolution to enterprise systems, including business
process re-engineering, client-server networking, and the emergence of integrated databases.
2. Understand the role of process modeling in re-designing business processes.
◆
BACKGROUND
In the twentieth century, we have seen the emergence of the “factory farm,” which rev-
olutionized American agriculture through the use of technology. Technology alone,
however, was not the main reason for the tremendous productivity improvements
associated with this form of organization, the factory farm. These productivity
improvements were possible because of the combination of technology plus new, inno-
vative procedures. This was one of the first instances of “re-engineering.” In this chap-
ter, you will learn how ERP has contributed to business process re-engineering, com-
bined with the use of new information technology.
The definition of re-engineering is “the fundamental rethinking and radical
redesign of business processes to achieve dramatic improvements in critical, contem-
porary measures of performance, such as cost, quality, service, and speed” (Hammer
and Champy, 1993). To understand re-engineering, it is important to understand the
concept of the value chain. The value chain consists of the primary and secondary
activities of the firm. Re-engineering strives for the efficient re-design of the com-
pany’s value chain.
In Table 1, the primary activities of the firm include inbound logistics, operations,
outbound logistics, marketing, and service. These activities are essential to creating,
producing, marketing, selling, and supporting a product or service.An information sys-
tem supports each of these primary activities. This information system can cut the cost
From Chapter 2 of Enterprise Resource Planning, First Edition. Mary Sumner. Copyright © 2005
by Pearson Education, Inc.All rights reserved.
17

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Primary
Inbound
Outbound 
Marketing
Activities
Logistics
Operations
Logistics
and Sales
Service
Functions
Materials 
Manufacturing;
Order
Advertising;
Service;
handling;
parts assembly
processing;
promotion
repair
delivery
shipping
Information 
Automated
Manufacturing
On-line 
Marketing
Remote
systems 
warehousing
control systems
order entry 
analysis
machine
supporting 
systems
systems
systems
diagnostics
primary 
activities
TABLE 1
The Value Chain: Primary Activities
Support Activities
Information Systems
Organization
Electronic mail (facilitates communications throughout the
organization)
Human resources
Skills databases
Technology
Computer-aided design and manufacturing
Purchasing
On-line links to suppliers’ databases
TABLE 2
The Value Chain: Secondary Activities
of performing a value activity, or it can be used to provide a “value-added” feature to
the product or service. For example, the value activity, called outbound logistics, deals
with processing orders to customers.An on-line order entry system which enables cus-
tomers to order electronically can cut the time and cost of this value activity.The value
activity, called service, can be supported by remote machine diagnostics, which “adds
value” by providing on-line diagnostic support.
In Table 2, a set of secondary activities support the primary activities of the orga-
nization.These secondary activities include organizational structure, human resources,
technology, and purchasing. Information systems can support each of these secondary
activities as well. For example, electronic mail can support the organizational structure
by facilitating timely communications. Information systems can support purchasing by
enabling purchasing agents to link into suppliers’ databases to place orders, determine
inventory levels, and check pricing.
Supply chain management involves the planning and control of all tasks along the
business value chain. In this way, suppliers can link directly to manufacturers, manufac-
turers can link directly to retailers, and retailers can link directly to customers. These
electronic linkages reduce costs, improve the timeliness of order processing and
delivery, and increase service levels.
18

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Driving Forces
External Responses
Internal Changes
Deregulation
Customer focus
Re-engineering work
Consolidation
Quality emphasis
Corporate cultural change
Changing values
Responsiveness
Teams
Customer sophistication
Strategic relationships
Empower workers
Technological advances
Downsizing
Quality management
TABLE 3
Motivation for Business Re-engineering
In today’s economy, some of the major motivations for streamlining and
re-engineering business processes are customer sophistication, deregulation, and
increasing competition on a global level. These driving forces provide a rationale for
re-thinking existing business practices and using technology to create new forms of
work (see Table 3). As with the factory farm, productivity increases require the use
of technology and changes in existing work methods and procedures. ERP can intro-
duce process improvement and process re-design.
In a work environment which has fragmented business processes, an external
event, such as a competitor’s price change, may trigger a whole set of fragmented
business processes, which involve multiple individuals and take extra time (see
Illustration 1). In general, responsiveness to market demands and a focus on customer
needs require quick response time and the simplification and integration of processes.
◆
BUSINESS PROCESS RE-ENGINEERING
In many current systems, technology has mechanized old ways of doing work.The best
way to see this is to use several case studies, explaining the situation before and after
re-engineering took place.The first case study deals with the Accounts Payable System
at Ford Motor Company. In the “before re-engineering” situation, independent data-
bases were maintained by Purchasing, Receiving, and Accounts Payable. When items
were purchased, a record was set up in the Purchasing database.When shipments from
the Supplier were received, the Receiving Department would update its database with
the amount received. If the shipments were partial shipments, then the record in the
Purchasing database did not match up with the record in the Receiving database.These
inconsistencies created problems in Accounts Payable, which had its own database and
was responsible for providing the vendor payments
After re-engineering, an integrated database supporting Purchasing, Receiving,
and Accounts Payable included “common data.” You will see these re-engineered
processes in Illustration 2. The company instituted a new “business rule” that Acc-
ounts Payable should only pay Suppliers when shipments were received (i.e., we pay
for what we get). In this way, many of the inconsistencies were eliminated. The 
19

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Price
approval
Price impact
request
Request
Need for
price change
Impact
analysis
Need for
price change
Field
notice
Price
notice
Catalog
change
Price
change
Price
change
Finance
Cost
accounting
Accounts
receivable
Competitive
analysis
Marketing
Product
manager
Salesperson
Sales
Sales
region
Sales
support
Competitive price move
ILLUSTRATION 1
Work Environment with Fragmented Business Processes
number of administrative staff in Accounts Payable was significantly reduced with
the procedures and the common database. One of the most important principles of
business re-engineering is to “break away from outdated rules.” In this case, the proce-
dural change, the technological support, and the cross-functional collaboration
reduced the administrative cost. Elements of business re-engineering are summarized
in Table 4.
In addition to Ford Motor Company’s Accounts Payable re-engineering exam-
ple, many excellent case studies in re-engineering exist (see Table 5). At IBM
Credit Authorization, for example, the re-engineering process eliminated a multi-step
20

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Purchase order
Purchasing
Goods
Receiving
Warehouse
Payment
Accounts payable
Database
ILLUSTRATION 2
Re-engineering Example: Ford Motor Accounts Payable
Elements
Activities
Business processes
Do not automate existing business processes; break away
from outdated rules
Integration
Integrate business processes
Technology
Use technology to re-design business processes
Cross-functional coordination
Re-design business processes from a cross-functional view
Timing
Improve processes continuously
Objective
Implement market-driven strategies designed to provide a
competitive edge
TABLE 4
Elements of Business Re-engineering
authorization process involving multiple departments and led to the design of a posi-
tion responsible for making the credit authorization decision. At Xerox Product
Development, a concurrent engineering process, using a common integrated database,
reduced product development lead times and improved responsiveness to market
needs. Proctor and Gamble collaborated with Wal-Mart to manage the inventory of
21

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Before Re-engineering
After Re-engineering
Business Impact
Ford Motor Company 
Independent databases
An integrated database
Fewer inconsistencies;
Accounts Payable
maintained by  
supporting multiple
reduction in clerical
purchasing, receiving,
functions (e.g.,
overhead; better
and accounts payable
purchasing, receiving,
responsiveness to
accounts payable)
customers
IBM Credit
Multi-step credit 
A “deal structurer”
Timely decision
Authorization
authorization process 
makes the credit
making; more
involving multiple 
authorization decision,
effective customer
departments and 
using multiple
service; elimination of
multiple individuals 
databases
redundant tasks and
(e.g., a pricer, checker)
bottlenecks
Xerox Product 
Sequential product
Concurrent 
Elimination of bottle-
Development
development process,
engineering, using a
necks and delays;
which meant that 
common integrated
faster product
workers had to wait 
database and a
development;
until prior steps were 
computer-assisted
responsiveness to
completed
design system
market needs
Wal-Mart Inventory 
Wal-Mart ordered its
Wal-Mart let its vendor,
Better inventory
Management
own stock of 
Proctor and Gamble,
management; more
merchandise from 
replenish its inventory
effective inventory
vendors; dealt with 
according to market
replenishment
excess inventory or 
trends
insufficient inventory
Hewlett-Packard’s 
Decentralized
Central negotiation of
Cost savings through
Purchasing Process
purchasing led to a 
corporate volume
the use of centrally
loss of corporate-wide 
discounts and use of a
negotiated discounts
discounts
shared database of 
negotiated prices
TABLE 5
Re-engineering Case Studies
Wal-Mart stores. Hewlett-Packard (HP) reaped substantial cost savings by creating a
shared database of centrally-negotiated prices.
You will see an illustration of Xerox Product Development’s process before and
after re-engineering in Illustration 3.
In summary, these re-engineering examples apply a number of principles, which
are summarized in Table 6. One of these principles, “organize around outcomes,” pro-
vides a rationale for creating newly designed jobs, such as Mutual Benefit Life’s posi-
tion of “case manager,” who is responsible for coordinating all underwriting tasks.This
position is possible because the case manager has access to multiple databases. In this
example, as in others, the combination of a re-engineered job and information technol-
ogy is the key to improved productivity and reduced costs.
The HP Purchasing database supports two different re-engineering principles. One
principle, “treat geographically dispersed resources as if they were centralized,” is
implemented because local branch managers have access to a common database
of centrally negotiated vendor prices. In addition, local managers can make their
22

Engineering evaluation
and development
Conceptual
design
Product definition
Process definition
Design cost estimate
Review for release readiness
Engineering release
Request for
engineering action
Conceptual design
Engineering and
evaluation development
Engineering and
evaluation development
Drawing and
data repository
Product definition
Process definition
Design cost estimate
Engineering review
Engineering
release
Data
ILLUSTRATION 3
Re-engineering Example: Xerox
After
Before
23

Principle
Case Study
Example
Organize around outcomes,
Mutual Benefit Life
A case manager performs and
not tasks
coordinates all underwriting
tasks centrally
Have those who use the output 
Hewlett-Packard
Department managers make
of the process perform the 
their own purchases using a
process
shared database of approved
vendors
Link parallel activities during 
Xerox
Concurrent engineering teams
the process, rather than at the 
participate in new product
end of the process
design and engineering
Treat geographically dispersed 
Hewlett-Packard
Each division has access to a
resources as if centralized
shared purchasing database at
HP’s corporate office
Capture information at 
Mutual Benefit Life
Customer service 
the source
representatives enter insurance
application information into a
central database
Subsume information 
Mutual Benefit Life
Customer service
processing work into the 
representatives have access to
real work that produces 
information for decision
the information
making
Flatten organizational layers
Mutual Benefit Life,
Decision making is
Hewlett-Packard, Xerox
decentralized to the appropri-
ate level; in many cases, this
eliminates or lessens the need
for mid-management
TABLE 6
Principles of Re-engineering Applied
Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
own purchases, rather than going through a central purchasing bureaucracy. This
implements the principle “have those who use the output of the process perform the
process.”
All of these re-engineering examples support common themes. One of these
themes is to decentralize decision making to the decision maker to be responsive to
the customers’ needs. This has the effect of flattening organizational layers because
there is less need for mid-level management. Another common theme is that the use
of information technology (e.g., shared databases, networking) facilitates the newly
re-engineered processes. In the Mutual Benefit Life, Hewlett-Packard, Xerox, and
Ford examples, access to central databases is essential to new ways of doing work.
These new ways of doing work mean re-designing jobs. The positions of “customer
service representative,” who makes underwriting decisions at Mutual Benefit Life,
and “deal structurer,” who makes credit authorization decisions at IBM Credit, are
examples of re-engineered jobs. With decentralized decision making, these positions
entail judgment, leadership, and the ability to adapt to changing customer needs (see
Table 7).
24

Organization
Traditional
Re-engineered
Job design
Narrow
Broad
Structure
Hierarchical
Flat
Career moves
Vertical
Horizontal
Work rules
Procedures
Judgment
Management
Supervision
Leadership
People skills needed
Structured
Adaptive
TABLE 7
Re-structuring Business Processes Means Re-structuring Jobs
◆
PROCESS MODELING
In order to depict the changes in data and processes associated with business
re-engineering, a commonly used tool in systems analysis is the process model. The
process model consists of five objects:
• The business process:The process depicts the business activities which are accom-
plished (e.g., check credit, mail invoice).
• The data store:The store depicts data that are needed by the business processes.
• The data flow:The flow depicts data being transferred from a process to another
process or between a process and a data store.
• The organizational unit:The organizational unit depicts the units of the organiza-
tion in which these processes take place (e.g., Accounts Receivable, Sales).
• The event, including triggers and outcomes:A trigger is an event which “triggers”
a process, and an outcome is an event which results from a process.
A short case illustrates the design of a process model. Neighborhood Food
Cooperative is a rapidly expanding organization which provides its members with gro-
ceries at favorable rates, because of its ability to buy in bulk from farmers and whole-
sale suppliers. The Board of the Cooperative is interested in analyzing its administra-
tive processes, including purchasing and distribution. A process model can depict the
following processes.
The Cooperative functions on a weekly cycle.Members may send in or deliver
a shopping list at any time during the week,either in handwritten form,or
using the pre-printed form for which the Cooperative has suppliers (e.g.,eggs,
meat,vegetables,etc.).The list is scanned,and any items which the Board has
decided will not be supplied this week (e.g.,coffee) are deleted.Each Friday
afternoon,all the lists are merged to get an overall demand for each item,so
that the staff can survey the prices (by calling each supplier for each item) and
get the best deal.By closing time on Friday,orders covering all goods needed
have been placed with suppliers by phone;these are followed by written con-
firmations.Suppliers invoice the Cooperative,ten days net,and the invoices
are held inAccounts Payable and paid weekly.On Sunday,the shipments are
delivered to the Cooperative where they are checked to be certain that the
Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
25

Receive bill
in mail to be
paid with the
next week’s
order
Pay
suppliers
weekly
(10 days net)
Deliver
order
if
necessary
Prepare
individual
orders
Deliver
shipments to
Cooperative
Invoice
the
Cooperative
Supply
prices to
Cooperative
Check
shipment for
accuracy and
orderliness
Follow up
order with
written
confirmation
Merge
lists to get
overall
demand
Check
invoice for
accuracy /
Put in A/P
Place
orders
by phone
Call
for prices
Accept and
scan lists/
Delete items
that won’t be
supplied
Distribute
preprinted
forms
Send in or deliver
shopping list
along with
payment for
previous week
Pick up
order from
Cooperative
Pay fees
Member
receives
order
Weekly
cycle
begins
Member
receives
order
Members
Suppliers
CO-OP
Unspec.
Suppliers
/Items
Does
member
have good
credit?
Has
member
paid
fees?
CO-OP
A/R
CO-OP
A/P
Order
system
Item
prices
Supplier
A/R
Members
No
Yes
Yes
FIGURE 1
Order Processing System at Neighborhood Food Co-op
26

correct items were shipped.The individual shopping baskets of the members
are then made up for pick-up by the customer or for delivery.
In Figure 1, you will see a process model depicting an order processing system at
Neighborhood Food Cooperative.
The process model is useful in the re-engineering process. First, it is useful for ana-
lytical purposes because it provides a graphical representation of the activities of the
current system. An analysis of the current system provides insight into changes in
process, information flows, work structure, and organization which are needed to
improve the productivity of the current system. Based upon these changes, a process
model can be built that incorporates these changes and is based upon “best practices.”
A best practice is a better way of doing business; it is an improved method.
The best practices supported by modules within ERP systems are based upon the
following: re-engineered process models, which depict improved process changes; inte-
grated data, which are shared by multiple processes; and structural changes, which
streamline business functions and maximize productivity. Seeing the differences
between the current business process model and the new process model is useful
because this gives everyone an opportunity to analyze the changes in work flow, work
systems, and work structures that will occur as a result of the ERP implementation.
Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
◆
RE-ENGINEERING AT RELIABLE FINANCE COMPANY
A case study will provide an excellent example of how a process model can be used to
depict the changes in business processes and information in re-engineering.
BACKGROUND OF THE BUSINESS
The Reliable Finance Company (RFC) started in a small mid-western town in the
1890s, lending money to farmers and businessmen. RFC assumed risks that the com-
mercial banks were unwilling to take and charged slightly higher interest rates.
Now, RFC has 178 branches, from Denver to Cleveland and from Detroit to
Houston. The company is committed to making loans to individuals to assist them in
making such purchases as automobiles, appliances, and home improvements.
Ed Clarkson, grandson of its founder, along with a new management team, man-
ages the company.They have decided on a growth plan that would expand the number
of RFC branches to 400 within the next three years and to 1,000 branches within
another five-year period after that. The locations will be selected in growing suburbs,
especially in Texas, Florida, California, and Arizona.
These expansion plans will require an enhanced information system to support
transactions processing for loans, payments, and settlements. The President has asked
the MIS Department to develop recommendations for the re-design of the existing
consumer loan system.
ANALYSIS OF THE CURRENT LOAN APPLICATION AND SCREENING SYSTEM
The first system to be analyzed is the loan application and screening system. Some of
the activities for loan application screening are handled by the branches, and some
of the activities are handled by the home office, which is located at Centerville, Indiana.
27

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Each RFC branch has a manager, several customer service advisors, and clerical
staff. Applicants for loans complete a Loan Application Form with the assistance of a
customer service advisor. The branch personnel check local income and bank refer-
ences, and the Branch Manager gives the application a preliminary screening prior to
sending the materials to the Home Office in Centerville.At the Home Office, the staff
in the Screening Department check if the loan applicant has defaulted on any prior
loans with RFC and check on outstanding and delinquent loans to ensure all current
loans held by the applicant are in good order. Finally, the Screening staff obtain an
external credit report from TRW to determine the applicant’s creditworthiness based
upon other external loan activities. Based upon data from the Branch and Home
Office credit searches, the Loan Officer in the Home Office determines whether to
accept or reject the loan application.
If the loan application is accepted, the Loan Department generates a check for the
loan amount and sends a confirmation of the loan’s acceptance to the branch personnel.
Loan paperwork is sent to Accounting, which sets up the loan account in the
Outstanding Loans File.TheAccounting Department prints aVoucher Booklet,which is
sent to the Branch. Once the Branch receives the letter of acceptance and the Voucher
Booklet,it notifies the customer to come and collect the check andVoucher Booklet.
The branch personnel keep copies of the vouchers in a local Outstanding Loans
file for each customer.These voucher copies are organized by due date. In this way, the
Branch Manager can see what payments are due each day. The information systems
department produces monthly management reports summarizing new loans by branch.
When a new loan is confirmed, the branch personnel set up an index card file for
each customer, with details such as name, address, Loan ID, and principal amount.This
information is not shown on the voucher copies, and it is often useful in identifying
accounts to which payments should be applied. Figure 2 depicts the current loan
application screening process.
CURRENT PROBLEMS
At the current time, RFC is planning to expand the number of branches from 187 to
400 in the next three years, and to a target of 1,000 branches over the next five years
after that.To accommodate expansion plans, the current system will need to be stream-
lined, modified, and enhanced.
One problem is the various steps in the loan approval process typically take 10–13
working days. In many of the cities where RFC has branches, commercial banks
approve or disapprove loan applications in 2–3 days. This means that some of the best
loan candidates (e.g., those who are the best credit risk) obtain approval for their loans
at least a week before RFC gets around to approving them. RFC is losing some of its
best loan prospects to the commercial banks.
OBJECTIVES
Management is interested in achieving the objective of reducing the time it takes to
approve a loan from 10–13 days to 2–3 days in order to be competitive with the com-
mercial banks. In order to attain this goal, a new process model has been designed. In
the new process model, a branch-level customer service representative has local access
to all of the databases needed to make the loan approval decision (see Figure 3).
28

Applicant
Cust. Svc.
advisors
Complete
loan app.
form
Keep
organized copies
of vouchers
Collect check
and voucher
booklet
Notify applicant
that check and
booklet are ready
Assist
applicant
with form
Set up
customer
file
Branch
manager
Clerical
(branch)
Screening
staff
TRW
Loan
officer
Loan
dept.
Acct.
dept.
Unspec.
Letter of
acceptance
Index card
file (cust. info)
Outstanding
loans
(local file)
Need a
loan
Loan
received
Check local
income and
bank refs.
Verify all
current loans
in good order
Obtain
external
credit report
Provide
credit
 report
Generate
check for
amt. of loan
Preliminary
screening of
application
Set up
new loan
account
Print
voucher
booklet
Accept/reject
loan app.?
Loan
records
Credit
report data
Outstanding
loans (home
office file)
Send materials
Accepted
Loan
paperwork
Voucher
booklet
FIGURE 2
Process Model of the Current Loan Application Screening System
29

Applicant
Clerical/
Customer
service rep.
Loan officer/
Branch
manager
Unspec.
Complete
loan
application
form
Need a
loan
Collect check
and voucher
booklet
Verify loan
application
information
Compare
applicant to
“delinquency
profile”
Send
rejection
letter to
applicant
Notify
applicant that
check and
booklet are
ready
Print voucher
booklet
Approve/
reject loan
app.?
Set up new
loan account
Generate
loan check
Approved
Delinquency
profile
data store
Loan
received
Customer
information
file
Outstanding
loan file
Loan
delinquency
records
TRW
(credit
report)
Applicant
ext. bank
records
Applicant
employer
records
Retrieve
Create
Retrieve
Rejected
FIGURE 3
Process Model of the New Loan Application Screening System
30

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
◆
MAKING RE-ENGINEERING WORK
In his analysis of why re-engineering efforts are a failure, Rosenthal argues that orga-
nizations need to apply a “clean slate approach” to process re-design and to move
away from the status quo. Based upon an in-depth study of re-engineering projects in
20 companies, Rosenthal found that 11 of the 20 projects measured less than 5% in
overall returns, through increased revenues or decreased costs, from re-engineering
efforts (Rosenthal, 1993).
The reason why so many re-engineering projects fail, Rosenthal notes, is that many
of these projects are too narrowly focused (e.g., they focus on a single activity within a
single function, such as accounts receivable) or are too general in nature (e.g., their
objective may be to create more knowledgeable reservations agents, whereas cus-
tomers just want faster bookings). When a process or series of processes is re-
engineered, jobs need to be re-designed and reward structures need to be in place to
provide incentives to change behavior.
Re-engineering efforts at Banca di America e di Italia (BAI),AT&T, and Siemens
Nixdorf illustrate re-engineering that works. At BAI, when a customer comes in to
make a deposit, the teller can analyze the customer profile using on-line databases
and suggest new financial services. AT&T created a project management position to
coordinate PBX sales from the beginning to end, resulting in a percentage increase
from 31–71% in bills paid within 30 days of installation. At Siemens Nixdorf, remote
diagnostics of networking issues helped troubleshoot 80% of the possible repairs and
enabled service technicians to focus on the important issues. In addition, parts were
loaded into service technicians’ cars so they did not need to make two trips, one to
diagnose the problem and another to make the repair (see Table 8).
A clean slate approach to process re-design calls for continuous training for new
roles so individuals do not fall back into “old behavior.” There must be a way of mea-
suring performance and tracking progress toward achieving new goals.Communications
are important so people understand why their behavior should be changed. Finally,
information technology should support the re-engineering of business processes
(Rosenthal, 1993).
Re-designed
Company
Processes
Before
After
BAI
Branch customer 
64 activities, 9 forms,
25 activities, 2 forms,
service
14 accounts
2 accounts
AT&T
PBX sales
12 project handoffs
3 handoffs
Siemens Nixdorf
Field service
30 support centers;
5 support centers;
1,800 headcount
800 headcount
TABLE 8
Re-engineering that Works
31

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Increased power
Client workstations have access to server-based software
Increased control
Server-based software can be systematically maintained and
upgraded
Increased efficiency
Multiple locations can use common information resources
Improved user interfaces
Graphical user interface (GUI) interface
Improved database control
Common access to a relational database
TABLE 9
Characteristics of a Client-Server Computing Environment
◆
HOW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FACILITATES ERP
ERP relies upon the use of information technology, including client-server computing
and shared databases. Many of the changes in business process design, work re-
engineering, and sharing of information resources are facilitated through the imple-
mentation of information technology.
EMERGENCE OF CLIENT-SERVER COMPUTING
The basic rationale for client-server computing is that application use is divided
between a “client,” which is usually a personal computer, and a “server,” or multiple
servers, which offer certain resources. The components of client-server computing
include a relational database, a server or servers, workstations, a network, and client
software for the workstations. In the client-server environment, desktop systems
are connected via networks to dedicated background servers, including file servers,
print servers, application servers, and database servers. Its advantages can be seen in
Table 9.
INTEGRATED DATABASES
The emergence of integrated databases is a foundation for ERP systems. Prior to inte-
grated databases, each functional unit within an organization created, maintained, and
updated its own databases (e.g., customer databases, supplier databases, employee
databases) (see Illustration 4). After the emergence of integrated databases, organiza-
tional units shared common data maintained in central databases.
The advantages of integrated databases are data sharing, reduced data redun-
dancy, improved data consistency, data independence, and improved data integrity.
Data sharing means a common data resource supports functional units across the
company. This reduces redundancy and contributes to data consistency. For example,
a customer number is consistent across modules, including sales and marketing,
financial accounting, and customer service. If for some reason a vendor number
changes, this change is made anywhere the vendor number is used across application
modules.
In addition, data independence means that data can be maintained separately
from the application modules, which use the data. If a data definition is changed,
32

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Product
planning
Product
development
Competitive
analysis
Product
management
Sales
Claims
Customer
service
Cost
accounting
Accounts
receivable
Data
Data
Data
Data
Data
Data
Data
Data
Data
ILLUSTRATION 4
Before: Data Are Maintained Independently By Various Organizational Units
then changes do not need to be made to application modules, which use the data. For
example, if a customer zip code is changed from a five-digit numeric field (63102) to a
nine-digit numeric field (63102-1107), the data definition for the zip code is changed in
the database management system, but the programs using this data element need not
be changed.This substantially reduces application maintenance costs.
Finally, a database management system improves data integrity and provides cen-
tral data administration. The database administrator can control access to data,
updates to the database, and security. Professional data administration procedures,
including backup and recovery, are assured. The security and integrity of the database
are important for the management of information and the effective use of information
for decision making.
ERP systems rely upon the use of an integrated database, in which data elements
and their relationships are defined to support multiple applications. Integrated data-
bases provide concurrency control, which enables multiple users to make updates to
the database. In addition, the database administrator provides controls to assure that
only authorized personnel can add, delete, and update data in the database. Security
procedures include login identification, account codes, and passwords.
33

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
◆
THE EMERGENCE OF PROCESS ENTERPRISES
As organizations implement ERP, they are moving away from the “silos,” or the spe-
cific units focused on products, regions, or functions.To emerge as a process enterprise,
organizations need to stress teamwork over turf and hierarchy and to focus on achiev-
ing “process goals.” One of the ways of making the transition to process management is
to give authority over work and budgets to “process owners.” (Hammer, 1999).
A case in point is Texas Instrument’s calculator business in the early 1990s. TI
had long product development life cycles, and they were losing business to competitors.
Management wanted to re-engineer TI’s calculator business, and this is what happened:
The first pilot teams not only failed to achieve the desired reductions in devel-
opment times but also barely managed to operate at all.They were, in effect,
sabotaged by the existing organization, which viewed them as interlopers.
Functional departments were unwilling to cede people, space, or responsibility
to the teams.The technical writers and designers charged with creating docu-
mentation got instructions from the product team and then got conflicting
orders from their supervisors in the marketing department.The corporate
training unit refused to relinquish control over the development of training
materials, and the advertising department insisted on continuing to create
product advertising.An effort that had been intended to create harmony in
product development instead created discord.
Product
planning
Product
development
Competitive
analysis
Product
management
Sales
Claims
Customer
service
Cost
accounting
Accounts
receivable
Data
Data
Data
Data
Uniform, Consistent, Available Information
ILLUSTRATION 5
After: Databases Are Integrated Across Functional Lines
34

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
The problem was that the power still resided in the old functional departments.
Management tried to superimpose an integrated process on a fragmented organization.
To introduce re-engineering successfully, management created organizational units
responsible for product development (e.g., of calculators) and created a process owner
with budgetary authority to manage the process.The process owner had authority over
designing the process, measuring its performance, and training the workers. The result
was that product development time was reduced by 50% (Hammer, 1999).
At IBM, a similar transition occurred. IBM wanted to standardize its operations
worldwide, by instituting common processes for order fulfillment and product devel-
opment to replace the diverse processes used in different parts of the world and for dif-
ferent products. However, independent country and product managers provided a
roadblock to rolling out the standardized processes.
What did IBM do? It changed the management structure and gave responsibility
for each process to a member of the Corporate Executive Committee. This shifted
power away from the country and product managers to senior management and
resulted in the successful implementation of standardized processes, resulting in cus-
tomer satisfaction and $9 billion in cost savings (Hammer, 1999).
ERP AND BUSINESS PROCESS CHANGE
The process changes associated with making re-engineering work are critical to the
success of ERP. At Owens Corning, an ERP implementation failed because regional
managers rejected the software or sought to tailor it to the needs of their own units.To
overcome this resistance, Owens Corning created the role of “process owner,” with the
authority to design the process, measure its performance, and train front-line workers
to perform it. This role had to be maintained, or the old organizational structures
would have re-emerged (Hammer, 1999).
◆
SUMMARY
ERP provides an opportunity to re-design business processes. With re-engineering,
business processes are simplified and business rules are improved. In addition, re-
designing processes provides the foundation for new opportunities, such as eBusiness.
To make process management work, all employees must “buy into” the new processes
and understand their role in contributing to the success of the new system. Re-
engineering with ERP enables organizations to be more responsive to changing
markets and to shifts in competitors’ strategies.
Questions for Discussion
1. Conduct a search of on-line databases to find a case in business re-engineering, similar to
some of the cases mentioned in this (e.g., Ford Motor Company, Mutual Benefit Life,
Hewlett-Packard).
a. Was an ERP system associated with the business-process re-engineering?
b. What business benefits were derived from adopting best practices?
c. What obstacles needed to be overcome as a result of implementing changes in work
flow, work methods, and work systems?
35

2. How does the implementation of ERP contribute to business process re-engineering?
3. How does information technology facilitate the process of business re-engineering.Without
information technology, would business process change be possible?
Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
◆◆◆Case
Re-engineering the Payment Processing 
System at RFC
Read the following case, which describes the cur-
rent payment processing system at RFC, and
complete the activities at the end of the case.
DESCRIPTION OF THE CURRENT
PAYMENT PROCESSING SYSTEM
Once the loan is set up, customers can pay in
three different ways. First, customers can bring
their payments into the branch in the form of
cash, check, or money order. Second, they can
mail their payments to the branch. The branch
personnel verify their Loan ID, if necessary by
checking the Customer card file, and update the
loan Outstanding Loans File by pulling the
voucher copy corresponding to the payment and
stamping it “paid” and then filing it in the Paid
Vouchers file in sequence by Loan ID and due
date sequence.
The actual payments are then batched and
deposited in the branch bank each afternoon.
The Home Office is notified by means of an
Advice of Payment Received (APR), which is
filled out for each payment and mailed to the
Home Office.
Third, customers may pay the Home Office
directly. If they do so, the Home Office Payment
Processing Department verifies that each pay-
ment is complete, by checking the enclosed
voucher. If the voucher is missing, the payment
processing clerk uses a printout of the central
Outstanding Loans File to look up the Loan ID
corresponding with the correct account.Then the
branch personnel are notified of the payment by
means of an APR, which is then mailed to the
branch personnel.
The details of the payment are used to
update the Outstanding Loans File in the Home
Office.Each evening,a batch payment processing
run is used to update all the accounts centrally,
based upon payments received during that work-
ing day. In addition, the branch personnel use the
APRs from the Home Office as well as its own
internal records of payments that have been sent
directly to the branch personnel to update its
own local Outstanding Loans File.
Payments made directly to the Home Office
are batched and sent directly to the Home Office
bank.The payment processing system produces a
payment report for the Accounting Department
and a branch-by-branch payment report for each
Branch Manager.
DELINQUENCY ANALYSIS SYSTEM
On a weekly basis, the delinquency analysis sys-
tem is run. It checks the Outstanding Loans File
in the Home Office and determines if payments
are overdue. It generates an Aged Trial Balance
Report, which indicates which payments are 15,
30, 45, and 60 days overdue. When a payment is
15 days overdue, a polite First Reminder is sent.
When a payment is more than 30 days overdue,
a second (less polite) reminder is sent. Four
reminders, with increasing degrees of insistence,
are sent. All of these reminders are computer-
generated. After the loan becomes 60 days over-
due, it is moved to the Collections Department,
and collections agents follow up at that time.
SETTLEMENT ACCOUNTING SYSTEM
From time to time, customers want to finish pay-
ing a loan before it becomes due. In these cases,
the customer requests a settlement figure, which
is the amount required to settle the outstanding
balance on the loan. If the request is urgent, the
Branch Manager will phone the request to the
36

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Home Office. The information systems depart-
ment now prepares a settlement run, which is
processed nightly, with the urgent request for
the settlement balance. The settlement balance
is sent back to the Branch Manager the next
morning.
PROBLEMS WITH PAYMENT
PROCESSING
At the current time, RFC is planning to expand
the number of branches from 187 to 400 in the
next three years and to a target of 1,000 over the
next five years after that. To accommodate
expansion plans, the current system will need to
be streamlined, modified, and enhanced. Some
of its current problems are the following:
1. About 80% of the payments are made to
branch personnel, and the rest are mailed
to the Home Office. Of the payments that
are mailed, the payment voucher from the
Voucher Booklet is missing in about half
the cases.This does not matter so much at
the branch location because the branch
personnel maintain a local customer card
file with the name and Loan ID. However,
at the Home Office, it is more difficult to
trace payments.At the current time,
incoming payments without an accompa-
nying voucher are identified by checking
against a printout of the Outstanding
Loans File. However, unidentified pay-
ments sometimes generate an APR to the
wrong branch, and the entire process
causes more clerical work and error
correction.
2. The bottlenecks in processing payments
trigger additional problems. Considerable
clerical overhead is caused by situations
where people do not pay until ten days
after their due date, and because of
various delays, their payment does not
actually get posted to the Outstanding
Loans File until after the Delinquency
Analysis run has sent them their first
reminder.When they call the branch
personnel to protest receiving a reminder,
the personnel have to call the Home
Office and trace their payment. Forty-four
people are currently tied up in the
Customer Service section at the Home
Office, and much of their time is spent
dealing with late and missing payment
matters.
3. Throughout the system, excessive clerical
overhead occurs. In 129 of the 187
branches, a full-time clerical person was
engaged in maintaining the local branch
loans file, in pulling voucher copies, in
recording payments, and in making out
APRs. In the other 58 branches, these
activities take between 2–5 hours 
per day.
4. Since the Outstanding Loans File is
always several days out of date, it is often
difficult to isolate loans that are delin-
quent until it is too late.About 2.5% of all
loans are never repaid. Last year
$4,795,000 was written off as uncol-
lectible.Although processing delays
account for not flagging late payers
sooner, management feels that RFC could
do a much better job of weeding out
potential delinquents during the initial
approval process.To do this, RFC wants to
build a picture of the potential delin-
quent, including age, occupation, income,
family size, location, mobility, and a host
of other criteria.A delinquency profile
will aid in identifying “high potential for
delinquency” accounts.This profile can be
developed, maintained, and modified by
Operations Research personnel on an
ongoing basis.
5. Because of error and adjustment activi-
ties, it is rarely possible to balance the
books for month end before the twelfth
(12th) of the succeeding month.This
greatly complicates planning for cash flow
and frequently requires RFC to borrow
more money that it needs and at higher
interest charges.
CASE EXERCISE
1. Draw a current process model for the
payment processing system at RFC.
2. What changes in business processes and
information do you feel will improve the
payment processing system at RFC?
3. Draw a new process model for a 
re-engineering payment processing 
system at RFC.
37

Re-engineering and Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
References
Hammer, Michael. 1990.“Re-engineering work:
Don’t automate, obliterate.” Harvard
Business Review 68: 104–112.
Hammer, Michael. 1999.“How process 
enterprises really work.” Harvard Business
Review 77: 108–118.
Hammer, Michael and Champy, James. 1993.
Re-engineering the Corporation. Harper
Business.
Rosenthal, Jim. 1993.“How to make 
re-engineering work.” Harvard Business
Review 71: 119.
38

Planning,
Design, 
and
Implementation
of Enterprise
Resource
Planning
Systems
Objective
Understand the information systems development process for enterprise systems, including
planning, design, and implementation.
I
n this chapter, you will learn about the traditional approach to information systems
design and how it compares with Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems
design. ERP design and implementation differs from traditional systems development.
In ERP design, the organization acquires a packaged software system that defines
processes and practices for the business. The main challenge in implementing ERP is
whether to change the organization’s business processes to fit the software or whether
to modify the software to fit the organization’s business processes. In this chapter, you
will learn about the trade-offs involved in re-engineering business processes to fit the
software versus customizing the software.
From Chapter 3 of Enterprise Resource Planning, First Edition. Mary Sumner. Copyright © 2005
by Pearson Education, Inc.All rights reserved.
39

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
◆
TRADITIONAL SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT
The traditional systems development life cycle included the phases of problem defini-
tion, feasibility study, systems analysis, systems design, detailed design, implementa-
tion, and maintenance (see Table 1). In systems analysis, the analyst undertakes a
detailed analysis of the current system, using tools and techniques, such as process
models and data models. Using these models, the systems designer analyzes bottle-
necks, duplication of effort, inconsistencies, and other problems with the current
system.
The fundamental approach used in traditional systems development is to analyze
the current system’s shortcomings and to develop a “new” system, which builds in
changes in processes and data that will support the firm’s business requirements. The
rationale is that automating the current system is counterproductive because the
current system may have problems, including redundant processes, insufficient data,
Step
Activities
Tools and Techniques
Problem definition
Identify problems with the 
Interviewing and data
current system
collection
Feasibility study
Assess the need for a systems 
Preliminary cost analysis
project, including technical,
economic, and management 
feasibility
Systems analysis
Undertake a detailed analysis 
Logical process models—
of the current system, including 
present system;
processes, information flows,
Logical data models—
and work organization
present system;
Organization charts 
(functional hierarchy
diagrams)
Systems design
Development of objectives for 
Logical process models—
the new system; re-engineering 
proposed system;
of processes and information
logical data models—
proposed system;
organization charts—
proposed system
Detailed design
Design of specifications for 
Program design specifications
the proposed system
output design; input design
Database design; forms design
Implementation
Software implementation;
Coding; testing;
training end-users;
documentation
development of reporting 
systems; design of controls 
and security
Maintenance
Ongoing technical support;
ongoing upgrades and 
enhancements
TABLE 1
Information Systems Design: Traditional Approach
40

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
and inefficient workflow. The systems design process provides an opportunity to re-
engineer or re-invent the current system prior to automating it. The systems design
process seeks to assure logical database design prior to detailed design, during which
the specifications for the physical system are developed (e.g., output design, input
design). Once the physical design specifications are set, then the system is pro-
grammed, tested, and implemented.
The problem with the traditional systems development life cycle is that it takes too
much time and costs too much. The traditional life cycle follows a “waterfall”
approach, in which there is a sequence of steps, starting with planning and analysis to
be followed by design, detailed design, and implementation. Since the mid-1980s, com-
panies have been seeking faster methods of developing information systems.
◆
NEW APPROACHES TO SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT
Three different approaches designed to speed up the building of information systems
were prototyping, end-user development, and software packages. In the late 1980s, pro-
totyping was introduced as a methodology for obtaining user requirements more
quickly and accurately. Using prototyping, systems designers could show “models” of
systems documents (e.g., reports, screens) to end-users to get a better idea of their
requirements. While this approach enabled end-users to specify their requirements, it
did not necessarily speed up the systems implementation process, including coding,
testing, and debugging.
End-user development was another approach introduced in the mid- to late-1980s
and is still relevant for many applications. Equipped with spreadsheets and database
packages, like Microsoft Excel and Access, end-users constructed their own informa-
tion systems. While this approach worked effectively for local departmental applica-
tions, it was not appropriate for the development of large-scale production systems
requiring quality assurance, security, documentation, backup, and live production.
In the late 1980s, software packages became more prevalent. They offered
economies of scale in development, enhancement, and maintenance, and many compa-
nies moved toward purchasing commercial off-the-shelf software. ERP systems are
large-scale, integrated commercial off-the-shelf software packages that support the
entire value chain of business functions.
◆
THE ERP SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
The ERP systems design process is different from the traditional systems development
process.The ERP systems development process includes planning, requirements analy-
sis, design, detailed design, implementation, and maintenance (see Table 2).
Planning starts with a needs assessment, which provides a business justification for
the purchase of the software. This needs assessment phase is important because of the
major investment in an ERP system and its business impact.The requirements analysis
phase of an ERP project involves specifying the business processes to be supported by
the ERP package. Most ERP vendors offer “best practices,” which are models of func-
tions supported by the ERP system.
41

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
Step
Activities
Tools and Techniques
Planning
Conduct a needs assessment;
Interviewing; cost justification
provide a business justification,
based upon the difference 
between the existing system 
and the proposed system
Requirements 
Analyze current business 
Use best practices models to 
analysis
processes and specify the 
see what the company can 
processes to be supported;
gain by implementing the 
select the ERP system
new system
Design
Re-engineer business processes 
Use the ERP methodology’s
around the best practices model 
best practices or customize
of the ERP system or customize 
the software
Detailed design
Choose standard models,
Interactive prototyping
processes, inputs, and outputs 
(e.g., customer lists, vendor lists)
Implementation
Configure the system;
Work with vendors to correct
migrate data from the old 
any “bugs” in the software;
system to the new system;
clean processes and data
develop interfaces;
Use reporting tools
implement reporting systems;
conduct testing;
implement controls, security;
train end-users
Maintenance and 
Provide technical support;
Add enhanced functionality 
continuous 
provide upgrades and 
to existing modules
improvement
enhancements
TABLE 2
ERP Systems Design Process
In the design phase of the project, the project sponsors introduce the best prac-
tices, which the ERP system supports.This entails re-engineering business processes to
fit the software. This is fundamentally different from the traditional systems develop-
ment approach, in which the systems designer defines new business requirements and
implements software to conform to these requirements. One of the fundamental design
decisions in implementing an ERP package is whether to re-engineer the organiza-
tion’s business processes to fit the software or to customize the software to fit the orga-
nization’s business practices.
PLANNING: MAKING THE BUSINESS CASE FOR ERP
The business justifications for ERP include tangible and intangible benefits, includ-
ing inventory reduction, operating cost reductions, overdue accounts collection,
process improvement, and reduction in cycle times (Ross, Vitale, and Willcocks,
2003). The technology and business rationales for ERP packages are illustrated in
Table 3.
42

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
Technology Rationales
Business Rationales
Ability to use timely operational data
Inventory cost reductions
Ability to integrate systems, instead of 
IT cost reductions
maintaining many separate systems
Ability to enhance systems without 
Personnel cost reductions
incurring the time and cost of custom 
development and modifications
Ability to implement new features, such as 
Increased profitability
Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
Access to on-line, real-time operational data
Productivity improvement
Reduction in the time and cost of systems 
Better cash management
development and maintenance
TABLE 3
Rationales for ERP
REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS
Requirements analysis activities involve (1) analyzing business processes and (2) spec-
ifying the processes to be supported by the ERP package. Since the company is buying
into the vendor’s view of best practices, it is important to select a system which fits with
the organization’s goals and competitive strategy (Umble, Haft, and Umble, 2003).
Most vendors offer best practices for specific industries, such as the chemical industry
and oil industry.
The process of selecting the best ERP system entails working through a checklist
of activities (see Table 4) (Umble et al., 2003).
Aside from the business issues, there are a number of technology factors to con-
sider in selecting an ERP vendor and an ERP system (see Table 5).
DESIGN: RE-ENGINEERING VERSUS CUSTOMIZING
The fundamental decision in ERP systems design is re-engineering versus customizing.
In the re-engineering approach, the team selects a commercial off-the-shelf ERP and
re-engineers business processes to fit the package. In the customizing approach, the
team selects a commercial ERP and customizes the ERP to meet unique requirements
(see Table 6).
An in-depth analysis of the trade-offs between re-engineering and customizing an
ERP system illustrates several important factors. Re-engineering the business to fit the
software can disrupt the organization because this represents changes in procedures,
work flows, and data. However, customizing an ERP can make upgrading to newer ver-
sions difficult since vendor-supplied versions will be based upon vanilla versions of the
software (see Table 7).
ALTERNATIVE ERP DESIGN OPTIONS
ERP systems can be designed using various approaches.A complete vanilla ERP pack-
age is easiest to implement because the organization can follow the vendor-prescribed
43

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
Steps
Activities
Complete Y/N
Create the vision
Develop corporate objectives for ERP
Create a feature/function list 
Use a team who are familiar with company 
processes; map current processes to the 
new best practices
Create a software 
Narrow the field based on size of company,
candidate list
industry type; talk to existing buyers in 
the industry 
Narrow the field to four  
Conduct preliminary analysis of strengths
to six serious candidates
and weaknesses; determine goodness of fit
Create the Request For 
Develop a list of features and functions
Proposal (RFP)
Review the proposals
Consider strengths and weaknesses of 
each proposal
Select two or three finalists
Have the finalists demonstrate their 
packages
Select the winner
Consider numerous factors (e.g., supplier 
support, closeness of fit, technological risk)
Justify the investment
Conduct a cost-benefit analysis;
tangible benefits include improved 
material control, reduced costs, increased 
productivity, increased on-time deliveries,
improved customer service, inventory 
reduction, and elimination of redundant 
databases; intangible benefits include 
reduced cost, higher morale, and improved 
communications; make a GO, NO GO 
decision
Negotiate the contract
Participate in contract review
Run a pre-implementation 
Have the cross-functional team review 
pilot
the pilot
Validate the justification
Involve the cross-functional team in a 
final GO, NO GO decision
TABLE 4
Selecting an ERP System
Technology Factors
Questions
Cost of technology
What are the start-up and recurring costs?
Installation 
What consulting assistance is offered (time, cost)?
User interfaces
What interfaces are supported?
Upgradability
What is the frequency of upgrades?
Computing environment
What is the computing environment?
Personnel requirements
What expertise is needed for design and implementation (business
analysts, consultants)?
TABLE 5
Technology Factors to Consider in Selecting an ERP System
44

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
Pros
Cons
Customizing 
Supports unique business 
An ERP may not support these 
approach
processes; strategic processes 
unique business processes;
are maintained
re-inventing the wheel; customiza-
tion is difficult, since modules are
integrated; difficult to upgrade the
software to newer versions, since
upgrades are based on vanilla
versions
Re-engineering 
Is supported by an ERP solution;
Does not support strategic or 
approach
takes advantage of shared or 
unique business processes;
generic processes within industries 
resistance occurs when there is 
(e.g., industry templates); best
extensive organizational change
practices may represent improved
process changes; documents best
practices; works well when there 
is minimal organizational change
TABLE 6
Re-engineering vs. Customizing
Re-engineering Approach
Customizing Approach
Re-engineering 
Supports re-engineering
Re-engineering is independent of the
business processes
processes to fit the software 
tool being implemented (e.g., its
system’s best practices
models, processes, outputs)
Organizational fit
Works well with minimal 
May disrupt the organization less 
organizational change, but 
because software is designed to
extensive re-engineering may 
support current methods of work 
disrupt the organization
organization and structure
Evolution
Evolution depends upon vendor 
Evolution can support unique user
upgrades and enhancements to 
requirements
the system
Timeliness
Software is available and ready 
May involve lengthy systems
to implement
development activities
Cost
Implementation is cost-effective
May involve extensive cost of custom
implementation
Requirements
Puts boundaries on the design;
Provides greater flexibility for
designs conform with business 
meeting unique requirements; not
models and best practices
constrained by the tools’ best 
practices; no boundaries for the
design
Competitiveness
Other firms have access to the 
Do not have to use software to which
same design
everyone in the industry has access
Fit
Requirements will be supported 
Unique requirements may not be
by an ERP system
supported by an ERP system
External consulting
More of a turnkey approach,
May entail the expense of much
particularly using a vanilla 
external consulting
implementation
TABLE 7
Detailed Comparison: Re-engineering vs. Customizing Approach
45

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
Customization Relative
Module
Implementation Frequency
Implementation*
Purchasing
93%
60.5%
Order entry
92.4%
67.8%
Materials management
91.8%
60.7%
Production planning
90.5%
69.2%
Financial accounting
87.3%
50.7%
Distribution/logistics
84.8%
67.9%
Financial control
82.3%
53.1%
Asset management
63.3%
41%
Human resources
57.6%
33%
Quality management
47.5%
36%
*Percentage of firms which have customized the module.
TABLE 8
ERP Modules and Level of Customization—Sweden
methodology and use consultants with specialized vendor expertise. Firms are more
successful in implementing ERP systems under budget or on-budget when the amount
of customizing is kept to a minimum (Mabert, Soni, and Venkataramanan, 2000).
Nevertheless, many organizations customize ERP modules. A large percentage of
firms surveyed in Sweden (Olhager and Selldin, 2003) decided to customize the ERP
system they selected (see Table 8).
When an ERP system is customized, the time and cost of the project increases
along with the risk associated with successful implementation. This is because the cus-
tomized software cannot be as easily integrated with new versions of the ERP, which
are introduced by the vendor over time. In their study of ERP implementation,
Mabert, et al., found that firms which were able to implement ERP under budget or
on-budget made fewer modifications than over-budget firms. Making modifications
in the ERP software contributed to a 50% increase in project duration (Mabert, et al.,
2000).
Some organizations decide to maintain their legacy systems and add ERP mod-
ules to support specific functions, such as Financial Accounting and Customer
Relationship Management (CRM). Though this approach is cost-effective compared
with a full-scale ERP implementation, it deprives the organization of the benefits of
an integrated ERP that supports multiple business functions, and it leads to the main-
tenance of legacy and ERP systems. The one advantage of this approach is that it dis-
rupts the organization less because users do not need to accept changes in business
procedures.
Another approach to ERP implementation is to use outsourcing and to have an
external vendor operate the system. One of the best ways of outsourcing ERP is to use
an Application Service Provider (ASP), which provides the ERP software on a time-
sharing basis to its customers (see Table 9). This enables the client to have access to
technological expertise and is more cost-effective than a full-scale internal ERP imple-
mentation. However, any outsourcing decision is dependent upon the reliability and
46

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
Option
Time
Cost
Advantages 
Disadvantages
Vanilla 
Moderate
Moderate
Easiest to 
May forfeit internal systems
implementation 
implement
which provide a strategic
of a single 
advantage
vendor ERP
Single-vendor ERP 
High
High
Maintains strategic
Poses greater risk and
with customization
processes
higher cost because vendor
modifications cannot be 
easily adopted
In-house with 
Moderate
High
Minimizes the extent
Higher cost because of
supplementary 
of change that users
maintaining legacy systems
ERP modules
have to accept
and new ERP modules;
limited benefits because of
lack of integration
ASP
Moderate
Moderate
Provides vendor 
Creates dependence on 
support and 
the provider
expertise at lower 
cost
TABLE 9
Menu of ERP Alternatives
stability of the vendor, and the organization is vulnerable (Ross, Vitale, and Willcocks,
2003).
The decision for which approach to use in implementing ERP should be based
upon the extent to which the business benefits of ERP can be realized using each
approach. If only partial business benefits can be achieved via an in-house system with
supplementary ERP capabilities, then management should consider a full-scale imple-
mentation approach, using vendor-supported ERP implementation or an outsourcing
approach to ERP services.
DETAILED DESIGN
In the project’s detailed design phase, the team selects the models, processes, and
information supported by the system.The best practices methodology provides models
supporting the business processes for each functional area within the business (see
Table 10).The process for using the best practices includes these steps:
1. Select applicable business processes.
2. Discard inapplicable business processes.
3. When business processes are not matched up with the system, they serve as a foun-
dation for re-engineering (re-organizing processes, organization).
4. Identify any areas not covered by the best practices and which may require the
development of customized models.
Detailed design involves interactive prototyping and extensive user involvement
in determining systems design elements. In SAP’s environment, the following elements
can be implemented (see Table 11).
47

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
Model
Purpose
Characteristics
Example
Component model
What is done?
Shows the major functions 
Create material
supported by the system
master
Organizational model
Who does what?
Shows the breakdown of 
Sales
organizational units
Data model
What information 
Shows the information
Material order
is needed?
needed by the company
Interaction model
What information 
Shows the major
Materials
must be exchanged
organizational units
management
between different 
involved in information
components?
processing (e.g., sales,
procurement, production)
TABLE 10
Models Supporting the Best Practices
Entity
Definition
Example
Organizational element
Depicts the enterprise structure 
Plant
using an SAP application
Master data
Data that is created centrally 
Customer master
and available to all applications
Transactions
Application programs that conduct 
Create sales order
business processes
Output
Information that is released
Sending an order 
confirmation to a customer
Workflow
Optimizes activities
Processing a travel request
form
Reporting
Generates reports
Financial analysis report
TABLE 11
SAP Design Elements
Figure 1 illustrates Customer master data, which provides relevant data to multiple
modules, including financial accounting and sales.
Figure 2 illustrates sales transactions. When a sales order is created, the user must
enter the customer number from the Customer master and the Material master num-
bers from the Material master for the items being ordered. This copies relevant cus-
tomer data and material data to the sales order.
Figure 3 illustrates various reporting systems, including reports generated via
information systems, such as financial, logistics, and human resources reports. In addi-
tion, tools for database query and ad hoc reporting are used to generate reports from
separate databases. These advanced reporting systems are known as executive infor-
mation systems and business warehouse applications.
48

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
Master data
(Customer master data)
Financial
accounting data
(only relevant for
company code)
General data
(cross-enterprise)
Sales data
(only sales-
relevant data)
FIGURE 1
Master Data: Customer Master
Ordering party 1xxx
Customer
master
Material
master
Item
Material
Quantity
1
2
HD-1300
P-103
10
20
Company code
Sales
organization
Distribution
channel
Division
Plant
Storage
location
Sales document
FIGURE 2
Sales Transactions
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
Implementation
ERP implementation includes addressing configuration issues, migrating data from the
old system to the new system, building interfaces, implementing reports, and pilot test-
ing. Many companies contract with a technical support specialist from the software
supplier to assist in implementation.
Configuring the ERP system requires the project team to address a number of fac-
tors, including data ownership and data management, as shown in Table 12.
49

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
◆
ERP IMPLEMENTATION STEPS
ERP implementation includes establishing security and permissions, so users have the
access they need. Migrating data from the old system to the new system means ensur-
ing that data to be migrated are accurate and that data bridges work. Building inter-
faces to other systems, such as office systems (e.g., Lotus Notes), can be very important
Factor
Things to Consider
Data ownership
Who is responsible for data integrity? (centralized responsi-
bility versus local responsibility?)
Distribution of procedures
Which business processes should be centralized?
Which processes should remain under local control?
Transactions 
Does the ERP provide an audit trail of transactions at the
traceable level?
Does the ERP provide an audit trail of transactions at the
aggregate level?
Data management
Will the ERP support centralized data management—a master
repository?
Will the ERP support local data management?
TABLE 12
Factors to Consider in Configuring an ERP System
Output 
Output 
SAP BW
Business
warehouse
Pull
SAP
Output 
Executive
information
system
Pull
Information
systems
(LIS, HIS, ...)
SAP
Output 
Push
Data stored in tables in SAP
Documents
Report on
online
transactions
FIGURE 3
Reporting Systems
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
50

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
Implementation Strategy
Percent
Big bang
42.1
Mini big bang
20.4
Phased by module
17.1
Phased by site
20.4
TABLE 13
Implementation Strategy 
(Swedish firms)
to successful operation. Documentation is provided by the vendor and should be
reviewed. User training is also an important priority. Training end-users, which is criti-
cal to successful implementation, is often not extensive enough (Umble et al., 2003).
The issue of whether to cutover to the new system all at once, or to phase in mod-
ules sequentially, is an important one. The cutover approach, known as the big bang
approach, is more rapid, but there might not be sufficient resources to accomplish it.
Most large firms choose to phase in modules by module or by site. Smaller firms can
implement the big bang approach with reasonable success. Based upon a survey of
Swedish firms (see Table 13), a large percentage of firms use the big bang or the mini
big bang approach, the latter being a partial vendor implementation (Olhager and
Selldin, 2003).
Since ERP projects represent considerable time commitments and cost, many risks
are involved in implementation, and these risks can trigger time and cost overruns.
These risks can be reduced if the company decides to implement a complete vendor
package because the vendor-tested implementation technique will be followed.
However, if the organization does not choose a full vendor implementation, then risk
assessment and analysis should become part of the implementation strategy. One risk
assessment model proposes that at the beginning of each phase of the project, project
managers should conduct a risk analysis to determine what might go wrong and what
strategies will be used if problems occur. Having a plan of action and external
resources available at the outset of the each project phase can minimize the implemen-
tation risk.
◆
SUMMARY
In ERP systems development, the project team specifies the functions to be sup-
ported by the ERP package and has the choice of re-designing the organization’s
business processes to fit the software or customizing the software. In addressing
this question, the project team must determine the business benefits that can be
achieved by implementing the vendor’s best practices and the overall maintainability
of the software. Critical success factors for ERP implementation include the com-
mitment of top management and project management, organizational change man-
agement, an effective implementation team, data accuracy, and extensive education
and training.
51

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
◆◆◆Case
Response to Request for Proposal 
for an ERP System
The purpose of this project is to give students an
opportunity to learn about various ERP systems
and to present vendor characteristics and qualifi-
cations in response to a Request for Proposal
(RFP).The RFP has been developed to meet the
needs of a mid-sized manufacturing company,
Wingate Electric.
In this project, the class will be organized
into teams, and each team will represent one of
four or more ERP vendors who are responding
to an RFP for an ERP financial module, which
can be integrated with a larger ERP system over
time.The case provides selection criteria to eval-
uate the alternative ERP financial modules, and
a brief description of the scoring method of eval-
uating the alternatives. Each team (representing
one of the vendors) will have an opportunity to
consult various resources, including the vendor
web sites, on-line library resources, trade publi-
cations, and marketing publications.
The case includes directions for each team,
which will give a presentation to a mock panel of
user managers of the company considering the
ERP options.The panel of user managers can be
selected from local businesses or from the uni-
versity community. The presentation will be
reviewed by the panel of user managers using an
Evaluation Form, and the panel will make the
selection decision based upon the “winning”
team. The panel of user managers will provide
feedback to each team with respect to the
strengths and weaknesses of each of their pre-
sentations, and the rationale for their selection
decision.
The materials for the Case Study include:
•
Company Background
•
The RFP
•
The selection criteria to evaluate the
alternative ERP modules supporting
financial applications
•
Scoring method, which describes the
scoring method of evaluating the
alternatives
•
Team directions
•
Team vendor assignments and resources for
vendor research
•
List of user managers (e.g., job titles,
background)
A. COMPANY BACKGROUND
Wingate Electric is a mid-sized manufacturing
company that makes small electric motors for
appliances, lawn mowers, and small tractors. The
Questions for Discussion
1. How does the traditional systems development life cycle differ from the ERP information
systems design and implementation process?
2. What are the advantages of the re-engineering method of implementing ERP? What are its
disadvantages?
3. What are the advantages of the customizing method of implementing ERP? What are its
disadvantages?
4. Dell wanted a more flexible architecture and the opportunity to select software from vari-
ous vendors. What were the advantages and disadvantages to using this approach? (See:
D. Slater, “An ERP package for you, and you, and even you,” CIO Magazine, February 15,
1999.)
5. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using an ASP to implement ERP?
52

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
company, founded by Bob Wingate, has been in
business for 100 years. It is currently owned by
his two sons, Dick and Steve Wingate, on a 50/50
basis. Dick, the CEO, handles the marketing and
business development side of the business, and
Steve, the Chief Operating Officer, is responsible
for internal operations management.
The MIS systems at Wingate Electric are
home-grown systems that have been patched
together over the years. These systems support
the major accounting and financial functions,
including sales order processing, inventory con-
trol, accounts payable, accounts receivable, and
general ledger. These applications use multiple
legacy file systems, and much of the data are
redundant. Since updates must be made to multi-
ple files, some of the data are inconsistent. With
little documentation, making queries to existing
databases is difficult.
Competitors within the industry are adopt-
ing ERP systems to integrate financial and man-
ufacturing data, and Wingate Electric is being
left behind. Competitors are adopting web-based
front ends for order processing, order tracking,
and order follow-up, but Wingate cannot move in
this direction because its back-office systems are
in disarray.
The owners of Wingate Electric have
decided to issue a RFP for an ERP system which
supports their accounting and financial functions
and which can be extended to support their pro-
duction and manufacturing applications over
time. The panel of user managers who will be
reviewing the presentations in response to the
RFP will be the following:
Dick Wingate, CEO
Steve Wingate, Chief Operating Officer
Robert Murdick, Chief Financial Officer
Richard Hayes, Marketing Manager
Kathryn Martell, Director of Accounting
Operations
B. REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL
Date: February 1, 2005
Wingate Electric is a mid-sized manufacturing
company that makes small electric motors for
appliances, lawn mowers, and small tractors. The
company, founded by Bob Wingate, has been in
business for 100 years. The company is currently
managed by its owners, Dick and Steve Wingate.
Dick Wingate, the CEO, is responsible for over-
all business development and marketing. Steve
Wingate, the COO, is responsible for operations
management.
Wingate Electric currently does $400 mil-
lion in sales. Its customers include major manu-
facturers of small appliances and vehicles, and
they would like to have web-based order pro-
cessing and order tracking capability, and this is
one motivation for acquiring an ERP foundation
for web-based applications.
The MIS systems at Wingate Electric are
home-grown applications that have become
fragmented over time.They are difficult to main-
tain, and they do not use an integrated relational
database. Managers have trouble gaining access
to data for query and reporting purposes.
Wingate Electric is interested in acquiring
an ERP system, which supports its financial and
accounting functions, including accounts receiv-
able, accounts payable, and general ledger.
The ERP financial system will be implemented
first, and the company is interested in adding
modules supporting production planning and
manufacturing in the next phase. Ideally,
the ERP system will also support Sales and
Marketing,
Human Resources,
CRM,
and
eBusiness. These capabilities will be imple-
mented in subsequent phases, depending upon
the success of the ERP modules supporting
financial and accounting functions.
The budget for ERP is estimated at
$1,000,000, excluding the cost of acquiring the
necessary upgrades in hardware, software, and
networking facilities. In the current environ-
ment, the firm has 100 microcomputer worksta-
tions, a Windows NT network, and a Hewlett-
Packard server supporting its legacy systems.
The timeline for selecting the ERP modules
supporting finance and accounting is three
months. The due date for the RFP response is
March 1, 2005. Upon receipt of the proposals,
four or more vendors will be asked to give pre-
sentations and to respond to questions. The
selection committee will make a decision within
30 days after the presentations have been given.
The selection criteria are listed below. Five of
these criteria deal with supplier-related issues,
and five of them deal with the evaluation of the
53

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
ERP modules supporting finance and account-
ing. Proposals and presentations should address
each of these selection criteria.
C. SELECTION CRITERIA FOR ERP
SUPPLIER
1. Corporate History, Experience, and
Corporate Profile
a. Overall History
b. Number of Years of Experience
c. Position in the Industry
2. Market Strategy and Strategic Direction
a. Market Share
b. Market Strategy
c. Future Market Strategy
d. Overall Strengths
3. Product Offerings, Integration, and
Scalability
a. Overall ERP Product Line
b. Module Integration Strategy
c. Web-based Application Strategy
d. New Offerings (e.g., business intelli-
gence, CRM)
4. Consulting Support
a. Support for Configuration of
Application Modules
b. Technical Support for System
Implementation
c. Cost of Consulting Support
d. Availability of Consulting Support
5. Availability of Training
a. Training in Configuration
b. Technical Training
Selection Criteria for ERP Modules
Supporting Financial and Accounting
Functions:
6. Fit with Current Business Processes
a. Fit with Sales and Order Processing
Processes
b. Fit with Financial Accounting Processes
(A/R,A/P, General Ledger)
c. Fit with Managerial Accounting
Processes
7. Reporting Applications
a. Current Reporting Capabilities
b. Availability of Tools for Database Query
and Reporting
c. Web-based Reporting Capability
8. User Friendliness
a. Availability of Tutorials
b. Availability of Application Module
Documentation
c. Technical Documentation
9. Cost
a. Cost of ERP Modules
b. Cost of Configuration and
Implementation Support
c. Cost of Training
d. Cost of Maintenance Fees and Software
Licenses
10. Ability to Integrate Finance and
Accounting Module with other ERP
Modules
a. Integration with Production and
Manufacturing Modules
b. Integration with Sales and Marketing
Modules
c. Integration with Human Resources
Modules
d. Integration with web-based 
Applications
D. SCORING METHOD
The selection committee will use the score sheet
(see below) to rate each vendor on each of the
selection criteria. The selection committee will
rate each presentation on the basis of the selec-
tion criteria, which include ten criteria in all. Five
of these criteria pertain to ERP supplier charac-
teristics, and five of these criteria pertain to the
characteristics of the ERP modules under con-
sideration. For each criteria, the selection com-
mittee will use a rating scale of 1 to 10, with 10
being the most possible points that can be scored
in any one category.
In addition, the selection committee will
rate each presentation on several bonus/penalty
items, which can add or detract from the total
scores. These bonus/penalty items will have
a possible value of 5 or 5 points each, as
illustrated on the score sheet below. These
bonus/penalty items include the effectiveness of
the overall presentation, and the special, value-
added qualifications (noted below). The overall
possible maximum score for each presentation is
110 points.
The selection committee will consist of
individuals who will play the roles of user
54

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
TABLE 1
Selection Committee Score Sheet
Team Members:
Score
Weight
Item
Criteria
Comments
10
#1
Corporate history, experience,
and profile
10
#2
Market strategy and strategic direction
10
#3
Product offerings, integration, scalability
10
#4
Consulting support (e.g., configuration,
technical)
10
#5
Training availability (e.g., configuration,
technical)
10
#6
Current business process fit
10
#7
Reporting applications (e.g., tools,
web-based)
10
#8
User-friendliness (e.g., tutorials,
documentation)
10
#9
Cost (e.g., modules, training,
maintenance)
10
#10
Ability to integrate with other 
ERP modules
100 possible
Basic total score
Bonus/Penalty Items
5/5
Presentation effectiveness
5/5
Unique qualifications
110 possible max
Basic score /
Bonus/penalty total
management. In addition, each of the teams will
rate the other team presentations using the same
score sheet.
E. DIRECTIONS TO TEAMS
Each team will assume the role of an ERP ven-
dor responding to the RFP. Each team should
have 3–6 students, with 5 students as ideal, and
each team will have three weeks to prepare for
the presentation to the selection committee. In
preparation for the presentations, each team
should do research on its ERP vendor’s charac-
teristics in order to address each of the selection
criteria. For example, to respond to the corpo-
rate history, experience, and corporate profile
criteria, the team will need to use external
resources for research about the vendor.
The presentations should be accomplished
in 25 minutes, with each team member having
5 minutes. There will be an additional 5 minutes
for questions from the Selection Committee.
The teams can augment their oral presenta-
tions with audio-visual aids, including computer-
based Powerpoint presentations. They can bring
handouts, articles in trade publications about
user experiences with the ERP modules under
consideration, and information about external
resources (e.g., web sites, trade reviews), which
the Selection Committee might want to consult.
The purpose of the exercise is to make the pre-
sentations as real as possible.
55

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
At the end of the presentations, the selection
committee will deliberate about each of the pre-
sentations,using the criteria that have been estab-
lished on the score sheet.They will tabulate their
scores and rank the presentations in sequence
(e.g., first place, second place, third place). After
reporting the results, the selection committee will
give informal feedback to each of the teams.
F. TEAM VENDOR ASSIGNMENTS AND
RESOURCES FOR VENDOR RESEARCH
Each team will represent a specific ERP vendor
(see Table 2 in this section).
Each team will be responsible for develop-
ing their presentation in response to the RFP.
In developing its proposal, each team should
address each of the selection criteria as effectively
as possible.To do so, it can use various resources,
including vendor web sites, on-line library data-
bases with articles in trade publications, vendor
marketing materials, and trade reviews.
G. LIST OF USER MANAGERS 
(JOB TITLES, BACKGROUND)
The selection committee and will consist of five
members: Dick Wingate, CEO; Steve Wingate,
Chief Operating Officer; Robert Murdick, Chief
Financial Officer; Richard Hayes, Marketing
Manager; and Kathryn Martell, Director of
Accounting Operations.
Dick Wingate, the CEO, handles marketing
and business development. He is a natural sales-
person and is extensively involved in community
activities and charitable organizations, such as
the Rotary Club, American Cancer Society, and
Boy Scouts. He enjoys skiing and golf, and he
owns a golf condo in Florida. Through his con-
tacts, he has been instrumental in growing the
sales of the business.
Steve Wingate, the Chief Operating Officer,
is responsible for internal operations manage-
ment. Steve is more internally focused than his
brother, Dick. He earned a Bachelor’s degree in
engineering from Purdue University, and he has
used his technical background to assume an
important role in quality management. He is
cautious about expenditures, and he scrutinizes
the budget to avoid unnecessary expenditures
and to control costs. He lives in the same middle-
class neighborhood where he grew up, which
speaks to his conservative lifestyle. Because of
his cost-conscious mentality, Steve is hesitant to
make a big investment in an ERP system.
Robert Murdick, Chief Financial Officer,
came to Wingate Electric after spending ten
years at Ernst and Young, a public accounting
firm. He chose to join the management at
Wingate Electric because the opportunity to
work with a team to expand a mid-sized com-
pany offered considerable challenge. In his con-
sulting career, Bob traveled extensively, and he
finds that his career at Wingate Electric provides
greater autonomy and flexibility. Bob’s account-
ing background convinces him that an invest-
ment in an integrated financial and accounting
system would be a good investment.
Richard Hayes, Marketing Manager, was
one of the most productive members of
Wingate’s sales force before joining the manage-
ment team. For seven years, Richard was the top
sales performer in this industry niche in the
country. Richard was able to earn this distinction
through his dedicated commitment to serving
the needs of his customers. Richard has a posi-
tive attitude toward automation. He encouraged
his sales force to use laptops with computer-
based sales prospecting software.
Kathryn Martell, Director of Accounting
Operations, started at Wingate Electric as a
clerk-typist 18 years ago. She is known for her
strong work ethic and perfectionism. She is loyal
to the company, and she works long hours. She
organizes the company picnic and Christmas
party each year. Kathryn is resistant to change,
and she is skeptical about spending a lot of
money on a computer-based information system.
Her opinion is that most of the inefficiency can
be remedied by adding staff members.
TABLE 2
Team Vendor Assignments
Vendor
Financial 
Team
Assignment
Module
A
Great Plains
Financial
Management
B
Peoplesoft
Financial
Management
Solutions
C
Oracle ERP
Financials
D
SAP
Financial
Accounting (FA)
56

Planning, Design, and Implementation of ERP Systems
References
Davenport,Thomas. 2000. Mission Critical:
Realizing the Promise of Enterprise Systems.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School
Press.
Gremillion, L.L., and P. Pyburn. 1983.“Breaking
the systems development bottleneck.”
Harvard Business Review 130–137.
Langenwalter, G., 2000. Enterprise Resources
Planning and Beyond: Integrating Your Entire
Organization. Boca Raton, FL: St. Lucie
Press.
Mabert,V.A.,A. Soni, and V.A.
Venkataramanan. 2000.“Enterprise resource
planning survey of U.S. manufacturing firms.”
Production and Inventory Management
Journal 41: 52–58.
Oden, H., G. Langenwalter, and R. Lucier. 1993.
Handbook of Material and Capacity Require-
ments Planning. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Olhager, Jan, and Erik Selldin. 2003.“Enterprise
resource planning survey of Swedish manu-
facturing firms.” European Journal of
Operational Research 146: 365–373.
Ross, Jeanne, Michael Vitale, and Leslie
Willcocks. 2003.“The continuing ERP
revolution: Sustainable lessons, new
modes of delivery,” in Second-Wave
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems.
Graeme Shanks, Peter Seddon, and Leslie
Willcocks (Eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 102–132.
Umble, Elisabeth, Ronald Haft, and M. Michael
Umble. 2003.“Enterprise resource planning:
Implementation procedures and critical
success factors.” European Journal of
Operational Research 146: 241–257.
57


ERP Systems: 
Sales and Marketing
From Chapter 4 of Enterprise Resource Planning, First Edition. Mary Sumner. Copyright © 2005
by Pearson Education, Inc.All rights reserved.
59

ERP Systems:
Sales and
Marketing
Objectives
1. Understand the sales and marketing module.
2. Recognize the interrelationships among business processes supporting sales and marketing,
production, accounting and finance, and human resources.
A
s an introduction to this chapter on Sales and Marketing, sales and marketing
functions can create problems, which lead to lack of responsiveness to customer
needs, lack of productivity, and lack of profitability.
CASE: ATLANTIC MANUFACTURING
Atlantic Manufacturing is a manufacturer of custom configured small motors
that go into jet skis, snowmobiles, and other recreational vehicles. Its customers
represent major consumer manufacturing companies. In June 2004, it reported
these problems in order acquisition, operations, distribution, and accounting.
SALES AND DISTRIBUTION
✓Salespersons have to call the home office for quotations for many products
because of many possible configurations.
✓Salespeople are making quotas, but profitability is declining because the
standard cost system is not providing accurate information with respect to
costs.
✓Customers are asking for reduced lead times, which could be achieved if
Atlantic’s engineers worked more closely with their suppliers.
60

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
CREDIT
✓Recently, customers were put on “credit hold” when they were not able to
pay on a timely basis. However, when the credit manager was out of town
for several weeks, an order went through to this customer by mistake.
Nothing could be collected on this account because the customer could
not pay.
CUSTOMER SERVICE AND REPAIR
✓Atlantic has a stand-alone system to take care of field service. When service
technicians repair equipment in the field, they do not always bill the cus-
tomer for the correct amount since the system does not have information
indicating which replacement parts are covered by the warranty.
✓Since the field service system is a stand-alone system and does not integrate
with other systems within the company, quality control people mainly use
anecdotal evidence to identify potential problems.
In contrast, Atlantic’s competitors are offering their customers lower quotes and
reduced lead times. Salespersons are creating quotes using laptops from their cus-
tomers’ offices. Credit checking is automatic on all new orders, and salespersons have
immediate access to customer credit information. Field service technicians have access
to data indicating which parts are covered by warranty to the customer and which parts
are covered by supplier warranty.
In the Atlantic Manufacturing case, a number of problems are affecting order
entry, credit management, and field service.The lack of an integrated system can cause
incorrect credit, inadequate inventory, shipping delays, incomplete invoices, and
accounts receivable delays (see Table 1). These problems can significantly affect
profitability and customer service.
Subsystems
Problems
Sales order entry
Incorrect pricing; incorrect credit information; calls to customers
to get the correct information
Inventory
Incorrect inventory; delays in inventory updates; inadequate
inventory to fill orders; partial shipments
Shipping and delivery
Delays in shipping and delivery
Invoicing
Inaccurate or incomplete invoices
Payment processing
Customers may not include a copy of their invoice with their
payment; incorrect posting of payments
Accounts receivable
Delays in accounts receivable posting; reminder letters are
generated to customers who have paid
TABLE 1
Problems with Sales Order Processing
61

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
◆
SALES AND MARKETING PROCESSES
Sales and marketing processes include operational-level and management control
processes (see Table 2). Operational processes include daily activities, such as prospect-
ing, contact management, telemarketing, and direct mail. Sales representatives need to
create and maintain lists of prospects by location, by product category, and by sales
potential and need to create and maintain a contact management system, which  tracks
customer preferences, sales history data, and the history of sales calls. When sales are
done via telemarketing, telemarketing databases are used for contacts and follow-ups.
Direct mail processes create and maintain mailing lists, some of which are designed for
target markets.
Traditionally, sales and marketing operational functions are supported by sales
order processing systems, which capture order data, and point-of-sale (POS) systems,
which capture data at the point of sale.These systems are linked to inventory manage-
ment systems, which update inventory levels for stock items based upon sales data.
◆
MANAGEMENT CONTROL PROCESSES IN SALES AND MARKETING
Management control activities in sales and marketing are designed to allocate sales
and marketing resources in order to achieve maximum revenues. One of the most
important areas is sales management.
SALES MANAGEMENT PROCESSES
Sales managers are responsible for creating territories and for allocating sales people’s
time to generate maximum revenue and service. The decisions which sales managers
need to make include the following:
• How should territories be shaped?
• How can we allocate salesperson time to call on the highest potential accounts?
• Which customers are most profitable?
• Which products are most profitable?
The information that sales managers use to make decisions is largely based upon
an analysis of past sales. Summary reports, comparative analysis reports, and exception
reports are all useful tools in analyzing sales trends and determining how to best allo-
cate resources. Examples include the following:
• Comparison of sales, product revenues, customer revenues, and territory revenues
against benchmarks of success
Operational
Prospecting; contact manage-
ment; telemarketing; direct mail
Management control
Sales management; product pric-
ing; advertising and promotion;
sales forecasting
TABLE 2
Sales and Marketing Processes
62

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
• Comparison of the productivity of each salesperson to the average for the
department
• Listing of the most profitable products in each territory
• Listing of the products that represent the highest percentage of sales for each
salesperson
• Listing of the customers that represent the highest percentage of sales for each
salesperson
See sales analysis reports examples in Figure 1 and 2.
Sales Management software is used by sales managers to assess the productivity of
the sales force and the success of products, by salesperson, by territory, and by customer
type. Specifically, sales management software achieves these and other objectives:
• To identify weak products in a territory
• To compare salesperson performance by product type and customer type
FIGURE 1
Sales Analysis Report
63

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
FIGURE 2
Sales Analysis Chart
• To compare salesperson performance against sales goals
• To analyze salesperson performance within territories
• To identify trends in customer purchases
• To identify potential shortages or excess stock in inventory
Sales analysis will drive decisions about how to allocate sales personnel, how to orga-
nize territories, how to serve customer needs, and how to train sales personnel to use
their time more effectively to generate maximum revenues from the highest potential
accounts.
SALES FORECASTING PROCESSES
Sales forecasting is important to determine the potential needs of customers in various
market segments. Sales forecasting activities include segmenting the market into target
groups of potential customers and planning products/services to meet the customers’
needs. Sales forecasts can be developed for overall sales, for sales by territory, for sales
by each product or service, for sales for new products/services, and for sales by sales
representative. Sales forecasts use information on past sales history as well as informa-
tion about competition, customer demand, and demographic trends.
ADVERTISING AND PROMOTION
Another important marketing process, which requires decisions about how to allocate
resources, is advertising and promotion.The major questions are the following:
• Which advertising media and promotional channels should I use?
• Which advertising channels and media are most effective in addressing specific
market targets?
The effectiveness of advertising campaigns needs to be constantly monitored.
64

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
PRODUCT PRICING SYSTEMS
What prices should I establish for products? This is a key question to be addressed as
part of marketing management. To make pricing decisions, the marketing manager
should know the expected product demand, the desired profit margin, the product pro-
duction costs, and the competing products. Pricing depends upon pricing strategy.
Pricing models are built from data from various forces that influence pricing, including
consumer price indices, expected consumer disposable income, volume of products
produced, labor costs, and raw materials costs.
◆
SALES AND MARKETING MODULES IN ERP SYSTEMS
Traditionally, sales and marketing software supports operational and management
control processes, including contact management, sales management, and sales analysis/
forecasting.The difference between Sales and Marketing modules within an Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) system and traditional sales and marketing software is that
ERP systems provide integrated marketing support systems, including contact files,
order entry files, and sales history files. In addition, ERP systems provide Customer
Relationship Management (CRM) software, which provides information to salespeo-
ple about the previous experiences of customers, including purchases, product prefer-
ences, and payment history.
With an ERP module, a customer places an order, and a sales order is recorded
(see Figure 3). The system schedules shipping and works backward from the shipping
date to reserve the materials, to order parts from suppliers, and to schedule manufac-
turing. The module checks the customer’s credit limit, updates sales forecasts, and cre-
ates a bill of materials. The salesperson’s commission is updated. Product costs and
profitability are calculated. Finally, accounting data is updated, including balance
sheets, accounts payable, ledgers, and other financial information.
Customer order
Goods issue
Create deliveries
Picking with
transfer order
Warehouse
Packing
Shipping documents
Update stock
Post general ledger
FIGURE 3
The Sales and Distribution Process
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
65

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
Subsystem
What It Does
Pre-sales
Tracks customer contacts; provides the customer with a price quote
Sales order 
Uses the price quote to record items to be purchased; determines the 
processing
sales price; records order quantities; configures quantity discounts;
checks customer credit
Inventory sourcing
Checks the inventory database to see if items can be delivered on time;
updates the production planning database to avoid any shortfalls
Delivery
Releases documents to the warehouse: items are picked; orders are
packed and shipped
Billing*
Uses sales order data to create an invoice; updates accounting
records; increases (debits) accounts receivable
Payment*
Accepts payment; decreases the customer’s accounts receivable
balance with the amount of payment
*Handled by the Accounting module.
TABLE 3
The Sales and Marketing Module and Related Modules
FIGURE 4
SAP Screen (Create Standard Order)
The purpose of the Sales and Marketing module within ERP is to identify sales
prospects, to process sales orders, to manage inventory, to handle deliveries, to provide
billing, and to accept and process payments (see Table 3).
As with other ERP modules, the Sales and Marketing module provides the bene-
fits of standard codes, a common database, standard documents, an audit trail, and data
integration (see Figure 4 and Table 4). For example, a standard document number fol-
lows an order throughout its life cycle, including partial shipments, partial payments,
and returns. This document flow prevents errors and inaccuracies and keeps account-
ing data relevant.
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
66

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
◆
ERP AND CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT
An ERP system supports back-office functions, such as sales, accounting, human
resources, and manufacturing, and the ERP system provides a foundation for advanced
applications, such as CRM, and Supply Chain Management (SCM). CRM represents
the systems that interface with the customer, and SCM represents the systems which
interface with the supplier. CRM, which provides an important front end to sales and
marketing, is described in the next section.
CRM is a comprehensive sales and marketing approach to building long-term cus-
tomer relationships. CRM relies upon the foundation of ERP. CRM provides a single
interface to the customer, so a salesperson who has a customer will know about all the
worldwide interactions for that customer. For example, if there is a problem with filling
an order for a Wal-Mart store in Albany, New York, the salesperson calling on the
Wal-Mart store in Carlsbad, California, will know about it.
Using the following scenario, you can see how a CRM can make the difference
between losing and gaining business.
Scenario 1:You are on your way to see one of your company’s best customers
(they represent 5% of the company’s total sales).When you get there, you
learn the customer is angry. His entire firm has been at a standstill for
48 hours because he cannot get delivery on a part for a high-speed color
laser printer; he has a critical deadline to meet on some marketing materials,
and he’s been on the phone for the past day to no avail.You have lost his
business. Somehow, you had not heard about any of this.
Scenario 2:You are on your way to see one of your company’s best
customers (they represent 5% of the company’s total sales). En route, you
turn on your laptop, and you receive a customer alert that there has been an
equipment failure on a high-speed color laser printer.When you arrive, your
service tech is there installing the broken part. He was able to order the
needed part via eBusiness and had it dispatched by courier.The customer
admits that he probably needed a laser printer upgrade because he has
been using excessive volumes.You have increased your revenue from this
customer.
Feature
Benefit
Standard codes
Each customer has a standard code
Common database
Common database supports all modules
Standard documents
Standard document number (e.g., sales order number) sticks with
the transaction throughout the process, including shipping and
accounting
Audit trail
Standard document number helps track partial shipments, partial
payments, returns
Data integration
Sales records are integrated with accounting records
TABLE 4
Advantages of Sales and Marketing ERP Software
67

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
These two scenarios show how knowledge of customer needs can affect customer
service and customer retention. CRM software had its roots in sales force automation
software, which is designed to provide sales representatives with sales activity manage-
ment, sales and territory management, contact management, lead management, config-
uration support, and knowledge management.
Sales Activity Management
Sales Activity Management guides sales representatives through each step of the sales
process, including generating leads, contacting prospects, handling order placement,
and assuring order follow-up.
Sales and Territory Management
Sales and Territory Management helps sales managers study the pipeline, monitor
salespeople’s activities, and optimize teams.
Contact Management
Contact Management helps sales representatives organize their contact data in data-
bases, so they can query these databases and ask questions, such as “Who is the client’s
purchasing agent?” and “Which customers received a recent promotion for product
XYZ?”
Lead Management
Lead Management enables sales representatives to monitor leads, to generate next
steps, and to refine selling efforts by using on-line support. Managers can distribute
leads to field sales representatives based upon the representative’s product knowledge.
Lead management enables sales people to track prospect attributes, such as product
interests, budget amounts, and likely competitors. Query capability makes it possible to
ask the following questions:
• At what step in the sales cycle do we lose our prospects?
• How many appointments did Mark have with XYZ company?
• What percentage of leads in the Eastern Michigan territory resulted in sales last
month?
• How did order amounts for product ABC in San Francisco compare with order
amounts in Seattle?
Configuration Management
Configuration Management provides product-specific configuration support to com-
panies that must build products for their customers. Technology vendors, appliance
vendors, and computer vendors are examples of companies which need to create prod-
uct configurations, make price quotes, and communicate these electronically via a lap-
top, while sitting in the customer’s office.
Knowledge Management
Knowledge Management offers access to information resources. Information
resources in sales include the following: corporate policy handbooks, sales presentation
slides, company phone lists, proposal templates, industry and competitor data, press
releases, and transcripts of sales meetings. Some of this information can be made avail-
able via the corporate intranet. Before making a follow-up call to a customer who has
68

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
attended a sales presentation, it is useful to review the presentation along with any
notes from prior meetings with the customer.
CRM systems build upon sales force automation capabilities and offer advanced
functions that can be integrated with an ERP system. The major functions of a CRM
system include one-on-one marketing, telemarketing, sales force automation, sales
campaign management, call center automation, e-Selling, data warehousing, and cus-
tomer service.Without an underlying Sales and Marketing ERP module, the CRM sys-
tem could not acquire needed operational-level data on sales, orders, and sales order
history to support CRM functions. CRM data are accessible via a data warehouse and
are separate from the operational database supported by the ERP system. A data
warehouse is a repository of integrated data, which enables sales representatives to
make queries and to generate reports on customer-specific trends.
CUSTOMER SERVICE
The processes, which are part of customer service, are initiated when the customer calls
with a service request. The service notification triggers a service order, which is dis-
patched to a service technician. Once the job is complete, the technician confirms the
hours worked and the materials used. Based on the billing request from the service
order, the Accounting Department generates a billing document.
Key Features
Characteristics
One-on-one marketing
Tailors products, pricing, and promotions to the customer
Telemarketing
Facilitates customer contact and call list management
Sales force automation
Maintains information on customer contacts in a database;
forecasts customer’s needs
Sales campaign management
Organizes marketing campaigns, including the creation of
call lists
Call center automation
Enables queries to a product marketing database
e-Selling
Delivers on-line systems that enable customers to configure
products on-line, including a shopping basket
Customer service
Handles customer service, from the customer request for
service to the service technician reporting time and materials
used
TABLE 5
Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
◆
INTEGRATION OF SALES AND DISTRIBUTION WITH 
OTHER MODULES
Sales and Distribution modules within SAP are integrated with other ERP modules
(see Figure 5). First, the Sales and Distribution module is interfaced with the Financial
Accounting module. In SAP, for example, you assign a billing transaction to a specific
sales organization, a distribution channel, and a division. This information is trans-
ferred to Financial Accounting (see Table 6).
69

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
CO/PA
Financial
accounting
Business
information
warehouse
Customer
relationship
management
Internet
sales
Mobile
sales
Tele-
sales
Sales and
distribution
Project
systems
Production
planning
Advanced
planning and
optimizer
Materials
management
Warehouse
management
Billing
Delivery
date
Sales
orders
Stock
reservation
Stock removal
Picking
removal
from stock
location
Data
Order
Customer
management
Make
to order
Availability
check
FIGURE 5
Sales and Distribution Integration
Sales
Billing document
Customer
Distribution
channel:    01
Division:   01
Value: 100.00
Sales org.: 0001
Financial accounting
Account assignment
Company code: 0001
A/R
Receivable
Revenues
100.00
100.00
100.00
FIGURE 6
Transferring Billing to Financial Accounting
Data integration across functional modules saves time, facilitates customer ser-
vice, and improves productivity and profitability. As an example of data integration,
the Sales and Distribution modules interface with other SAP modules, including
the Materials Management, Human Resources, Quality Management, Financial
Accounting, and Controlling modules.
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
70

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
◆
SUMMARY
Sales and Marketing modules in an ERP system are designed to support sales order
entry, inventory sourcing, delivery processing, billing, and payment processing. The
core Sales and Marketing module is a foundation for CRM systems. CRM modules
support sales management, contact management, lead management, and configuration
management. In addition, interrelationships exist between sales and marketing mod-
ules and modules supporting materials management, human resources, financial
accounting, management accounting, and quality management.
Questions for Discussion
1. Gather information about the best practices which are associated with the Sales and
Marketing modules within an ERP package. You can do this by (1) conducting research on
the web; (2) interviewing a user of a Sales and Marketing package; (3) using an on-line data-
base to find an article in a trade publication which describes the effective use of a Sales and
Marketing module; or (4) using a Sales and Marketing module within an ERP system to
identify new best practices.
a. What are the best practices, which you have discovered?
b. How do they contribute to overall productivity?
c. What information for decision making do they provide?
2. The Sales and Marketing module within ERP is regarded as the module with the most inter-
faces to other modules, including Human Resources, Materials Management, Production
Planning, and Financial Accounting. Describe the interfaces between the Sales and Market-
ing module and each of these other modules:
Materials management
MM
Material master describes spare parts used in repairs
and services sold to the customer
Human resources
HR
Matches technician’s qualifications with requirements
needed for specific service orders
Quality management
QM
Checks condition of materials being shipped back to
a customer following repair
Financials
FI
Bills customers for service and receives payments
Controlling
CO
Service order can collect costs and become an input
into profitability analysis
TABLE 6
Integration of Sales and Distribution with Other Modules
Module
What Information Is Shared with Sales and Marketing
Human resources
Materials management
Production planning
Financial accounting
71

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
Featured Article: Staples and Integrated ERP
Using the following excerpt, how is technol-
ogy helping Staples achieve a competitive
advantage?
STAPLES KIOSKS CONNECT CUSTOMERS
AND MERCHANDISE
Customer service drives Paul Gaffney’s commit-
ment to integration. And profits show that com-
mitment matters.
“Our most profitable customers are those
who use the full range of the way we do busi-
ness,” says Gaffney, the CIO at Staples in
Framingham, Mass. He adds that customers
“want to get a very consistent and seamless
experience.When you do the right thing for your
best customers, good things happen.”
The CIO of the office-supplies giant stresses
that for those good things to happen, it’s essen-
tial to have an overarching strategy that uses
IT to advance the company’s mission. Gaffney
adds that “trying to be more holistic in our out-
look is one of the things that separates great IT
organizations from the rest of the pack.”
One of the products of Gaffney’s enter-
prisewide focus on the customer is the online
kiosk, dubbed Access Point, that is installed in all
of the company’s 1,040 U.S. stores. Creating the
kiosks required connecting the company’s
e-commerce website, Staples.com, with its point-
of-sale (POS) system, order management sys-
tem, distribution system and supply chain. On
the people front, staffers from the retail, catalog,
online, finance, distribution, merchandising and
training areas, practically everyone but the cafe-
teria chefs, collaborated. For example, the kiosks
offer customers the option of buying, say, an
office chair at the kiosk using a credit card, then
taking a bar-code printed receipt up front to
the register to pay in real-time. Customers can
also use the kiosks to access a library of infor-
mation about products and services, view an
inventory of 45,000 online products, and build
PCs to order (eliminating the need for more than
35 percent of stores to carry computers). “We’re
letting customers do business the way they want
to do business, not the way we want them to,”
says Gaffney.
But the benefits don’t go solely to cus-
tomers. For Staples, the multimillion-dollar
Access Point project has introduced many cus-
tomers to Staples.com. The company estimates
that a customer who shops in both stores and
one other channel (Staples.com or catalog) has a
lifetime value of two and a half times that of a
store-only shopper.
And the company’s approach toward inte-
gration goes beyond customer-facing systems.
Another major integration project involved
consolidating the Staples and Quill fulfillment
center facilities. Staples acquired Quill, a mail-
order office products company, in 1998. To
connect the two disparate order management
systems, Staples could have gone the point-to-
point route, which would have required building
customized connections between the two sets of
applications. But the Staples team chose instead
to implement an integration layer built on IBM’s
MQ series. “That way, if we had a future acquisi-
tion, or needed more volume in the future, we
won’t have to do a new point-to-point integra-
tion project,” says Gaffney.
Reducing the number of direct linkages
between systems is one part of Gaffney’s holistic
strategy. Standardization is another. “Every IS
organization is trying to deliver more business
results for less money. One tool is reducing the
number of different technologies that you need
your staff to be proficient in. If you have four or
five [technology] approaches, you’ve diluted
your staff’s proficiency. I think it’s a productivity
imperative,” Gaffney says.
Staples is just starting to look hard at how it
can standardize, but Gaffney pointedly says that
Web services will play a key role. Because of
that, Gaffney doesn’t feel a need to standardize
his platform on either Sun’s Java 2 Platform
Enterprise Edition (J2EE) or Microsoft’s .Net,
since Web services can work with both. “We
believe it’s more important to focus on good
semantics, for example, getting the definition of
the interface right on our next generation inter-
nal pricing service, than to get hung up on
whether it’s a J2EE or Microsoft deployment,”
he says.
72

ERP Systems: Sales and Marketing
To ensure that his IS organization continues
to maintain a big- picture integration strategy,
Gaffney has appointed a team, led by two vice
presidents in IS but involving people from all
business areas, to help Staples get a detailed look
at its business processes.They also want to deter-
mine how people and technologies map against
those processes (for example, to see if there are
multiple groups of people using multiple tech-
nologies, all to produce a sales forecast). They
can then use the information they uncover to
move ahead on the integration projects that will
have the most business impact.
SOURCE: Datz,Todd,“Strategic Alignment;Your
business processes can’t enable superior customer
service or an efficient supply chain without inte-
grated systems.The four companies profiled here
demonstrate the benefits of a strategic perspective
and long-term commitment to integration.” CIO,
Aug 15, 2002, p. 1–64.
References
Dyche, Jill. 2002. The CRM Handbook.A
Business Guide to Customer Relationship
Management. New York:Addison-Wesley.
Hasan, Matt. 2003.“Ensure success of CRM with
a change in mindset.” Marketing News 16.
Parke, Shep. 1998.“Avoiding the unseen perils
of sales technology.” Sales and Field Force
Automation.
Rigby, D., F.R. Reichheld, and P. Schefter. 2002.
“Avoiding the pitfalls of CRM.” Harvard
Business Review, 101–109.
Ruquet, Mark E. 2003.“Evaluating CRM:
Many hurdles remain for carriers.” National
Underwriters. Cincinnati: National
Underwriters Company.
Schultheis, Robert, and Mary Sumner. 1998.
Management Information Systems:The
Manager’s View. 4th ed. Burr Ridge, IL:
Irwin/McGraw-Hill.
73


ERP Systems: 
Accounting and Finance
From Chapter 5 of Enterprise Resource Planning, First Edition. Mary Sumner. Copyright © 2005
by Pearson Education, Inc.All rights reserved.
75

ERP Systems:
Accounting 
and Finance
Objectives
1. Understand the accounting and financial systems within ERP.
2. Recognize the interrelationships among business processes supporting sales and marketing,
production, accounting and finance, and human resources.
D
ifficulties with accounting functions can create problems that lead to bottle-
necks, mis-information, lack of responsiveness to suppliers, and poor control (see
Table 1).
CASE: ATLANTIC MANUFACTURING
At the current time,Atlantic Manufacturing is experiencing similar issues with
its paper-intensive accounting systems.
✓Manufacturing sometimes ships products to customers with inaccurate
paperwork, so Accounts Receivable has to track down the product specifica-
tions to ensure customers are making proper payment. In some cases, the
original invoices are incorrect.
✓Accounts payable to suppliers is bogged down, and Purchasing has to con-
tact Accounting to get details about payment dates.
✓Sales people report they could sell a large quantity of items at a reduced
price. Should Atlantic submit a quotation? There is no management infor-
mation to help sales managers determine if they can make a profit by selling
items at a slightly reduced price.
In the Atlantic Manufacturing Case, problems occur when a lack of coordination
exists between sales and accounting and between manufacturing and accounting.
Many problems occur when accounting information is out of date or inaccurate. For
example, when customer accounts receivable balances fall out of date, this results in
mis-information to sales about customer credit limits.
76

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
Business decision making about product profitability is difficult when financial
information is maintained in separate databases for marketing, production, and pur-
chasing. These multiple databases make determining product profitability difficult.
Providing information on cost differences (e.g., standard costs versus actual costs) of
inventory is difficult, and accurate inventory costing is the basis for determining prod-
uct profitability.
◆
ACCOUNTING AND FINANCE PROCESSES
At the conceptual level, an accounting system supports operational and management
control functions. At the operational level, an accounting system produces transac-
tions, such as paychecks, checks to vendors, customer invoices, and purchase orders.
You can see the workings of an accounting system by looking at the conceptual model
provided (see Figure 1).
The accounting processes begin when a sales order is entered. This generates an
inventory update to the inventory system, which maintains information about each
item in stock and triggers the purchase of additional stock when stock levels reach
certain points. The purchase order system creates purchase orders and tracks which
purchase orders have been filled, which items are on back order, and when orders are
expected to be received.
Subsystems
Problems
Credit management
Accounts receivable balances on customer accounts can
fall out of date and result in mis-information in sales
about customer credit limits
Product profitability
Inconsistent recordkeeping, keyed into multiple data-
bases, may result in incorrect data on product profitability
Finished goods inventory
Delays in increasing finished goods inventory when
finished goods are transferred from manufacturing into
the warehouse
Inaccurate inventory costing
Difficulty providing information on cost variances 
(e.g., the difference between standard costs and actual
costs)
Consolidating information 
Difficulty closing books at the end of accounting periods,
from subsidiaries
which is complicated when multiple subsidiaries deal
with multiple currencies; difficulty integrating financial
information generated from incompatible systems, with
different databases
Management reporting
Separate databases for marketing, production, and
purchasing make it difficult to provide management 
with an integrated analysis of profitability and 
cash flow
Creating an audit trail
Difficulty creating an audit trail of transactions when
multiple transactions use multiple databases
TABLE 1
Problems without ERP
77

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
Monthly statements
Cash
Invoices
Verified
sales orders
Verified
purchase orders
Accounting
Inventory
withdrawals
Inventory totals
Customer
orders
Packaging
slips
Inventory
Order to
restock
inventory
Customers
Purchasing
Accounts payable
Payroll
Payroll totals
Purchases and
cash payments
totals
Checks to
creditors
Fixed assets
Fixed asset
register totals
Sales and cash
receipts totals
Accounts receivable
General ledger
Accounting
reports
Management


Name of Depositor
Address
City, State
Pay to the
order of
NAME OF YOUR BANK
CITY, STATE
|:051503051|:
51  8757 0"
0497
/0000195900/
Depositor’s signature
Dollars
$
Creditors
FIGURE 1
Conceptual Model of an Accounting System
The sales order generates an invoice to the customer from theAccounts Receivable
System. When payments are made, the accounts receivable balance is updated. When
payments are overdue, the Accounts Receivable System generates an Aging Report
that shows account balances, which are 30, 60, and 90 days overdue.The inputs and out-
puts of the Accounts Receivable System include daily transactions (see Figure 2).
In the accounting system, payments to suppliers or vendors are made through the
Accounts Payable System (see Figure 3).
Accounts receivable
Sales order
Payments
Adjustments
(returns)
Schedule of accounts
receivable
Custom statements
Aging report

FIGURE 2
Accounts Receivable
78

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
◆
MANAGEMENT CONTROL PROCESSES IN ACCOUNTING
Control processes within accounting include budgeting, cash management, capital bud-
geting, and investment management. Budgeting processes entail tracking revenues and
expenses and comparing these amounts to actual expenses and revenues. Budgetary
analysis includes comparing current budget allocations to prior year’s allocations and
comparing current revenues and expenditures to prior years’ revenues and expendi-
tures. For example, a budget analyst can compare a department’s travel expenses for
the current year with the former year and find a 25% increase in travel expenditures.
Another analysis may find that revenues generated from sales in one region are much
greater this year than in prior years. In both of these cases, the budgetary analysis may
raise further questions for investigation. For example, sales managers may want to take
advantage of potential growth areas by assigning additional sales representatives or
introducing new products into these regions.
CASH MANAGEMENT PROCESSES
Cash management ensures the organization has sufficient cash to meet its needs and to
place excess funds into use through investments. A cash flow analysis shows the esti-
mated amount of revenues and expenditures each month. Budget analysts can perform
what-if cash flow analysis to determine the impact of different business conditions,
such as decreased revenue, deferred expenditures, deferred hiring, and leasing fixed
assets instead of purchasing them.
Accounts payable
Purchase orders
Payments
Adjustments
(returns)
Checks to creditors
Schedule of accounts payable, due
dates for purchases on account, last
date when discounts can be taken
List of bills due

FIGURE 3
Accounts Payable
CAPITAL BUDGETING PROCESSES
Capital budgeting processes analyze the impact of possible acquisitions. Capital bud-
geting uses evaluation tools, such as net present value (NPV), internal rate of return
(IRR), and payback period. In NPV analysis, the manager can determine the present
value of future cash flows. For example, if the current discount or interest rate is 10%,
then you would receive $1,000,000 on an investment of $909,090.90 a year from now.
The present value of $1,000,000 to be spent one year from now is $909,090.90. In IRR,
the organization can determine if it can make a better return by acquiring an asset
now or by investing its money in another venture. A third form of analysis for capital
budgeting is payback period. In this analysis, you determine the time at which the
increase in revenues or savings in expenses will match the investment in the new
asset.
79

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
◆
ACCOUNTING AND FINANCE MODULES IN ERP SYSTEMS
Traditionally, computerized accounting systems provide operating-level software to
produce invoices, checks, monthly statements, financial statements, and other financial
outputs. Financial Accounting deals with financial statements required for external
reporting purposes (e.g., balance sheets and P&L statements). External reporting
requirements are established by general accounting standards, as well as legal require-
ments. Management accounting systems or management control systems provide
information on product profitability and cost center profitability, which enables man-
agers to make business decisions.
The difference between traditional computerized accounting systems and ERP
modules supporting the Accounting and Finance departments is that financial infor-
mation is shared in an integrated database (see Table 3). For example, when
finished goods are transferred into the warehouse, financial statements are updated
with up-to-date cost information. ERP modules provide up-to-date information on
cost variances, so that product pricing and profitability decisions can be made with
accurate information.
The Accounting module is an integral part of the entire ERP system, and most
accounting entries are automated as different business transactions occur. One of the
major benefits of using the Accounting module within an ERP system is that the sys-
tem creates a document flow of all transactions. If the customer has a question about
an invoice, an accounting representative can trace the data to the original order docu-
ment (see Table 4).
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING MODULES IN ERP
Financial Accounting deals with financial statements required for external reporting
purposes (e.g., balance sheets and P&L statements). External reporting requirements
Operational
General ledger
Fixed asset
Sales order
Accounts receivable
Accounts payable
Inventory control
Purchase order
Payroll
Management Control
Budgeting
Cash management
Capital budgeting
TABLE 2
Summary of Accounting Processes
Table 2 summarizes the accounting processes at the operational and control
level. In summary, operational processes produce daily transactions on a periodic
basis. Management control processes, such as budgeting and cash management, sup-
port decisions on how to allocate resources to maximize profitability and to cut
costs.
80

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
Subsystem
What It Does
Credit management
Accounts receivable balances are automatically updated, so
sales has up-to-date information on customer credit limits
Product profitability
Data is entered and stored in an integrated database,
leading to uniform results
Finished goods inventory
ERP automatically updates the increase in the monetary
value of finished goods when finished goods are transferred
to the warehouse; financial statements are updated
Inaccurate inventory costing
Provides up-to-date information on cost variances, which
enables the company to establish prices that will enable it to
sell products profitably
Consolidating information 
Provides an integrated database with the capability of
from subsidiaries
converting multiple currencies
Management reporting
ERP database is integrated, so all information is consistent,
complete, and accurate; a data warehouse provides a
comprehensive database for management reporting
Creating an audit trail
ERP provides interconnected document flow, which
establishes an audit trail and makes it possible to research
and link source documents
TABLE 3
How ERP Supports Accounting and Finance
are set by general accounting standards, as well as legal requirements. Financial
Accounting modules post all accounting transactions, and these transactions are
reflected in the general ledger (see Figure 4).
Within Financial Accounting is the Accounts Receivable subsystem.The Accounts
Receivable module monitors customer accounts, accepts payments, updates accounts,
generates due date lists, generates balance confirmations, and produces account state-
ments. The accounts receivable module interfaces with Cash Management (see
Figure 5).
Accounts Payable handles all payments to suppliers, including international pay-
ments, and takes advantage of available discounts (see Figure 6).
MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING MODULES IN ERP SYSTEMS
Management accounting modules provide an internal accounting perspective for man-
agers who are responsible for directing and controlling operations. Management
accounting modules provide information about variances between planned versus
Order placed
Doc 789654
Order requirements transferred to Materials Management
Doc 667852
Picking request tells warehouse what items are on order
Doc 995380
Goods removed from inventory
Doc 345621
Invoice generated
Doc 786453
Accounting entries posted
Doc 094531
TABLE 4
Document Flow Creates an Audit Trail
81

Accounts
receivable
accounting
Accounts
payable
accounting
Asset
accounting
Treasury management
General ledger
Balance sheet
Profit & loss
Human resources
Inventory mgmt.
Purchasing
Sales
FIGURE 4
Financial Accounting Process
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
Accounting
document 
Accounting
document 
Payment transactions
Dunning notice
Balance
sheet
Incoming
orders
Delivery
Invoice/
A/R accounting
document
O
O
Cash
management
Profit &
loss (P/L)
Cash mgmt. &
forecast date
FIGURE 5
Accounts Receivable
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
82

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
actual data, data are the basis for planning. Key management accounting activities
include the following:
Cost Center Accounting: Cost centers are organization sub-areas treated as indepen-
dent account assignment objects in cost accounting.
Internal Orders: Internal orders are used as a basis for collecting and controlling
costs according to the job incurring the costs.
Activity-Based Costing (ABC): ABC monitors costs by business process rather than
by cost center, so the cost of a business process can be determined.
Product Cost Controlling: Product cost controlling calculates the costs of manufac-
turing a product or providing a service.This provides information to Profitability
Analysis to calculate contribution margins.
Profitability Analysis: Profitability analysis analyzes profit or loss by individual mar-
ket segments, which include products, customers, and orders.
Profit Center Accounting: Profit center accounting evaluates the profit or loss of an
organization’s individual, independent areas.
Consolidation: Consolidation provides the ability to consolidate financial data for
external and internal accounting perspectives.
• Profit center accounting, profitability analysis, and cost center analysis provide a
company-wide view of costs and enable management to answer questions, such as
Accounting
document 
Accounting
document 
Payment transactions
Payment program
Balance
sheet
Purchase
order
Goods
receipt
Invoice
receipt/Invoice
verification
Cash mgmt. &
forecast date
O
O
Cash
management
Profit &
loss (P/L)
FIGURE 6
Accounts Payable
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
83

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
the following:
• Which products are most profitable?
• Which divisions are most profitable?
• Which customers are most profitable?
These questions can be broken down further. For example, you could ask which
customers in the New York territory are most profitable during the month of
December.Which products in the Seattle territory are most profitable during the June
through August timeframe? All of these questions enable management to allocate
resources, including product development, sales force hours, and management time, so
resources will be devoted to the highest-potential accounts and products. This maxi-
mizes overall profitability and business performance.
Increasingly, businesses are using profit centers, or responsibility centers, to man-
age operations. Each profit center manager is responsible for his/her own business, and
for the profit and loss of the business. Profit center accounting creates reports on the
performance of these profit centers (see Table 5).
Business Scenarios
Functions
Profit center accounting
Provides profitability reports with planned versus actual
comparisons; provides profitability reports with a comparison
of current period versus cumulative period
Profitability analysis
Identifies which products or markets have the highest 
contribution margins
TABLE 5
Management Control Functions in ERP
FIGURE 7
Profitability Analysis
84

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
◆
THE NEW ROLE FOR MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
ERP systems provide on-line real-time data for decision making. With ERP,
“Accountants are no longer at the back of the corporate ship issuing delayed reports
about the history of the voyage . . . Instead, they will be on the bridge with the CEO,
offering real-time cost information to help steer the ship into the future” (Kaplan and
Cooper, 1998).
ERP systems offer two types of data. The first type of data is operational data,
which provides feedback on the quality and efficiency of processes. Operational data,
for example, includes information on cycle time and defects and the cost of people and
machines used in operations.
With ERP, managers have access to activity-based cost (ABC) information. ABC
information traces the costs from resources (e.g., people, machines) and applies these
costs to specific products, services, and customers. Using ABC systems, managers can
answer important questions, such as the following:
• How much does it cost to make a product?
• How profitable is a customer?
• How profitable is a product?
This information differs from operational information. A comparison of opera-
tional control systems and ABC systems is shown in Table 7.
ABC information, running as a part of an ERP system, provides managers with
information on the profitability of customers and products with real-time data on sales
and production.This information is strategic because it can guide decisions on market-
ing strategy and business strategy. For example, information indicating that a certain
product line is profitable would lead sales managers to develop incentives for sales
personnel to focus on marketing this product line.
To understand data within the proper context, managers need to link information
coming from operational control systems with information coming from ABC systems.
Module
Interface
Financial Accounting
The source of data for Management Accounting (e.g., revenue
postings to the general ledger)
Materials Management
Posts cost of goods to Management Accounting
Production Planning
Posts the cost of bills of materials, which are created in
Production Planning
Personnel Administration
Posts expenses for payroll transactions
Sales and Distribution
Posts revenue from billing documents
TABLE 6
Integration of Managerial Accounting and Control Systems with Other ERP Modules
The Managerial Accounting module within ERP is a central clearinghouse for
accounting information that is created, updated, and used by many different functional
areas of the business, including financial accounting, materials management, produc-
tion planning, personnel administration, and sales and distribution (see Table 6).
85

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
The ABC system budgets the quantity and expense of committed resources and feeds
this information into the operational control system, which monitors the actual
expenses.As an example, an order entry department has eight clerks, and the ABC sys-
tem uses the standard that each clerk can process 2,000 orders per month.Total depart-
mental output is 16,000 orders per month. The operational control system tests the
standard by examining the actual quantity of accomplished work. If the order entry
department loses a person but can still process 16,000 orders without difficulty, then
this information can be used to recalculate the capacity of order processing activity to
2,285 orders per month per person (Kaplan and Cooper, 1998).
Process standards must be updated based upon continuous improvements. When
changes in efficiency are updated (e.g., the ability to process 2,285 orders per month),
the system can update the activity cost driver rates. Increases in materials, energy, and
wage rates can cause budgeted expenses to rise, and cost driver rates can be updated
accordingly.
The implications of having real-time data for managerial accounting is of enor-
mous importance. ERP systems provide a “coming of age” for managerial accounting
because information on customer, product, and market profitability can be based on
real-time information. However, these data must be used in context. Managers should
not be using ABC systems for real-time operational control. Rather, they should link
operational data and ABC data as a basis for guiding continuous improvement.
Operational Control Systems
ABC Systems
Purpose
Provides information about 
Provides strategic cost information
process and business unit 
about the underlying economies of
efficiencies
the business
Data
Information must be timely,
Estimates are sufficient; lower 
accurate, and specific to the 
requirements for accuracy
work group
How cost is defined
Relevant information on the 
Cost of resources across the value 
cost of people, machines,
chain of providing a product or
energy, which are used in 
service (e.g., from suppliers to after-
operating processes
sale service)
Questions addressed
What scrap metal is left over 
How much does it cost to make a
from production?
product and serve a customer?
How profitable is a product?
How profitable is a customer?
Scope
Specific to a responsibility 
Aggregates costs across multiple
center
cost and responsibility centers
Example
Measure actual expenses of 
Measure what it costs to connect a
a specific process: a customer 
customer to the Internet including
help desk
customer help desk, credit check,
dispatching, billing, and customer
service
Adapted from: Kaplan, Robert and Robin Cooper.“The promise and peril of integrated systems,”
Harvard Business Review, July/August 1998, pp. 109–119.
TABLE 7
A Comparison of Operational Control and ABC Systems
86

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
The partnership between ERP and ABC establishes a connection between the key
enabler of management decision making (e.g., ABC) and the key enabler of informa-
tion flow in the organization (e.g., ERP). Now that operational managers have access
to on-line, real-time ABC data, they can focus on measuring product and customer
profitability and reducing operating costs. The partnership between ABC and ERP
allows management accountants to play the role of proactive business strategists
rather than reactive, retrospective reporters (Shaw, 1998).
◆
SUMMARY
The purpose of the Accounting and Financial modules is to support financial account-
ing and management accounting functions. Financial information is created, main-
tained, and updated for external reporting purposes. Management accounting informa-
tion is internal information designed to support management decision making. By
analyzing profitability and business unit performance, managers can allocate resources
to marketing the most profitable products and services, and this will increase revenues
and reduce costs.
Questions for Discussion
1. Gather information about the best practices, which are associated with the Financial
Accounting module within an ERP package. You can do this by (1) conducting research on
the web; (2) interviewing a user of a Financial Accounting module; (3) using an on-line data-
base to find an article in a trade publication that describes the effective use of an Financial
Accounting module; or (4) using an Financial Accounting module within an ERP system to
identify best practices.
a. What are the best practices you have discovered?
b. How do they contribute to overall productivity?
c. What information for decision making do they provide?
2. The Financial Accounting module is often the first module to be implemented within an
ERP system.Why do many companies start with the Financial Accounting module?
3. Many divisions of organizations seek decentralized financial control. How can an ERP sys-
tem be implemented to ensure local financial decision making and control?
4. The Management Accounting module within ERP has interfaces to many other modules,
including Human Resources, Sales and Distribution, Materials Management, Production
Planning, and Financial Accounting. Describe the interfaces between the Management
Accounting module and each of these other modules:
Module
What Information Is Shared with Management Accounting
Human Resources
Sales and Distribution
Materials Management
Production Planning
Financial Accounting
87

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
5. The Mid-Level Market for ERP
The high-end accounting software vendors (e.g., SAP, PeopleSoft, BAAN, Oracle) see the
potential of the mid-level market, and to edge into it, they have been scaling down their
expensive and complex products. The mid-level market is variously described as organiza-
tions with annual revenue of between $20 million and $200 million or with more than 100
employees.
By removing some high-end functions and restricting users’ ability to customize the
remaining ones, the vendors can trim prices and, they claim, can accelerate implementation
from an average of two years to between three to six months. For a mid-sized organization,
this is a major plus because it usually lacks the information technology (IT) staff required to
customize an ERP package.
Gather research on ERP packages that address the needs of the mid-level market.
What challenges do mid-market companies face in implementing ERP software?
Source: Jones, Roberta Ann. “Spotlight on midlevel ERP software.” Journal of
Accountancy. v. 193, No. 5, May 2002, pp. 24–47.
Featured Article
Read these excerpts from the article, “The
changing landscape of computerized accounting
systems,” and answer these questions: (1) Define
each of the “in-technologies and systems.”
(2) What is their relationship to the success
of ERP?
MORE POWER AND GREATER
STANDARDIZATION
The world of accounting systems software
used to be divided into two parts: the low end
and the high end. This worked quite well before
e-commerce, e-business, and enterprise resource
planning came along. These, coupled with
cheaper and more powerful computers, have
given rise to a new breed of accounting systems
beyond the high end.The good news, however, is
that while the pricing of the new breed is not
cheap, it is far less than the mainframe- and mini-
computer-based systems that previously were
needed to perform the same functions. Also, for
the first time, database management within
accounting systems is becoming standardized
under the SQL-based client-server system. This
means ease of movement for databases from one
application to another.
The computer has revolutionized the way
enterprises keep their accounting records. After
transactions are recorded they can be manip-
ulated sorted,
analyzed,
summarized,
and
turned into financial statements with ease. The
observer does not even know whether Luca
Pacioli’s double-entry concept is still being used.
Accounting seems to be the perfect application
for making the most of computing power.
As we face the 21st century and the third
millennium, questioning what technology has in
store for accounting systems is quite appropriate.
With prices for consumer PC systems hovering
around $600–1,000, and low-end accounting soft-
ware priced at about $100, businesses can afford
to have computerized accounting. But, are the
old programs enough to run a business in the
21st century?
The New Marketplace. Today the com-
puter accounting industry has three major levels,
with the mid and lower levels each split into two
groups.
ERP vendors dominate the highest tier of
accounting systems, where software solutions can
start at $150,000.The mid level (where previously
high-end functions are found),with software costs
at $8,000–$50,000, is divided into SQL-based sys-
tems and non-SQL-based systems.Lastly,the low-
end systems,which still provide some bang for the
buck, carry prices in the $100–5,000 range. This
group is also broken down into two strata: the
very low-end systems, and a class of “larger” sys-
tems that are more functional and robust but fall
far short of the mid-level systems.
Another force at work is the introduction of
e-commerce and e-business into the accounting
88

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
systems mix. Most, if not all, mid- and high-end
products provide some sort of communications
interface with the Internet. Many of these inter-
faces are based on ODBC and the ability to have
multiple software and hardware products com-
municate directly with the accounting system
and its databases.
Even low-end vendors such as Peachtree
offer an e-commerce module.
Peachtree’s
PeachLink provides small businesses with the
wherewithal to do business on the Internet.
PeachLink allows the user to list products and
services on the Web, take orders, and even
receive payments.
THE 21ST CENTURY MARKETPLACE
Most of the major accounting systems manufac-
turers agree with the following view of the future
accounting marketplace:
“In” technologies and systems
E-commerce and e-business
Best practices
SQL
GUI front ends
Web-enabled applications
Extended enterprise solutions
Value chain
Internet-based Commerce. Commerce con-
ducted over, through, by, or with Internet-related
technologies will be the single hottest technology
in the next decade.Vendors that responded to an
e-mail survey all stressed a vision of e-commerce
or e-business solutions. Each and every non-
respondent’s website also stressed e-commerce
or e-business.
A new feature in Quicken 99 exemplifies
the attention that accounting vendors are paying
the Internet. Quicken, the highly popular and
simple to use home accounting system, now pro-
vides remote entry of transactions through
the Web. This capability allows users of Quicken
99 to enter transactions through Intuit’s
(Quicken’s publisher) site and store them for
later retrieval.
E-business has been defined as the
exchange of goods and services using electronic
means. Electronic data interchange (EDI) and
electronic funds transfer (EFT) are examples of
e-business primarily conducted at the commer-
cial or wholesale level. E-commerce is the use of
the Internet to conduct business. Amazon.com
and online securities trading are examples of
e-commerce at the retail level.
The use of SQL as the back-end database,
and its ability to use ODBC as a methodology
for transmitting information to and from other
applications, makes using the Internet for
business transactions easier than ever. Dell
Computer 
Corporation 
currently 
handles
$10 million in retail transactions per day over the
Internet, according to Lettie Ledbetter of Dell
Computer’s public relations department.
Enterprise 
Resource 
Planning. Lynne
Stockstad, director of global marketing at Great
Plains software, sees the back office application
of ERP as follows:
“This application category is the backbone
of a strategic business management solu-
tion. . . . It typically includes fully integrated
applications across financials, distribution,
human resources/payroll, service manage-
ment, and manufacturing. ERP solutions
have predominantly been implemented by
the Fortune 500 businesses. However, major
midmarket vendors . . . are now offering this
full scope of ERP solution[s].” ERP leaders
SAP, PeopleSoft, and Baan have, as stated,
moved into the middle tier of businesses,
breaking into the Fortune 500 and beyond.
They have done this by repositioning and
restructuring their current selection of ERP
products to run on the mid-tier platform of
choice,Windows NT.
Nevertheless, the former high-end accounting
products, which have been reclassified by these
ERP vendors, should not be discounted. As
Stockstad stated, ERP and the creation of pro-
grams that support this system of management
are on the wish lists of the now mid-level
accounting systems.
Solutions which in the past cost in the mil-
lions of dollars can now be achieved for less than
$500,000. This new accessibility to ERP allows
information power that was not previously
available to be used by smaller corporations.
Solutions geared toward specific industry sets or
implementation of management theories (such
as best practices) foster tighter integration of the
89

ERP Systems: Accounting and Finance
accounting, managerial, and operational func-
tions of the business.
The addition of the Internet to ERP and
e-commerce has morphed even this newfound
jargon with a new glossary of terms, most
notably the extended enterprise solution (EES).
Best Practices. Arthur Andersen defines
best practices as “simply the best way to perform
a process.” The boom in ERP and e-commerce
gives rise to the need to institute best practices,
to both improve the bottom line and create an
air of control over what is to be a new explosion
in information. From accounting to marketing
data, inventory control to depreciation sched-
ules, it is the art of data warehousing that is
enabling the small and large business to manage
growth in changing economic times. By imple-
menting best practices, from planning to imple-
mentation, companies are able to reengineer
their business and maximize productivity. A best
practice forces a reexamination of the business
from all points of view, essentially requiring the
corporate entity to redefine itself.
The largest mistake made during the imple-
mentation of a new accounting system, espe-
cially a manufacturing requirement processing
(MRP) or ERP system, is to redesign the new
system to work in the old environment. This is
often done without a thorough examination of
the effectiveness of existing procedures and an
evaluation of where best practices can optimally
be employed.
Structured Query Language. As mentioned
previously, SQL is quickly becoming the data-
base of choice. Vendors from Peachtree to
Accountmate are rolling out SQL-based
accounting systems, offering improved manage-
ment of increasing amounts of data. The use of
SQL standardizes the database aspect of these
upper-end accounting systems. Before the accep-
tance of SQL, every vendor either used disparate
database systems or created or modified their
own database system. This made it difficult to
share information with other systems located on
shared resources.
THE RULER OF THE ROOST
Today, and most certainly tomorrow, ERP rules
the roost, requiring CPAs’ and businesses’
accounting staffs to retool and reeducate them-
selves in this new management philosophy. ERP,
best practices, and ad hoc SQL queries will exist
not only in large enterprises but also in mid-sized
companies.
SOURCE: Honig, Susan,“The changing landscape
of computerized accounting systems,” CPA
Journal, v. 69, n. 5, May, 1999, pp. 14–20. Copyright:
Copyright New York State Society of Certified
Public Accountants 1999.
References
Baxendale, Sidney, and Farah Jama. 2003.“What
ERP can offer ABC.” Strategic Finance 85:
54–57.
Connolly, James. 1999.“ERP: Corporate
cleanup.” Computerworld 33: 74–78.
Kaplan, Robert, and Robin Cooper. 1998.“The
promise and peril of integrated systems.”
Harvard Business Review 109–119.
Schultheis, Robert, and Mary Sumner. 1998.
Management Information Systems:The
Manager’s View. 4th ed. Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/
McGraw-Hill.
Shaw, Russell. 1998.“ABC and ERP: Partners at
last?” Management Accounting 80: 56–58.
Smith, Mark. 1999.“Realizing the benefits from
investment in ERP.” Management Accounting
34: 34.
Stein,Tom. 1999.“Making ERP add up.”
Information Week. 59.
90

ERP Systems:
Production 
and Materials
Management
Objectives
1. Understand the production and materials management systems within ERP.
2. Recognize the interrelationships among business processes supporting sales and marketing,
production and materials management, accounting and finance, and human resources.
A
s an introduction to this chapter on Production and Materials Management, we
will go back to the Atlantic Manufacturing case and see how difficulties with pro-
duction and materials management functions create capacity problems, supplier prob-
lems, and order filling delays.
CASE: ATLANTIC MANUFACTURING
Issues occur in the Materials and Manufacturing processes, as well as in the
Purchasing processes.
MATERIALS AND MANUFACTURING
✓Materials and manufacturing people at Atlantic are constantly dealing with
shortages, capacity problems, and supplier problems. A capacity problem
forced them to air express a shipment to a customer to meet the promised
delivery date, incurring much greater costs.
✓A last-minute change in specifications failed to make it to the shop floor
before the order was assembled and shipped. This caused a time delay in
delivering the correct merchandise.
✓The product design process is basically sequential, so it takes between 9 and
12 months from concept to production. Competitors can design and manu-
facture products with shorter lead times.
From Chapter 6 of Enterprise Resource Planning, First Edition. Mary Sumner. Copyright © 2005
by Pearson Education, Inc.All rights reserved.
91

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
✓When engineering starts to design a product, it often does not have detailed
information from Marketing about the details of what customers want.
✓Excess inventory is a problem.
PURCHASING
✓Purchase requisitions get lost in the approval process, because paperwork is
all manual. It is difficult to track some of the paperwork down, so buyers
sometimes create multiple purchase requisitions.
In this chapter, you will learn about how Production and Materials Management
can help companies control costs and provide efficient order fulfillment, from cus-
tomer orders to purchase requisitions.
◆
BACKGROUND
The history of manufacturing systems shows the evolution of systems that were
designed to re-order inventory using a re-order point to systems, which adapt produc-
tion schedules to meet customer needs. Increased flexibility, increased responsiveness
to customer demand, and increased integration are themes associated with manufac-
turing system evolution.
The manufacturing systems of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s were designed to man-
age high-volume production of a few products. These systems used large mainframe-
based databases and were designed to implement large-scale production plans to
address constant demand. If too much was manufactured, however, then excess inven-
tory could become a significant problem. These systems were not flexible enough to
provide customized products in limited quantities quickly.
By the late 1980s, the rules of thumb governing manufacturing changed.
Customers expected their suppliers to create new products and services to meet their
needs. This meant that production schedules needed to be more changeable and flexi-
ble to accommodate changing customer demands. Manufacturing Execution Systems
(MES) provided continuous feedback and control of manufacturing processes, so
changing market needs could be addressed. MES provided components to manage
machine resources, to prioritize production schedules, to control workflow, to manage
labor, and to automate document flow.
In the 1990s, ERP systems were instrumental in integrating manufacturing
processes with other business processes. ERP systems manage processes across the
supply chain so that customers’ needs for information about products and services are
met. ERP systems achieve operational efficiency through integration of data.
Prior to ERP, customers primarily dealt with distributors and retailers; the manu-
facturer was far removed from the customer. With ERP, the supply chain becomes
more integrated, and many manufacturers sell directly to customers.This enables man-
ufacturers to develop a better sense of customers’ needs and to adapt to their needs
more efficiently.
92

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
Many of the problems with traditional systems occur because of lack of integration
between production planning, sales, purchasing, and accounting. If production plans
are not linked to expected sales levels, then there may not be sufficient inventory to
meet demand. There may be too many slow-moving items because customers no
longer demand these items. This is particularly true in industries where buyer prefer-
ences change, such as clothing, consumer electronics, and computers.
Inaccurate production forecasts trigger incorrect purchasing decisions by
Materials Management, leaving excess raw materials and finished goods inventory.
Excess inventories impact the cash flow and profitability of the business because they
represent significant costs (see Table 1). To minimize excess inventory, production
must be based upon an accurate sales forecast.
◆
PRODUCTION PLANNING AND MANUFACTURING PROCESSES
Production Planning and Manufacturing Processes include all the activities necessary
to ensure production. Production systems achieve these objectives:
1. Producing the production plan
2. Acquiring raw materials
3. Scheduling equipment, facilities, and workforce to process these materials
4. Designing products and services
5. Producing the right quantity and the required level of quality at the time required
by production goals
The production planning and manufacturing processes, which achieve these goals,
include operational-level and managerial-control processes (see Table 2).
Operational-level processes handle daily activities, such as purchasing, receiving,
Quality Control (QC), and inventory management. The function of purchasing is to
obtain the right quantity of raw materials and production supplies. In receiving, items
are inspected and received, and information about their status is passed along to
accounts payable, inventory, and production. QC identifies vendors who ship badly
made or unreliable materials. QC continues to monitor the quality of production goods
as they move from raw materials, to goods-in-process, to finished goods inventory. In
Subsystems
Problems
Production Planning 
Production planning may not be linked to expected sales levels;
difficulty in adjusting production to reflect actual sales;
difficulty in meeting anticipated sales demand
Production
Materials costs and labor costs can deviate from standard costs,
and this will change manufacturing costs
Purchasing/Materials 
Production manager may not be able to give the Purchasing/
Management
Materials Management manager a good production forecast
Accounting
Differences occur between standard costs and actual costs
TABLE 1
Problems in Production Planning and Materials Management
93

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
Operational
Purchasing
Receiving
Quality Control (QC)
Cost accounting
Materials management
Inventory management/control
Management control
MRP
Just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing
Capacity planning
Production scheduling
Product design
TABLE 2
Production Planning and Manufacturing Processes
Total Quality Management (TQM) environment, emphasis is placed on anticipating
and preventing defects. Continuous feedback about quality is critical.
In modern production planning and manufacturing, information systems support
these processes. Shop floor data collection systems are used to enter data about the
status of goods-in-process, including the amount of worker time devoted to each phase
of the production process. In factory floor automation, microcomputers with key-
boards enable factory floor personnel to enter data about the time spent on a job
order, piece counts, and the amount of scrap materials.
Materials Management systems provide information on inventory levels of pro-
duction materials, usage of these materials in production, and location of materials. Bill
of Materials (BOM) systems provide a list of ingredients for the final product, includ-
ing raw materials, subassemblies, and component parts.
Inventory management systems maintain inventories at their proper levels.
Traditionally,a re-order point system makes certain that sufficient production materials
are ordered with sufficient lead time to arrive at the plant when they are needed in the
production process. Another inventory management tool is economic order quantity,
which identifies the economic order quantity for each item.
Finally, cost accounting systems collect and report information about the
resources used in production processes to determine accurate production costs, includ-
ing the cost of personnel, materials, equipment, and facilities (Schultheis and Sumner,
1998).
◆
MANAGEMENT CONTROL PROCESSES IN PRODUCTION 
AND MANUFACTURING
MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING (MRP)
Material Requirements Planning (MRP) supports these processes:
• Identifying stock that planned production calls for
• Determining the lead time to get the stock from suppliers
94

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
MRP
The amount and timing of raw materials orders to support the
Master Production Schedule (MPS)
BOM
The recipe of materials needed to make a product
Lead times
The time for the supplier to receive and process the order, and ship
it to the manufacturer
Lot sizing
Production quantities
MPS
Master Production Schedule
Gross requirements
Raw materials needed for production
Planned orders
Sufficient raw materials for production
TABLE 3
MRP Vocabulary
• Calculating safety stock levels
• Calculating the most cost-effective order quantities
• Producing purchase orders for needed stock items in the right amounts
MRP uses inputs from the Master Production Schedule (MPS). The MPS uses the
sales forecast to identify the products needed and when they are needed.
It is useful to have some basic vocabulary for production and manufacturing
processes (see Table 3).
The ideal production and manufacturing environment is a just-in-time (JIT) sys-
tem,in which enough inventory is on hand to serve needs.To make a just-in-time system
work, suppliers need to deliver enough material to meet the production schedule. The
company needs to develop close working relationships with suppliers to make this
work. Suppliers can use Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) or the Internet to monitor
the manufacturer’s inventory levels by linking into their inventory systems. In this way,
they can replenish the manufacturer’s inventory on a JIT basis.
CAPACITY PLANNING PROCESSES
The purpose of capacity planning is to determine if there is enough production capac-
ity, in terms of personnel, space, machines, and other production facilities, to meet pro-
duction goals. Capacity planning requires detailed information about human resources,
BOM, goods-in-process inventories, finished goods inventories, lot sizes, status of raw
materials, orders in the plant, and lead time for orders. The result is time-phased plans
for each product and for each production work area. Additionally, personnel capacity
planning estimates the number and type of workers, supervisors, and managers needed
to meet the master production plan.
Production Scheduling information systems allocate specific production facilities
for the production of finished goods to meet the master production schedule. This
allows managers to control projects and project completion times/dates and to deter-
mine the impact of problems on projected completion dates.
Product Design and Development information systems integrate information
about component costs into product design/engineering in order to reduce costs. For
example, a product designer can compare component costs from two or three alterna-
tive sources and build the most cost-effective component into the product design
before the product goes into manufacturing (Schultheis and Sumner, 1998).
95

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
◆
PRODUCTION PLANNING AND MANUFACTURING MODULES 
IN ERP SYSTEMS
The introduction of ERP extends the production information system to finance, mar-
keting, human resource management, and other functions. ERP modules for produc-
tion planning and manufacturing support materials requirements planning, shop floor
control, inventory management, and capacity planning. The ERP system accesses cost
accounting data through integration with the financial accounting system.
The ideal computer-integrated manufacturing system is designed to integrate all
software and hardware used in manufacturing by merging manufacturing databases.
This concept eliminates paperwork and bottlenecks associated with non-integrated
data. The objective is to decrease design costs, to decrease lead time, to increase pro-
ductivity of engineering and design processes, to decrease work-in-process inventory,
and to decrease personnel costs.
With an ERP system, sales forecasts are used to determine production levels and
to develop a production plan. Sales forecasts are an input into the sales and operations
plan, which determines resource requirements for production. Demand Management
creates an MPS, which determines the quantities and dates for finished products that
are needed. The MRP component develops a detailed material plan, which is a set of
planned orders for materials to be purchased or for materials to be transferred from a
plant (see Table 4).
The MRP module determines what needs to be ordered at what time in order to
fulfill the requirements of the MPS, and this triggers the purchasing of needed raw
materials and/or subassemblies. The MRP function develops the planned orders, and
these orders are sent to Production as work orders. Each work order includes a list of
required materials from the BOM, and the manufacturing operations, which need to
be performed. Materials are issued to these work orders in the manufacturing
process.
Subsystems
How an ERP Works
Sales Forecasting
Production has access to sales forecasts, so it can adjust production
levels to actual sales if sales differ from expectations
Sales and Operations 
Determines if production facilities can produce enough to meet
Planning
consumer demand
Demand Management
Breaks down the production plan into weekly production;
produces the MPS, which is the production plan for finished goods
MRP
Determines the amount and timing of raw materials orders or
subassemblies to support the MPS
Purchasing
Generates Purchase Orders for raw materials
Detailed Scheduling
Schedules production based on demand
Production
Uses the detailed schedule to manage operations
Accounting
ERP captures data on the shop floor for accounting purposes
TABLE 4
How ERP Supports Production Planning
96

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
Forecasting
Sales &
operation
planning
Demand
management
MPS
MRP
Manufacturing
execution
Order
settlement
Sales info
system
CO/PA
Procurement
Inventory
Capacity
Costing
Production master data
Reporting and analysis
Planning process
Execution process
FIGURE 1
Manufacturing Planning and Execution Process
Source: Figure 108, SAP01, SAP Overview, p. 331.
SAP’s modules in Production Planning support Sales and Operations Planning,
Demand Management, the MPS, MRP, Manufacturing Execution, and Order
Settlement (see Figure 1). Each of the modules provides important inputs into the next
module (see Table 5).
Module
Function
Sales and Operation Planning
Determines the rate at which the company provides
manufacturing, engineering, and financial resources to support
the sales plan
Demand Management
Links forecasting functions to the MPS and the MRP
MPS
Creates planned orders for top-level items to satisfy 
requirements from Demand Management
MRP
Determines which material you need, in what quantity,
and at what time; generates replenishment schedules for all 
manufactured components, purchased parts, and raw materials
Manufacturing Execution
Creates production orders from planned orders;
production orders contain data on production objectives,
material components, required resources, and costs
Order Settlement
Confirms production order operations; collects data on 
quantities produced, completion dates
TABLE 5
SAP Modules in Production Planning
97

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
The Sales and Operations Plan, which determines what manufacturing resources
are needed to support the sales forecast, is an input into Demand Management
(see Figure 2). Demand Management links the forecast to the MPS and MRP. MRP
determines which materials are required, in what quantity, and at what time, and then
creates the necessary orders through the procurement process. Procurements converts
the planned order into a purchase requisition, or production planning converts the
planned order into a production order.
The MPS and MRP are inputs into Manufacturing Execution, which creates the
production orders. The production orders have data on production goals, materials,
resources, and costs. Manufacturing Execution is an input to Order Settlement, which
collects data on production amounts, times, and completion dates.
FIGURE 2
Sales Forecast
◆
MATERIALS MANAGEMENT MODULES IN ERP SYSTEMS
The Procurement Process determines needs, identifies potential sources of supply,
compares alternative quotations, creates a purchase order, tracks the status of a
purchase order, receives goods, and verifies invoices upon receipt of goods (see
Table 6).
An ERP system provides needed integration between the Materials Management
subsystem and other subsystems (see Table 7). For example, all purchase orders are
assigned to a cost center in the Management Accounting module. In Production
Planning, the inventory function posts components needed to fill Production Orders.
Purchasing and Financial Accounting share common vendor data.
98

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
Activity
Description
Determine requirements
Determines needs, based upon re-order point, regular
checking of stock, and forecasting based upon usage
Source determination
Identifies potential sources of supply
Vendor selection
Compares alternative quotations
Purchase order processing
Uses information from a purchase requisition to create a
purchase order
Purchase order follow-up
Provides status of purchase orders
Goods receiving and 
Confirms the receipt of goods
inventory management
Invoice verification
Matches invoices with information on goods which have been
received
TABLE 6
The Procurement Process
Interface With
Interface Type
Management Accounting
Purchase orders are assigned to a Cost Center
Financial Accounting
Purchasing maintains vendor data which are defined jointly
with Financial Accounting
Sales and Distribution
When a Purchase Requisition is created, it is assigned to a
sales order
Production Planning
Inventory Management posts components needed for
production orders
TABLE 7
Integration of Materials Management with Other Subsystems
◆
THE FUTURE OF ERP IN MANUFACTURING AND 
THE SUPPLY CHAIN
Manufacturers are moving toward JIT manufacturing environments since companies
want to carry less inventory and want to produce more customized products. Emerging
developments in manufacturing are the convergence of manufacturing execution
systems and ERP, the use of advanced planning and scheduling systems, advanced data
collection strategies, and eBusiness.
MANUFACTURING EXECUTION SYSTEMS (MES) AND ERP
The convergence of MES and ERP systems is a recent development. MES are factory
floor information and communication systems which provide feedback from the fac-
tory floor on a real-time basis. MES support data collection, detailed scheduling, labor
management, quality management, maintenance management, product tracking, and
performance analysis.These systems provide feedback from the factory floor on a real-
time basis (Manetti, 2001).
99

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
ERP vendors are expanding their modules to extend closer to the plant floor, and
MES vendors are expanding their shop floor solutions to include front-end and back-
end applications such as order fulfillment and warehouse management systems. A
partnership between MES and ERP systems yields outstanding results: better shop
floor to front office communication, better customer service, and improved informa-
tion for decision making.
ADVANCED PLANNING AND SCHEDULING (APS) SYSTEMS
APS Systems work with ERP systems by providing business analysis and decision sup-
port capabilities. The majority of ERP systems are still transactions-oriented and have
limited decision support features.An APS system leverages the data residing in a com-
pany’s ERP system to provide decision support for production planning, demand plan-
ning, and transportation planning (Kilpatrick, 1999).
DATA COLLECTION
In the past, data collection focused on using a network of bar code readers to gather
inventory movement and shop activity on the plant floor. To reduce on-hand invento-
ries and transaction costs, today’s data collection goes far beyond bar codes and the
network of collection stations. Real-time data are gathered directly from the shop floor
using mobile and Internet-enabled devices, bar-coding capabilities, and easy interfaces
(Turbide, 2000). Automating routine data collection with mobile user interfaces opti-
mizes the flow of information 300% or more (Turbide, 2000). Choosing a data collec-
tion system that integrates tightly with a powerful ERP package gives companies a
competitive edge.
eBUSINESS STRATEGIES IN MANUFACTURING ERP
The business world is looking for less inventory and more customized products.
Manufacturing is moving toward JIT manufacturing, whereby the exact supplies
needed for manufacturing are acquired on a timely basis. eBusiness offers the potential
to improve materials management by facilitating communications between all links in
the supply chain.
Business-to-business (B2B) electronic commerce increased in transaction value
from $43 billion in 1998 to $1.3 trillion by 2003. This is ten times the value of business
to consumer electronic commerce (Manetti, 2001). B2B applications enable procure-
ment organizations to interact with a multitude of suppliers, creating more competitive
bidding. Technology allows buyers to provide suppliers with their material resource
planning forecasts and, using this information, suppliers can make bids to meet a com-
pany’s specific needs.
eBusiness buyers benefit from the rise of eMarketplaces or exchanges.
eMarketplaces aggregate buyers, sellers, content, and business services, making tradi-
tionally fragmented markets more efficient. eMarketplaces lower the cost of doing
business by eliminating inefficient processes which are part of traditional paper-based
supply chains. By reducing search costs, eMarketplaces enable buyers to evaluate alter-
native supply sources. eMarketplaces offer a number of advantages, including lower
100

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
prices, lower transaction costs, improved electronic communications, and community
features, such as discussion forums. eMarketplaces maintain neutrality, rather than
favoring sellers over buyers or pushing one seller over another.
Web technology enables suppliers to see Requests for Proposals (RFPs), technical
specifications, and purchasing requirements so they can respond more quickly to meet
these requirements. Some companies reduce supply chain lag times by giving suppliers
a chance to obtain real-time demand forecasts, so these suppliers can ship raw materi-
als and parts without waiting for a purchase order.
Finally, eMarketplaces have transformed the role of purchasing agents. Prior to the
emergence of eMarketplaces, purchasing agents spent a good deal of their time pro-
cessing purchase orders and expediting shipments. With eBusiness, purchasing agents
can devote their efforts to more strategic activities, such as organizing e-partnerships
and analyzing alternative sourcing possibilities.
◆
SUMMARY
The discussion of Production and Materials Management illustrates how the produc-
tion plan is based on the sales forecast. Once the sales plan is developed, then the
Demand Management function determines the quantities and dates required for fin-
ished products. The MPS satisfies the requirements of Demand Management, and the
MRP system determines what is needed, in what quantity, and at what time to fulfill
the requirements of the MPS. In the next step, Purchasing or Procurement generates
purchase orders for materials or subassemblies, which are needed for the production
process. All of these Production and Materials Management processes are essential to
ERP.
Questions for Discussion
1. Many people argue that MRP is a precursor to ERP, and that ERP systems were designed
to integrate MRP systems with financial and accounting systems.
a. Given the interrelationship between MRP and ERP, does it make sense for a non-
manufacturing company to adopt an ERP system?
b. Have manufacturing systems been the basis for all ERP systems?
2. Gather information about the best practices, which are associated with the Production
Planning and Materials Management modules within an ERP package. You can do this in
one of four ways: (1) Conduct research on the web; (2) Interview a user of a Production
Planning/Materials Management module within an ERP package; (3) Use an on-line data-
base to find an article in a trade publication which describes the effective use of a
Production Planning/Materials Management module; or (4) Use a Production and Materials
Management module within an ERP system.
a. What are the best practices you have discovered?
b. How is the ERP system with Production and Materials Management modules superior
to a non-integrated Manufacturing system (i.e., where the Financial Systems and MRP
systems are separate).
c. What information for decision making does the integrated system provide?
101

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
Featured Article
3. The Production Planning and Materials Management modules within ERP have interfaces
to other modules, including Human Resources, Sales and Distribution, and Financial
Accounting. Describe these interfaces:
What information is shared with Production Planning
Module
and Materials Management
Human Resources
Sales and Distribution
Financial Accounting
The article “What ERP can offer ABC”
describes the integration of manufacturing and
accounting data, which is made possible through
the use of ERP. Based upon this article, answer
these questions:
1. What manufacturing data is used by the
managerial accounting module within ERP?
2. How is this information used to control
costs, to maximize productivity, and to
streamline operations?
3. How does this data integration support
managerial decision making?
“WHAT ERP CAN OFFER ABC”
One of the greatest stumbling blocks in imple-
menting an activity-based costing (ABC) system
is finding the right activity cost driver to use in
attributing the cost of an activity to products or
other cost objects.The nonfinancial measures that
are typically used as activity cost drivers are rarely
found in the accounting system. Measures such as
number of sales orders,number of material moves,
and number of engineering change notices per
type of product are more likely found elsewhere.
Because the activity cost drivers aren’t
under the control of the accounting system, the
activity cost-driver information isn’t subject to
the same process controls used to add reliability
to the accounting numbers. In the early days of
ABC-based costing, activity cost-driver informa-
tion was often derived from a “back-of-an-
envelope” information system.
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems
can significantly increase the availability and
reliability of activity cost-driver information.ERP
systems have become popular in recent years
because they typically integrate financial account-
ing, managerial accounting, cost accounting, pro-
duction planning, materials management, sales
and distribution, human-resource management,
quality management, and customer service using
a relational database.The use of a relational data-
base permits functional areas to share informa-
tion without reentering the data or duplicating the
data in databases throughout the organization.
One of the more dramatic ways that
ERP systems provide reliable activity cost-
driver information is by integrating production
planning, materials management, and cost and
management accounting. In cost and manage-
ment accounting, activity-based costing is used
to increase the accuracy of the product-cost
information and to develop activity-based bud-
gets. Before ABC, the materials handling costs
and other materials management costs were
often allocated to products based on a percent-
age of the direct material costs associated with
each product. The percentage amount used in
the allocation was based on the relationship
between budgeted materials management costs
and the expected total cost of direct materials.
Turning Overhead Costs into 
Direct Costs
To simplify this presentation, we will focus on
ABC support in the widely used R/3 System
from SAP. It’s important to note that ERP sys-
tems from other vendors typically include an
ABC feature with degrees of integration that
vary from company to company. Check your
vendor’s support team for specifics.
102

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
SAP’s R/3 system links production plan-
ning’s bill of materials with material movement
information that is available in the materials
management portion of the system. It permits
the establishment of standards for material han-
dling. In fact, in many respects, the use of the R/3
system results in material handling cost as a
direct cost rather than as the traditional indirect
(overhead) cost.
The R/3 system is capable of regarding
materials handling as a process whose activity
cost driver is the “number of pallet moves.” The
cost of the materials handling process is then
attributed to a product based on the various
direct materials that are moved in the manufac-
ture of the product specified in a production
order. The bill of materials (BOM) for the pro-
duction order will reveal direct material part
numbers that will be needed. Materials manage-
ment personnel will have already entered into
the R/3 system information about the number of
units of each direct material part number that
will fit on a pallet. One unit of direct material
part number B123 might require 1/20th of a pal-
let (20 units per pallet), and one unit of direct
material part number A456 might require 1/50th
of a pallet (50 units per pallet).
If we assume that a unit of product PDQ
requires one unit of direct material B123 and
one unit of direct material A456, then the R/3
system can calculate a standard direct cost that
includes material handling costs. Those material
handling costs formerly would have been
regarded as indirect (overhead) costs. Table 1 in
this section (featured below) shows the direct
costs associated with a production order for
1,000 units of product PDQ. Those direct costs
were calculated using an activity-based costing
approach to product costing.
In costing the bill of materials for the produc-
tion of 1,000 units of product PDQ,the R/3 system
would link production planning’s BOM for PDQ
with material management’s “bill of services,”
which specifies the portion of a pallet required by
each unit of the various raw materials.That BOM
would be related to the standard direct material
costs maintained by the financial accounting por-
tion of the R/3 system for inventory costing pur-
poses. The associated bill of services would be
related to the activity cost-driver charging rate for
the materials handling process as determined by
the ABC system. These relationships are possible
because the data resides in the R/3 system’s rela-
tional database. Using this relational database,
each direct material part number on the BOM is
converted to its related cost based on the standard
direct material costs maintained by the financial
accounting portion of R/3 for inventory valuation
purposes. Further, the quantity of required direct
materials is converted into required pallet moves,
and the required pallet moves are costed using the
activity cost-driver charging rate calculated by the
ABC system.
R/3 Support for Activity-Based
Budgeting
These same relationships between production
planning, materials handling, and accounting,
TABLE 1
Calculation of Standard Cost for a Production Order
Direct material B123
1,000 products  1 unit  $10.00 per unit  $10,000
Direct material A456
1,000 products  1 unit  $25.00 per unit  25,000
Materials handling:***
1,000 products  1 unit of B123  1/20  $50*

2,500
1,000 products  1 unit of A456  1/50  $50*

1,000
Total Direct Product Cost**
$38,500
Direct Cost per Unit of Product
$38.50
* This $50 represents the activity cost-driver rate for the material handling process.This amount is calculated by
dividing the annual budgeted costs of the materials handling process by the annual capacity of the process in
terms of the number of pallet moves.
** This example has omitted other direct costs for simplicity purposes.
*** If a direct material required only a portion of a pallet, the number of pallets would be increased to the next
whole number of pallets.
103

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
as represented in the R/3 system, are a tremen-
dous benefit when the ABC system is used
for budgeting purposes. Activity-based budget-
ing (ABB) attempts to anticipate the demands
on a process, such as materials handling, given
the estimated production of various products in
standard batch sizes. Table 2 in this section (pre-
sented above) shows the required number of
pallet moves by the materials handling process
given a budgeted annual production of 100,000
units of product PDQ in lot sizes of 1,000 units.
When the budgeted production of all prod-
ucts (product PDQ and others) is considered, the
R/3 system will have estimated the quantity of
the various direct materials and the number of
pallet moves required to support the total bud-
geted production. The activity-based budget will
already have an estimated budgeted cost and an
estimated practical capacity in terms of pallet
moves for the materials handling process. Let’s
assume that the budgeted annual cost for materi-
als handling was $5 million and the budgeted
annual capacity at that budgeted level was
100,000 pallet moves (resulting in the $50 activ-
ity cost-driver charging rate mentioned earlier).
If the production budget estimated that 120,000
pallet moves would be required for the year, the
activity-based budgeting system would reveal
that the demands on material handling would be
20,000 pallet moves in excess of the budgeted
capacity. This should certainly result in a reeval-
uation of the materials handling process and its
budget.
This reevaluation could result in process
improvements, including placing more units of
raw material on each pallet or reducing the aver-
age length of each move. If no process improve-
ments are possible, the manufacturer may have
to increase the capacity of pallet moves by
increasing the resources budgeted for the mate-
rials handling process. The final budget for
materials handling cost and materials handling
capacity will determine the activity cost-driver
charging rate for each pallet move. Thus, the $50
activity cost-driver charging rate used in deter-
mining the direct cost for product PDQ could
change as a result of a shift in the budgeted prac-
tical capacity and/or the budgeted cost.
Other Processes
SAP’s R/3 system collects a multitude of nonfi-
nancial measures that are potential activity cost
drivers for use in ABC systems. It can count and
record the number of line items on a sales order,
the number of sales orders for each type of prod-
uct, the weight of each item on a shipping docu-
ment, the number of shipping containers per
sales order, and more.
This information is collected as part of a for-
mal process that has built-in controls designed to
ensure reliability. These controls include auto-
matic counting of line items on a sales order. As
the sales-order information is entered into the
R/3 system, the system counts and records the
number of different products that are included
on the sales order. As the orders are processed,
the system counts the number of sales orders
for each product type. Another control includes
the mandatory inclusion of information in the
master record. For example, the master record
for direct material B123 must include the maxi-
mum number of units of the direct material that
will fit on a pallet (20 units for B123) before the
master record will be incorporated into the ERP
system.
Bar coding of product information is
another control that adds integrity to the system.
SAP’s R/3 can record information directly into
the system by reading bar-code information con-
cerning direct materials input and product out-
put.A feature of R/3 is the use of sensing devices
on machines that will record data in the system
without human intervention. With this feature,
TABLE 2
Budgeted Pallet Moves for 
Product PDQ
Direct Material 
1,000  1/20  50 pallet 
B123
moves per production
order
Direct Material 
1,000  1/50  20 pallet 
A456
moves per production
order
Total for Product 
70 pallet moves per 
PDQ
production order of 1000
If 100,000 units of product PDQ require 100
production orders, then the budgeted annual
production of product PDQ will require 7,000
pallet moves.
104

ERP Systems: Production and Materials Management
References
Fitzgerald, K. 1999.“Buyer’s interest keeps
growing.” Purchasing:The Magazine of Total
Supply Chain Management S8–S12.
Kilpatrick, J. 1999.“Advanced planning systems
spark the supply chain.” APICS:The
Performance Advantage 25–28.
Liker, Jeffrey, Ed. 1997. Becoming Lean: Inside
Stories of U.S. Manufacturers. Portland, OR:
Productivity Press.
Manetti, J. 2001.“How technology is transform-
ing manufacturing.” Production and Inventory
Management Journal 42: 54–64.
Pine, B. Joseph, and Stan Davis. 1999. Mass
Customization:The New Frontier in Business
Competition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.
Rondeau, P.J., and L.A. Litteral. 2001.
“Evolution of manufacturing planning and
control systems: From reorder point to
enterprise resource planning.” Production and
Inventory Management Journal 42: 1–7.
Schultheis, Robert, and Mary Sumner. 1998.
Management Information Systems:The
Manager’s View. 4th ed. Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/
McGraw-Hill.
Turbide, D. 2000.“Welcome to the new
millennium.” Midrange ERP:The
Management Magazine for Midsized
Manufacturers 10–16.
every time a punch press makes a “punch,” the
system automatically records the number of
pieces created by the “punch.”
SAP’s R/3 system has an abundance of non-
financial measures that may be used by activities
as activity cost drivers.These measures have a high
degree of integrity because of the way they are
collected and recorded. Now, activity-based cost-
ing can move beyond the back-of-an-envelope
information for determining the activity charging
rates used to assign activity costs to products or
other cost objects. Integrating the ERP informa-
tion with the ABC process saves time and
resources.
SOURCE: Baxendale, Sidney J; Jama, Farah,
“What ERP can offer ABC,” Strategic Finance,
v. 85, no. 2,August, 2003, p. 54–57. Copyright:
Copyright Institute of Management Accountants,
Aug. 2003.
105


ERP Systems: 
Human Resources
From Chapter 7 of Enterprise Resource Planning, First Edition. Mary Sumner. Copyright © 2005
by Pearson Education, Inc.All rights reserved.
107

ERP Systems:
Human
Resources
Objectives
1. Understand the Human Resources (HR) processes supported by an ERP system.
2. Recognize the interrelationships among business processes supporting human resources,
financial accounting, and other modules.
CASE: ATLANTIC MANUFACTURING
Atlantic Manufacturing is facing a number of issues relevant to Human
Resources (HR), in terms of recruiting, retention, and cost control of benefits.
RECRUITING
✓In recent years, recruiting talented sales representatives has become increas-
ingly difficult. In addition, turnover among sales representatives is very high.
Often, Atlantic makes an investment in training a new sales representative,
and that investment is lost when the sales rep leaves the firm.
✓It is difficult to make queries to the HR files to identify good candidates for
job openings within the firm. For example, the firm had an opening for a web
designer several months ago, and it was impossible to go through the various
personnel files to identify possible internal candidates.
HUMAN RESOURCES DATA ADMINISTRATION
✓Paperwork supporting the HR function seems to grow and grow. This
has meant adding administrative staff to maintain and to update employee
and job salary history data and to provide numerous governmental reports
associated with affirmative action, the Family Medical Leave Act, and
OSHA.
108

ERP Systems: Human Resources
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS ADMINISTRATION
✓The firm needs better data on the most relevant compensation packages for
certain hard-to-find job descriptions, such as sales managers.They want to be
able to offer competitive compensation packages that will enable them to
retain qualified personnel, but they do not want to offer unnecessary pro-
grams that will increase their costs.
✓The cost of employee benefits has increased dramatically over the past sev-
eral years. Atlantic is interested in developing strategies, which will control
the costs of these health benefits.A better information system would enable
them to assess the costs and benefits of alternative health insurance pro-
grams, early retirement plans, and educational program reimbursements.
Subsystems
Problems
Employee information
Need to query employee information to identify
candidates with required skill sets
Applicant selection and 
Need to develop selection criteria to provide a more stable
placement
workforce
Government reporting
Need to maintain and update data for government
reporting requirements
Job analysis and design
Need to design positions, which will minimize turnover by
providing breadth and depth of responsibilities
Compensation 
Need to develop competitive salary and benefits packages
for key positions
Benefits administration
Need to analyze alternative benefits scenarios to minimize
costs and maximize employee loyalty and satisfaction
TABLE 1
Problems with Human Resources
A number of problems are affecting the quality and responsiveness of the HR
function (see Table 1). Most of these problems deal with the lack of access to informa-
tion about employees, skill sets, job descriptions, turnover data, retention data, and
benefits plans that will enable managers to make queries and to generate reports for
external agencies, including government agencies.
◆
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PROCESSES
The business processes supporting HR can be categorized into operational and
decision-making processes (see Table 2). Operational-level processes include creating
and maintaining employee information, position information, and handling the
109

ERP Systems: Human Resources
HR Processes
Operational
Employee information; position control; application selection/
placement; performance management info; government reporting;
payroll information
Management 
Job analysis and design; recruiting information; compensation;
control
employee training/development
TABLE 2
Business Processes Supporting Human Resources
job application screening and placement process. Other important operational-level
activities include government reporting, payroll administration, and performance man-
agement (Schultheis and Sumner, 1998).
Managers need information to make decisions in order to allocate human
resources effectively to achieve organizational goals. This means designing job specifi-
cations that enable the organization to recruit and retain highly qualified individuals.
Designing compensation packages to attract and retain employees is important to
achieving organizational goals. Employee training and professional development are
critical to maintain appropriate skill sets, to improve productivity, and to maintain loy-
alty and morale.
Future workforce planning entails determining future workforce requirements
and emerging skill sets. The gap between current workforce profiles and future
skill sets needs to be analyzed so these skill sets can be developed. This may mean
retraining internal candidates, acquiring external expertise, and outsourcing certain
functions.
◆
HUMAN RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEMS
HR information systems have evolved in much the same way as information systems
supporting finance, sales and marketing, and production and manufacturing.
Historically, there has been a reliance on stand-alone, specialized applications support-
ing applicant tracking, compensation and benefits planning, skills training, and time
and attendance reporting. This proliferation of applications leads to redundant data,
which are difficult to maintain. Another shortcoming of legacy human resource man-
agement systems is their failure to link HR data with financial data. HR software that
maintains and updates information on benefits, payroll, and labor without a tie-in to
financial systems has limited value. By blending HR and financial data, the value of the
HR function has increased for the organization as a whole.
An HR module within an ERP system offers the linkage between HR applications
and financial systems and a standard set of processes based on best practices. However,
as with any other ERP solution, it is not advisable to customize the system.
110

ERP Systems: Human Resources
◆
HUMAN RESOURCE MODULES IN ERP SYSTEMS
The components of HR modules within an ERP system include HR Management,
Benefits Administration, Payroll, Time and Labor Management, and Employee/
Manager Self Service (Ashbaugh and Rowen, 2002).
• HR Management records personnel activity from the job application to
retirement.Advanced systems can read résumés and enter pertinent data into
the database.
• Benefits Administration links employee data to benefits data, including employee
benefit election data.Advanced systems enable employees to elect and update
benefits’ preferences via the web.
• Payroll produces paychecks, tax reports, and sends accounting data to the general
ledger.
• Time and Labor Management collects data for time/work reporting.
• Employee Self Service provides web-based self-service reporting for travel
reimbursement, personnel data changes, benefits enrollment, and training
classes enrollment.
An ERP system can support these HR processes (see Table 3).
Subsystem
How ERP Works
Employee information
Maintains personnel information, including job history,
salary, and retirement and benefit choices
Skills inventory
Maintains information on special skills, work experience
Position control
Defines each position within the organization; provides
common job categories, descriptions, and specifications
which can be used across the organization
Application selection/placement
Maintains information for recruiting, screening,
evaluating, and selecting candidates for employment
Compensation
Maintains compensation data; maintains employee
compensation changes (e.g., salary increases, salary
history, job evaluation results, appraisal results)
Performance management
Maintains performance appraisal data and productivity
data
Training and development 
Tracks information about courses, instructors, students,
systems
and registrations; identifies training deficits and enables
employees to book appropriate training
Government reporting
Provides reports in response to government statutes,
including the Age Discrimination Act, the Equal Pay
Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, the
Family Leave and Medical Act
Payroll
Generates payroll and various statements
TABLE 3
Human Resource Processes Supported by ERP
111

ERP Systems: Human Resources
FIGURE 1
SAP Screen (Display Personal Data)
One of these operational-level processes, Display Personal Data, is shown in
Figure 1.
In addition to supporting these capabilities, ERP modules support attendance
reporting, determination of overtime and bonus wages, and tracking of absences, which
are due to vacation, illness, or leave. HR systems handle booking of travel services and
associated expense reimbursement. You can see an SAP screen for creating Display
Travel in Figure 2.
ATTRIBUTES OF HUMAN RESOURCE MODULES IN ERP SYSTEMS
The attributes of a HR module within an ERP system include integration, a common
database underlying all individual modules, and a common relational database, which
promotes ad hoc query and reporting capabilities. ERP modules provide flexible and
scalable technology, an audit trail, which provides the ability to review the history of
changes to the database, and drill-down capability, which is the ability to reach the
source document of the prior step in the process. Workflow management depicts the
electronic routing of documents within the HR module. As with other ERP modules,
the HR module provides process standardization.
Additional ERP attributes include security, user friendliness, web features, and
document management and imaging capability. Security, including login security and
record security, limits access to certain screens. User friendliness is supported by stan-
dard menus and flexible reporting tools. ERP modules provide web capabilities,
enabling job seekers to download employment applications and to submit résumés on-
line. Document management and imaging, which provides access to repositories
of electronically stored documents, is an increasingly important feature of ERP
(Ashbaugh and Rowen, 2002).
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
112

ERP Systems: Human Resources
MANAGEMENT CONTROL MODULES IN ERP SYSTEMS
Beyond maintaining databases on employees, positions, skills, applicants, and perfor-
mance, a HR information system provides information that enables the organization to
manage workforce characteristics. The objective of a good HR strategy is to acquire,
place, train, and develop employees to meet organizational needs. HR information sys-
tems support managerial decision-making needs by offering query and reporting tools
for what-if analysis, (see the questions in Table 4).
An SAP screen which enables management to make a Compensation Change
based upon a compensation review is illustrated in Figure 3.
A comprehensive HR module within an ERP package maintains and updates
employee files, skills inventory files, job analysis files, design files, affirmative action
files, and occupational health and safety files.These operational data provide a founda-
tion for HR applications that support organizational effectiveness. Strategic HR appli-
cations are Human Capital Inventory, Position Control, Labor/Management Relations,
and Business Intelligence (Ashbaugh and Rowen, 2002).
Human Capital Inventory. A human capital inventory enables the organization to
track employees from application to retirement, including information on skills track-
ing, career planning, and linkage between performance evaluations and organizational
goals. For example, tracking skills needed by IT personnel who develop mission-critical
applications may provide a rationale for a strategic decision to invest in training
designed to maintain these skills.
Position Control. When position control is linked to budgeting, managers can plan
and budget for personnel costs. For example, if a strategic decision is made to limit the
FIGURE 2
SAP Screen (Display Travel)
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
113

ERP Systems: Human Resources
Subsystem
Questions and Decisions
Recruiting
Do we have any internal candidates with a B.S. in Marketing
and with Spanish-speaking ability?
What are our most effective recruiting sources 
(e.g., universities, web sites, referrals, search firms)?
Job Analysis
What are the characteristics of our most effective managers 
(e.g., educational background, experience)?
What are the characteristics of information technology (IT) 
professionals whom we retain?
What jobs experience the highest turnover?
What skill sets are missing among our HR professionals?
Compensation
What salaries and compensation packages do we need to offer
our sales representatives to be competitive in our industry?
What is the impact of various pay plans on retention and
promotion of personnel?
What do external market surveys say about job pricing?
Benefits
How can we control the cost of employee health benefits?
Can we reduce employee benefit costs by providing self-
selection of benefits?
Workforce development
What replacement personnel need to be planned for because
of retirements?
What should the future workforce look like? What new skill
sets will we need?
What additional human resources will we need in the
short-term and long-term?
What are the implications of workforce needs for training and
development?
What is the impact of a proposed merger on workforce
development and retention?
What is the availability of a skilled workforce in various
locations under consideration for the placement of a new
factory?
TABLE 4
Human Resource Decisions Supported by an ERP System
cost of contract plant maintenance personnel, then a link to budgets is essential to
measure if this strategy is being followed.
Labor/Management Relations. HR modules provide accurate information such as
tracking of seniority lists and disciplinary actions and tracking and analysis of griev-
ances and worker’s compensation. Data depicting trends in employee absences, costs
for overtime work, and trends in employee benefits’ costs, are particularly valuable in
labor negotiations.
Business Intelligence is the use of advanced analytical tools to provide insight into
organizational trends. Many interesting organizational trends are occurring in HR,
including turnover analysis, recruitment and training analysis, and salary/workforce
planning. Business intelligence is important to understanding these trends and devel-
oping human resources policy.
114

ERP Systems: Human Resources
FIGURE 3
SAP Screen (Compensation Change)
◆
INTEGRATION OF HR MODULES WITH OTHER MODULES
One of the major benefits of an ERP system is the integration of modules. In the case
of HR, the payroll, compensation, and expense reimbursement subsystems are inte-
grated with the Financial Accounting Subsystem. This saves needless duplication of
effort and provides a cost basis for making HR decisions.
◆
SUMMARY
HR management, decision making, and workforce development are among the most
strategic areas of focus today. In the past, many human resource management systems
have focused upon creating, maintaining, and updating personnel records.This process
was so time-consuming that it was difficult to use these data for decision making.With
the introduction of comprehensive, integrated ERP systems with HR modules, it is
now possible to participate in short-term and long-term workforce development so
personnel can be recruited, developed, compensated, and retained to meet overall
organizational objectives.
Questions for Discussion
1. Compensation for sales representatives is an important issue in many industries. If compen-
sation packages are inadequate, salespeople will move to other firms with more attractive
compensation packages.What information can a HR module provide to enable managers to
develop compensation strategies to attract and retain successful sales representatives?
Source: Copyright SAP AG.
115

ERP Systems: Human Resources
Featured Article
Please read the following article, “Keep Track of
Your Employees,” and answer these questions:
1. What are the benefits of automated time
and attendance records?
2. What advantages might accrue to employ-
ees using these systems?
Though companies have been squeezing labor
costs the past couple of years, many large busi-
nesses still do so without a clear picture of their
employees’ time, attendance, and skills. Tracking
those factors is often done through a hodgepodge
of manual processes or legacy applications.
“The time-keeping task has been neglected
at many companies,” says Paul Hamerman, an
analyst at Forrester Research. “Most have a
piecemeal approach of manual or disconnected
dumb time-card systems or some automation in
some places, but most companies haven’t
invested in end-to-end solutions.” Hamerman
estimates that only about a third of midsize
to large companies have standardized and
automated time and attendance systems. The
market for software that provides company-wide
automation of time and attendance hit about
$275 million in 2002, with almost 8% growth pre-
dicted for this year, Hamerman says. “Any com-
pany with a large contingency of hourly employ-
ees needs to do this,” he says. Industries such as
health care, retail, financial services, manufactur-
ing, and hospitality are among prime targets for
such systems.
The most obvious benefit from automating
time and attendance is the elimination of the
time-consuming and error-prone manual process
of figuring out time sheets and time cards and
relaying that information to a payroll unit.
“Another advantage is better analysis and con-
trol over labor allotment, costs, and scheduling,”
Hamerman says.
Banner Health realized those benefits when
it recently rolled out Kronos Inc.’s time- and
labor-management software. The operator of 19
hospitals, six long-term care centers, and other
2. How can an HR system enable an organization to meet reporting requirements that are
consistent with the following government statutes?
a. Age Discrimination in Employment Act
b. Equal Pay Act
c. Family Leave and Medical Act
d. Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA)
e. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1978
f.
Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973
3. Collect information about the best practices, which are associated with the HR module
within an ERP package. You can do this by (1) conducting research on the web; (2) inter-
viewing a user of an HR package; (3) using an on-line database to find an article in a trade
publication that describes the effective use of an HR module; or (4) using an HR module
within an ERP.
a. What are the best practices which you have discovered?
b. How do they contribute to overall productivity?
c. What information for decision making do they provide?
4. Many organizations purchase the HR module from one ERP vendor (e.g., Peoplesoft) and
the Financial Accounting modules from another ERP vendor (e.g., SAP).
a. What do you see as the advantages of this approach?
b. What do you see as the disadvantages of this approach?
5. Turnover among IT professionals has been a big issue for many years.There is a tremendous
investment made in training IT professionals, and this is why turnover represents a consid-
erable cost. What information will enable the manager to understand turnover and to
develop human resources strategies to minimize turnover among IT professionals?
116

ERP Systems: Human Resources
services, including family clinics and home-care
services in seven states, has deployed the Kronos
Workforce Central application suite to 15,000
employees. It will soon be rolled out to nearly all
26,000 workers, says Kathy Schultz, Banner’s
director of application development.
Using Kronos, Banner employees log on for
work at badge terminals, the Web, or an interac-
tive voice-response phone application. This
information goes into Banner’s payroll systems
and is available to managers in real time. For
example, nursing supervisors can adjust staffing
plans based on factors such as which employees
have worked overtime or the skills needed for a
shift.
It was a culture change that also provided
employees with a financial benefit: Those with
direct deposit can access their pay a day earlier,
Schultz says. Under the old process, Banner’s
bank sometimes didn’t get payroll data in time to
credit employees’ accounts so that funds were
available on payday.
Smurfit-Stone Container Corp.’s stan-
dardization of workforce management on
Workbrain 
Inc.’s 
Web-based 
ERM3,
an
employee-relationship management software
system, is part of a larger effort to consolidate
systems and processes. The $7.5 billion-a-year
container maker also is implementing SAP
financial apps and has installed PeopleSoft Inc.
as the standard package for payroll processing.
Smurfit-Stone wants to optimize scheduling
and tracking of more than 30,000 employees in
the 275 North American facilities of its packag-
ing-products manufacturing business. ERM3
interfaces with the PeopleSoft apps, so time and
attendance information is sent from ERM3 to
PeopleSoft payroll.
While Kronos and Workbrain are leading
providers of time and attendance solutions, other
vendors include CyberShift Inc. and Stromberg
LLC, Forrester’s Hamerman says. Large ERP
packages also include time-tracking modules.
SOURCE: Marianne Kolbasuk McGee,“Keep
Track of Your Employees,” Information Week,
June 30, 2003, p. 59.
References
Ashbaugh, Sam, and Miranda Rowen. 2002.
“Technology for human resources manage-
ment: Seven questions and answers.” Public
Personnel Management 31: 7–20.
Schultheis, R., and M. Sumner. 1998.
Management Information Systems:
The Manager’s View. Burr Ridge, IL:
McGraw-Hill/Irwin Publishing.
117


Managing an 
ERP Project
From Chapter 8 of Enterprise Resource Planning, First Edition. Mary Sumner. Copyright © 2005
by Pearson Education, Inc.All rights reserved.
119

Managing 
an ERP 
Project
Objectives
1. Recognize the importance of project management and control in minimizing the risk factors
associated with implementing ERP systems.
2. Understand the process of organizational change and its application to enterprise system
development, implementation, and operations.
E
RP projects often represent the single largest investment in an information systems
project for many companies and, in many cases, the largest single investment in any
corporate-wide project.The magnitude and complexity of these projects poses consider-
able risk, which explains the “war stories” connected with implementing ERP systems
(see Table 1).
◆
WHAT RESEARCH SHOWS ABOUT ERP PROJECT
IMPLEMENTATION SUCCESS
In their study of firms that have implemented ERP systems, Mabert, Soni, and
Venkataramanan, 2001, described the firms’ implementation experiences, determined
the business returns from ERP, and determined what factors influenced these experi-
ences and returns (Mabert et al., 2001).Their sample included firms ranging from large
firms with annual revenues of more than $5 billion with more than 20,000 employees to
smaller firms with revenues of less than $500 million per year and fewer than 20,000
employees. SAP/R3 was the most frequently reported ERP, representing 65.3% of the
sample. J.D. Edwards followed at 12.9%, and Oracle with 8.9%.
The overall data suggest that the firms felt they achieved more than 65% of the
expected business case targets. The firms which were able to implement ERP either
under-budget or on-budget attained a greater proportion (i.e., by 11%) of the planned
business case than the overbudget firms (Mabert et al., 2001).
Although the response data indicated that 70% of the firms felt their ERP system
was a successful project, the majority of firms (55.5%) indicated the actual ERP system
implementation cost exceeded the original estimated budget by an average of 60.6%.
The range of experiences included a low of 10% to a high of 200% (Mabert et al.,2001).
120

Managing an ERP Project
Certain factors influence whether firms are under/on budget or overbudget for
implementation. First, under-budget or on-budget firms make fewer modifications than
the overbudget firms.According to their survey data,these modifications contribute to a
50% increase in project duration.In addition,under-budget or on-budget firms establish
greater authority for project implementation and implement more effective communi-
cations. Finally, the under-budget and on-budget firms manage their ERP implementa-
tions better, and they manage their businesses better. This enables them to generate
additional revenues to cover the cost of ERP implementation (Mabert et al.,2001).
In general, ERP systems projects bring about a host of new questions. Some of
these questions and issues are the following:
• What technology challenges (e.g.,hardware,software,and networking) are encoun-
tered in implementing an enterprise-wide information management system?
• What organizational challenges (impact on business processes) are addressed?
• What people challenges (e.g., recruitment, training, retraining, and retaining) are
encountered?
• What challenges are associated with project size and scope?
• What are the strategies for minimizing the risks associated with the technology,
organization, people, and size/scope?
◆
CAUSES OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS PROJECT FAILURES
Project
What Happened
FoxMeyer Corporation 
Drug distributor FoxMeyer claimed that the bungled ERP 
SAP ERP System
installation in 1996 helped drive it into bankruptcy
W.W. Grainger, Inc.
Grainger spent $9 million on SAP software and services in  
SAP ERP System
1998 and 1999; during the worst six months, Grainger lost 
$19 million in sales and $23 million in profits
Hershey Foods Corp.
To meet 1999’s Halloween and Christmas candy rush, Hershey
IBM-led installation and 
compressed the rollout of a new $112 million ERP system by
integration of SAP,
several months; sales fell 12% in the quarter after the system
Manugistics Group Inc.,
went live
and Siebel Systems, Inc.
software
Tri Valley Growers
An agricultural cooperative,Tri Valley bought at least
Oracle ERP and 
$6 million worth of ERP software and services from Oracle in
application integration
1996;Tri Valley stopped using the Oracle software and stopped
paying the vendor; Oracle denied all claims; the case was
settled in January 2002
Universal Oil Products 
After a 1991 ERP deal with Andersen resulted in unusable
LLC ERP with Andersen 
systems for Universal Oil, the industrial engineering firm cried
Consulting
fraud, negligence, and neglect in a $100 million lawsuit in 1995
TABLE 1
War Stories
Much has been written about the causes of information systems project failures.
Poor technical methods is only one of the causes, and this cause is relatively minor
in comparison to larger issues, such as communications failures and ineffective
121

Managing an ERP Project
Failure
Cause
Result
Resource failures
Conflicts of people, time 
Incorrect systems with poor reliability,
and project scope due to 
difficulty with maintenance, and
insufficient personnel
dissatisfied users
Requirement 
Poor specification of 
Leads to developing the wrong system
failures
requirements
with many changes in requirements
downstream
Goal failures
Inadequate statement of 
Leads to developing the wrong system
system goals by management
by leading to requirement failures
Technique failures
Failure to use effective soft-
Causes inadequate requirements 
ware development approaches,
specification, poor reliability, high
such as structured analysis/
maintenance costs, scheduling and
design
budget problems
User contact 
Inability to communicate 
Causes inadequate requirements
failures
with the system user
specification, and poor preparation for
accepting and using the information 
system
Organizational 
Poor organizational struc-
Leads to poor coordination of tasks,
failures
ture, lack of leadership, or
schedule delays, and inconsistent
excessive span of control
quality
Technology 
Failure of hardware/
Cause schedule delays, poor
failures
software to meet specifica-
reliability, maintenance problems, and
tions and failure of the
dissatisfied system users
vendor to deliver on time,
or unreliable products
Size failures
When projects are too large,
Caused by insufficient resources,
their complexity pushes the
inadequate requirements
organization’s systems devel-
specifications, simplistic project
opment capabilities beyond 
control, poor use of methodology
reasonable limits
People management
Lack of effort, stifled creativ-
Time delays and budget overruns 
failures
ity, and antagonistic attitudes
occur, poor project specifications, and
cause failures
system is difficult to maintain
Methodology 
Failure to perform the 
This type of failure can lead to any of
failures
activities needed while 
the consequences of system failure
unnecessary activities are 
performed
Planning and control 
Caused by vague assignments,
Work assignments may overlap, deliver-
failures
inadequate project manage-
ables may be poorly defined, and poor 
ment and tracking tools
communication may result
Personality failures
People clashes
Passive cooperation and covert resis-
tance, with possible acts of vengeance
TABLE 2
Causes of Project Failures
leadership. In Robert Block’s analysis, twelve categories classify most system failures
(see Table 2).
In summary, Block points out that successful projects are on time, within budget,
reliable, maintainable, and meet the goals and requirements of users. Block also points
out that managers who succeed do an initial evaluation of a project.They evaluate the
122

Managing an ERP Project
rules, players, goals, constraints, and project manager’s responsibility and authority, and
the feasibility of success (Block, 1983).
◆
RISK FACTORS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS PROJECTS
Studies dealing with risk factors in information systems projects describe issues of
organizational factors, skill set, management support, software design, user involve-
ment, technology planning, project management, and project escalation.
Some risk factors are associated with organizational factors, including the extent of
changes being proposed, sufficiency of resources, and magnitude of potential loss
(Barki, Rivard, and Talbot, 1993). Project managers may have to address issues over
which they have no control, such as changing scope/objectives and conflicts between
user departments (Keil, Cule, Lyytinen, and Schmidt, 1998). Lack of development
expertise, lack of application-specific knowledge, and lack of user experience con-
tribute to project risk (Barki et al., 1993; Ewusi-Mensah, 1997).
Lack of senior management commitment (Keil et al., 1998) and lack of agreement
on a set of project goals/objectives (Ewusi-Mensah, 1997) lead to time/cost overruns.
Misunderstanding requirements and continuously changing requirements contribute
to project risk. Lack of an effective methodology and poor estimation can lead to cost
and time overruns (Keil et al., 1998). Software risk factors include developing the
wrong functions, developing the wrong user interface, shortfalls in externally furnished
components, and shortfalls in externally performed tasks (Boehm, 1991).
Lack of user commitment, ineffective user communications, and conflicts amongs
user departments are sources of risk (Keil et al., 1998). Lack of adequate technical
expertise and lack of an adequate technology infrastructure to support project
requirements contribute to escalating time and cost overruns and are associated with
project abandonment (Ewusi-Mensah, 1997). Technological newness (e.g., need for
new hardware, software), application size (e.g., project scope, number of users, team
diversity), application complexity (e.g., technical complexity, links to existing legacy
systems) and failure of technology to meet specifications are project hazards (Barki
et al., 1993).
Project risk assessment is based upon project size, technological experience, and
project structure (McFarlan, 1981), and managers need to control these risks. Project
management and control failures, caused by inadequate planning and tracking, can
contribute to unrealistic schedules and budgets and to project failure (Boehm, 1991).
In information technology (IT) projects, there is a tendency to discount problems and
their severity may remain unknown for a long period of time. When projects run into
difficulty, there is a tendency to escalate projects because of societal norms (e.g., need-
ing to save face) and to keep pouring resources into a failing project. This creates a
greater risk of failure. (Keil and Montealegre, 2000).
Managers should recognize and implement strategies to minimize the risk of
project failure, as outlined in the above description. If they recognize the nature and
magnitude of the risks they face in implementing ERP systems, they can minimize
these risks by employing project management and control strategies to address the
challenges they face.
123

Managing an ERP Project
Lower Risk
Higher Risk
Business process 
Extensive re-design of business
Extensive customization to align
re-design
processes to fit the package
package with existing business
processes
Scope of business 
Scope of project affects 0–25%
Scope of project affects 50–100% 
processes
of business processes
of business processes
TABLE 4
Organizational Factors in ERP Projects
◆
RISKS IN IMPLEMENTING AN ERP SYSTEM
TECHNOLOGY RISKS
Implementing an ERP system poses unique challenges and risks. These risks involve
technology, organization, people, and project size. The technology risks depend upon
how consistent the new technology is with the current corporate infrastructure and
operating system environment (see Table 3). When an organization introduces tech-
nology that is inconsistent with current database, operating system, and network man-
agement environments, the risk is greater.
ORGANIZATIONAL RISKS
The second area of risk deals with organizational factors.When business processes are
re-designed to fit the package, the risk of excessive time and cost investments decreases
(see Table 4).Customization poses the risk of extra,if not excessive project costs.
PEOPLE FACTORS
The third area of risk deals with people resources (see Table 5). If the IT professional
staff is familiar with the application-specific modules, then the likelihood of imple-
menting the system effectively will be enhanced. However, if the current skill mix of
the IT staff does not include knowledge of application-specific ERP modules, the orga-
nization will incur significant costs in re-skilling the workforce or in acquiring external
consultants.
Lower Risk
Higher Risk
Technology fit
System consistent with current 
System implementation will
technology infrastructure
require major changes in 
technology infrastructure
Fit with technological 
Technical requirements
Technical requirements 
expertise
(e.g., database, operating system,
(e.g., database, O/S, network) for 
network) for the system are 
the system are not consistent 
consistent with technology 
with technology know-how
expertise
TABLE 3
Fit with Organizational Technological Expertise
124

Managing an ERP Project
Lower Risk
Higher Risk
Knowledge of 
IT staff knowledgeable in 
IT staff has limited knowledge
IT staff
application-specific modules
of application-specific modules
Knowledge of 
User representatives fully
User representatives have limited
user staff
involved in the project
involvement in the project
TABLE 5
People Factors in ERP Projects
PROJECT SIZE
The fourth source of risk deals with project size.As already mentioned, an ERP project
can be the largest single investment in a corporate technology project that an organi-
zation undertakes. The sheer size of these projects, as measured in time, staff commit-
ment, budget, and scope, poses considerable risk and causes increased concern for
accountability on the part of users and senior management.
◆
MANAGING LARGE-SCALE ERP PROJECTS
We can learn from experience in managing commercial off-the-shelf software projects.
Large-scale projects involving software packages are MRP projects and ERP projects.
Package implementation is different from custom implementation because users are
likely to want to customize programs in the package to fit their unique needs, and users
are dependent upon the vendor for assistance and updates (Lucas, Walton, and
Ginzberg, 1988). Some of the variables associated with the successful implementation
of packages are greater vendor participation in implementation and support, a higher
rating of user/customer capabilities by the vendor, and a higher rating of user skills by
MIS management.
The experience implementing large-scale MRP and ERP packages provides a bet-
ter understanding of lessons learned. Commitment from top management and ade-
quate training are critical success factors for implementation (Duchessi, Schaninger,
and Hobbs, 1989). Lack of training leads to difficulties in MRP system implementation
(Ang,Yang, and Sum, 1994).
ERP projects, which are commercial off-the-shelf packages, pose unique chal-
lenges.As in all large-scale projects, top management support, presence of a champion,
good communication with stakeholders, and effective project management are critical
success factors in ERP projects (Bancroft, Seip, and Sprengel, 1998). Unique ERP
implementation factors include re-engineering business processes, understanding cor-
porate cultural change, and using business analysts on the project team.
Based upon interviews with senior members of ERP implementation teams,
Parr, Shanks, and Darke identified factors necessary for successful implementation
of ERP systems, where success is understood to be adherence to time and budgetary
constraints (Parr et al., 1999). Management support of the project team, a project team
with the appropriate balance of technical/business skills, and commitment to change by
all the stakeholders were important.
125

Managing an ERP Project
Risk Category
Risk Factor
Organizational fit
➢Failure to re-design business processes
➢Failure to follow an enterprise-wide design which
supports data integration
Skill set
➢Insufficient training and re-skilling
➢Insufficient internal expertise
➢Lack of business analysts with business and
technology knowledge
➢Failure to effectively mix internal and external
expertise
➢Lack of ability to recruit and retain qualified ERP
systems developers
Management strategy
➢Lack of senior management support
➢Lack of proper management control structure
➢Lack of a champion
➢Ineffective communications
Software design
➢Failure to adhere to standardized specifications
which the software supports
➢Lack of integration
User involvement and training
➢Insufficient training of end-users
➢Ineffective communications
➢Lack of full-time commitment of customers to
project management and project activities
➢Lack of sensitivity to user resistance
➢Failure to emphasize reporting
Technology planning/integration
➢Inability to avoid technological bottlenecks
➢Attempting to build bridges to legacy applications
Source: Sumner, M. 2002.“Risk factors in managing enterprise-wide/ERP projects.” Journal of
Information Technology 15: 317–327.
TABLE 6
Summary of Risk Factors in ERP Projects
MANAGING THE RISK FACTORS IN ERP PROJECTS
Strategies for controlling the risk factors in ERP projects include management com-
mitment to re-designing business processes, obtaining business analysts with knowl-
edge of application-specific modules, obtaining top management support, and making
a commitment to using the vendor-sponsored project management methodology (see
Table 7). In addition, technical expertise is needed to plan and monitor client-server
implementation and upgrades (Sumner, 2002).
A summary of the risk factors affecting the management of ERP projects
described in case studies of major corporate ERP implementations (Sumner, 2002) is
in Table 6.
COMPARISON OF SUCCESSFUL VERSUS UNSUCCESSFUL ERP PROJECTS
A number of research projects address the question of what factors distinguish success-
ful ERP projects vs. unsuccessful ERP projects. These factors include customization,
126

Managing an ERP Project
Type of Risk
Strategies for Minimizing Risk
Organizational fit
➢Commitment to re-designing business processes
➢Top management commitment to restructuring
and following an enterprise-wide design which
supports data integration
Skill mix
➢Effective recruiting and retaining of specialized
technical personnel
➢Effective re-skilling of the existing IT workforce
➢Obtaining business analysts with knowledge of
application-specific modules
➢Effective use of external consultants on project
teams
Management structure and strategy
➢Obtaining top management support
➢Establishing a centralized project management
structure
➢Assigning a champion
Software systems design
➢Commitment to using project management
methodology and best practices specified by
vendor
➢Adherence with software specifications
User involvement and training
➢Effective user training
➢Full-time commitment of users to project
management roles
➢Effective communications
Technology planning/integration
➢Acquiring technical expertise
➢Acquiring vendor support for capacity planning
and upgrading
➢Planning for client-server implementation,
including client workstations
Source: Sumner, M. 2002.“Risk factors in managing enterprise-wide/ERP projects.” Journal of
Information Technology 15: 317–327.
TABLE 7
Strategies for Controlling Risk Factors in ERP Projects
the use of consultants, supplier relationship management, change management, and
use of business impact measures. Project-related factors associated with success versus
failure include the way projects are divided, project leadership, project focus, the proj-
ect champion role, and the flexibility of the project schedule. Additional factors are
management reporting needs, user training, and technological challenges.
Customization
It costs more and takes much longer to implement ERP when the modules are modi-
fied (Mabert et al., 2003). Customization increases project time and cost dramatically,
Brown and Vessey note, and implementing the best practices embedded in the vendor
package greatly increases the chance of project success (Brown and Vessey, 2003). One
of the primary benefits of ERP is business process re-engineering that can be gained by
adopting best practices, but many organizations do not achieve this benefit because
they modify the ERP system to avoid having to change.
127

Managing an ERP Project
Use of External Consultants
Effective management of external consultants is important for ERP project success
because the consultants can offer valuable expertise in cross-functional business
processes, in system configuration, and in application specific modules, such as finan-
cial modules (Brown and Vessey, 2003). However, problems can occur when manage-
ment outsources the entire ERP project to a contractor, without involving internal IT
people. Organizations should use consultants but take advantage of opportunities to
develop internal knowledge (Willcocks and Sykes, 2000).
Supplier Relationship Management
Because of the dependence on external vendors and consultants in the ERP imple-
mentation process, it is important to build effective relationships, facilitate contracts,
and monitor contracts (Willcocks and Sykes, 2000). Successful ERP projects use a
vendor-accelerated implementation strategy to help implement the system on time
(Mabert et al., 2003).
Change Management
In implementing ERP, companies often fail to address resistance to change, especially
resistance to changes in job design. Individuals need to understand the interrelation-
ships the ERP system creates. For example, if you enter bad data in one place, the data
will affect others (Ross,Vitale, and Willcocks, 2003). Since ERP implementation entails
changes in business processes, change management is essential (Brown and Vessey,
2003). An organizational culture that fosters open communications is important to
avoid resistance to change (Scott and Vessey, 2002).
Business Measures
Since many firms fail to establish specific benefits in measurable terms at the outset of
an ERP project, it is difficult to determine the benefits (Ross et al., 2003). This can
make it difficult to acquire ongoing resources. Success strategies are continuously mon-
itoring project outcomes, and capitalizing on small successes (Scott and Vessey, 2002).
PROJECT-RELATED FACTORS
Project Division
Comparisons of successful versus unsuccessful ERP projects indicate that a good idea
would be to subdivide the project into smaller projects and to achieve tangible busi-
ness benefits for each project (Motwani, Mirchandanai, Madan, and Gunasekaran,
2002;Willcocks and Sykes, 2000).
Project Leadership
Project leadership is an important issue, and project leaders need to have a proven
track record (Brown and Vessey, 2003). One of the lessons learned in case studies of
ERP projects is that a strong project leader needs to keep the project on track, even
when changes require following contingency plans (Scott and Vessey, 2002).
Project Focus
There is often too much focus on technology rather than on the business benefits of
ERP. Focusing on user needs over technology is a success strategy for ERP implemen-
tation (Willcocks and Sykes, 2000).
128

Managing an ERP Project
ADDITIONAL FACTORS
User Training
User training is critical to ERP success. Organizations must be willing to invest in user
training because people’s jobs will change. User training should focus on business
processes, not just technical training in how to use the software (Willcocks and Sykes,
2000).
Management Reporting Needs
Many organizations ignore management reporting requirements. This is because ERP
systems do not always have effective query and reporting tools (Ross et al., 2003).
However, excellent query and reporting tools for ERP systems can be acquired from
third-party vendors.
Technological Challenges
Technological challenges can be complex.To be successful in implementing ERP, firms
need to recognize the complexity of data conversion and interface development (Scott
and Vessey, 2002).
A summary of factors contributing to successful versus unsuccessful ERP projects
is illustrated in Table 8.
TWO PROJECTS: FOXMEYER VERSUS DOW CHEMICAL
In 1993 and 1995, FoxMeyer Drug and Dow Chemical initiated ERP projects.
The FoxMeyer Drug project was a failure and has been blamed for the company’s
bankruptcy in 1996. There were some similarities between the two projects. Both
companies implemented a vanilla version of SAP R/3 software. Both companies
experienced similar challenges, such as insufficient ERP skills and conversion from a
mainframe to a client-server infrastructure. Neither company invested in change man-
agement, and neither seemed to have a good project planning strategy. Even though
the Dow Chemical project experienced difficulties, it was ultimately successful. The
two case studies demonstrate that overcoming the risks inherent in implementing ERP
is important (Scott and Vessey, 2002).
The comparison between the FoxMeyer Drug project and the Dow Chemical pro-
ject reveals some interesting differences. FoxMeyer lost a major customer, Phar-Mor,
in 1993, and signed a new customer, University HealthSystem Consortium (UHC),
Role of the Project Champion
A project champion is essential (Willcocks and Sykes, 2000). Beyond this, project team
members need to have the authority to make decisions on behalf of their functional
area (Brown and Vessey, 2003).
Project Schedule
Some slack needs to be built into the project schedule because unforeseen issues will
arise in an ERP project. In more successful projects, managers create contingency
plans and measure achievements (Scott and Vessey, 2002).
129

Managing an ERP Project
Successful Projects
Unsuccessful Projects
Customization
Did not modify the ERP modules
(Mabert et al., 2003)
Compromise on a vanilla imple-
mentation, by implementing best 
practices embedded in the vendor 
package (Brown and Vessey, 2003)
Use of 
Effectively manage external 
Outsource the entire ERP project with-
consultants
consultants to fill in gaps in 
out involving the internal IT group
expertise (Motwani et al., 2002,
(Willcocks and Sykes, 2000)
Brown and Vessey, 2003)
Supplier  
Effectively manage supplier 
relationship
relationships, including 
management
contract monitoring and 
contract facilitation (Willcocks 
and Sykes, 2000)
Follow the vendor accelerated 
implementation strategy 
(Mabert et al., 2003)
Change 
Effectively manage change (Brown
Fail to address resistance to change,
management 
and Vessey, 2003)
including changes in job design (Ross,
approach
Foster a culture with open communi-
Vitale, and Willcocks, 2003)
cations (Scott and Vessey, 2002)
Business 
Fail to establish specific benefits in
measures
measurable terms (Ross et al., 2003)
Project 
Subdivide the project into smaller
division
projects, with tangible business 
benefits (Willcocks and Sykes,
2000; Motwani et al., 2002)
Project 
Obtain project leaders with a proven
leadership
track record (Brown and Vessey,
2003), who can keep the project on
track (Scott and Vessey, 2002)
Project focus
Focus on business benefits of ERP
Focus on technology (Willcocks and
(Willcocks and Sykes, 2000)
Sykes, 2000)
Project 
Obtain a project champion 
champion
from the business side 
(Willcocks and Sykes, 2000)
Project schedule
Create slack in the schedule 
(Scott and Vessey, 2002)
Management 
Ignore management reporting needs
reporting 
(e.g., query and reporting tools) 
(Ross et al., 2003)
User training
Focus on business processes,
Focus on teaching technical skills 
not just technical training 
(Willcocks and Sykes, 2000)
(Willcocks, 2002)
Technological 
Recognize the complexity of con-
challenges
verting data and creating interfaces
(Scott and Vessey, 2002)
TABLE 8
Factors Contributing to Successful versus Unsuccessful Projects
130

Managing an ERP Project
FoxMeyer
Dow Chemical
Corporate characteristics
Wholesale drug distribution 
$2.5 billion producer of silicone
business
products
Business environment
Lost a major customer 
Faced lawsuits from silicone breast
(Phar-Mor) in 1993 and 
implants
signed up a new customer 
(UHC)
Project characteristics
Initiated SAP R/3 project 
Initiated SAP/R3 implementation 
in 1993
in 1995
Project portfolio
Installed a warehouse 
automation system at the 
same time
Organizational culture
Less open culture; employees
Culture more accepting of change
did not express concerns to 
management
Viewpoint regarding 
Unrealistic expectations
Focused on small wins
business benefits of ERP
about the return on 
investment in ERP
Business factors
UHC contract required 
major changes in the 
software
Project planning/
Inadequate project planning
Adjusted scope when project
management 
difficulties occurred; maintained
control over the project
Relationship with 
Used external consultant
Relied on internal people to 
external consultants
(Andersen Consulting)
design processes and configure  
the system
Project champion
Project did not have a 
Strong leadership from a project
champion
champion
Adapted from: Scott, Judy and Vessey, Iris,“Managing risks in enterprise systems implementations,”
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 45, No. 4,April 2002, pp. 74–81.
TABLE 9
Differences between FoxMeyer Drug versus Dow Chemical’s ERP Implementation
but the contract with UHC required changes to the software, causing the overall SAP
project cost to go over $100 million. At the same time, FoxMeyer embarked on imple-
menting new warehouse automation software.Technical issues clouded the SAP imple-
mentation. For example, project managers did not run tests to discover that SAP could
not process the 420,000 transactions per day that had been processed on the main-
frame (Scott and Vessey, 2002).
Dow Chemical experienced project implementation difficulties, but was able to
overcome the risks. Dow Chemical’s project had a strong project leader and a project
champion (see Table 9). Even though they did not have a good project plan in place at
the outset, Dow Chemical was able to adjust the project scope when difficulties
occurred and to maintain control over the project (Scott and Vessey, 2002). Dow
Chemical fostered open communications, and this contributed to project success,
whereas employees at FoxMeyer did not express their concerns openly even though
131

they had concerns about the project. Finally, FoxMeyer had unrealistic expectations
about the return on investment in ERP and even underbid contracts based upon its
perception that costs would decrease. In contrast, Dow achieved small wins.
If there is a lesson to be learned from the comparison of the FoxMeyer versus the
Dow Chemical projects, it is that sound management is a critical success factor. Risks
will be encountered in any ERP project, and these risks must be addressed through
sound leadership and effective project management.
Managing an ERP Project
◆
SUMMARY
ERP projects tend to be large and complex, and require expertise that is not typically
found internally within the organization implementing the ERP system.As such, these
high-risk projects require multiple strategies to minimize risks (Applegate, McFarlan,
and McKenney, 1999). A steering committee, responsible for system selection, moni-
toring, and managing external consultants, must be involved throughout the project
(Bingi, Sharma, and Godla, 1999). External consultants with knowledge about specific
modules (Piturro, 1999) are critical, but their knowledge should be transferred to inter-
nal employees.
Selecting a vendor may be a lifelong commitment (Davenport, 2000). ERP imple-
mentations require companies to adapt the organization to the package through
business process re-engineering. A close fit between the software vendor and the user
organization is positively associated with successful package implementation (Janson
and Subramanian, 1996). User training is important, so frontline workers will be able to
handle the demands of the new ERP system (Sweat, 1999).
Most important, ERP systems integrate information and standardize processes. If
organizations find this consistent with their overall business strategies, then they will
perceive greater value from ERP.
Questions for Discussion
1. Use articles in trade publications which are available in the library or through on-line data-
bases to explore factors contributing to the problems encountered in these ERP projects.
The timeframes are given so you can find articles during the appropriate timeframes:
a. FoxMeyer Drug (project cancelled in 1996)
b. Dow Chemical (project cancelled in 1998)
c. Dell Computer (project cancelled in 1998)
d. Hershey’s (project in 1999–2000 timeframe)
2. Use articles in trade publications which are available in the library or through on-line data-
bases to explore factors contributing to the successful implementation of ERP projects. In
your analysis, include the following:
a. Technology factors
b. Project management factors
c. User-related factors
3. Using Microsoft Project, do the following:
a. You will see a project management schedule for an ERP project below.This project
management plan has been created using Microsoft Project.
132

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
4 days
7 days
7 days
14 days
4 wks
8 wks
1 wk
3 wks
2 wks
1 wk
8 wks
3 wks
2 wks
1 wk
6 wks
6 wks
Mon 1/19/04
Wed 1/28/04
Wed 1/28/04
Thu 1/29/04
Thu 2/19/04
Thu 2/19/04
Thu 2/19/04
Mon 3/29/04
Mon 4/26/04
Mon 5/3/04
Thu 4/1/04
Wed 6/2/04
Mon 6/28/04
Mon 7/5/04
Mon 5/3/04
Mon 7/5/04
Finalize vendor decision
Hire SD (sales/distrib.) consultant
Develop internal project team
Select client-server system
Implement client-server system
Develop SD interfaces
Hire MM (materials mgmt.) consultant
Install SD module
Test SD module
Bring SD module into production
Develop MM interfaces
Install MM module
Test MM module
Bring MM module into production
Develop SD training
Develop MM training
Task Name
ID
Duration
Start
January
Jan.
February
Feb.
March
Mar.
April
Apr.
May
May
June
June
July
July
August
Aug.
Project: ERPprojectmanagementplan
Date: Mon 3/22/04
Task
Split
Progress
Milestone
Summary
Project summary
External tasks
External milestone
Deadline
Page 1
FIGURE 1
Project Management Plan
133

Managing an ERP Project
Featured Article
“FOXMEYER’S PROJECT WAS A DISAS-
TER. WAS THE COMPANY TOO AGGRES-
SIVE OR WAS IT MISLED?”
CASE
Divide the class into two teams, one arguing on
behalf of FoxMeyer that SAP was to blame, and
one arguing on behalf of SAP that FoxMeyer’s
management was to blame. Each team should
address these questions:
1. Was FoxMeyer misled?
2. What strategies could have been put into
place to avoid the project disaster?
3. What business misjudgments occurred?
4. Was FoxMeyer’s failure due to technology
failure or business failure?
“Don’t know whether the deficiencies resulted
from the fact that the systems just didn’t work
or from the fact that there was poor implemen-
tation,” says Bart A. Brown Jr., a Wilmington,
Del.-based bankruptcy trustee appointed to
oversee the case of FoxMeyer Drug Co.,
Carrollton, Tex. But if even 20% of what he has
read of the situation in previous media accounts
is true, Brown says, “then it sounds like there is
a claim there.”
Then the nation’s fourth largest distributor
of pharmaceuticals to both druggists and hospi-
tals, FoxMeyer in the early ’90s bet its future on a
massive enterprisewide software and warehouse-
automation project and lost. In August 1996 the
company filed for protection under Chapter 11
of the federal bankruptcy code.
The bankruptcy court must decide whether
FoxMeyer—which expected to save $40 million
annually from a massive overhaul of its com-
puter systems that were designed to serve a
rapidly expanding customer base—was misled by
any of the software companies and systems
integrators it dealt with. They are: SAP AG,
Walldorf, Germany, which supplied enterprise-
wide financial and logistics software; Andersen
Consulting, which provided implementation
expertise through an on-site team that at one
point numbered about 50 people; and Pinnacle
Automation Inc., St. Louis, which through
its operating subsidiaries supplied conveyors,
carousels, and a warehouse-management system
for FoxMeyer’s distribution center inWashington
Court House, Ohio.
FoxMeyer executives complained to the
bankruptcy trustee earlier this year that the tech-
nology vendors had oversold their capabilities
during the sales process. Bankruptcy trustee
Brown expects to decide by year-end whether his
office will pursue legal action against the ven-
dors on behalf of FoxMeyer or to allow the right
to make a legal claim to revert to Avatex Group
of Dallas, the new name of FoxMeyer Health
Corp., the parent firm of FoxMeyer Drug.
ID
Activity
Duration
A
Create a list of software features which are needed
3 months
B
Create a list of ERP software candidates
3 months
C
Narrow choices down to 3 or 4 candidates
3 months
D
Develop a Request for Proposal
1 month
E
Participate in Vendor Presentations
3 months
F
Review Vendor Proposals
1 month
G
Evaluate and Select the Best Alternative 
1 month
H
Negotiate for Pricing and Licensing Agreements
2 months
I
Develop implementation schedule
2 months
b. Create a project management schedule for an ERP selection decision using Microsoft
Project. Use these parameters:
134

Managing an ERP Project
One thing no one disagrees on is that
FoxMeyer Drug crashed and burned. Once a
$5 billion company, FoxMeyer filed under
Chapter 11 shortly after taking a $34 million
charge to cover uncollectible costs related to
shipping and inventory troubles.
The reason for FoxMeyer’s collapse, though,
remains a subject of debate. A FoxMeyer
spokesperson told the Wall Street Journal in late
1996 that computer-integration problems related
to the company’s IT effort-whose total price tag
ultimately topped $100 million were “a signifi-
cant factor leading to the bankruptcy filing.”
While executives at Avatex declined com-
ment, some technology experts who were on the
scene agreed to be interviewed for this article.
Christopher Cole, chief operating officer at
warehouse-automation vendor Pinnacle, says the
FoxMeyer mess was “not a failure of automa-
tion. It was not a failure of commercial software
per se. It was a management failure.”
To understand what happened at FoxMeyer,
it’s best to start with the company’s business
strategy and plans for technology to support
it. FoxMeyer was afraid its customer orders—
involving some 300,000 items daily, according to
one person who worked on the technology
overhaul—would soon outgrow the capacity of
its aging Unisys mainframe.To gear up to handle
continued growth in the business, the company
embarked upon a search for a client/server based
system that would enable it to relieve the stress
on this system while keeping up with anticipated
growth in business volume.
A key concern that the FoxMeyer project
team had to address early on was the system’s
ability to handle the sheer magnitude of
FoxMeyer’s business. FoxMeyer was taking and
filling orders from thousands of pharmacies and
hospitals each day. Because each pharmacy
could order hundreds of items at once, it was
common for the company to process hundreds
of thousands of transactions daily.
To make sure the new systems were up to
handling that volume, SAP’s software was tested
on client/server hardware supplied by both
Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, Mass., and
Hewlett-Packard Co. (HP), San Jose, the latter of
which ultimately was selected. “But there are a
lot of variables in doing benchmarking and vol-
ume testing,” says Kenneth Woltz, president of
Woltz & Associates Ltd., Chicago-based consul-
tants,“and I believe that just increased the risk. I
would hate to guess how many HP systems they
had coupled together and what changes had to
be made to the Oracle database to process their
huge volume.”
Woltz, who advised FoxMeyer during the
early stages of the project, contends that the
implementation appeared troubled almost from
the start. “Andersen had been selected as the
SAP partner,” he recalls. “And I remember a
meeting where a presentation was being made
that laid out a schedule for the entire implemen-
tation to be completed in 18 months.”
Woltz says he challenged that goal as totally
unrealistic. “Many IT personnel put forth these
master schedules where each of the modules is to
be implemented in two to three months,” he
explains, “but I’ve never seen that happen in
reality in a large, complex organization.”
A successful implementation of a new
general-ledger accounting system sometimes
takes up to a year by itself, Woltz argued. He
believed FoxMeyer lacked available users on
staff with the sophistication to handle a fast-
track installation. “My position was, ‘Go slower.’
Competition was tough in this industry, but many
companies underestimate how long it takes to
implement changes in core business processes,”
he says.
Andersen’s role, Woltz says, was to install
SAP. “They put together the master schedule for
implementing SAP financials and logistics mod-
ules,” he adds.
Comments an Andersen spokesperson,“We
delivered, the work we performed was success-
fully completed, and we were paid in full.”
SAP officials agree that volume was an
issue at FoxMeyer and continues to be a source
of some concern at McKesson Corp., San
Francisco, which bought FoxMeyer Drug’s assets
in October 1996. (The value of potential claims
against SAP, Andersen, and Pinnacle were
excluded from this transaction.)
However, Robert Pawlick, who served as
project manager for SAP America Inc. at the
FoxMeyer site, says that thanks to the test
runs conducted at FoxMeyer, “there was some
measurement evidence that these systems could
perform at that level.”
SAP’s
functionality
came
under
close
scrutiny
as
well. At
that
time, SAP
was
regarded are as a supplier of accounting and
135

Managing an ERP Project
Chronology of a Crash
Date
Event
March 1993
FoxMeyer seeks solutions to system capacity issues. SAP introduced to
FoxMeyer account by Digital
May 1993
SAP R/3 package selected; Phar-Mor, a major customer, seeks bankruptcy
protection
July 1993
Questions regarding SAP’s capacity to handle FoxMeyer’s order volumes are
raised; benchmark testing process begins
Jan.–Mar. 1994
FoxMeyer picks Hewlett-Packard hardware platform; signs Andersen
Consulting as its SAP implementation partner
Feb. 1995
SAP financial, sales, and distribution modules begin coming on-line to serve
University HealthSystem contract
May 1995
Washington Court House distribution center scheduled to open
Feb. 1996
Thomas Anderson, FoxMeyer’s Health’s president and CEO (and champion of
the company’s integration/warehouse automation projects), is asked to resign
due to delays in new warehouse and realizing the SAP system projected savings
Aug. 1996
FoxMeyer Drug files for Chapter 11 protection from its creditors
Oct. 1996
McKesson buys FoxMeyer Drug business
March 1997
Status of FoxMeyer Drug bankruptcy shifts to Chapter 7 liquidation
Dec. 1997
Projected date for bankruptcy trustee Bart A. Brown Jr. to decide if his office
will pursue claims on behalf of FoxMeyer Drug against SAP,Andersen, and
Pinnacle
manufacturing software than a developer of sys-
tems with extensive functionality for warehouse
management. So FoxMeyer elected to go with a
warehouse system from McHugh Software
International
(formerly
McHugh-Freeman),
which it purchased through Pinnacle.
SAP, though, thinks it could have provided
both systems. “Part of our claim to fame is that
we have an excellent sales-and-distribution set
of functionality,” says Peter Dunning, SAP
America’s executive vice president for global
accounts. “I think the slight wrinkle [at
FoxMeyer] was that they were in more of a
high-volume, complex-pricing environment.”
As a result, “There were certainly some differ-
ences that they wanted in the software.” SAP
solved them without holding up any software-
implementation deadlines, he says.
Regardless, the decision to go with two dif-
ferent vendors for two of the company’s most
important business systems added still greater
complexity to an already challenging situation.
“Now you had two major packages that needed
to be integrated,” Woltz asserts, “and that is a
tough [job],in part because it is difficult to get two
diverse vendors’ knowledge of the nitty-gritty of
their products in order to design a real-time inte-
gration. Despite the difficulty in assessing the
internals of application packages, we did get into
enough depth to know that there were many
functional holes.”
A significant change in FoxMeyer’s business
added to the problems. In July 1994 the company
won a contract to supply University Health-
System Consortium (UHC), a nationwide net-
work of major teaching hospitals, in a deal that
was expected to yield up to $1 billion in revenues
annually for five years.
Once this pact was signed, recalls Pawlick,
who now is SAP America’s global support man-
ager, “the focus of the project dramatically
changed from giving them headroom on their
current mainframe system,which had been one of
FoxMeyer’s driving factors,to satisfying the needs
of the University HealthSystem Consortium.”
Prior to this contract, explains SAP’s
Dunning, FoxMeyer had planned to have a small
amount of capacity left on the Unisys platform
136

Managing an ERP Project
once the SAP implementation was complete.
“But with this new contract,” he says, “their
volumes would severely increase, and they ran
out of capacity on their mainframe.” The
throughput capacity of the SAP project had to
be increased, Dunning says.
SAP claims to have met such technical chal-
lenges in a manner that FoxMeyer found satis-
factory. “In fact, FoxMeyer was a selective, but
very good reference for SAP,” Pawlick maintains.
Adds Dunning, “McKesson reinforced the
work we had done at FoxMeyer.” Shortly after
purchasing FoxMeyer’s assets, he explains,
McKesson, planning an SAP implementation of
its own, examined the FoxMeyer installation and
was so impressed that it decided not only to keep
the equipment, but also to speed up its own
project. “They had SAP fully installed,” says
Buzz Adams, senior vice president for process
improvement at McKesson. “McKesson has
learned some useful lessons from FoxMeyer.”
McKesson was fortunate to avoid the corpo-
rate migraines that accompanied the troubled
start-up of FoxMeyer’s Washington Court House
distribution facility. “I don’t think some of the
things were thought through well enough,” says
Pinnacle’s Cole, regarding this portion of the
installation. (His company supplied hardware
that FoxMeyer and Andersen integrated into a
340,000-sq-ft warehouse designed to service hos-
pitals and pharmacies unrelated to the UHC
contract.) “As an example, we were told to design
a system that could ship in X number of hours,
and we designed a system that could do that.
Then later, it became a requirement that they be
able to ship in one-third to one-half that time.”
By the same token, he says, “I remember
there being an enormous issue on balancing sys-
tem traffic.” While FoxMeyer initially counted
on a typical shipment or package to make three
or four stops along its automated route within
the warehouse, in reality, this figure could wind
up at eight or nine, a condition that sometimes
caused conveyors to gridlock. But Cole contends
that “the problem wasn’t that the conveyor shut
down; it was that the way they were running
orders through there was such that they were
gridlocking the system.”
Pinnacle does accept responsibility for
problems such as the occasional motherboard
failure, although Cole states that such glitches
were “never the pacing issue.” Rather, he says
that the inhouse Unisys-based management-
information system under which FoxMeyer was
trying to run the new equipment “choked and
died.” For example, he reports that between the
existing system and the new SAP implementa-
tion, “they had an enormous amount of trouble
feeding us the information we needed on a
timely basis.” Nor did the facility debut on time.
Slated to open in May 1995, the warehouse
began shipping goods that August, and even that
date was one FoxMeyer had difficulty meeting as
a result of labor problems. Workers from other
Ohio warehouses that the Washington Court
House center was supposed to replace already
had begun leaving their jobs en masse.
“The transition from closing old warehouses
did not go smoothly,” Cole recalls. Equipment
outages resulted in the shipping of numerous
half-finished orders. Then, when customers
would complain about missing items, FoxMeyer
representatives, unaware of what was happening
on the warehouse floor, would authorize makeup
shipments that turned out to be duplicates but
were never reported as such by recipients.
FoxMeyer also suffered losses in transfer-
ring inventory to the new center. Because of a
debilitating morale problem among departing
workers, Cole explains, a lot of merchandise was
dumped into trucks and arrived at Washington
Court House with packages damaged or broken
open or otherwise unsalable as new product.
“That led to a huge shrinkage in inventory,” Cole
states. “As an outsider looking at it, I would
imagine that they lost a lot there, as well as with
the problems of their own internal computer
system.”
Meanwhile, FoxMeyer was faring poorly
elsewhere in its business. The UHC contract,
which initially had helped boost the distributor’s
stock value, ultimately delivered neither the vol-
umes nor the profit margins expected.
“FoxMeyer was the price cutter in the
industry,” says Adam Feinstein, a research
associate who follows the drug and medical-
supply 
wholesale 
industry 
for 
Salomon
Brothers in New York. That factor, combined
with the information-system and warehouse-
management initiative, pushed the company
over the edge, he says. “They spent a lot of
money and tried to put together a progressive
137

Managing an ERP Project
management-information system,” he says, “but
they overspent and bit off more than they could
chew.”
Woltz offers a somewhat similar assessment.
“Most companies would be wise to sell what they
can currently deliver, perhaps with modest
enhancements required to close the deal, but
certainly not commit to a fast-track schedule on
a technology implementation that has not been
proven,” he asserts.
As for the system’s anticipated savings,
Dunning says the $40 million figure FoxMeyer
executives liked to use didn’t come from SAP.
“We generally don’t do calculated savings to that
extent, especially when it involves a lot of soft-
ware that’s not ours.”
Dunning sums up SAP’s involvement in the
FoxMeyer fiasco this way: “It’s one of those sto-
ries where the operation was a success, and the
patient died.”
Trying to win market share by price-cutting
based on anticipated savings from new computer
systems proved not to be a smart strategy.“If you
put in new systems hoping [that] will give you
efficiencies, without improving your overall
processes, it rarely works,” says McKesson’s
Adams.
SOURCE: Jesitus, John,“Broken promises?”
Industry Week, v. 246, n. 20, Nov 3, 1997, p. 31–36.
Copyright: Penton Publishing, 1997.
References
Ang, J.S.K, K.K.Yang, and C.C. Sum. 1994.
“MRP II company profile and implementa-
tion problems:A Singapore experience.”
International Journal of Production
Economics.
Applegate, L.M., W.F. McFarlan, and J.L.
McKenney. 1999. Corporate Information
Systems Management. Text and Cases. 5th ed.
Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/McGraw-Hill.
Bancroft, N., H. Seip, and A. Sprengel. 1998.
Implementing SAP R/3. 2nd ed.
Greenwich,CT: Manning Publications.
Barki, H., S. Rivard, and J.Talbot. 1993.“Toward
an assessment of software development risk.”
Journal of Management Information Systems
10: 203–225.
Bingi, P., M.K. Sharma, and J.K. Godla. 1999.
“Critical issues affecting an ERP implementa-
tion.” Information Systems Management 16:
7–14.
Block, Robert. 1983. The Politics of Projects.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Yourdon Press,
Prentice-Hall.
Boehm, B.W. 1991.“Software risk management:
Principles and practices.” IEEE Software 8:
3241.
Brown, Carol, and Iris Vessey. 2003.“Managing
the next wave of enterprise systems:
Leveraging lessons from ERP.” MIS Quarterly
Executive 2: 65–77.
Computerworld. 2002.“35 years of IT
leadership:The best and the worst.”
Computerworld 36: 74.
Davenport,T. 2000. Mission critical: Recognizing
the promise of enterprise systems. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Duchessi, Peter, Charles Schaninger, and Don
Hobbs. 1989.“Implementing a manufacturing
planning and control information system.”
California Management Review 75–90.
Ewusi-Mensah, Kweku. 1997.“Critical issues in
abandoned information systems development
projects.” Communications of the ACM 40:
74–80.
Janson, M.A., and A. Subramanian. 1996.
“Packaged software: Selection and 
implementation policies.” INFOR 334:
133–151.
Keil, Mark, Paul E. Cule, Kalle Lyytinen, and
Roy C. Schmidt. 1998.“A framework for
identifying software project risks.”
Communications of the ACM 41: 76–83.
Keil, Mark, and Ramiro Montealegre. 2000.
“Cutting your losses: Extricating your
organization when a big project goes
awry.” Sloan Management Review
41: 55–68.
Lucas, H., E.Walton, and M. Ginzberg. 1988.
“Implementing packaged software.” MIS
Quarterly 537–549.
138

Managing an ERP Project
Mabert,V.A.,A. Soni, and M.A.
Venkataramanan. 2001.“Enterprise resource
planning: Measuring value.” Production and
Inventory Management Journal 42: 46–51.
Mabert,V.A.,A. Soni, and M.A.
Venkataramanan. 2003.“Enterprise resource
planning: Managing the implementation
process.” European Journal of Operations
Research 146: 302–314.
McFarlan, F.W. 1981.“Portfolio approach to
information systems.” Harvard Business
Review 59: 142–150.
Motwani, J., D. Mirchandanai, M. Madan, and
A. Gunasekaran. 2002.“Successful implemen-
tation of ERP projects: Evidence from two
case studies.” International Journal of
Production Economics 75: 83–94.
Parr,A.N.,G.Shanks,and P.Darke.8/21-22/1999.
“Identification of necessary factors for
successful implementation of ERP systems,”
in Ngwerryama, Ojelanki; Introna, Lucas;
Myers, Michael; DeGross, Janice,“New
Information Technologies in organizational
processes: Field studies and theoretical
reflections on the future of work.” IFIP TC8
WGB8.2 International Working Conference
on New Information Technology in
Organizational Processes: Field Studies and
Theoretical Reflections on the Future of
Work. St. Louis, MO.
Piturro, M. 1999.“How midsize companies are
buying ERP.” Journal of Accountancy 188:
41–48.
Ross, Jeanne, Michael Vitale, and Leslie
Willcocks. 2003.“The continuing ERP
Revolution: Sustainable lessons, new models
of delivery,” in Second-Wave Enterprise
Resource Planning Systems. Graeme Shanks,
Peter Seddon, and Leslie Willcocks (Eds.),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2003. pp. 102–132.
Scott, Judy, and Iris Vessey. 2002.“Managing
risks in enterprise systems implementations.”
Communications of the ACM 45: 74–81.
Somers,T., and K. Nelson. 2003.“The impact
of strategy and integration mechanisms
on enterprise system value: Empirical
evidence from manufacturing firms.”
European Journal of Operational Research
146: 315–338.
Sumner, Mary. 2002.“Risk factors in managing
enterprise-wide/ERP projects.” Journal of
Information Technology 317–327.
Sweat, J. 1999.“Learning curve.” Information
Week 746: 209–231.
Willcocks, Leslie, and Helen Margetts.“Risk
assessment and information systems.”
European Journal of Information Systems
3: 127–138.
Willcocks, L.P., and R. Sykes. 2000.“The 
role of the CIO and the IT function in 
ERP.” Communications of the ACM
43: 22–28.
139


Index
Page references followed by "f" indicate illustrated
figures or photographs; followed by "t" indicates a
table.
A
Accountability, 125
Accountants, 85, 87, 90, 105
Accounting, 2-4, 7-8, 15, 20, 28, 32-34, 36, 46, 48-49,
53-54, 56, 60, 65-67, 69-71, 75-90, 91,
93-94, 96, 98-99, 101-103, 108, 111,
115-116, 135
finance and, 53-54
future of, 99
Accounting department, 36, 69
Accounting standards, 80-81
Accounting systems, 15, 76, 80, 88-90, 94, 101
accounts payable, 6, 19-22, 53, 65, 76, 78-83, 93
Accounts receivable, 5, 20, 25, 31, 33-34, 53, 61, 66,
76-78, 80-82
accuracy, 13, 26, 51, 86, 102
of information, 13
Acquisitions, 79
activity-based costing, 83, 102-103, 105
adjustments, 78-79
Advances, 15, 19
Advantages, 7-9, 32, 47, 52, 67, 100, 116
Advertising, 18, 34, 62, 64
corporate, 34
product, 18, 34, 62, 64
Affect, 4, 61, 68, 128
Age, 37, 86, 111, 116
Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 116
Agencies, 109
Agent, 68
Agents, 18, 31, 36, 101
report, 36
agreement, 123
Agreements, 12, 134
AIDS, 55
Allocations, 79
anticipate, 104
Application, 24, 27-30, 32-33, 46, 48, 54, 88-89,
110-111, 113, 117, 120-121, 123-128, 136
Applications, 3-4, 7, 28, 33, 41, 48, 52-55, 67, 72, 89,
100, 110, 112-113, 116, 126
Art, 4, 90
Assets, 78-79, 135, 137
current, 79
fixed, 78-79
attention, 89
Attitudes, 122
attributes, 68, 112
audit trail, 50, 66-67, 77, 81, 112
Authority, 34-35, 121, 123, 129
authorization, 20-22, 24
availability, 10, 13, 54-55, 70, 102, 114
testing, 13
Available, 5-6, 14, 34, 45, 48, 51, 68, 81, 89, 103, 117,
132, 135
B
back order, 77
backup, 33, 41
Balance sheet, 82-83
Balance sheets, 65, 80
Bankruptcy, 121, 129, 134-136
liquidation, 136
Banks, 27-28
bar-coding, 100
Behavior, 31
Benchmarking, 9, 135
Benefits, 1, 4-14, 35, 42, 44, 46-47, 51, 66, 72-73, 80,
90, 108-111, 114-116, 127-128, 130-131
extended, 90
service, 4-6, 44, 46, 72-73, 111
Benefits packages, 109
Best practices, 2, 8-9, 13-14, 27, 35, 41-45, 47-48, 51,
71, 87, 89-90, 101, 110, 116, 127, 130
bill of materials, 2, 65, 94, 103
billing, 6, 66, 69-71, 85-86
Blending, 110
Breakdown, 48
Bridges, 50, 126
Budget, 13, 46, 53, 56, 68, 79, 104, 113, 120-122, 125
defined, 122
Budgeting, 11, 79-80, 103-104, 113
capital, 11, 79-80, 113
Business analysis, 100
Business environment, 131
business intelligence, 54, 113-114
Business operations, 3
Business process, 9, 17, 19, 25, 27, 32, 35-36, 55, 83,
124, 127, 132
business processes, 2-5, 7-9, 11, 14, 17, 19-21, 25,
27, 31, 35, 37, 39, 41-43, 45, 47-48, 50-51,
54, 60, 73, 76, 91-92, 108-110, 121,
124-130, 135
definition, 17, 48
transaction, 135
Business review, 38, 57, 73, 86, 90, 139
Business rules, 35
Business services, 100
Business strategy, 15, 85, 135
Business to consumer, 100
Buyer preferences, 93
Buyers, 44, 92, 100-101
Product, 92
Role, 101
Buzz, 137
C
Capabilities, 47, 53-54, 69, 100, 112, 122, 125, 134
Capacity, 2-3, 57, 86, 91, 94-97, 103-104, 127,
135-137
Capacity planning, 2-3, 94-96, 127
Capital, 8, 11, 79-80, 113
customer, 80
fixed, 79-80
growth, 79
human, 8, 113
requirements, 80
Capital budgeting, 11, 79-80
Career, 25, 56, 113
career planning, 113
Case Studies, 6, 14, 19-20, 22, 126, 128-129, 139
Case study, 19, 24, 27, 52
Cash flow, 37, 77, 79, 93
Cash flows, 79
Cash management, 10, 43, 79-83
change management, 51, 127-129
Channel, 49, 69-70, 72
Channels, 64
Service, 64
Chief financial officer, 53, 56
Chief operating officer, 53, 56, 135
COO, 53
Civil rights, 116
Civil Rights Act, 116
Claims, 33-34, 121, 135-137
clothing, 93
coding, 40-41, 100, 104
collaboration, 20
Collapse, 135
Collections, 36
Commercial banks, 27-28
Commitment, 11, 51, 56, 72-73, 123, 125-127, 132
Communication, 99-100, 122, 125
Companies, 1, 9-10, 13-14, 16, 31, 41, 49, 60, 68, 73,
87-88, 90, 92, 99-101, 116, 120, 128-129,
132, 134-135, 138-139
Comparative analysis, 62
Compensation, 109-111, 113-115
Competition, 19, 64, 105, 135
Competitive advantage, 7-8, 13, 15, 72
Competitive environment, 9
Competitive strategy, 43
Competitiveness, 45
Competitors, 7-9, 13, 34-35, 53, 61, 68, 91
Component parts, 94
compromise, 130
Computer-aided design, 18
Computer-based information system, 56
computer-integrated manufacturing, 96
conceptual design, 23
Concurrency, 33
Concurrency control, 33
Conditions, 79
Conference Board, 2
Configuration, 13, 49, 54-55, 68, 71, 128
manufacturing, 54
Confirmation, 26, 28, 48
Consideration, 11, 54-55, 114
Consistency, 32
Consolidation, 19, 83
Consortium, 129, 136
Constraints, 123, 125
changing, 123
implementing, 123, 125
UNIQUE, 125
Consumer products, 13
Contacts, 56, 62, 66, 69
Content, 100
Continuous improvement, 86
Contract, 44, 49, 114, 130-131, 136-137
Contracts, 11, 128, 132
Control, 2-3, 5, 18, 32-34, 44, 46, 50, 53, 56, 61-62,
65, 76-77, 79-80, 84-87, 90, 92-96, 102,
104-105, 108-111, 113-114, 116, 120,
122-123, 126, 131, 138
control activities, 62
Control processes, 62, 65, 79-80, 93-94
Control systems, 18, 80, 85-86, 105
external, 80
Controlling, 8, 70-71, 81, 83, 126-127
Convergence, 99
conversion, 129
Cooperation, 122
Coordination, 4, 6, 21, 76, 122
manufacturing, 4, 6, 76
systems, 4, 6, 21, 76, 122
Copyright, 1, 17, 39, 49-50, 59, 65-66, 70, 75, 82-83,
90, 91, 105, 107, 112-113, 115, 119, 138
corporation, 38, 89, 121
Corporations, 9, 89
cost accounting, 20, 33-34, 83, 94, 96, 102
cost driver, 86, 102-103
Cost-benefit analysis, 11, 44
Costs, 2-3, 5-6, 11-12, 14, 18, 22, 31, 33, 41, 44, 56,
60, 65, 71, 77, 80, 83, 85-88, 91-98,
100-103, 105, 109, 113-114, 116, 122, 124,
127, 132, 135
distribution, 3, 6, 60, 65, 71, 85, 87, 102
labor costs, 65, 93, 116
product and, 86-87, 95
sales and, 2, 14, 60, 65, 71, 85, 87, 91, 96-98, 102
Countries, 2
Credit, 6-7, 20-22, 24-26, 28-30, 61, 65-66, 72, 76-77,
81, 86, 117
credit limit, 65
CRM, 7, 43, 46, 53-54, 65, 67-69, 71, 73
CRM software, 68
CRM systems, 69, 71
Cross-functional team, 44
Culture, 117, 128, 130-131
organizational culture, 128, 131
Customer databases, 32
Customer demand, 64, 92
Customer management, 70
Customer needs, 2-3, 19, 24, 60, 64, 68, 92
Customer relationship management, 7, 14, 43, 46, 65,
141

67, 69-70, 73
CRM, 7, 43, 46, 65, 67, 69, 73
trends in, 14
Customer satisfaction, 12, 35
Customer service, 5-6, 24, 28, 32-34, 37, 44, 61,
68-70, 72-73, 86, 100, 102
Customer service representative, 24, 28
Customers, 2-7, 18, 22, 24, 31, 36, 46, 53, 56, 60-65,
67-69, 71-72, 76, 78, 83-85, 92-93, 126, 137
D
data, 2-9, 13-14, 19, 23, 25, 27-28, 32-34, 40, 42-43,
48-51, 53, 61-62, 65-70, 77, 80-81, 83,
85-87, 89-90, 92, 94-100, 102-104, 108-115,
117, 120-121, 126-130
Data administration, 33, 108
Data collection, 94, 99-100
data conversion, 129
data flow, 25
data model, 48
Data repository, 23
Data warehouse, 69, 81
Database, 2, 15, 19-22, 24, 32-33, 40-41, 48, 53-54,
66-67, 69, 71, 80-81, 87-90, 101-103,
111-112, 116, 124, 135
characteristics of, 32, 54
development of, 40-41
examples of, 24, 89
purpose of, 66, 87
systems, 2, 15, 19-22, 24, 32-33, 40-41, 48, 53-54,
66-67, 69, 71, 80-81, 87-90, 101-103,
111-112, 116, 135
uses, 66
database administrator, 33
Database design, 40-41
Database management system, 33
security, 33
database system, 90
Database systems, 90
databases, 4, 12, 14, 17-19, 22, 24, 28, 31-35, 44, 48,
53, 56, 62, 68, 77, 88-89, 92, 96, 102, 113,
132
commercial, 28, 89
electronic, 18, 89
dates, 76, 79, 95-98, 101
Deadlines, 136
debugging, 41
Decision makers, 4
Decision making, 4, 24, 33, 71, 77, 85, 87, 100-102,
115-116
Decision-making, 109, 113
Demand, 3, 10, 25-26, 64-65, 92-93, 96-98, 100-101
aggregate, 100
excess, 64, 92-93
Demand chain, 10
Depreciation, 90
Deregulation, 19
design, 4, 8-9, 13, 17-19, 21-25, 27, 31-32, 35, 39-57,
91-92, 94-96, 109-110, 113, 122-124,
126-128, 130-131, 136-137
elements of, 21
principles of, 24
Detailed analysis, 40
diagrams, 40
Direct mail, 62
Discounts, 22, 66, 79, 81
Discrimination, 111, 116
Disposable income, 65
Distribution, 3-4, 6, 8, 25, 46, 49-50, 60, 65, 69-72, 85,
87, 89, 99, 102, 131, 134, 136-137
shipping and, 65
supply chain management, 3, 8
Distribution center, 134, 136
Distribution channel, 49, 69-70
Distributors, 2, 92
Diversity, 123
Documentation, 34, 40-41, 51, 53-55
documents, 41, 45, 50, 65-67, 81, 85, 112
distribution of, 50
Dollar, 7, 9, 72
Dollars, 1, 78, 89
Downsizing, 19
Downstream, 122
E
E-business, 88-89
defined, 89
e-commerce, 88-89
E-commerce, 72, 88-90
economic order quantity, 94
Economics, 138-139
Economies of scale, 41
Economy, 19
Education, 1, 17, 39, 51, 59, 75, 91, 107, 119
Efficiency, 4, 32, 85-86, 92
Electronic Commerce, 100
Electronic data, 89, 95
Electronic data interchange, 89, 95
EDI, 89, 95
electronic funds transfer, 89
Electronic mail, 18
E-mail, 89
emphasis, 3, 19, 94
Employee benefits, 109, 114
Employee training, 110
Employees, 35, 88, 109-111, 113, 116-117, 120,
131-132
loyalty, 109-110
Employment, 111-112, 116
Enhancement, 41
Enterprise resource planning, 1-16, 17-22, 24-25,
27-28, 31-38, 39, 57, 59, 65, 75, 88-89, 91,
102, 105, 107, 119, 139
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, 1, 39,
102
enterprise resource planning systems, 1-16, 17-22,
24-25, 27-28, 31-38, 39, 57, 102, 139
Environment, 2, 9, 11, 19-20, 32, 44, 47, 53, 90, 94-95,
124, 131, 136
Equal Pay Act, 111, 116
Error correction, 37
ETC, 25
Evaluation, 23, 52-53, 79, 90, 111, 122
evidence, 2, 16, 61, 135, 139
supporting, 2
Exchange, 89
Exchanges, 100
Expansion, 27-28, 37
expect, 11
Expectations, 96, 131-132
Expected product, 65
Expenditures, 56, 79
Expenses, 79, 85-86
Experience, 54-55, 72, 111, 114, 123, 125, 138
expertise, 44, 46-47, 110, 123-124, 126-128, 130, 132,
134
Explosion, 90
F
Failure, 31, 67, 110, 122-123, 126-127, 129, 134-135,
137
Family, 37, 108, 111, 116-117
FAST, 138
feasibility study, 40
Feature, 18, 44, 67, 89, 102, 104, 112
feedback, 3, 52, 56, 85, 92, 94, 99
Field studies, 139
Finance, 20, 27, 53-54, 60, 72, 75-81, 83-90, 91, 96,
105, 110
accounting and, 53, 60, 75-81, 83-90, 91
summary of, 80
Financial analysis, 48
applications, 48
Financial management, 8, 13, 56
Financial resources, 97
Financial services, 31, 116
Financial systems, 76, 101, 110
Firms, 2, 4, 7-8, 15-16, 45-46, 51, 57, 114-115,
120-121, 128-129, 139
organizational culture, 128
organizational processes, 139
Fixed assets, 78-79
Flexibility, 10, 45, 56, 92, 127
Food, 25, 27
Forecasting, 62, 64-65, 96-97, 99
sales, 62, 64-65, 96-97, 99
Forecasts, 64-65, 69, 93, 96, 100-101
forms design, 40
Forrester Research, 116
Fragmentation, 7
fraud, 121
Frequency, 44, 46
Front office, 100
G
General Ledger, 53-54, 65, 78, 80-82, 85, 111
Germany, 134
Global marketing, 89
Globalization, 10
Goals, 31, 34, 43, 64, 93, 95, 98, 110, 113, 122-123
Goods, 21, 25, 65, 77, 80-81, 83, 85, 89, 93-96, 98-99,
137
public, 89
Government, 109-111, 116
compensation packages, 109-110
Government agencies, 109
Graphical user interface, 32
Group, 13, 86, 88, 121, 130, 134
groups, 15, 64, 73, 88
H
handouts, 55
Hazards, 123
Health care, 116
Health insurance, 109
help desk, 86
Hierarchy, 34, 40
Hospitals, 116, 134-137
HTTP, 15
Human capital, 8, 113
Human resource management, 2, 96, 109-110, 115
employee training and, 110
Human resources, 2, 7-8, 14, 18, 46, 48, 53-54, 60,
67, 70-71, 76, 82, 87, 89, 91, 95, 102,
107-117
compensation packages, 109-110, 114-115
human resources management, 113, 117
direct deposit, 117
I
illustration, 19-23, 32-34
Implementation, 3, 8-9, 11-16, 27, 32, 35-36, 39-57,
88-90, 120-121, 124-128, 130-132, 134-139
Inbound logistics, 17
Inc., 9, 116-117, 121, 134-135
Incentives, 31, 85
Income, 28, 37, 65
disposable, 65
Industry, 1, 13, 43-45, 53-54, 56, 68, 88-89, 114, 135,
137-138
Inefficiencies, 3
Information, 1-7, 10-11, 13-16, 17-18, 22, 24, 27-28,
30-34, 36-37, 39-41, 47-48, 50, 52, 55-56,
60-62, 64-65, 68-73, 76-77, 80-81, 83,
85-90, 92-96, 99-105, 109-111, 113-117,
120-123, 126-127, 132, 137-139
information and communication, 99
Information management, 110, 121
Information system, 17, 27, 50, 56, 96, 102, 109, 113,
122, 138
Information systems, 1, 4, 15-16, 18, 28, 37, 39-41,
48, 50, 52, 73, 90, 94-95, 105, 110, 113, 117,
120-121, 123, 138-139
Information technology, 14-16, 17, 22, 24, 31-32, 36,
88, 114, 123, 126-127, 139
Infrastructure, 123-124, 129
Initiative, 137
input design, 40-41
Insurance, 24, 109
integrated ERP systems, 115
Integration, 3, 5, 8-10, 16, 19, 21, 47, 54-55, 66-67,
69-73, 85, 89, 92-93, 96, 98-99, 102, 112,
115, 121, 126-127, 135-136, 139
Integrity, 32-33, 50, 104-105
intelligence, 54, 113-114
Interest, 11, 27, 37, 79, 105
Interest rate, 11, 79
current, 79
Interest rates, 27
Internal rate of return, 79
IRR, 79
Internet, 14, 70, 86, 89-90, 95, 100
defined, 14, 86, 89
Interviews, 125
Intranet, 68
Inventories, 93-95, 100
Inventory, 2-6, 10-15, 18, 21-22, 42-44, 53, 57, 61-62,
64, 66, 71-72, 77-78, 80-82, 90, 92-100, 103,
105, 111, 113, 135, 137, 139
management of, 90
Inventory control, 2, 53, 80, 90
Inventory management, 2, 15, 22, 57, 62, 93-94, 96,
99, 105, 139
Investment, 1, 8, 11-13, 16, 41, 44, 56, 79, 90, 108,
142

116, 120, 125, 131-132
government, 116
net, 11-12, 79
Investments, 79, 124
Invoices, 25, 61, 76-78, 80, 98-99
IRIS, 131, 138-139
IRR, 79
J
Jargon, 90
Job analysis, 109-110, 113-114
job descriptions, 109
Job design, 25, 128, 130
Jobs, 22, 24-25, 31, 114, 129, 137
measuring, 31
service, 22, 24, 31, 137
K
Kiosks, 72
Knowledge, 68, 123-128, 132, 136
specialized, 127
Knowledge management, 68
L
Labor, 65, 92-93, 99, 110-111, 113-114, 116, 137
trends in, 114
Labor costs, 65, 93, 116
Language, 90
Lawsuits, 131
Lead time, 94-96
Leader, 128, 131
Leadership, 24-25, 122, 127-128, 130-132, 138
Learning, 15, 139
Learning curve, 139
Leasing, 79
Ledger, 53-54, 65, 78, 80-82, 85, 111, 135
ledgers, 65
general ledger, 65
letters, 61
Licenses, 12, 54
Licensing, 134
Licensing agreements, 134
Lifestyle, 56
Liquidation, 136
Loans, 27-29, 36-37
Local data, 50
Logistics, 2, 10, 17-18, 46, 48, 134-135
inventory management, 2
transportation, 10
warehousing, 18
Loss, 22, 82-84, 123
assessment, 123
control, 84, 123
reduction, 22
severity, 123
underwriting, 22
verification, 83
M
Management, 2-8, 10-16, 18-19, 22, 24-25, 27-28, 31,
33-35, 37, 40, 43, 46-51, 53, 55-57, 61-63,
65, 67-73, 76-85, 87-90, 91-105, 109-117,
120-132, 134-136, 138-139
activities of, 18, 27
functions of, 69, 90
Managers, 2, 10, 22, 24, 35, 51-53, 56, 62-63, 68, 76,
79-81, 85-87, 95, 109-110, 113-115, 117,
122-123, 129, 131
Manufacturers, 18, 53, 89, 92, 99, 105
Manufacturing, 2-4, 6, 8, 14-16, 18, 52-54, 57, 60-61,
65, 67, 76-77, 83, 89-90, 91-102, 105, 108,
110, 116-117, 136, 138-139
Manufacturing firms, 4, 15-16, 57, 139
Manufacturing operations, 96
Manufacturing strategy, 3
Margin, 65
Margins, 6-7, 83-84, 137
Market research, 15
Market share, 14, 54, 138
Marketing, 2-3, 8, 14, 17-18, 20, 32, 34, 52-54, 56,
59-73, 76-77, 85, 87, 89-90, 91-92, 96, 110,
114
defined, 2, 14, 89
global, 89
needs and, 92
people, 34, 61-62, 68, 72-73, 76, 85, 91
place, 8, 18, 56
Marketing management, 62, 65
Marketing objectives, 60
Marketing strategy, 85
Marketplace, 14, 88-89
Markets, 1, 35, 62, 84, 100
Mass customization, 105
master production schedule, 2, 95
Material requirements planning, 2, 94
Materials handling, 102-104
Materials management, 2, 8, 46, 70-71, 81, 85, 87,
91-105
materials requirements planning, 96
MRP, 96
meaning, 4
Measurement, 135
Media, 64, 134
meetings, 68-69
MIS, 15, 27, 53, 76-77, 125, 138
Money, 11, 27, 36-37, 56, 72, 79, 137
Motivation, 7, 19, 53
Myths, 15
N
Negligence, 121
Negotiation, 22
Planning, 22
Process, 22
Net present value, 11-12, 79
NPV, 79
Networking, 11, 17, 24, 31, 53, 121
New products, 64, 79, 92
Norms, 123
NPV, 79
O
Objectives, 1, 4, 17, 28, 40, 44, 60, 63, 76, 91, 93, 97,
108, 115, 120, 123
accounting, 4, 28, 60, 76, 91, 93, 108, 115
Offer, 7, 32, 41, 43, 69, 72, 85, 89-90, 100, 102, 105,
109, 114, 128
Oil, 13, 43, 121
Operational excellence, 6
Operations, 3, 9, 13, 17-18, 35, 37, 53, 56, 60, 81,
84-85, 96-98, 102, 120, 139
Operations management, 53, 56
operations plan, 96, 98
Opportunities, 35, 128
Oracle, 1, 7-8, 56, 88, 120-121, 135
Oracle Database, 135
oral presentations, 55
purpose of, 55
Order processing, 2, 6-7, 18, 27, 53-54, 61-62, 86, 99
Organization, 2, 6-8, 11, 13-14, 17-18, 25, 27, 32,
34-35, 39-40, 42-43, 45-47, 49, 51, 57, 69,
72-73, 79, 83, 87-88, 102, 110-111, 113, 116,
121-122, 124-125, 132, 135, 138
control systems, 18
definition of, 17, 72
organization charts, 40
Organizational change, 45, 51, 120
Organizational culture, 128, 131
strong, 128, 131
Organizational objectives, 115
Organizational processes, 139
Organizational structure, 18
Organizations, 1-2, 6, 8-9, 14, 31, 34-35, 46, 56, 72,
87-88, 100, 116, 127-129, 132
Outbound logistics, 17-18
Output, 24, 40-41, 48, 50, 86, 104
potential, 104
output design, 40-41
Outsourcing, 46-47, 110
overhead, 3, 22, 37, 102-103
Overhead costs, 3, 102
Ownership, 49-50
P
Packaging, 78, 117
Partnership, 87, 100
passwords, 33
payback period, 79
paychecks, 77, 111
payroll, 78, 80, 85, 89, 110-111, 115-117
Percentage of sales, 63
Perception, 132
Performance, 4-7, 10, 16, 17, 31, 35, 63-64, 84, 87,
99, 105, 110-111, 113
Performance appraisal, 111
Performance evaluations, 113
Perils, 73
Permits, 102-103
Personality, 122
Place, 7-8, 12, 18-19, 25-26, 31, 56, 79, 113, 128, 131,
134
planning and scheduling, 99-100
Plans, 3, 27-28, 37, 92-93, 95, 109, 114, 117, 128-129,
135
business, 3, 27, 37, 92-93, 109, 114, 117, 128-129,
135
Policies, 138
Politics, 138
Portfolio, 131, 139
Power, 32, 35, 88-89
PowerPoint, 55
Present value, 11-12, 79
presentations, 52-56, 134
press releases, 68
Price, 8, 19-20, 65-66, 68, 76, 135, 137-138
Prices, 22, 25-26, 65, 81, 88, 101
Pricing, 18, 61-62, 65, 69, 72, 80, 88, 114, 134, 136
e-commerce and, 88
payment, 61, 65
strategy, 65, 72, 114
value, 18, 72
Primary activities, 17-18
Principal, 28
Principles, 20, 22, 24, 138
Process control, 3
Procurement, 6, 8, 10, 48, 97-101
Product advertising, 34
product design, 4, 91, 94-95
Product development, 21-22, 33-35, 84
Product line, 54, 85
Product management, 33-34
defined, 33
effective, 33
Product managers, 35
Product or service, 17-18, 64
Product planning, 33-34
Product specifications, 76
Production, 2-4, 7-8, 15, 41, 46, 48, 53-54, 57, 60,
65-66, 70-71, 76-77, 85-87, 91-105, 110,
138-139
decentralized, 87
Production costs, 65, 94
production order, 97-98, 103-104
Production planning, 2, 7-8, 46, 53, 66, 70-71, 85, 87,
93-94, 96-103
Productivity, 5, 7, 10-11, 17, 19, 22, 27, 43-44, 60, 63,
70-72, 87, 90, 96, 102, 105, 110-111, 116
labor, 110-111, 116
Products, 3, 6, 13, 34-35, 60, 62-65, 68-69, 72, 76, 79,
81, 83-85, 87-89, 91-93, 95-96, 99-105, 117,
121-122, 131, 136
consumer products, 13
defined, 89, 99, 122
development of, 34
levels of, 6
packaging, 117
Professional development, 110
Professionals, 114, 116
Profit, 10, 65, 76, 82-84, 137
Profit center, 83-84
Profits, 72, 121
program design, 40
Project management, 11-12, 31, 51, 120, 123,
125-127, 131-132, 134, 138
Project plan, 131
Project scope, 122-123, 131
Project structure, 123
Promotion, 18, 62, 64, 68, 114
proposals, 44, 53-54, 101, 134
Prospecting, 56, 62
Planning, 56
Protection, 134, 136
prototyping, 41-42, 47
developing, 41
Public relations, 89
defined, 89
public relations department, 89
purchase order, 21, 77, 80, 83, 98-99, 101
purchase requisition, 98-99
Purchasing, 4, 7-8, 18-19, 21-22, 24-25, 41, 46, 68,
76-79, 82, 91-94, 96, 98-99, 101, 105, 137
Purchasing agents, 18, 101
purpose, 3, 48, 52, 55, 66, 86-87, 95
specific, 3, 86, 95
143

Q
Quality, 3, 17, 19, 41, 46, 56, 61, 70-71, 85, 93-94, 99,
102, 109, 122
quality control, 61, 93-94
Quality management, 19, 46, 56, 70-71, 94, 99, 102
Quantity discounts, 66
query, 48, 53-54, 68, 90, 109, 112-113, 129-130
Quotas, 60
quotations, 6, 60, 98-99
R
Rate of return, 79
internal, 79
Rates, 25, 27, 86, 105
Rating, 54, 125
Raw materials, 65, 93-97, 101, 103
Reach, 1, 77, 112
recommendations, 27
Records, 29-30, 36, 66-67, 88, 104-105, 111, 115-116
Recruiting, 108, 110-111, 114, 127
Recruitment, 114, 121
redundancy, 32
Referrals, 114
Reimbursements, 109
Relational database, 32, 53, 102-103, 112
Relationships, 19, 33, 67, 95, 103, 128, 130
reorder point, 3, 105
reports, 2, 28, 41, 48-49, 62-63, 69, 78, 84-85,
108-109, 111, 137
components of, 111
feedback on, 85
types of, 85
Repositioning, 89
request for proposal, 52-53, 134
research, 1, 11, 13-16, 37, 52, 55-57, 71, 81, 87-88,
101, 116, 120, 126, 137, 139
conducting, 11, 71, 87, 116
planning, 1, 11, 13-16, 37, 52, 55-57, 71, 87-88,
101, 126, 137, 139
purpose of, 52, 55, 87
Resources, 2, 5, 7-8, 10-11, 14-15, 18, 22, 24, 32, 46,
48, 51-57, 60, 62, 64, 67-68, 70-71, 76, 80,
82, 84-87, 89-90, 91-92, 94-95, 97-98, 102,
104-105, 107-117, 122-124, 128
enterprise resource planning (ERP), 102
response time, 4-6, 19
Responsibility, 34-35, 50, 84, 86, 123, 137
Retailers, 18, 92
Retention, 68, 108-109, 114
Retirement, 109, 111, 113
Retirement plans, 109
qualified, 109
Return on investment, 13, 16, 131-132
Revenue, 10, 62, 67, 79, 85, 88
Revenues, 1, 7, 11, 31, 62, 64, 70, 79, 87, 120-121,
136
RFP, 44, 52-53, 55-56
Request for proposal, 52-53
Risk, 28, 44, 46-47, 51, 120, 123-127, 132, 135,
138-139
asset, 46
business, 44, 46-47, 51, 120, 124-127, 132, 135,
139
commercial, 28, 125, 135
enterprise, 28, 120, 126-127, 138-139
financial, 46
market, 138
objective, 28
operational, 139
strategic, 47
Risk management, 138
enterprise, 138
Risks, 8, 27, 51, 121, 123-124, 129, 131-132, 138-139
Role, 17, 35, 55-56, 72, 85, 87, 101, 127, 129, 135,
139
managerial, 85
Rules of thumb, 92
S
Safety stock, 95
Salaries, 114
Salary, 108-109, 111, 114
Sales, 1-2, 4, 7-8, 14, 18, 20, 25, 31-34, 48-49, 53-54,
56, 59-73, 76-82, 84-85, 87, 91, 93, 95-99,
101-102, 104, 108-110, 114-115, 121,
133-134, 136
Sales and marketing, 2, 8, 14, 32, 53-54, 59-73, 76,
91, 110
Sales data, 49, 62
Sales force, 56, 63, 68-69, 84
Sales management, 62-63, 65, 71
sales order, 7-8, 48, 53, 61-62, 65-67, 69, 71, 77-78,
80, 99, 104
sales order entry, 61, 71
Sales potential, 62
Sales presentation, 68-69
Sales process, 68, 134
Sales records, 67
Salespeople, 60, 65, 68, 115
SAP, 1, 7-8, 47-50, 56, 65-66, 69-70, 82-83, 88-89, 97,
102-105, 112-113, 115-117, 120-121, 129,
131, 134-138
scope, 86, 89, 121-125, 131
SD, 8
Search costs, 100
Securities, 89
Security, 33, 40-42, 50, 112
Selection, 52-56, 89, 99, 109-111, 132, 134, 138
Sellers, 100-101
Sensitivity, 126
Service provider, 46
Services, 3, 31, 47, 64, 71-72, 85, 87, 89, 92-93, 100,
103, 112, 116-117, 121
attributes of, 112
defined, 89
quality management, 71
shipping, 2, 18, 61, 65, 67, 104, 135, 137
Ships, 76
Shrinkage, 137
SIMPLE, 11, 89
Singapore, 138
Size, 37, 44, 121-125
Skills, 18, 25, 110-111, 113, 116-117, 125, 129-130
Skills training, 110
slides, 68
Society, 56, 90
software, 1-3, 7-8, 11-13, 32, 35, 39-46, 49, 51-54, 56,
63, 65, 67-68, 80, 88-89, 96, 110, 116-117,
121-123, 125-127, 129, 131-132, 134-136,
138
custom, 43, 45, 125
evaluation of, 53, 122
outsourcing, 46, 110
prototyping, 41-42
purchasing, 7-8, 41, 46, 68, 96
request for proposal, 52-53, 134
tracking, 53, 110, 116-117, 122-123
source documents, 81
Sourcing, 66, 71, 101
Span of control, 122
spreadsheets, 41
SQL, 88-90
queries, 90
statements, 88
view, 89-90
Stakeholders, 125
Standardization, 7-10, 72, 88, 112, 117
Status, 9, 31, 93-95, 98-99, 136
Status quo, 9, 31
steering committee, 11, 132
Stock, 22, 62, 64-65, 70, 77, 94-95, 99, 137
Stories, 105, 120-121, 138
Strategic management, 15
Strategies, 15, 21, 35, 51, 99-100, 109, 115-116, 121,
123, 126-128, 132, 134
competitive, 15, 21, 100, 109
corporate, 35, 126
functional, 21, 35, 128
Strategy, 3, 15-16, 43, 51, 54-55, 65, 72-73, 85,
113-114, 126-130, 135, 138-139
focus, 3, 15, 72, 85, 127-130
Stress, 34, 135
Students, 52, 55, 111
Subsidiaries, 77, 81, 134
Success, 14-16, 35, 51, 53, 57, 62-63, 73, 88, 120,
123, 125, 127-129, 131-132, 138
summarizing, 28
Supply, 2-5, 8, 10, 18, 26, 67, 72-73, 92, 98-101, 105,
136
aggregate, 100
excess, 5, 92
Supply chain, 2-5, 8, 18, 67, 72-73, 92, 99-101, 105
defined, 2, 99
Supply chain management, 3, 8, 18, 67, 105
Supply chains, 100
advantages, 100
Support, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 24, 27, 31, 33,
40-42, 44-47, 49-50, 53-55, 65, 68-69, 71,
80, 87, 89, 94-100, 102-104, 111-113, 123,
125-127, 135-136
support activities, 18
surveys, 4, 6-7, 9, 11, 15, 114
Sweden, 5, 7, 9, 11, 15, 46
system, 1-4, 8-13, 15-16, 17-19, 22, 26-28, 33, 35-37,
39-54, 56, 60-62, 65, 67, 69, 71-72, 77-78,
80, 85-90, 92, 94-98, 100-105, 108-117,
120-122, 124-125, 127-128, 131-132,
134-139
System design, 42
systems analysis, 25, 40
feasibility study, 40
Systems approach, 3
systems development, 39-42, 51-52, 57, 138
planning, 39-42, 51-52, 57, 138
Systems development life cycle, 40-41, 52
systems implementation, 41, 47, 51
testing, 41
T
Tables, 50
teams, 19, 24, 34, 52, 55-56, 68, 125, 127, 134
advantages of, 52
disadvantages of, 52
effective, 125, 127
Teamwork, 34
Technical skills, 130
Technological advances, 19
Technology, 14-16, 17-19, 21-22, 24, 31-32, 36, 42-44,
68, 72-73, 88-89, 100-101, 105, 112, 114,
117, 121-128, 130, 132, 134-135, 138-139
advances in, 15
information technology, 14-16, 17, 22, 24, 31-32,
36, 88, 114, 123, 126-127, 139
Telemarketing, 62, 69
Telesales, 70
templates, 45, 68
Territory, 62-64, 68, 84
Territory management, 68
throughput, 4, 7, 137
time sheets, 116
Time value of money, 11
Timing, 21, 95-96
Total cost, 102
Total costs, 12
Total quality management, 94
TQM, 94
Total quality management (TQM), 94
Trade, 14, 39, 43, 52, 55-56, 71, 87, 101, 116, 132
Trade-offs, 39, 43
Training, 11-12, 31, 34-35, 40, 51, 54-55, 72, 108,
110-111, 113-114, 116, 121, 125-127,
129-130, 132
Transactions, 2, 5, 27, 48-50, 77-78, 80-83, 85, 88-89,
100, 131, 135
consistent, 81
isolated, 5
Transportation, 10, 100
costs, 100
Transportation planning, 100
Trends, 14, 22, 62, 64, 69, 114
trial balance, 36
TRIPS, 31
Trucks, 137
Trustee, 134, 136
Turnover, 108-109, 114, 116
U
Underwriting, 22, 24
principles, 22, 24
steps, 22
United States, 7, 9, 11, 14
Universities, 114
U.S, 4-5, 7, 9, 11, 14-15, 57, 72, 105
U.S., 4-5, 7, 9, 11, 14-15, 57, 72, 105
V
Value, 11-12, 16, 17-18, 41, 54, 70, 72, 79, 81, 86, 89,
100, 110, 132, 135, 137, 139
building, 41, 72
defined, 86, 89
Value chain, 17-18, 41, 89
definition of, 17
organizational structure, 18
Value-added, 18
144

Product, 18
Variables, 125, 135
vendor selection, 99
Vision, 44, 89
visual aids, 55
Vocational Rehabilitation Act, 116
Volume, 3, 22, 65, 72, 92, 135-136
Volumes, 67, 136-137
W
Wages, 112
Wall Street Journal, 135
War, 120-121
Warehousing, 18, 69, 90
Warranty, 6, 61
Weaknesses, 44, 52
Web, 5, 7, 11, 15, 52-56, 71-72, 87, 89, 101, 108,
111-112, 114, 116-117
Web site, 15
Web sites, 52, 55-56, 114
websites, 8
Won, 72, 136
Work, 2, 6, 16, 19-20, 24-25, 27, 31-32, 34-35, 37-38,
40, 42-43, 45, 50, 56, 72, 86, 88, 90, 95-96,
100, 111, 114, 117, 122, 134-135, 137, 139
Workers, 19, 22, 35, 95, 117, 132, 137
workforce, 93, 109-110, 113-115, 117, 124, 127
Workforce Management, 117
World, 35, 88, 100
WWW, 15
145

