
Environmental Science
Toward a Sustainable Future
Richard T. Wright    Dorothy F. Boorse
Twelfth Edition

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsoned.co.uk
© Pearson Education Limited 2014 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the 
prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark 
in this text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such 
trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any afﬁ liation with or endorsement of this 
book by such owners. 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 10: 1-292-02084-9
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-02084-6

Table of Contents
P
E
A
R
S
O
N
 
C
U
S
T
O
M
 
L
I
B
R
A
R
Y
 
I
1. Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
1
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
2. Science and the Environment
29
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
3. Basic Needs of Living Things
53
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
4. Populations and Communities
81
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
5. Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
109
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
6. Wild Species and Biodiversity
139
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
7. The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
169
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
8. The Human Population
199
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
9. Population and Development
229
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
10. Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
255
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
11. Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
283
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
12. The Production and Distribution of Food
309
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
13. Pests and Pest Control
339
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse

II
14. Energy from Fossil Fuels
365
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
15. Renewable Energy
393
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
16. Nuclear Power
417
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
17. Environmental Hazards and Human Health
443
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
18. Global Climate Change
471
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
19. Atmospheric Pollution
505
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
20. Water Pollution and Its Prevention
543
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
21. Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
573
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
22. Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention
593
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
23. Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
617
Richard T. Wright/Dorothy Boorse
641
Index

An observer looks out over the Benxi Iron and Steel Group in Liaoning, China.
Learning objectives
 1. Economics and the Environment: 
Describe how economic activity 
relates to environmental goods 
and services, and  differentiate 
between green and brown 
 economies.
 2. Resources in a  Sustainable Econ-
omy: Summarize the components 
of the wealth a nation draws 
on to establish and maintain 
an economy, and identify new 
efforts to measure true economic 
progress.
 3. Environmental Public Policy: 
Explain the kinds of policies 
employed to regulate the use of 
natural resources and deal with 
pollution, and describe a typical 
policy life cycle.
 4. Benefit-Cost Analysis of Environ-
mental Public Policy: Discuss how 
benefit-cost analysis is applied to 
environmental policy regulations, 
and give examples of the impact 
of regulations.
 5. Politics and the  Environment: 
Assess the role played by 
 partisan politics in recent 
 environmental public policy.
Economics, 
Politics, and 
Public Policy
B
y all measures, China has become the economic giant of the early 21st cen-
tury. Take your pick: umbrellas, toys, shoes, appliances, electronics, souve-
nirs, clothes—chances are that they were made in China. China has become 
the factory to the world. The Chinese economy has doubled in the past decade, 
growing at close to 10% per year. In contrast, the U.S. economy grew only 2% per 
year over the same period. A new Chinese middle class numbers between 100 mil-
lion and 150 million. Middle-class Chinese citizens commonly own a car and an 
apartment and have opportunities to travel and purchase pricey consumer goods. 
With a population of 1.35 billion, China has a huge pool of labor. Now that the ex-
treme control of private life is a thing of the past, people are able to choose where 
they live, work, and travel. Millions of rural Chinese move to urban centers each 
year, attracted by jobs created by factories that spring up almost overnight. Chinese 
schools have created a workforce with a literacy rate that is over 95%. Because of 
the accelerating pace of cultural life, children are now guiding their parents into the 
realities of modernity. Traditions are being overthrown by the Internet, by the fierce 
drive to learn English, and by the social mobility that accompanies the 
economic boom.
toxic air. There are clear signs that China’s race 
to achieve economic superpower status carries with 
it some costs that go well beyond a stretching of 
From Chapter 2 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. 
Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All 
rights reserved.

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
the social fabric. Seven Chinese cities are among the “10 most 
polluted places” in the world, according to the World Health 
Organization. The air is loaded with sulfur dioxide from coal-
burning power plants and coal stoves, and acid rain costs some 
$4.3 billion annually in crop damage. Up to 750,000 premature 
deaths a year are believed to be traceable to air pollution. In the 
city of Linfen in Shangxi province, the hospital treats countless 
numbers of patients with respiratory disease each day. The city 
is dotted with coke ovens, coal-processing plants, factories, and 
a coal-fired power plant (Fig. 1). It has been at the top of China’s 
pollution charts for years. One of its hamlets, Beilu, is known as 
“the cancer village” because of the extremely high death rate of 
those 55 and older.
toxic Water. Xiao Sizhu, a farmer in the village of 
 Xiaojiadian, died at 55 of esophageal cancer. In an interview 
shortly before his death, Xiao spoke of swimming and fishing in 
the tributary of the Yellow River that runs through the village. 
However, he says, “Now I never go close to the water because it 
smells awful and has foam on top.” One oncologist calls the area 
“the cancer capital of the world” because of esophageal and 
stomach cancer rates that are 25 times higher than the national 
average. The Yellow River itself is being sucked dry by irrigation 
projects stemming from some 20 dams, and the remaining water 
is grossly polluted with sewage and industrial wastes. Three 
chemical spills in 2006 turned the Yellow River red, and another 
spill turned it white. More than 500 million rural Chinese are 
forced to use water that is contaminated by human and industrial 
waste; only 20% of wastewater receives any treatment.
environmentaL PoLicy. The Chinese economy 
has flourished in large degree because of the decentralization of 
power in the 1980s, when local governments and private indus-
tries were encouraged to develop their resources relatively free 
of the restraints of central planning. The booming economy has 
also put great power in the hands of the local governments and 
industries and has enabled them to flaunt existing environmental 
laws and policies. China does have its Ministry of Environmental 
Protection, similar to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), but the country is so large that the ministry has been un-
able to keep up with the need for enforcement. Recently,  
the Chinese government has been turning to international  
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and has encouraged  
concerned citizens to form homegrown NGOs that focus atten-
tion on pollution and other environmental issues. At least 2,000 
such groups are now registered, and they are beginning to make 
a  difference. Typically, a group—like Green Camel Bell in the 
western Chinese city of Lanzhou—identifies a case of blatant 
pollution by some factory, documents the pollution, and reports  
it to the central government. Green Camel Bell was successful  
in shutting down more than 30 factories dumping wastes into 
tributaries of the Yellow River.
bottom Line. China’s example demonstrates that eco-
nomic growth can lift millions out of poverty and establish a 
country’s strong place in the world market. But when this growth 
is at the cost of natural resources and the health of many of its 
people, it is clearly unsustainable. The economic development 
happening in China has already taken place in the industrialized 
countries of Japan and the West, but in these countries, pollu-
tion has been addressed by environmental laws and regulations. 
The Chinese example shows us that economic growth must be 
accompanied by the development and enforcement of just and 
effective environmental public policies.
We look first at economics and its connections to the natural 
environment.
Figure 1 Smog in Linfen, China. The city is re-
puted to have the worst air in China.
2

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
1  Economics and the Environment
Economics is the social science that deals with the produc-
tion, distribution, and consumption of goods and services 
and with the theory and management of economies or 
economic systems. Because economic goods and services 
are usually connected to—and indeed depend on—en-
vironmental goods and services, economics needs to be 
grounded in an understanding of the biological and physi-
cal world. Simply put, no environmental goods and serv-
ices, no economy.
Relationships Between Economic 
Development and the Environment
In a human society, an economy is the system of exchanges 
of goods and services worked out by members of the society. 
Goods and services are produced, distributed, and consumed  
as people make economic decisions about what they need 
and want and what they will do to become players in the 
system—what they might provide that others would need 
and want. As societies develop, economic activity as-
sumes increasingly broader dimensions, with increasingly 
pervasive impacts on the whole society.  Furthermore, an 
unregulated economy can make intolerable inroads into 
natural resources. In particular, during the latter part of 
the 19th century in the United States, private enterprise 
had unrestrained access to forests, grazing lands, and 
mineral deposits. This unsustainable exploitation of re-
sources began to be addressed at the turn of the century, 
as government rules and regulations imposed necessary 
limits.
Fortunately, economic activity in a nation can also 
 provide the resources needed to solve the problems that this 
very activity creates. A strong relationship exists between the 
level of development of a nation and the effectiveness of its 
 environmental public policies. Figure 2 shows three patterns 
that describe relationships between various environmental 
problems and per capita (per individual in the population) 
income levels.
 • Many problems decline (for example, sickness due to in-
adequate sanitation or water treatment) as income levels 
rise, because the society decides to apply the resources 
available—usually from taxes—to address the problems 
with effective technologies.
 • Some problems increase and then decline (for exam-
ple, urban air pollutants like sulfur dioxide, particulate  
matter, and carbon monoxide) when the serious conse-
quences of the problem are recognized and public policies 
are developed to address them.
 • Increased economic activity causes some problems to in-
crease without any clear end in sight (for example, sub-
urban sprawl, municipal wastes, and CO2 emissions).
The key to solving all of these problems brought on by 
economic activity is the development of effective public poli-
cies and institutions. When this does not happen, environ-
mental degradation and human disease and death are the 
inevitable outcomes. What is happening today in China is a 
sad case in point. To understand this relationship better, let 
us look at how economic systems work.
Economic Systems
Economic systems are social and legal arrangements peo-
ple construct in order to satisfy their needs and wants and 
improve their well-being. Economic systems range from 
Intensity of Environmental Problem
Problems Increase
Problems Decline
A
B
C
Problems Increase
Then Decline
$200
$2,000
$20,000
Economic Development
(Per Capita Income)
Figure 2 Environmental problems and per capita 
income. Some of the most serious environmental problems can 
be improved with income growth; other problems get worse and 
then improve, while some problems just worsen.
3

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
or change jobs. This system was most prominent during the 
20th century in the communist regimes of the  Soviet Union 
and its satellites and in Mainland China and some smaller 
Asian countries. It proved to be a disaster, both economically 
and environmentally. The failure of the centrally planned 
economy in the former Soviet Union led to economic chaos 
in the countries that it once comprised or dominated. North 
Korea, Cuba, and a few African countries are the last to re-
tain this economic model.
The Market Decides. In a pure free-market economy, the 
market itself determines what will be exchanged. Goods and 
services are offered in a market that is free from government 
interference. The system is completely open to competition 
and the interplay of supply and demand. If supply is lim-
ited relative to demand, prices rise; if there is an oversupply, 
prices fall because people and corporations will economize 
and pay the lowest price possible. The whole system is in 
private hands and is driven by the desire of people and busi-
nesses to acquire goods, services, and wealth as they act in 
their self-interest. All “players” have free access to the mar-
ket. Competition spurs efficiency as inferior products and 
services are forced out of the market. People can make in-
formed decisions about their purchases because there is suf-
ficient information about the benefits and harms associated 
with economic goods. The free-market economic system is 
thought to be at its best when left completely alone.
the communal barter systems of primitive societies to the 
current global economy, which is so complex that it defies 
description. In the organized societies of today’s world, 
two kinds of economic systems have emerged: the centrally 
planned economy, characteristic of dictatorships, and the 
free-market (or capitalist) economy, characteristic of de-
mocracies.
In any kind of economy, there are basic components 
that determine the economic flow of goods and services. 
Classical economic theory considers land (natural resources), 
labor, and capital as the three elements that constitute the 
“factors of production.” Economic activity involves the 
circular flow of money and products, as shown in Figure 3. 
Money flows from households to businesses as people pay 
for goods and services and from businesses to households 
as people are paid for their labor. Labor, land, and capital 
are invested in the production of goods and services by busi-
nesses, and the products provided by businesses are “con-
sumed” by households.
The Rulers Decide. The cycles shown in Figure 3 apply to 
both kinds of economic systems in existence today; the two 
systems differ mostly in how economic decisions are made. In 
a centrally planned economy, the rulers make the basic deci-
sions regarding what and how much will be produced where 
and by whom. The government owns or manages most in-
dustries, and the workers often lack the freedom to choose 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
G
oo
ds
 a
n
d 
S
er
vi
ce
s 
  
  
$
 
P
ai
d
 f
o
r 
L
a
b
o
r 
$ 
P
ai
d
 f
o
r 
G
o
o
d
s 
a
n
d
 
S
e
r
vi
c
e
s 
FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
CONSUMPTION
PRODUCTION
Labor
Capital
Land
Businesses
Households
Figure 3 Classical view of economic 
activity. Land (natural resources), labor, and 
 capital are the three elements constituting the 
 “factors of production” (bottom green arrow). 
 Economic activity involves the circular flow of 
money (blue  arrows) and products (top green 
arrow).
4

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
hardships for people (and countries) at the bottom of the 
 economic ladder. For example, if population growth is rapid 
and there are not enough jobs to go around, the result often 
is exploitation of workers. Furthermore, a market economy 
only offers people access to goods and services; if people lack 
the means to pay, access alone will not meet their needs. In 
this  situation, a society could employ a “safety net” to provide 
food security for impoverished people—something the market 
does not do. Also, it is too easy for self-interest to lead busi-
nesses and individuals to exploit natural resources or avoid 
costs by polluting the environment instead of producing a 
“clean” product.
Presumably acting in the self-interest of their people, 
governments also find ways to manipulate the market in 
their own favor. This is especially true for international 
trade, where protective barriers and subsidies prevent the free 
flow of goods and services. The World Trade Organization 
(WTO) is supposed to enforce trade rules between nations, 
but wealthy nations have been able to dominate the WTO to 
the detriment of other countries.
International Trade and  
the World Trade Organization
Trade is a fundamental economic activity. The exchange of 
goods drives the engine of the free-market economy. In  today’s 
world, trade has become increasingly globalized, and in the 
process, world trade has become one of the most  dominant 
forces in society. However, many question whether this is 
good, and their concerns become headline news every time the 
WTO meets. For example, in Seattle, Washington, in  December 
1999, tens of thousands of protesters (called  “globophobes” 
by some) took to the streets to block the delegates from  
assembling—and were subjected to tear gas, pepper spray,  
and rubber bullets as things began to turn ugly (Fig. 4). The 
The Role of Governments. The preceding discussion de-
scribes only the very basics of the two economic systems. In 
reality, no country has a pure form of either economy. Re-
cently, a hybrid economic system has emerged, called state 
capitalism, most fully developed in China, Russia, and the 
Gulf oil states. These countries, rich in natural resources or 
in abundant labor (China), have used their exports to amass 
capital that has enabled them to invest in building up the 
country’s infrastructure and form state-owned corporations. 
Although major players in the global economy, these are 
countries where democracy is restricted. As they develop, 
their people are increasingly joining a “global middle class,” 
and the tensions between state control of the economy and 
political freedom are becoming evident (as in the 2011 
“Arab spring”).
The developed countries and many developing countries 
are democracies with market economies, but even in these, 
government involvement occurs at many levels. Govern-
ments can, for example, own and operate different facets of 
the country’s infrastructure, such as postal services, power 
plants, and public transport systems. Governments may 
also control interest rates, determine the amount of money 
in circulation, and adopt policies that stimulate economic 
growth in times of slowdown. Governments also maintain 
surveillance over financial processes such as stock markets 
and bank operations (although not always well, based on the 
U.S. 2008 market meltdown). On the downside, powerful 
business interests can manipulate facets of a market econ-
omy, and unscrupulous people can exploit the freedom of 
the market to defraud people. Only governments can provide 
the policing that the society needs.
Is There a Conscience? Many people believe that the con-
ventional capitalist economic system lacks a “conscience.” 
They argue that many workings of the market economy  create 
Figure 4 Protestors at the WTO meeting. The 
World Trade Organization meeting in Seattle, Washington, 
in 1999, drew thousands of protestors, who were repelled 
by police using tear gas and water cannons.
5

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
(2008) have failed to reach agreement on the issues of farm-
ing subsidies and trade barriers. Currently, there is limited 
hope that the Doha negotiations will come to fruition; the 
developed nations continue to insist on maintaining subsi-
dies to agriculture, and the developing nations remain firm 
in their resolve to protect their industries and farmers from 
unfair competition.
The WTO supposedly retains the power already del-
egated to it, but the continued failure to reach agreements 
over tariffs and subsidies signals a serious weakening in glo-
bal trade governance. The likely outcome is a proliferation 
of bilateral arrangements between countries, which may not 
be all bad, given the tendency of the developed countries to 
dominate WTO issues in the past.
The Need for a Sustainable Economy
The global economy has proven to be quite successful in 
mobilizing people to engage in economic activity. The Chi-
nese experiment is a case in point. The global economy has 
also been successful in improving the well-being of peo-
ple: Life expectancy has never been higher; labor-saving 
devices remove much of the toil in wealthy countries; and 
aircraft, cars, computers, and cell phones open up lifestyles 
and work opportunities unimaginable a few decades ago. 
However, the global economy has also helped to create en-
vironmental problems: continued poverty and hunger in 
developing countries, the decline of ecosystem goods and 
services, rising global temperatures and seas, and the loss 
of biodiversity. Given the vital connections between the en-
vironment and the economy, there is a clear need for a dif-
ferent kind of economy; “business as usual” does not work. 
The path to a sustainable future will require a sustainable, 
green economy.
What will such an economy look like? Instead of pro-
moting growth, the primary goal of the economy will be 
improving human well-being. Instead of drawing down nat-
ural capital, the economy will value and preserve ecosystem 
services and goods. Instead of plunging ahead with “busi-
ness as usual” technologies, societies will embrace technolo-
gies that reduce pollutants and use energy more efficiently. 
A rising consumer demand for green products—products 
like compact fluorescent bulbs, hybrid and electric vehicles, 
solar and wind power systems, and organic foods—will be 
met by businesses eager to provide them. These technolo-
gies, and the economy they will build, are in contrast to 
what can be called the brown economy—all the current 
economic activities that are contributing to environmen-
tal degradation and resource depletion. In fact, this shift 
is revolutionary, and appropriately, the UN Department 
of Economic and Social Affairs has titled its 2011 World 
Economic and Social Survey publication “The Great Green 
Technological Transformation.”1
protesters were an unusual alliance of environmental activists 
and organized labor, groups that are often at odds over timber 
harvests and fishing. What were their issues?
The WTO was created in 1993 by trade ministers from 
many countries meeting to build on the foundation for 
global trade laid by the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (GATT). The WTO was given the responsibility for 
implementing numerous trade rules and, in doing so, was 
 empowered to enforce the rules, with the option of impos-
ing stiff trade penalties on violators. In effect, the WTO be-
came a force for the globalization of trade, facilitating it by 
encouraging the reduction or elimination of trade barriers 
(tariffs) between countries and of subsidies to domestic in-
dustries that tended to discriminate against foreign-produced 
goods. Those who support the WTO claim that free trade 
between countries is the key to global economic growth and 
prosperity. This all sounds very good, but as always, the 
devil is in the details.
Free-Trade Rules. Since its creation, the WTO has adju-
dicated a number of international trade issues and, in the 
process, has established a reputation for elevating free trade 
over substantial human rights and environmental resource 
concerns. Furthermore, many trade agreements and the dis-
pute rulings are carried out in closed sessions. For example, 
the WTO ruled against a U.S. law requiring any imports of 
shrimp to be certified as turtle safe (that is, the shrimp were 
to be certified as harvested by trawlers employing “turtle 
exclusion devices,” or TEDs). Even though TEDs have been 
proven to reduce turtle mortality by 97%, the WTO ruled 
that the restriction was a violation of WTO rules. Other is-
sues that have come before the WTO are a U.S. ban on the 
import of wooden crates from China because they harbored 
the Asian long-horned beetle (a serious threat to forest trees) 
and bans against developing countries’ products that utilize 
child labor.
More Talk. In the Seattle meetings, the talks broke down 
not because of the protests, but because of a refusal of 
the key players—the United States, Japan, and Europe—
to move from their positions. In the WTO meetings held 
in Cancún, Mexico, in September 2003, the talks broke 
down again before negotiations could proceed. This time 
a coalition of 20 developing nations (G-20) representing 
60% of the world’s people simply walked out of the meet-
ings. Their issue was primarily the import barriers and 
subsidies that distort global trade in agricultural products. 
The developed nations are major exporters of agricultural 
products, and they subsidize their farmers heavily; the re-
sult is depressed world markets for these products. The 
developing nations want to protect their farmers from 
competition with these low-priced farm products, so they 
impose tariffs.
The future of the WTO is unclear. The Doha Develop-
ment Round of WTO negotiations began in 2001 with the 
objective of lowering trade barriers around the world, but 
the subsequent WTO meetings in Seattle, Cancún, Hong 
Kong (2005), Geneva (2006), Davos (2007), and Geneva 
1United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. World Economic and 
Social Survey 2011: The Great Green Technological Transformation. New York: 
United Nations, 2011.
6

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
country’s economy. Similarly, the total global biosphere is 
the context for the global economy.
As described by Thomas Prugh, Robert Costanza, and 
Herman E. Daly in The Local Politics of Global Sustainabil-
ity, economic production can thus be seen as it really is: the 
process of converting the natural world to the manufactured 
world. Renewable and nonrenewable resources and the eco-
systems containing them are turned into cars, toys, books, 
food, buildings, highways, computers, and so forth. Thus, 
to quote these authors, “Resources flow into the economy 
from the enfolding ecosystem and are transformed by labor 
and capital (using energy, also a resource), and then pass out 
of the economy and back into the ecosystem in the form of 
wastes.”2 (See Figure 5.)
The ecological economists’ view emphasizes the role 
of natural ecosystems as essential life-support elements— 
ecosystem capital. Their approach brings sustainability 
sharply into focus. If the economy continues to grow, the 
natural world continues to shrink. In time, economic pro-
duction and consumption must come to a steady state, and 
2  Resources in a Sustainable 
Economy
What are the resources on which a country draws to estab-
lish and maintain an economy? The classic economic para-
digm says that land (which represents the environment), 
labor, and capital are the essential resources needed for a 
country to be able to mount its economy. However, a new 
breed of economists, often called ecological economists, has 
emerged in recent years and has taken issue with this view. 
These economists point out that the classic view (Fig. 3) sees 
the environment simply as one set of resources within the 
larger sphere of the human economy. The environment’s vital 
role in supplying the goods and services on which human 
activities depend is minimized. They argue that the classi-
cal approach looks at things backward and that the natu-
ral environment actually encompasses the economy, which 
is constrained by the limits of resources in the environment  
(Fig. 5). The production and consumption that define the clas-
sical economic view are just part of the system. Without the 
vital raw materials provided by the environment and without 
the capacity of the environment to absorb wastes (pollution), 
there is no economy. Thus, the ecosystems and natural re-
sources found in a given country provide the context for that 
Figure 5 Ecological econ-
omists’ view of  economic 
activity. The natural environ-
ment encompasses the economy, 
which is constrained by the 
resources found within the envi-
ronment.
Heat
energy
Human Economy
Production
Wastes
Materials
Energy
Consumption
  
  
  
 
R
e
cy
cl
in
g 
Sun
EN
VI
RO
NM
EN
T 
So
ur
ce
 o
f E
ss
en
tia
l G
oo
ds
 a
nd
 S
er
vic
es
 
Heat
energy
2Thomas Prugh, Robert Costanza, and Herman E. Daly, The Local Politics of 
Global Sustainability. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2000, p. 19.
7

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
capital assets have very clear income- earning potential, but 
they may also be subject to obsolescence and must be re-
newed continually. For example, a clothing factory produces 
a flow of goods destined for consumers, but the machinery 
wears out over time, and the building itself ages. Thus, we 
have income—a flow of goods—and depletion, which is re-
ferred to as capital consumption.
Natural capital (Fig. 6b) refers to the goods and services 
supplied by natural ecosystems and the mineral resources in 
the ground. Natural capital represents an indispensable set of 
resources, some of which are renewable and some nonrenew-
able. Renewable natural capital (ecosystem capital) is repre-
sented by forests, fisheries, agricultural soil, water resources, 
and the like, which can be employed in the production of 
a flow of goods (lumber, fish, grain). Often overlooked is 
the fact that this same natural capital also provides a flow 
of services in the form of waste breakdown, climate regula-
tion, and oxygen production. (The World Bank authors offer 
a caution in interpreting their work: they did not assess the 
service components of natural capital because of difficulties 
in measuring them and calculated mainly the actual resource 
inputs into production—that is, forests as a source of timber, 
mineral assets, etc.).
Renewable natural capital is subject to depletion, but 
it also has the capacity to yield a sustained income if it is 
managed wisely. Nonrenewable natural capital, such as 
oil and mineral deposits, also is subject to depletion and 
provides no services unless it is extracted and converted 
into some useful form. It is part of the wealth of a nation, 
however, as long as it is in the ground. Some components 
of natural capital are easier to measure than others. For 
instance, the lumber of a forest can be reckoned in board 
feet, but how does one measure the impact of a forest on 
the local climate and on its capacity to sustain a high level 
of biodiversity?
Intangible capital (Fig. 6c) is divided into three ele-
ments. The first is human capital, which refers to the popula-
tion and its physical, psychological, and cultural attri butes 
to be sustainable, this must happen before our natural capi-
tal is consumed beyond its ability to support our economy. 
If we add to ecosystem capital the nonrenewable mineral re-
sources, such as fossil fuels and metal ores, we can use the 
more inclusive term natural capital. Thus, natural capitalism 
would be an economic system that promotes sustainabil-
ity and recognizes the central role of natural ecosystems. It 
would replace conventional capitalism. It would be a green 
economy.
Without a doubt, the ecosystems and mineral resources 
of a given country—its natural capital—are a major element 
in the wealth of that country. In recent years, the World 
Bank’s Environment Department has been working on ways 
of measuring the wealth of nations and has produced some 
insightful analyses, which we consider next.
Measuring the Wealth of Nations
Environmentally sustainable development means improv-
ing human well-being over time, a process that means eve-
rything to the world’s impoverished people. It is a process 
that requires societies to manage all of their assets that can 
contribute to improving human well-being. What are the 
components of a nation’s wealth? In a classic document titled 
Where Is the Wealth of Nations? Measuring Capital for the 
21st Century,3 the World Bank indicates three major compo-
nents of capital that determine a nation’s wealth: produced 
capital, natural capital, and so-called intangible capital.
Produced capital (Fig. 6a) is the human-made buildings 
and structures, machinery and equipment, vehicles and ships, 
monetary savings and stocks, highways and power lines, and 
so forth that are essential to the production of economic 
goods and services. Produced capital is often the major focus 
of national economic planning, and it is the most easily meas-
ured of the three components of a nation’s wealth. Produced 
3World Bank, Where Is the Wealth of Nations? Measuring Capital for the 21st 
Century. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2006.
Figure 6 The wealth of nations. Three major components of a nation’s capital determine its wealth: (a) 
produced capital, (b) natural capital, and (c) intangible capital, which largely consists of human capital and the 
quality of formal and informal institutions.
(a) Produced capital
(b) Natural capital
(c) Intangible capital
8

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
third in many countries, this does not mean that it is unim-
portant. In particular, natural capital plays a more impor-
tant role in low-income countries (Table 1), a signal that as 
they develop, they use these assets to build the other forms 
of wealth. The 10-year analysis performed by the World 
Bank indicates that per capita total wealth has grown by 
17%, most notably in the lower-middle-income countries. 
This grouping is dominated by China, whose human capital 
doubled over the 10-year period—a consequence of China’s 
recent heavy investment in education.
The dominance of the intangible (human resources 
and social assets) component emphasizes the importance 
of  investing in health, education, and nutrition in a society 
that desires to move further along in development. It also 
emphasizes the importance of having an efficient judicial 
system, clear property rights, and an effective and uncor-
rupt  government—elements of social capital. In these key 
works on defining the wealth of nations, the World Bank has 
provided the basics of a tool for measuring true economic 
progress. It is the growth in wealth, and all the components 
of that wealth—not the growth in gross national product 
(GNP), which was once commonly employed to indicate eco-
nomic success, or in its now more commonly used alterna-
tive, gross domestic product (GDP).
Measuring True Economic Progress
The gross national product, or GNP, refers to the sum of all 
goods and services produced (really, consumed) by a country 
in a given time frame. The GNP was once the most com-
monly used indicator of the economic health and wealth of 
a country. Most countries now use the comparable gross 
domestic product, or GDP. The GDP is the GNP minus 
net income from abroad. As a per capita index, the GDP is 
often used to compare rich and poor countries and to assess 
economic progress in the developing countries. An impor-
tant element in calculating a net GDP is accounting for the 
assets that are used in the production processes. Buildings 
and equipment, for example, are essential to production, 
but they gradually wear out or depreciate. Their deprecia-
tion is charged against the value of production (called capital 
 depreciation); that is, an accounting of capital depreciation 
is routinely subtracted from the production of goods and  
(innate talents, competencies, abilities, etc.). To this is added 
the value imparted by education, which enables members of 
a population to acquire skills that are useful in an economy. 
Education can be either formal or informal; the point is that 
people acquire a productive capacity through learning. In-
vestments in health and nutrition also contribute to increases 
in human capital.
The second element of intangible capital is what the 
World Bank has called social capital—the social and political 
environment that people create for themselves in a society. 
Social capital includes more formal structures and relation-
ships as defined by government, the rule of law, the court 
system, and civil liberties. It also includes the horizontal rela-
tionships of people as they associate into religious or ethnic 
affiliations or join organizations in which they have a com-
mon interest. Social capital is considered a vital element of 
a nation’s wealth, because social relationships clearly affect, 
and are affected by, economic processes.
The third element of intangible capital is knowledge 
 assets—the codified or written fund of knowledge that can be 
readily transferred to others across space and time.  Although 
these assets constantly grow, they are useful only if people 
have access to them (hence, the vital importance of libraries, 
schools, universities, and the Internet).
New Work by the World Bank
The World Bank’s Environment Department devised various 
means of measuring each of these components of the wealth 
of nations and then set about evaluating the wealth of differ-
ent nations (their assets). In a recent extension of this effort,4
a 10-year record of wealth accounting has provided some 
new insights into wealth measurements. Some of the results 
of the World Bank’s analysis are shown in Table 1. One find-
ing that should come as no surprise is the notable differences 
in per capita wealth among groups of nations ranked by in-
come.
Interestingly, the major source of wealth for most na-
tions is intangible wealth, but natural capital ranks high in 
a number of countries. Although natural capital often ranks 
4World Bank, The Changing Wealth of Nations: Measuring Sustainable Develop-
ment in the New Millennium. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011.
tabLe 1 Total Wealth and Per Capita Wealth by Type of Wealth, 2005
Total Wealth 
Per Capita Wealth
Intangible
Produced
Natural
Income Group
($ billions)
($ dollars)
Capital (%)
Capital (%)
Capital (%)
Low income
3,597
6,138
57
13
30
Lower middle income
58,038
16,903
51
24
25
Upper middle income
47,183
81,354
69
16
15
High income
551,964
588,315
81
17
2
World
673,593
120,475
77
18
5
Source: World Bank, The Changing Wealth of Nations: Measuring Sustainable Development in the New Millennium. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011.
9

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
tors in the GPI—such as labor that goes into housework, 
parenting, and  volunteering—are not calculated in the 
GDP. Negatives in the GPI include factors like the costs 
of crime, loss of leisure time, costs of pollution, depletion 
of nonrenewable resources, and loss of farmland. Thus, for 
the United States in 2004, positive contributions to the GPI 
totaled $11.06 trillion, while negative contributions were 
$6.64 trillion, yielding a net GPI of $4.42 trillion. In con-
trast, the 2004 GDP was $11.71 trillion. Over the years, 
the per capita GPI has remained fairly constant, while the 
GDP has risen sharply (Fig. 7), suggesting that the benefits 
of GDP growth are increasingly offset by the rising environ-
mental and social costs of economic activity. The thinking 
behind the GPI has been carefully reviewed in the scientific 
lite rature, and several countries, the state of Maryland, and 
Canadian provinces have made a first attempt to measure 
and apply the GPI as an index of sustainability.
Environmental Accounting. One of the major documents 
that came out of the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, 
Agenda 21, recognized the need for “a program to develop 
national systems of integrated environmental and economic 
accounting in all countries.” The UN’s Statistical Division, 
which coordinates the accounting procedures of member 
countries, has prepared a manual designed to accomplish 
Agenda 21’s objective (Handbook of National Accounting: 
Integrated Environmental and Economic Accounting). In the 
manual, countries are encouraged to perform environmental 
accounting by putting their environmental assets and serv-
ices in monetary units and keeping a parallel account of their 
net domestic product (similar to the GDP) as it is affected 
by environmental accounting. The document includes case 
studies and step-by-step instructions and strongly advocates 
the adoption of integrated environmental and economic ac-
counting by UN member nations.
In 2007, environment ministers from the leading global 
economies initiated a study intended to show how to apply 
economic thinking to the important ecosystem services that 
are so beneficial to societies. That study, The Economics of 
services in order to generate a net GDP. The GDP measure-
ment is flawed, however, because it does not include goods 
created and services performed by a family for itself. Thus, 
subsistence farming in developing countries is not measured, 
and this omission surely produces a falsely lower GDP for 
these countries. The GDP also omits the natural services pro-
vided by ecosystems. For example, even though clean air is 
as important in treating asthma as medicine is to asthmatics, 
only the medicine is included in the GDP. There is a more 
fundamental flaw, however.
Natural Capital Depreciation. The economists who 
invented the GNP as a measuring device years ago never 
took into account the depreciation of natural capital—an 
omission that has been pointed out by ecological econo-
mists and others. Such concerns are regarded as external 
to a country’s balance sheet. Following the classical view 
of economics, the natural resources and their associated 
natural services are considered a “gift from nature.” Given 
this state of aff airs, it is possible for a nation to cut down 
a million acres of forest and count the sale of the timber 
on the income side of the GDP ledger, whereas on the ex-
pense side, only the depreciation of chain saws and trucks 
would be included. Completely hidden from accounting is 
the loss of all the natural services once performed by the 
forests, and incredibly, the disappearance of the million 
acres of forest is shown as an economic asset. As long as 
this discrepancy remains, it is possible for nations to un-
derestimate the value of their natural resources. They are 
able to deplete fisheries, lose soil by intensive farming, re-
move forests, and degrade rangelands by overgrazing and 
still account for these activities as economic productivity. 
The GDP can increase due to production by industries that 
deplete and pollute the environment and can increase again 
with cleanups of that pollution—a double benefit!
Correcting this system of accounting would require 
calculating the current market value of natural assets and 
considering it to be part of the stock of a nation’s wealth, 
as recommended by the World Bank. To this value would 
be added the value of the natural services performed by the 
ecosystems in which the resources are found (omitted by the 
World Bank analysis). The natural assets and the services 
they perform are the nation’s natural capital. When the natu-
ral resources are drawn down, the depreciation represented 
by the loss of natural capital would be entered into the ledger 
as the GDP is calculated. Similar arguments can be made for 
human resources as a measure of a nation’s wealth. A more 
accurate GDP would have to take all of these depreciations 
into account.
Genuine Progress Indicator. If the GDP is simply un-
able to measure true economic progress, some other 
index is necessary. The nonprofit organization Redefin-
ing Progress has proposed the Genuine Progress Indicator 
(GPI) as a measure of economic progress. This index is cal-
culated by assuming that some kinds of economic activity 
are positive and sustainable and others are not, even if the 
latter are included in the GDP. Some of the positive fac-
Figure 7 GDP and GPI per capita, 1950–2004 (in year 2000 
dollars). The GDP (gross domestic product) is the conventional measure of 
economic progress used by economists. The GPI (Genuine Progress Indicator) is 
a more realistic measure of progress. Note how it is falling behind the GDP over 
the years.
(Source: John Talberth, Clifford Cobb, and Noah Slattery, The Genuine Progress Indicator 2006: 
A Tool for Sustainable Development, Redefining Progress, 2006, with permission.)
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
1950
1990
1980
1970
1960
2000
Dollars
GDP per Capita
GPI per Capita
10

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
human rights abuses, scores 33.1. In fact, some countries 
(e.g., Kuwait, Angola) are so poorly run that they have 
negative intangible capital; their people are becoming more 
impoverished.
Intergenerational Equity. What we have just discussed 
is a matter of intragenerational equity—the “golden rule” 
of making possible for others what is possible for you. All 
forms of current assets need to be managed well to improve 
the well-being of people who already exist. Sustainable devel-
opment, by contrast, is also about intergenerational equity—
meeting the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their needs. Thus, we 
can conserve resources and avoid long-term pollution partly 
out of a concern for future generations.
Economists point to some problems with this perspec-
tive, however. Economics deals with future resources by ap-
plying what is called the discount rate. By this, we mean the 
rate used for finding the present value of some future benefit 
or cost. The discount rate often approximates current inter-
est rates. For example, a dollar is worth more to us today 
than it will be five years from now, even without inflation, 
because we can put the dollar to use now and can earn in-
terest on that dollar if we invest it. At a 5% rate of inter-
est, in five years our dollar would be worth $1.28. Turning 
this idea around, a dollar five years from now is worth only 
$0.78 today.
Following this reasoning, it can be concluded that some 
resources or benefits are worth more now than they will be 
in the future. This concept can be applied to a stand of trees. 
The owner has several options: (1) cut all the trees and sell 
the timber today; (2) hold onto the trees in the hope that they 
will bring a better price at some time in the future; or (3) 
harvest the trees on a sustainable basis, spreading out prof-
its over time. If it turns out that the trees grow more slowly 
than current interest rates, the economically profitable deci-
sion would be to cut them now and invest the proceeds. This 
is a problem for natural capital, because it would appear to 
argue in many cases for maximizing short-term profit over 
sustainable, long-term use of the resource. In other words, 
we should reap the economic value now and let future gen-
erations bear the ecological costs (in reality, the resource is 
likely to have additional value in the form of services that is 
not included in the economic assessment of its worth). Simi-
larly, if we let future generations cope with global climate 
change, we can continue to enjoy the present benefits of the 
unrestrained use of fossil fuels. The same can be said about 
other resources, such as swordfish: we can harvest them 
now, and when they’re gone, we can switch to some other 
species of fish.
This approach presents a problem for intergenerational 
equity. The self-interest of present individuals and genera-
tions is at odds with the longer term, sustainable interests of 
a community or a society. To make things a bit more chal-
lenging, some have argued that conserving resources for the 
future could actually be thought of as putting the interests of 
future generations above those of, say, the poor today. In an-
swer, it can be said that both sets of interests are legitimate, 
Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB), has produced seven 
reports, culminating in a 2010 final report5 that incorpo-
rates elements of former reports and shows “how economic 
concepts and tools can help equip society with the means to 
incorporate the values of nature into decision making at all 
levels,” to quote from the preface. This work, coordinated 
by the UN Environment Program (UNEP), shows how pay-
ments for ecosystem services can improve a country’s stew-
ardship of ecosystem capital. The good news is that many 
developing countries are working with the UNEP team to 
put TEEB into practice.
Resource Distribution
None of the resources that are crucial to an economy are 
evenly distributed among nations. Table 1 shows that great 
differences in wealth exist among the nations of the world. 
It is significant that the greatest differences occur in the two 
categories of assets that are most closely tied to the process 
of development: the human-resource-dominated intangible 
capital and produced capital. With the exception of the oil-
rich Middle East, the per capita differences in natural capi-
tal are unremarkable. Thus, economic development, which 
fosters growth in human resources and produced capital, is 
the pathway to achieving more equity in the distribution of 
resources.
Essential Conditions. There are many reasons why some 
countries have undergone rapid development and others 
have not; population growth is one that is cited in this text. 
Perhaps the most important reasons relate to the major in-
stitutions that coordinate social and political life and that 
make up the social capital of a society. For example, the 
definition of rights, the enforcement of those rights, and 
the facilitation of economic exchange are all considered es-
sential to the successful development of human capital and 
produced capital. A well-developed body of law, an honest 
legal system, inclusiveness, broad civic participation, and a 
free press are essential for maintaining rights within a soci-
ety. A well-developed market economy and free entry into 
and exit from markets for people and businesses are also 
conducive to development. Functioning communication and 
transportation networks and viable financial markets are 
needed to sustain a market economy. History tells us that if 
these resources are in place, a society will make progress in 
the development of human resources and produced assets. 
In societies where such resources are not in place, corrup-
tion, inefficiency, banditry, injustice, and intolerance often 
prevail; continuing poverty and environmental degradation 
are the predictable outcome. For example, one of the major 
components of intangible capital as measured by the World 
Bank is the “rule of law index.” Sweden scores 87.5 out of 
100 on this index, while Pakistan, with its corruption and 
5TEEB, The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Mainstreaming the Eco-
nomics of Nature: A synthesis of the approach, conclusions and recommendations 
of TEEB. 2010.
11

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
world. Environmental public policy addresses two sets of envi-
ronmental issues: (1) the prevention or reduction of air, water, 
and land pollution and (2) the use of natural resources like 
forests, fisheries, oil, and land. All public policy is developed 
in a sociopolitical context that we will simply call politics.
What are the consequences of not having an effective 
environmental public policy? Human societies and their eco-
nomic activities have the potential for doing great damage 
to the environment, and that damage has a direct impact on 
present and future human welfare (Table 2). The effects of 
pollution and the misuse of resources are seen most clearly in 
those parts of the world where environmental public policy is 
often not well established and implemented—the developing 
world. As Table 2 shows, millions of deaths and widespread 
disease are directly traceable to degraded environments. The 
costs to human welfare are felt in the areas of health, eco-
nomic productivity, and the ongoing ability of the natural 
environment to support human life needs. Therefore, laws to 
protect the environment are not luxuries to be tolerated only 
if they do not interfere with individual freedoms or economic 
activities; they are part of the foundation of any well-organ-
ized human society and essential for achieving sustainability.
but given a choice, many people might want to see their chil-
dren and grandchildren enjoy an improved well-being and 
might be more inclined to seriously consider making present 
sacrifices in order to protect a more hopeful future.
We turn our attention now to environmental public pol-
icy, which makes possible both present and future well-being 
for human societies.
3  Environmental Public Policy
Environmental public policy includes all of a society’s laws 
and agency-enforced regulations that deal with that society’s 
interactions with the environment. Public policies are devel-
oped at all levels of government: local, state, federal, and in-
ternational.
The Need for Environmental Public Policy
The purpose of environmental public policy is to promote the 
common good. Just what the common good consists of may 
be a matter of debate, but at least two goals stand out: the im-
provement of human welfare and the protection of the natural 
tabLe 2 Principal Health and Productivity Consequences of Poor Environmental Management
Environmental Problem
Effect on Health
Effect on Productivity
Water pollution and water 
scarcity
More than 3 million deaths and billions of illnesses 
a year are attributable to water pollution and poor 
household hygiene caused by water scarcity.
Fisheries are declining; rural household time 
(time spent fetching water) and municipal costs of 
providing safe water are increasing; water shortages 
constrain economic activity.
Air pollution
Many acute and chronic health impacts exist: 
excessive levels of urban particulate matter and 
smoky indoor air are responsible for 2 million 
premature deaths annually.
Acid rain and ozone have harmful impacts on  
forests, agricultural crops, bodies of water, and 
human artifacts.
Solid and hazardous wastes
Diseases are spread by rotting garbage and blocked 
drains. Risks from hazardous wastes are typically 
local, but often acute.
Groundwater resources are polluted and rendered 
unusable for irrigation or domestic use.
Soil degradation
Effects include reduced nutrition for poor farmers on 
depleted soils and greater susceptibility to drought.
Some 23% of land used for crops, grazing, and 
forestry has been degraded by erosion. Field 
productivity losses in the range of 0.5–1.5% of the 
gross national product are common on tropical soils.
Deforestation
Localized flooding leads to death and disease.
Effects include reduced potential for sustainable 
logging and for prevention of erosion, increased 
watershed instability, and diminished carbon storage 
capability for forests. Nontimber forest products are 
also lost.
Loss of biodiversity
Effects include the potential loss of new drugs.
Ecosystem adaptability is reduced, and goods and 
services are lost.
Atmospheric changes
Such changes result in possible shifts in vector-borne 
diseases, risks from climatic natural disasters, and 
skin cancers attributable to depletion of ozone shield.
Coastal investments are damaged by the rise in sea 
level; regional changes in agricultural productivity 
occur.
Sources: World Bank, World Development Report, 1992. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992; Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005; UNEP Global 
Environment Outlook GEO4, 2007.
12

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
are when it is formulated into law and when it receives appro-
priations. The appropriations must be authorized every year, 
and new laws can always amend or abolish existing laws. 
Given this basic process, there are many opportunities for the 
political system to influence environmental public policy.
State and Local Levels. Some policies are developed at 
the state and community levels to solve more-local problems. 
States replicate much of the structure of the federal govern-
ment, with legislatures, governors, a judiciary, and various 
agencies. Cities and towns employ conservation commis-
sions, planning boards, health boards, water and sewer 
commissions, and the like. Cities and towns, for example, es-
tablish zoning regulations to protect citizens from haphazard 
and incompatible land uses. Some municipalities and regions 
go further and establish broader policies like “smart growth” 
to address the problems of urban sprawl. Cities and towns 
are adopting mandatory recycling and pay-as-you-throw 
regulations for municipal solid-waste management. Many 
states are responding to global climate change with policies 
aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions and mandating 
renewable-energy portfolios. Eleven states have bottle laws 
that facilitate recycling. Indeed, states and municipalities are 
often out in front of the federal government on a number of 
environmental issues, often initiating valuable experiments 
in environmental public policy that could result in national 
policy changes.
Policy Options: Market or Regulatory?
Suppose that a legislative or administrative decision has been 
made to develop a policy to deal with an environmental 
problem. Now what? The objective of environmental public 
policy is to change the behavior of polluters or resource users 
so as to benefit public welfare and the environment. The 
two main ways to accomplish these behavior changes are by 
using a direct regulatory approach, in which standards are 
set and technologies are prescribed—the so-called command-
and-control strategy—and by using basic market approaches 
to set prices on pollution and the use of resources. Both ap-
proaches have their advantages and disadvantages. Many 
newer policies include elements of each.
Policy in the United States
The U.S. Constitution is widely regarded as responsible for 
establishing a very effective form of government. The con-
veners of the Constitution decided on three branches of 
government, all of which play a role in establishing and en-
forcing environmental public policy (Fig. 8). The legislative 
branch, or the Congress, consists of the Senate and the House 
of Representatives. All of these legislators are elected by the 
people from the 50 states. The Congress has the power to es-
tablish laws, which must pass both houses of the legislature 
and then go to the executive branch of the government for 
approval by the President. A host of administrative agencies, 
most headed by members of the President’s cabinet, report to 
the President. We will encounter many of these agencies as 
we examine different environmental problems. The  judicial 
branch of government is responsible for interpreting the 
law, from the Constitution and its amendments to the many 
pieces of legislation passed by the Congress.
Rules and Regulations. Environmental public-policy law is 
the responsibility of the Congress. Once a piece of legislation 
is passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate and 
is signed into law by the President, it is implemented by the 
appropriate government agencies. The EPA and most other 
federal agencies are required to develop rules and regulations 
for issues only broadly covered in the laws, and it is these rules 
that put the bite in the laws passed by Congress. In making 
rules, agencies are required to solicit public comments, and 
these most often come from major stakeholders interested in 
or affected by the rules—business and public interest groups. 
The agencies then evaluate the comments and may or may not 
adjust the rules, depending on the validity of the comments. 
Finally, agencies publish their new rules in the Federal Regis-
ter, where they are “filed” for all interested parties to see.
One final role the Congress must play is to pass appro-
priations for the various programs that have already been au-
thorized by law. The executive branch (the President) draws 
up a budget asking for appropriations for all of the govern-
ment agencies and programs, and the Congress decides how 
much of what the President asks for will actually get funded. 
Thus, the two times the Congress can influence a given issue 
Figure 8 The three branches of government in the United States. The legislative, executive, 
and judicial branches provide a balance of power as laws are enacted, administered, and sometimes reviewed.
Capitol Building
Legislative
Congress
House of
Representatives
Senate
White House
Supreme Court Building
Executive
President
Vice President
Cabinet
Administrative Agencies
Judicial
Supreme Court
Federal Courts
Circuit and District Courts
13

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
by assigning individual quotas that add up to a sustainable 
fishing take—the total allowable catch.
A new market-based initiative for conserving the serv-
ices provided by ecosystems is Payments for Ecosystem (or 
Environmental) Services (PES). Forest, farm, and wetlands 
owners hold properties that provide valuable services to so-
cieties as they sequester carbon, preserve biodiversity, and 
prevent soil erosion. They are seldom compensated for these 
services. A PES program would use some form of environ-
mental accounting (think TEEB) to establish a monetary 
value for a given ecosystem service, and those who benefit 
from the service would pay the landowner to maintain the 
service over the years and not convert the land to some envi-
ronmentally undesirable use. Often the government does the 
paying on behalf of the society, as in the Conservation Re-
serve Program, where farmers are paid to protect open space 
and/or wetlands they own.
Whether regulation based or market based, public policy 
does not appear out of nowhere. We will now examine how 
public policy is developed.
Public Policy Development:  
The Policy Life Cycle
Environmental public policy is developed in a sociopoli-
tical context, usually in response to a problem. As we saw  
(Fig. 2), less developed countries or regions face a group of 
poverty-related environmental issues, such as a lack of sani-
tation facilities or unsafe water supplies. As these countries 
develop, they become better able to deal with these basic 
issues through effective public policies. However, more  
affluence can bring new problems (such as industrial air 
pollution) that require further public policy development, 
and sometimes unexpected problems, such as stratospheric 
ozone depletion, arise as a result. When specific problems are 
addr essed through public policy in democratic societies, the  
development of that policy often takes a predictable course, 
which we will call the policy life cycle.
The typical policy life cycle has four stages: recogni-
tion, formulation, implementation, and control (Fig. 9). Each 
Command and Control. Traditionally, most of the laws 
that give the EPA its authority have prescribed command-
and-control solutions. The laws direct the EPA to regulate 
pollution problems, often specifying many of the details 
to be used. For example, if they know the health effects 
of pollutants, the legislators may choose to set standards 
that protect the health of the most vulnerable members 
of the population. This is the case with the basic criteria 
covering air pollutants. To meet these standards, regula-
tions are established, and polluters are required by law 
to comply with the regulations. The regulatory approach 
also works well with land use issues in which certain val-
ues are upheld that will not necessarily be protected by 
a straightforward market approach. Indeed, many envi-
ronmental problems are not readily amenable to market-
based policies.
One of the shortcomings of the regulatory approach is 
that it practically guarantees a certain sustained level of pol-
lution. If a polluter is told to use a particular technology or is 
given a cap on emissions, the policy gives the polluter no in-
centive to invest in technologies that would keep pollution at 
lower levels than allowed. A better approach might be to set 
a standard (for air quality or water quality, for example) and 
let the polluter decide how best to achieve the standard. Here 
there is a command, but control is in the hands of the pol-
luter. Pollution prevention is the preferred course of action, 
and it is encouraging to see the EPA moving deliberately in 
that direction.
Market Approaches. Market-based policies have the vir-
tues of simplicity, efficiency, and, in theory, equity. All pol-
luters are treated equally and will choose their responses on 
the basis of economic principles having to do with profit-
ability. With a market-based approach, there are strong 
incentives to reduce the costs of using resources or of gener-
ating pollution. The cap-and-trade system for SO2 emissions 
under the Clean Air Act of 1990 is a good example of the 
market approach to pollution control. User fees (pay as you 
throw) for the disposal of municipal solid waste are another. 
Several countries have restored and sustained fishery stocks 
Figure 9 The policy life cycle. Most environmental 
issues pass through a policy life cycle, and each issue is ac-
corded a different degree of political “weight” as it moves 
through each stage of the cycle. The final result is a policy 
that has been incorporated into the society and a problem 
that is under control.
Degree of
dissension
1. Recognition
2. Formulation
3. Implementation
4. Control
Political weight
Stage
14

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
look into the claims of Rowland and Molina. The commit-
tee issued a report that confirmed the dangers of CFCs and 
recommended banning the chemicals. The EPA considered 
the evidence and banned the use of CFCs in spray cans in 
1978. Environmental groups applauded the decision. CFCs 
continued to be used in increasing amounts, however, in 
other applications. Then, in 1985, a British team working 
in Antarctica reported a huge “hole” in the ozone layer over 
that continent, and further research showed that the ozone 
hole was due to unique conditions that led to high release of 
chlorine from CFCs and to subsequent ozone destruction. 
Ozone destruction was seen to be occurring more widely, 
and the world scientific and environmental organizations 
began calling for global action. This led to a meeting con-
vened by the United Nations in Montreal, Canada, in 1987. 
There, member nations agreed to scale back CFC produc-
tion 50% by 2000.
Thus, the formulation stage is a stage of rapidly increas-
ing political weight. The public is now aroused, and debate 
about policy options occurs in the corridors of power. The 
political battles may become fierce, as questions dealing with 
regulation and who will pay for the proposed changes are 
addressed. Media coverage is high, and politicians begin 
to hear from their constituencies. Lobbyists for special in-
terests or environmental groups pressure legislators to sof-
ten or harden the policy under consideration. During the 
formulation stage, policy makers consider the “Three E’s” 
of environmental public policy: effectiveness (whether the 
policy accomplishes what it intends to do in improving the 
environment), efficiency (whether the policy accomplishes its 
objectives at the least possible cost), and equity (whether the 
policy parcels out the financial burdens fairly among the dif-
ferent parties involved).
Implementation Stage. The ozone hole continued to 
grow, however, and the signers of the Montreal Proto-
col agreed to speed up the phaseout of CFCs, moving the 
target date for completion to 1996. The major chemical 
of the stages carries a certain amount of political “weight,” 
which varies over time and is represented in the figure by 
the course of the life-cycle line. We will use the discovery of 
ozone depletion in the stratosphere as a case study to illus-
trate the policy life cycle.
Recognition Stage. In the early 1970s, chlorofluorocar-
bons (CFCs) were hailed as miracle chemicals: virtually inert, 
nontoxic, nonflammable, noncorrosive. They appeared in 
thousands of products and applications, from computers, tel-
ecommunications, pharmaceuticals, and refrigerators to food 
processing and cosmetics. They were ideal aerosol propel-
lants, were extremely useful as refrigerants, and were effec-
tive as cleaning agents for electronics.
Physical chemist Sherwood Rowland, while working at 
the University of California at Irvine in 1972, read a paper 
by English scientist James Lovelock, who proposed using 
CFCs as markers to measure atmospheric winds because of 
their increasing presence in the atmosphere. Rowland and 
new postdoctoral student Mario Molina (Fig. 10) decided to 
investigate the question of what happens to CFCs in the at-
mosphere. The two scientists reasoned that CFCs would not 
break down unless they entered the stratosphere, where solar 
radiation is strong enough to break the tough molecules. 
They hypothesized that CFC breakdown would release chlo-
rine and that the chlorine would in turn react with ozone 
molecules in the stratosphere.
Molina and Rowland suddenly realized that the proc-
ess they had uncovered had the potential to reduce the strat-
ospheric ozone layer that blocked ultraviolet radiation from 
entering the lower atmosphere, where it could seriously dam-
age biological tissues. They published their results in 1974.6 
The immediate response was unremarkable, so the pair 
began calling public attention to the dangers of CFCs. The 
chemical industry (especially Dow and DuPont, major CFC 
manufacturers) responded by attacking them wherever they 
spoke, ridiculing their work, and even accusing them of being 
agents of the Soviet KGB intent on destroying capitalism.
Illustrated by these events, the recognition stage of pub-
lic policy is low in political weight. The stage begins with the 
early perceptions of an environmental problem, often com-
ing as a result of scientific research. Scientists then publish 
their findings, and the media pick up the information and 
popularize it. When the public becomes involved, the politi-
cal process is under way. During the recognition stage, dis-
sension is high. Opposing views on the problem surface as 
businesses or technological industries respond to the bad 
news that they are at the root of some new environmental 
problem. Eventually, the problem gets attention from some 
level of the government, and the possibility of addressing it 
with public policy is considered.
Formulation Stage. A turning point came in 1976, when 
the National Academy of Sciences appointed a committee to 
Figure 10 Mario Molina and Sherwood Rowland. These two 
physical chemists discovered the threat posed by chlorofluorocarbons to the 
ozone layer in the stratosphere. Their work led to the Montreal Protocol, an inter-
national agreement to phase out the use of ozone-destroying chemicals around 
the world.
6Mario Molina and F. S. Rowland, Stratospheric Sink for Chlorofluoromethanes: 
Chlorine Atom-Catalysed Destruction of Ozone. Nature 24(9). 810–812. June 28, 
1974.
15

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
The policy life cycle is a simplified view of what is fre-
quently a highly complex and contentious political process. 
At any one time, different problems will be in different stages 
of the life cycle, as shown in Figure 11 for a number of en-
vironmental problems in the industrialized countries. Also, 
countries in different stages of economic development will be 
in different stages of the policy life cycle for a given prob-
lem. For example, sickness and death due to polluted water 
are still serious problems in many developing countries be-
cause public policies have not yet caught up with the need 
for water treatment and sewage treatment. In contrast, this 
problem is in the control stage in the industrialized societies. 
The reason for the discrepancy can often be traced directly to 
the costs that lie behind the development and implementation  
of public policy.
Economic Effects of Environmental  
Public Policy
What are the relationships between a country’s economy and 
its environmental public policy? Are there some policies that 
are too costly? How should a society parcel out its limited 
resources to address environmental problems? Are environ-
mental regulations a burden on the economy? Let us begin 
to sort out these questions by looking at the relationship be-
tween environmental policies and costs.
Costs of Policies. As we have seen, policies do not just ap-
pear out of thin air. Instead, they are the result of some ver-
sion of the policy life cycle. Some policies have relatively little 
or no direct monetary cost—they do not require major invest-
ments of administration or resources. For example, removing 
subsidies to special interests and denying special access to na-
tional resources can result in a more efficient and equitable 
operation of the economy and can protect the environment. 
The use of national lands for cattle grazing (Fig. 12a) and tim-
ber harvesting (Fig. 12b) is subsidized in the United States. As 
a result, the real costs—and environmental consequences—of 
these activities are borne not by the special interest groups that 
companies capitulated and were already developing more 
benign substitutes for CFCs. In fact, DuPont effectively op-
posed an ill-advised attempt in the 104th Congress to ter-
minate U.S. participation in the Montreal Protocol. Several 
other chemicals in wide use that also had ozone-destroying 
potential were added to CFCs as substances to be regu-
lated. It fell to regulatory agencies in the various countries 
to enforce the Montreal Protocol agreements.
At this point, the policy has reached the implementation 
stage, in which its real political and economic costs are ex-
acted. The policy has been determined, and the focal point 
moves to regulatory agencies. During the implementation 
stage, public concern and political weight are declining. By 
now, the issue is not very interesting to the media, and the 
emphasis shifts to the development of specific regulations 
and their enforcement. Industry learns how to comply with 
the new regulations. Over time, greater attention may be 
given to efficiency and equity as all the players in the process 
gain experience with the policy.
Control Stage. CFCs are no longer being manufactured 
and released into the atmosphere. Substitutes for them are 
readily available. The size of the ozone hole has stopped in-
creasing, and the amount of CFCs in the stratosphere is start-
ing to decline. The Montreal Protocol stands as a remarkable 
achievement of international diplomacy and concord. Sher-
wood Rowland and Mario Molina were awarded the Nobel 
Prize in chemistry in 1995 for their discovery.
The final stage in the policy life cycle is the control stage. 
By this point, years have passed since the early days of the 
recognition stage. Problems are rarely completely resolved, 
but the environment is improving, with things moving in the 
right direction. Policies (and their derived regulations) are 
broadly supported and often become embedded in the soci-
ety, although their vulnerability to political shifts continues. 
Regulations may become more streamlined. The policy mak-
ers must now see that the problem is kept under control, and 
in due time, the public often forgets that there ever was a 
serious problem.
Figure 11 Environmental problems in the policy 
life cycle. Different environmental problems are in different 
stages of the policy life cycle in industrial societies.
Renewable energy
Acid deposition
Sewerage
Water treatment
Contagious diseases
Global warming
Nuclear wastes
Ozone depletion
Municipal wastes
Air pollution
Indoor air pollution
Urban sprawl
1. Recognition
2. Formulation
3. Implementation
4. Control
Political weight
Stage
16

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
that environmental protection has no significant adverse ef-
fect on the economy and in fact has had a pronounced posi-
tive effect.
Anecdotal Evidence. First, we must recognize that 
much of the evidence used to support the charges that have 
been made is anecdotal, and therefore suspect. For example, 
according to the American Petroleum Institute, “environ-
mental restrictions on energy extraction and production have 
caused the loss of 400,000 jobs,” and according to Florida 
sugar growers, “Measures to protect the Everglades will 
cause the loss of 15,000 jobs.” Indeed, numerous cases can 
be cited where some jobs were lost because of environmental 
regulations.
Anecdotal evidence can also be used in favor of envi-
ronmental policy. According to the California Planning and 
Conservation League Foundation, “Recycling has created 
14,000 jobs in California,” and according to the EPA, “The 
Clean Air Act of 1990 will generate 60,000 new jobs.” In-
deed, many sectors of the U.S. economy that are most sub-
ject to environmental regulations—plastics, fabrics, and so 
forth—have improved their efficiency and their competitive-
ness in the international market.
Careful Studies. Is there something more substantial to 
help us with this important controversy? The best evidence 
comes from careful studies of what is actually happening. 
These studies reveal the following interesting findings:
 • Estimated pollution-control costs are only 1.72% of 
value added. (Value added is the increase in value from 
raw materials to final production.) Industries are not 
going to shut down, move overseas, or lay off thousands 
of workers for costs of this size.
 • Only 0.1% of job layoffs were attributed by employers 
to environment-related causes, according to a study by 
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
have access to these resources, but by all taxpayers. Removing 
such subsidies, however, can have very real political costs, as 
powerful interests do everything they can to hold onto their 
privileges.
Most environmental policies impose some very real 
economic costs that must be paid by some segment of so-
ciety. For instance, we establish policies that control pol-
lution because their benefits are judged to outweigh their 
costs—that is, the public welfare is improved, and the envi-
ronment is protected. Who pays the costs? The equity prin-
ciple implies that those benefiting from the policies—the 
customers of businesses whose activities are regulated and 
the people whose health is protected by laws against pollut-
ing—should pay, through taxes or higher charges. (When 
businesses are taxed or industries are forced to add new 
technologies, they pass their costs along to consumers, so 
the costs of public policies are borne by the public in one 
way or another.)
Impact on the Economy. For years, special interest 
groups and conservative think tanks (e.g., the Competitive 
Enterprise Institute) have argued that environmental policies 
are excessive and bad for the economy—that our concern 
for environmental protection costs hundreds of thousands of 
jobs, reduces our competitiveness in the marketplace, drives 
up the price of products and services, and, in general, im-
poses costs on the economy that are nonproductive. These 
views are widespread and are routinely used to try to roll 
back the laws and regulations that represent environmental 
public policy.
How sound are these arguments? This concern has been 
addressed by many economists in recent years, and the gen-
eral findings of their studies indicate that the “environment 
versus economy” trade-off is a myth. Even without consider-
ing the environmental or health benefits, economists found 
Figure 12 Subsidized access to pubic resources.  (a) Cattle grazing in BLM-managed land near 
Baker City, Oregon. (b) Timber harvesting in the Olympic National Forest, Washington. Both of these activities are 
subsidized by taxpayers because the special interests with access to the resources pay only a fraction of the  
market value of the resource.
(a)
(b)
17

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
 • The “environmental protection industry” is a major job-
creating, profit-making, sales-generating industry.
 • The argument that environmental protection is bad for 
the economy is simply unsound. Not only is environ-
mental protection good for the economy, but environ-
mental public policy is responsible for a safer, healthier, 
and more enjoyable environment.
We turn next to the details of benefit-cost analysis, a 
specific tool that is employed in developing environmental 
public policy. In doing so, we will address the question of 
how to measure the cost-effectiveness of regulating pollution.
4  Benefit-Cost Analysis of 
Environmental Public Policy
The President of the United States has the power to issue ex-
ecutive orders, which are usually directives to government 
agencies or departments designed to accomplish a presiden-
tial initiative. President Ronald Reagan, concerned that the 
U.S. economy and business interests might be overregulated, 
issued Executive Order 12291 in 1981. This order required 
that all significant regulations be supported by a benefit-
cost analysis. A significant regulation is defined as one that 
imposes annual costs of at least $100 million. Subsequent 
presidents, including President Obama (in Executive Order 
13563), issued similar executive orders that basically contin-
ued most of the policies of Reagan’s order.
A benefit-cost analysis begins by examining the need 
for the proposed regulation and then describes a range of al-
ternative approaches. Afterward, it compares the estimated 
costs of the proposed action and the main alternatives to the 
benefits that will be achieved. All costs and benefits are given 
monetary values (where possible) and compared by means 
of what is commonly referred to as a benefit-cost (or cost-
benefit) ratio. A favorable ratio for an action means that the 
benefits outweigh the costs, and the action is said to be cost 
effective. There is an economic justification for proceeding 
with it. If costs are projected to outweigh benefits, the project 
may be revised, dropped, or shelved for later consideration.
Benefit-cost analysis of environmental regulations is in-
tended to build efficiency into policy so that society does not 
have to pay more than is necessary for a given level of en-
vironmental quality. If the analysis is done properly, it will 
consider all of the costs and benefits associated with a regu-
latory option. In so doing, it must address the problem of 
external costs.
External Costs
In the language of economics, an external cost is some ef-
fect of a business process that is not included in the usual 
calculations of profit and loss. For example, when a business 
pollutes the air or water, the pollution imposes a cost on so-
ciety in the form of poor health or the need to treat water be-
fore using it. This is an external bad. When workers improve 
their job performance as a result of experience and learning, 
 • In general, states with the strictest environmental regula-
tions also had the highest rates of job growth and eco-
nomic performance. California established new energy 
efficiency policies in 1978, and since then, the energy 
sector has added more than a million jobs, far outpac-
ing other economic sectors. Indeed, California has set 
a remarkable pace in creating a “green economy” (see 
Sustainability, “California’s Green Economy” p. 41).
In short, the results of careful studies of the relationship 
between environmental protection and economic growth refute 
the suggestion that environmental policies are bad for jobs and 
the economy. In fact, economic performance is highest where 
environmental public policy is most highly developed. Health-
ier workers are more productive and spend less on medical 
care. It may be no coincidence that in the former communist 
countries in Europe, where environmental public policy was 
deliberately suppressed in order to favor industry, both the 
economy and the environment have been disaster areas. The 
evidence indicates that concerns over energy efficiency, pollu-
tion control, and conservation of resources have encouraged 
businesses to modify their technologies in ways that make them 
more competitive, not less, in the national and international 
marketplace. The evidence also suggests that many more jobs 
have been created by environmental policy than have been lost.
The Environmental Protection Industry. Taken as a 
whole, environmental protection is a huge industry. In a land-
mark 1990 study,7 the EPA calculated that the estimated cost 
of complying with environmental regulations by 1997 would 
be about 2.7% of the GDP—about $210 billion at that time. 
Admittedly, this estimate was very rough—some believe it was 
too low, while others think it was too high. To put the per-
centage into perspective, in 1997, the United States spent an 
estimated 10.6% of the GDP on health care and 4.3% for na-
tional defense. Is it worth 2.7% of the GDP to provide healthy 
air to breathe and clean water and ecosystems that can con-
tinue to provide essential goods and services if we are willing 
to spend 15% on our personal health and national security?
A study of total expenditures for the environmental pro-
tection industry for one year revealed that it was responsible 
for the following:
 • $355 billion in total industry sales;
 • $14 billion in corporate profits;
 • $63 billion in federal, state, and local government 
revenues; and
 • 4 million jobs.
In sum, we can draw the following conclusions from our 
examination of the impact of environmental policy on the 
economy:
 • Environmental public policy does not diminish the wealth 
of a nation; rather, it transfers wealth from polluters to 
pollution controllers and to less polluting companies.
7Environmental Investments: The Cost of a Clean Environment, Report of the Ad-
ministrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to the Congress of the United 
States. EPA-230-1 1-90-083. November 1990. National Center for Environmental 
Economics, USEPA.
18

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
100% control is likely to be impossible at any cost. Because 
of this exponential relationship, regulatory control often has 
to focus on an optimum cost-effectiveness, as Figure 13 indi-
cates. In any case, the costs of pollution control constitute a 
powerful incentive to make substitutions, to recycle materi-
als, or to redesign industrial processes.
Costs Go Down. In most cases, pollution-control tech-
nologies and strategies are understood and available. Thus, 
equipment, labor, and maintenance costs can be estimated 
fairly accurately. Unanticipated problems that increase costs 
may occur, but as technology advances and becomes more 
reliable, experience is gained, and lower-cost alternatives 
 frequently emerge. The costs of pollution control are likely 
the improvement is not credited in the company’s ledgers, 
although it is considered an external good.
Amenities such as clean air, uncontaminated groundwa-
ter, and a healthy ozone layer are not privately owned. In the 
absence of regulatory controls, there are no direct costs to a 
business for degrading these amenities. In other words, they 
are externalities. Therefore, there are no economic incentives 
to refrain from polluting the air or water. By including all of 
the costs and benefits of a project or a regulation, benefit-
cost analysis effectively brings the externalities into the eco-
nomic accounting.
Environmental Regulations  
Impose Real Costs
The costs of pollution control include the price of purchas-
ing, installing, operating, and maintaining pollution-control 
equipment and the price of implementing a control strategy. 
Even the banning of an offensive product costs money be-
cause jobs may be lost, new products must be developed, 
and machinery may have to be scrapped. In some instances, 
a pollution-control measure may result in the discovery of a 
less expensive way of doing something. In most cases, how-
ever, pollution control costs money. Thus, the effect of most 
regulations is to prevent an external bad by imposing eco-
nomic costs that are ultimately shared by government, indus-
try, and consumers.
Costs Go Up. Pollution-control costs tend to increase ex-
ponentially with the level of control to be achieved (Fig. 13). 
That is, a partial reduction in pollution may be achieved by 
a few relatively inexpensive measures, but further reduc-
tions generally require increasingly expensive measures, and 
SUSTAINABILITy
California’s Green Economy
The global transition 
to a sustainable green 
economy from the cur-
rent brown economy 
is under way. Globally, 
even nationally, it is a hit-and-miss proposition, 
but one location in which this transition has 
been well documented is the state of California. 
Next 10, a San Francisco nonprofit, recently 
published a well-documented report on the 
green economy in that state.8 Relative to 1995, 
jobs in the green economy have grown by 56%, 
while the total economy grew by 18%. The state 
employment department reported that people in 
more than 263,000 jobs spend half or more of 
their time on the production of green products 
or services, with an additional 170,000 people 
performing jobs that involve part-time activities 
in the green economy.
Just what are green jobs? Next 10 distin-
guished between a “core” green economy and 
an “adaptive” green economy. Core green 
economy businesses provide the products and 
services that deal in alternatives to carbon-
based energy sources (wind, solar, biomass, 
etc.), conserve energy (e.g., building efficiency 
products and services) and other natural 
resources, and reduce pollution and recycle 
waste (e.g., emissions monitoring, recycling 
machinery, etc.). Adaptive green economic 
activities involve the businesses that are ad-
justing their processes to improve resource 
efficiency and change consumption habits of 
households. The report shows that green eco-
nomic activities employ people across every 
region of the state.
An example of a California green business 
is Sol Focus, located in Palo Alto. This company 
develops and manufactures innovative photo-
voltaic systems that are operating in several 
states and are being deployed in Spain, Greece, 
Italy, Portugal, and many other countries. The 
company holds more than 40 patents and spe-
cializes in the use of advanced optical systems 
that focus and convert large amounts of solar 
energy to electrical energy. One of its unique 
products is a system called concentrator photo-
voltaic technology (CPV). This technology uses 
systems of cells employing reflective mirrors 
that concentrate the solar energy up to 500 
times, greatly reducing the number of solar cells 
needed to capture solar energy and also greatly 
reducing the cost of the collection panels. With 
270 employees, Sol Focus is a great example of 
a green company that is making a difference in 
California and throughout the world.
T
t
e
r
i
8Next 10, Many Shades of Green: Regional Distribution and 
Trends in California’s Green Economy. 2010. August 15, 2011.
Figure 13 The benefit-cost ratio for reducing pollution. The 
cost of pollution control increases exponentially with the degree of control to be 
achieved. However, benefits to be derived from pollution control tend to level off 
and become negligible as pollutants are reduced to near or below threshold  
levels. The optimum cost-effectiveness is achieved at less than 100% control.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Reduction of pollution (percent)
Cost or benefit (dollars)
Area of
optimum
cost-
effective-
ness
Value of
benefits
derived
Cost of
pollution
control
19

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
to be highest at the time they are initiated; then they decrease 
as time passes (Fig. 14a). The importance of this trend will 
become evident when we consider the time span over which 
costs and benefits are compared.
How accurate are the cost estimates? A look at some his-
torical examples reveals that industry reports predict higher 
costs of regulations than government studies do, and surpris-
ingly, even government analysts often overestimate the costs 
of regulations. For example, industry sources claimed that 
the costs of eliminating CFCs from automobile air condition-
ers would increase the price of new cars by anywhere from 
$650 to $1,200. In reality, the price increase turned out to be 
much lower—from $40 to $400. A recent study of benefit-
cost analyses revealed that overestimates of costs occurred 
in 12 of 14 regulations. The primary reason given for the 
overestimates is a failure to anticipate the impact of techno-
logical innovation—admittedly a factor that is difficult to 
predict—although another reason might be a deliberate ploy 
to project costs so high that the regulators will back down.
The costs of improving the quality of the environment 
represent a major economic outlay. What benefits have we 
received in return?
The Benefits of Environmental Regulation
The Regulatory Right to Know Act directs the Office of Man-
agement and Budget (OMB) to submit an annual report to 
Congress containing, among other things, an estimate of the 
costs and benefits of federal rules. The 2011 report includes 
an up-to-date study of costs and benefits over the October 1, 
2000–September 30, 2010 decade. The OMB found that the 
benefits (those that could be measured in monetary units) far 
exceeded the costs. The benefits were estimated at between 
$132 billion and $655 billion, while industries, states, and 
municipalities spent an estimated $44 billion to $62 billion to 
comply with the rules. The OMB report demonstrated that the 
benefits of major regulations issued between 2000 and 2010 
exceeded the costs manyfold (Fig. 15). The lion’s share of both 
the costs and the benefits for 2010 was attributed to the EPA’s 
regulation of sulfur dioxide in the air. Fewer hospital visits and 
reductions in both premature deaths and lost workdays were 
benefits associated with reductions in this air pollutant man-
dated by the Clean Air Act.
Calculating Benefits. Such benefits of regulatory policies 
are seldom as easy to calculate as the costs. Estimating benefits 
is often a matter of estimating the costs of poor health and 
damages that would have occurred if the regulations had not 
been imposed (Fig. 14b). For example, the projected environ-
mental damage that would have resulted from a given level of 
sulfur dioxide emissions from a coal-fired power plant (an ex-
ternal bad) becomes a benefit (an external good) when a regu-
latory action prevents half of those emissions. Benefits include 
such things as improved human health, reduced corrosion 
and deterioration of materials, reduced damage to natural re-
sources, preservation of aesthetic and spiritual qualities of the 
environment, increased opportunities for outdoor recreation, 
and continued opportunities to use the environment in the  
Figure 14 Cost-effectiveness of pollution control over time.  
(a) Pollution-control strategies generally demand high initial costs. The costs then 
generally decline as those strategies are absorbed into the overall economy.  
(b) Benefits may be negligible in the short term, but they increase as environmen-
tal and human health recovers from the impacts of pollution or is spared increas-
ing degradation. (c) When the two curves are compared, we see that what may 
appear as cost-ineffective expenditures in the short term (5–10 years) may in fact 
be highly cost-effective expenditures in the long term.
(b)
0
5
10
25
20
15
Pollution control
per year costs (dollars)
Years from time of initiation of controls
(a)
0
5
10
25
20
15
Impacts if controls
are not initiated
Impacts if controls
are initiated
Value of
benefits obtained
by controls
Health impacts and environmental
degradation per year costs (dollars)
Years from time of initiation of controls
0
5
10
25
20
15
Value of
benefits
Costs
Unfavorable
cost–benefit
ratio
Favorable cost–
benefit ratio
Costs for value of benefits (dollars)
Years from time of initiation of controls
(c)
20

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
future. The dollar value of these benefits is derived by estimat-
ing, for instance, the reduction in health care costs, the reduc-
tion in maintenance and replacement costs, and the economic 
value generated by the enhanced recreational activity. Exam-
ples of benefits are listed in Table 3.
The values of some benefits can be estimated fairly ac-
curately. For example, air-pollution episodes increase the 
number of people seeking medical attention. Because the med-
ical attention provided has a known dollar value, eliminating 
a certain number of air-pollution episodes provides a health 
benefit of that value.
Shadow Pricing. Many benefits, however, are diffi-
cult to estimate. Accurate benefit–cost analysis depends on 
assigning monetary values to every benefit, but how can a 
dollar value be put on maintaining the integrity of a coastal 
wetland or the enjoyment of breathing cleaner air? The 
 answer is to find out how much people are willing to pay 
to maintain these benefits. How can this be done, though, if 
there is no free market for the benefits? Again, economists 
have an answer: shadow pricing involves assessing what peo-
ple might pay for a particular benefit if it were up to them to 
decide. For example, to evaluate the costs of noise nuisance 
from aircraft (an external bad) in the vicinity of Schiphol 
Airport in Amsterdam, researchers evaluated the housing 
prices in the vicinity of many airports around the world and 
found that the closer the airport, and therefore the greater 
the noise, the lower the house value when  compared with 
similar houses farther away. In this case, the benefit is seen as 
being free from the nuisance of low-flying aircraft, and peo-
ple’s willingness to pay is seen in the price of houses.
Figure 15 Benefits and costs of major regula-
tions, 2000–2010. Clearly, the benefits of regulations far 
outweigh the costs of implementing the rules.
(Source: Office of Management and Budget, 2011 Report to Congress on 
the Benefits and Costs of Federal Regulations and Unfunded Mandates 
on State, Local and Tribal Entities, June 2011.)
Billions of 2001 Dollars
$0
$100
$50
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Fiscal Year
Benefits
Costs
tabLe 3 Benefits That May Be Gained by the Reduction or Prevention of Pollution
1. Improved human health
Reduction and prevention of pollution-related illnesses and premature deaths
Reduction of worker stress caused by pollution
Increased worker productivity
2. Improved agricultural and forest production
Reduction of pollution-related damage
More vigorous growth by removal of stress due to pollution
Higher farm profits, benefiting all agriculture-related industries
3. Enhanced commercial or sport fishing
Increased value of fish and shellfish harvests
Increased sales of boats, motors, tackle, and bait
Enhancement of businesses serving fishermen
4. Enhanced recreational opportunities
Direct uses, such as swimming and boating
Indirect uses, such as observing wildlife
Enhancement of businesses serving vacationers
5.  Extended lifetime of materials and less necessity  
for cleaning
Reduction of corrosive effects of pollution, extending the lifetime of metals, textiles, 
rubber, paint, and other coatings
Reduction of cleaning costs
6. Enhanced real estate values
Increased property values as the environment improves
21

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
The Value of Human Life. Shadow pricing becomes dif-
ficult when the analysis has to place a value on human life. 
Many of the pollutants to which people are exposed are 
hazardous, exacting a toll on health and life expectancy. To 
estimate the benefits of regulating such pollutants, it is neces-
sary to calculate how many lives will be saved or how many 
people will enjoy better health. The less the value that is put 
on a human life, the less the likelihood that a regulation will 
pass the benefit-cost test. Finding a value for these benefits is 
fraught with ethical difficulties. For example, the EPA calcu-
lated that new clean-air standards for ozone and particulates 
would prevent 18,700 premature deaths annually, and the 
monetary benefit of this prevention was valued at $110 bil-
lion (close to $6 million per life saved). Different approaches 
have resulted in a range of values for human life from tens of 
thousands of dollars to $10 million per life saved. Any benefit-
cost analysis that must factor in the risk to human life requires 
that human lives be valued somewhere within this very broad 
range. The OMB valued each cancer case at $5 million, each 
traffic fatality at $3 million, and each lost-workday injury at 
$50,000.
How does shadow pricing work for the nonhuman com-
ponents of natural environments—for a population of rare 
wildflowers, for example, or a wilderness site? The values 
of these things depend entirely on how willing people are 
to pay for their preservation. Again, monetary values must 
be assigned to their existence, and again, the outcome will 
be strongly influenced by a highly subjective element in the 
analysis.
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
Cost-effectiveness analysis is an alternative option for evalu-
ating the costs of regulations. Here the merits of the goal are 
accepted, and the question is: How can that goal be achieved 
at the least cost? To find out, alternative strategies for reach-
ing the goal are analyzed for costs, and the least costly 
method is adopted.
Cost-effectiveness can be applied to the desired level of 
pollution control. As Figure 13 shows, a significant benefit 
may be achieved by modest degrees of cleanup. Note, how-
ever, how differently the cost and benefit curves behave 
with increasing reduction of pollution. At some point in 
the cleanup effort, the lines cross and the costs exceed the 
benefits. Few additional benefits are realized when cleanup 
begins to approach 100%, yet costs increase exponentially. 
This behavior follows from the fact that living organisms—
including humans—can often tolerate a threshold level of 
pollution without ill effect. Therefore, reducing the level of a 
pollutant below its threshold level will not yield an observa-
ble improvement. Optimum cost-effectiveness that meets the 
efficiency criterion for public policy is achieved at the point 
where the benefit curve is the greatest distance above the cost 
curve.
However, the perspective of time should be considered 
in calculating cost-effectiveness (Fig. 14c). A situation that 
appears to be cost ineffective in the short term may prove 
extremely cost effective in the long term. This is particularly 
true for problems such as acid deposition and groundwater 
contamination from toxic wastes.
Progress
What has been the result of environmental regulation to 
date? Pollution of air and surface water reached critical lev-
els in many areas of the United States in the late 1960s, and 
since that time, huge sums of money have been spent on pol-
lution abatement. Benefit-cost analysis shows that, overall, 
these expenditures have paid for themselves many times over 
in decreased health care costs and enhanced environmental 
quality. Consider the phaseout of leaded gasoline as just one 
example. The project cost about $3.6 billion, according to an 
EPA benefit-cost report. Benefits were valued at more than 
$50 billion, $42 billion of which were for medical costs that 
were avoided!
The following are some of the accomplishments of envi-
ronmental public policy, as reported by the EPA:
 • From 1970 to 2011, total emissions of five principal air 
pollutants have decreased by a total of 67%.
 • Average blood levels of lead for children have declined 
more than 90% since 1980.
 • Between 1986 and 2010, releases of toxic chemicals, as 
reported to the Toxics Release Inventory, decreased 62%.
 • In 2010, states reported that 92% of the population on 
community water systems had drinking water that met 
all standards, as opposed to 79% in 1993.
 • Acid deposition has decreased by 41–69% over the 
past 18 years.
 • More than 413,000 leaking underground gasoline 
storage tanks have been cleaned up since 1988.
 • Between 1980 and 2011, 1,123 Superfund sites on the 
National Priorities List of highly contaminated locations 
have been completely cleaned up.
 • Recovery of municipal solid wasted by recycling has in-
creased from 7% in 1970 to 34.1% in 2010, diverting 
85 million tons away from disposal in 2010.
Between 1980 and 2010, these improvements occurred 
even as the GDP grew by 127%, the population rose by 
36%, and the number of motor vehicle miles driven in-
creased by 96%.
A benefit-cost analysis accompanies every new regulatory 
rule from the EPA and other federal agencies. Even when a rule 
is not classified as a major regulation, the accompanying docu-
mentation must demonstrate, by benefit-cost analysis, that the 
rule does not qualify as significant. Like it or not, benefit-cost 
analysis is now part of public policy in the United States.
5 Politics and the Environment
Given that environmental public policies exact a cost and 
can seriously affect businesses and private life, establishing 
and defending these policies can be a contentious affair. We 
22

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
have described the modern environmental movement and its 
corollary, environmentalism. Our brief look at this move-
ment pointed out that political battles have accompanied al-
most every environmental issue, and that is still the situation. 
Politics always accompanies policy.
Political Parties and the Battle for Control
In the first decades of the modern environmental move-
ment, pollution-control policies were enacted by broad, 
bipartisan coalitions and signed and implemented by 
Presidents of both parties. Grassroots citizen involvement 
played a key role in mobilizing this political accomplish-
ment. By the 1990s, however, a very well-articulated en-
vironmental backlash emerged. The conservative mood 
of the country that elected Ronald Reagan embraced a 
large ideological contingent that called for policy reform 
to reduce the regulation of industry so that market forces 
and private enterprise could be freed up “to move the 
economy forward.” The same contingent also defended 
private property rights threatened by programs like the 
Endangered Species Act and wetlands regulations. This 
movement viewed environmentalists as the enemy of free 
enterprise, responsible for promoting a false view of Earth 
as fragile and in crisis because of human mismanagement. 
The anti-environmental movement received the support of 
many new conservative legislators, and the result was grid-
lock in Congress.
The Republican-controlled 104th Congress (1995–
1996) continued this attack on the environment with an 
effort to dismantle many key laws, especially the Clean 
Water Act, the Clean Air Act, and Superfund. When it be-
came apparent what was happening, heavy grassroots 
work by many environmental organizations and extensive 
media coverage made it clear that the public did not sup-
port this anti- environmental thrust. As a result, most of 
the anti- environmental legislation of the 1990s died in the 
Senate or was vetoed by President Clinton. However, more 
recent Congresses have made it clear that environmental 
policy continues to be a sharply partisan matter, resulting 
in continued legislative gridlock. Anti-environmentalism 
now characterizes the Congressional Republicans, while the 
Democrats in the Congress are seen as pro-environment. 
The issues that most energize the current debate are global 
climate change and the EPA, although there is a broad scope 
of regulatory agencies and environmental legislation that 
have become the target of Congressional Republicans. They 
are aided and abetted by some powerful special interest lob-
bies and conservative media.
Special Interest Politics. The role and power of special in-
terest groups became evident during these struggles. In the 
1970s and 1980s, special interests (such as the coal industry 
and the fisheries industry) hired lobbyists who used their in-
fluence to try to convince congressional committee members 
to act in their favor on issues that were important to them. 
Environmental NGOs would then use the media to expose 
the issues to the public and call on their constituencies to 
telephone and send mail to their representatives in Congress. 
The anti-environmental interests caught on to the NGO 
strategy and began to mimic what they were doing, but more 
effectively because they had deeper pockets. Soon a constant 
battle between special interest groups emerged in which each 
would use the media and telephone calls (enhanced by phone 
banks, which can generate thousands of calls to legislators in 
a short period) to pressure members of Congress. Added to 
this picture was the massive explosion in campaign contribu-
tions, largely from businesses and industry.
What all this means is that environmental concerns 
are often a battle of special interest groups—that environ-
mental protection is seen as one among many interests in 
American politics. The issues are up for grabs, and protect-
ing the environment often depends largely on the strength 
of environmental interest groups. James Skillen, former ex-
ecutive director of the Center for Public Justice, says that 
this is a seriously flawed development. In this setting, eco-
logical well-being not only must have scientific proof of its 
validity, but also has to intrude into the political arena in 
competition with opposing special interests and win. Skil-
len believes that environmental justice—meaning the pro-
tection of land, air, water, and the associated biota—should 
not have to depend on an interest group for its advocacy. 
Rather, it is a matter of the public good and, as such, 
should be seen as a basic responsibility of government. To 
quote Skillen, “Recognition in basic law of the necessity of 
ecological health as the precondition of all public and mar-
ket relations should become as fundamental as the recog-
nition that certain human rights exist as the precondition 
of all public rules and market regulations.”9 The NGOs 
stepped into the gap because they found that doing so was 
necessary.
The Presidential Picture. Presidents have great power 
to influence national affairs, among them many that con-
cern the environment. Presidents appoint agency heads 
who are loyal to their administration, and the regulations 
that emerge from federal agencies understandably reflect 
the ideological makeup of the party in the White House. 
If lobbyists have access to important members of the ad-
ministration, they will have undue influence over agency 
rule making. Republican President George W. Bush (2000–
2008) identified himself as an environmentalist during the 
2000 presidential campaign. However, shortly after his 
election, he began a process of environmental policy redi-
rection. With the support of a host of anti-environmental 
special interests—such as the energy, timber, and mining 
industries; the construction industry; road builders; and 
“free-market” think tanks—Bush used the regulatory proc-
ess to make changes in environmental public policy. Many 
existing policies were weakened or canceled. Most promi-
nently, the Bush administration withdrew the United States 
9James Skillen, How Can We Do Justice to Both Public and Private Trusts? Paper 
presented at the Global Stewardship Initiative National Conference, Gloucester, 
MA, October 1996. Available at cesc.montreat.edu/GSI/GSI-Conf/discussion/ 
Skillen.html.
23

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
and energy efficiency. Because of Democratic Senate control, 
these votes fell on barren soil; Obama would have vetoed 
them anyway.
To conclude, we have seen a partisan struggle in recent 
years over the environment. It has involved special interest 
groups, Congress, Presidents, and their regulatory agencies. It 
is a battle of ideologies, and the outcome of the battle has enor-
mous consequences for the environment and for the public.
Citizen Involvement
How is the general public involved in environmental pub-
lic policy? The public is involved directly in public policy 
because not only are we the recipients of the outcome of 
the policies, but also we pay for the benefits we receive 
through higher taxes and higher costs of the products we 
consume. We should care deeply about public policies. 
And the evidence of polls indicates that the American 
public does care. A 2011 bipartisan survey10 showed that 
American voters overwhelmingly reject congressional ef-
forts to reign in the EPA and instead trust the EPA more 
than Congress to set clean air standards. This finding 
indicates a serious disconnect between many congres-
sional representatives and the people they are supposed to  
represent.
What can you do to have an impact on environmental 
public policy? Here are some suggestions:
 • Take note of the viewpoint of any political candidate on 
matters of environmental policy. Public concern about 
environmental policy can play an important role in the 
election or defeat of political candidates.
 • Contact your legislators to inform them of your support 
for a particular environmental public policy under con-
sideration by the Congress. You will very likely receive 
an acknowledgment of your concern, and if enough 
people do the same, your legislator is likely to reflect 
your views on the issue.
 • Become involved in local environmental problems. Local 
jurisdictions often have the power to make crucial deci-
sions affecting the environment, and groups of citizens 
working together can often make a difference in how the 
decisions go.
 • Become a member of an environmental NGO that in-
forms its constituencies of environmental concerns 
around the country and lobbies for those concerns.
 • Stay informed on environmental affairs; only when the 
public is informed is it likely that grassroots support will 
be maintained and environmental policy will really re-
flect public opinion. Incidentally, taking a course in en-
vironmental science is an excellent way to start getting 
informed!
from the Kyoto Protocol (an international agreement to 
curb greenhouse gas emissions), canceled support for in-
ternational family planning, softened air and water quality 
standards, and crafted an energy policy that favored heavy 
exploitation of fossil fuels.
In November 2008, a majority of the American elec-
torate voted Barack Obama, a Democrat, to the office 
of President. With the support of a decisive Democratic 
majority in the House and Senate between 2008 and 2010, 
Obama proceeded to reverse the Bush-era tide of anti-
environmental policies. Following are some of the most 
prominent actions:
 • Under Bush, federal scientists often had their work cen-
sored if it failed to conform to White House policy, es-
pecially in the realm of climate change; Obama issued a 
directive aimed at preventing any political interference 
in science—to ensure that “we make scientific decisions 
based on facts, not ideology,” in his words. The key 
word in this directive was integrity; scientific integrity 
was to be maintained in all executive departments and 
agencies.
 • The Bush EPA refused to act after the Supreme Court 
ruled that CO2 was a pollutant under the Clean Air 
Act and should be regulated if it is a health threat; 
the Obama EPA issued a finding that CO2 and other 
greenhouse gases pose a serious threat to public 
health and the environment because of their clear link 
to climate change. Subsequent regulatory rulings, like 
new fuel-economy standards, have implemented this 
finding.
 • A last-minute Bush rule abolished the requirement 
that federal agencies consult with wildlife experts be-
fore taking actions that could harm endangered spe-
cies; this requirement was reinstated by the Obama 
administration.
 • As a major tool for fixing the stalled economy, the 
 Stimulus Bill (the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of 2009) included more than $40 billion for clean 
energy and energy efficiency programs, the largest clean 
energy bill in U.S. history.
Mid-Term Blues
The easy days of a Democratic Congress and a Democratic 
administration came to an end with the mid-term elections 
of 2010. When the dust cleared, the House reestablished a 
Republican majority, while the Senate remained in Demo-
cratic control. Once again, the House began to pass a host 
of anti-environmental legislative bills and riders (a rider is 
a provision added to a bill that has little connection to the 
substance of the bill and would likely not pass if consid-
ered independently). In its first year of operation, the House 
voted to prohibit action on climate change, to stop actions 
to prevent water and air pollution, to undermine protections 
of coastal areas and other public lands, and to dismantle 
Obama administration initiatives promoting clean energy 
10Ayres McHenry Associates, Inc., American Voters Strongly Oppose Congres-
sional Action Against Clean Air Standards: Voters Want EPA, Not Congress, to 
Set Standards. http://www.lungusa.org/healthy-air/outdoor/resources/clean-air-
survey/clean-air-memo.pdf. August 16, 2011.
24

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
REVISITING THE THEMES
sound science
One component of the wealth of nations is intangible cap-
ital. Two elements of that capital are essential to main-
taining science as a key to coping with environmental 
issues: education and the accumulation of scientific information as part 
of the fund of human knowledge that can be transmitted across bounda-
ries of space and time. A truly wealthy nation will maintain a high level 
of scientific competence in its populace. The work of Sherwood Rowland 
and Mario Molina demonstrates the vital role science can play in the de-
velopment of public policy—in this case, leading to protection of Earth’s 
ozone shield. However, scientific integrity can be corrupted by politics, 
as seen in the workings of the George W. Bush administration, where 
scientists were silenced or had their work censored by politicians. The 
“new broom” of the Barack Obama administration has done much to 
restore scientific integrity in our federal offices.
sustainability
The ecological economists have made sustainability 
central to their economic theories. They rightly point out 
that the natural environment encompasses the economy. 
Therefore, there are limits to global economic growth that are set by the 
environment, and the economy must come to a steady state at some 
point. A nation must manage its assets, but it can’t do that unless it 
knows what they are and how to measure them. Depleting assets of any 
kind are a clear signal of unsustainable practice, and characteristic of the 
current business-as-usual brown economy. A future sustainable green 
economy must focus on human well-being, not growth. It will value and 
preserve ecosystem services and goods. It will develop a host of “green” 
products that will revolutionize our technologies. It will discard the 
GDP as a measure of economic progress. Instead, it may even embrace 
the GPI as a better measure of economic well-being. Without question, 
societies must develop effective environmental public policies if they are 
to prevent the millions of deaths and widespread disease that a lack of 
policies exacts. Laws to protect the environment are essential for achiev-
ing sustainability. This is well illustrated by the accomplishments of envi-
ronmental public policy as documented by the EPA.
stewardship
Table 2 demonstrates the consequences of poor environ-
mental stewardship; laws to protect the environment are 
not a luxury, but an essential foundation for a society. 
Former EPA Administrator Christine Todd Whitman (a Republican) 
introduced the agency’s Draft Report on the Environment 2003 with 
these words: “We are all stewards of this shared planet, responsible for 
protecting and preserving a precious heritage for our children and grand-
children. As long as we work together and stay firmly focused on our 
goals, I am confident we will make our air cleaner, our water purer, and 
our land better protected for future generations.” Environmental public 
policy over the past 40 years has accomplished much in achieving a safer 
and healthier environment. This represents our society’s clear commit-
ment to planetary stewardship.
s
T
m
n
Former EPA Ad
s
T
c
t
Therefore there
s
O
i
t
issues: educatio
1. What is happening these days in the Chinese economy and 
environment?
 2. Three patterns of environmental indicators are associated 
with differences in the level of development of a nation. What 
problems decline, what problems increase and then decline, 
and what problems increase with the level of development?
 3. Name three basic kinds of economic systems and explain 
how they differ.
 4. What is the role of the World Trade Organization, and how 
has this role broken down recently?
 5. What are some characteristics of a sustainable economy?
 6. Describe the three components of a nation’s wealth. What 
insights emerge from the World Bank’s analysis of the 
wealth of different groups of nations?
 7. Why is the gross national product an inaccurate indicator of 
a nation’s economic status? How can it be corrected?
 8. What conditions are necessary for a country to make 
progress in the development of human resources and pro-
duced assets?
 9. Explain the importance of considering both intragenera-
tional equity and intergenerational equity in addressing re-
source allocation issues.
REviEw QuEstions
10. What is the overall objective of environmental public policy, 
and what are the objective’s two most central concerns?
11. Describe the various bodies responsible for environmental 
public policy at the federal, state, and local levels.
12. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the regula-
tory approach versus a market approach to policy develop-
ment?
13. List the four stages of the policy life cycle, and show how 
the discovery of ozone layer destruction and the subsequent 
responses to it illustrate the cycle.
14. What is the conclusion of careful studies regarding the rela-
tionship between environmental policies, on the one hand, 
and jobs and the economy, on the other?
15. Define the term benefit–cost analysis as it relates to environ-
mental regulation. How does this analysis method address 
external costs? Distinguish it from cost-effectiveness analysis.
16. Discuss the cost-effectiveness of pollution control. How 
much progress have we made in pollution control in recent 
years?
17. How has the political arena affected environmental public 
policy in the last few years? What has been the role of spe-
cial interest groups? Political parties? Presidents?
25

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
thinking EnviRonmEntally
 1. Consider the ultimate impact that environmental law has 
on the economy. Do short-term drawbacks justify long-term 
goals? If there is a conflict, which should come first—the 
economy or the environment?
 2. Research the Doha Round of meetings of the World Trade 
Organization. Analyze the positions of the developing coun-
tries and the industrial countries, and propose a solution 
that might meet the concerns of both groups.
 3. Examine the three types of capital that make up the wealth 
of nations. Which do you think is the most valuable? Justify 
your answer.
 4. What different roles do you think the federal and state 
governments should have in environmental policy?
 5. Suppose it was discovered that the bleach that is commonly 
used for laundry is carcinogenic. Referring to the policy life 
cycle, describe a predictable course of events until the prob-
lem is brought under control.
making a DiffEREncE
 1. Our government makes the decisions that have the big-
gest long-term effects on the environment. Find a cause 
that you feel strongly about, and find a way to support it. 
Demonstrating is easier than it sounds—you don’t neces-
sarily have to drive a hundred miles to join in some kind 
of march. It’s easy to join an online movement (for exam-
ple, visit www.StopGlobalWarming.org) or write a letter 
to a senator.
 2. Help call attention to instances of pollution in your com-
munity. You can talk to regulators in the county health 
department, the EPA, or whoever is in charge of monitor-
ing pollution in your region. It’s their job to listen.
 3. Instead of taking a long-distance vacation and relaxing during 
your break, join a volunteer group and get something done. 
There are many opportunities to help out.
 4. Find out the costs and benefits of your own lifestyle on a 
purely economic level. Decide what other changes you could 
make to save you money and save the environment at the 
same time.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cREDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top): Lou Linwei / Alamy; (bottom left): Martha Bayona/iStockphoto; PETER 
PARKS/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom; KIM STALLKNECHT/AFP/Newscom; (left): 
Toklo/iStockphoto; (center): Noah Poritz/MacroWorld/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 
(right): David Weintraub/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (left): fstockfoto/Shutterstock; 
(center): Frontpage/Shutterstock; (top right): VisualField/iStockphoto; (top right): 
AP Photo; (top left): John Craig/Bureau of Land Management; (top right): Dainis 
Derics/Shutterstock
Text Credits
Table 1: “Total Wealth and Per Capita Wealth By Type of Wealth, 2005 (Table 1),” 
from World Bank: World Development Report; Figure 2: Source: Based on World 
Development Report 1992; Figure 7: Source: Based on “The Genuine Progress 
Indicator 2006: A Tool for Sustainable Development,” by John Talberth, Clifford 
Cobb, and Noah Slattery, from Redefining Progress, 2006; Figure 15: Source: Office 
of Management and Budget. 
26

Economics, Politics, and Public Policy
benefit-cost analysis A comparison of the benefits of any particular 
action or project to its costs. (See cost-benefit ratio.)
capital In classical economic theory, one of the three factors of 
production (alongside land and labor); more broadly, any form 
of wealth. See intangible capital, ecosystem capital and natural 
capital.
centrally planned economy An economic system in which a ruling 
class makes most of the basic decisions about how the economy 
will be structured; typical of communist countries.
discount rate In economics, a rate applied to some future benefit 
or cost in order to calculate its present real value.
Doha Development Round Negotiations for trade begun in 2001 
with the objective of lowering trade barriers around the world.
ecological economist An economist who thoroughly integrates 
ecological and economic concerns; part of a new breed of 
economist who disagrees with classical economic theory.
economics The social science that deals with the production, 
distribution, and consumption of goods and services.
economic production As seen by ecological economists, economic 
production is the process of converting the natural world to the 
manufactured world.
economic systems The social and legal arrangements people in 
societies construct in order to satisfy their needs and wants and 
improve their well-being.
economy See economic systems.
equity An ethical principle where people’s needs are met in an 
impartial and just manner.
executive branch That facet of the government in the United States 
consisting of the president, his cabinet, and all administrative 
agencies.
external cost, externality Any effect of a business process not 
included in the usual calculations of profit and loss. Pollution 
of air or water is an example of a negative externality—one that 
imposes a cost on society that is not paid for by the business itself.
free-market economy In its purest form, an economy in which the 
market itself determines what and how goods will be exchanged. 
The system is wholly in private hands.
Genuine Progress Indicator (GPI) An alternative measure of 
economic progress, the GPI calculates positive and negative 
economic activities, to reach a more realistic view of sustainable 
economic activity. It is an alternative to the gross domestic 
product.
human capital See intangible capital.
intangible capital One component of the wealth of nations. 
Comprises the human capital, or the population and its attributes; 
the social capital, or the social and political environment that 
people have created in a society; and the knowledge assets, or the 
human fund of knowledge.
judicial branch One of the three branches of government set up 
by the U.S. constitution, involving a system of judges at various 
levels on up to the Supreme Court.
knowledge assets See intangible capital.
labor In classical economic theory, one of the three elements that 
constitute the factors of production: the work done by people as 
they produce goods or services.
land In classical economic theory, one of the three elements that 
constitute the factors of production: the natural resources used in 
the production of goods and services.
legislative branch One of the three branches of government set 
up by the U.S. constitution, the legislative branch consists of the 
House of Representatives and the Senate, all members of which 
are voted into office by the people of different states.
natural capital The natural assets and the services they perform. 
One form of the wealth of a nation is its complement of natural 
capital.
Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES) A market-based system 
that pays owners who hold properties that provide valuable 
services.
produced capital The stock of buildings, machinery, vehicles, and 
other elements of a country’s infrastructure that are essential to 
the production of economic goods and services. One component 
of the wealth of nations.
social capital See intangible capital.
state capitalism A hybrid economic system with elements of both 
central planning and free-market economic systems, seen in 
China, Russia, and many Gulf oil states.
value added The increase in value from raw materials to final 
production.
glossaRy
27

This page intentionally left blank 

Science 
and the 
Environment
From Chapter 1 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Learning Objectives
 1. The State of the Planet: Explain 
the main reasons for concern 
about the health of our planet 
today.
 2. Environmental Science and 
the Environmental Movement: 
Describe what the environmental 
movement has achieved in recent 
years, and explain how envi-
ronmental science has greatly 
contributed to the environmental 
movement.
 3. Three Unifying Themes: Define 
sustainability, sound science, and 
stewardship, the three unifying 
themes in environmental science.
 4. Moving Toward a Sustainable 
Future: List trends that must be 
overcome in order to pursue a 
sustainable future and trends 
that promote sustainability. 
Science and the 
Environment
T
here was once a town in the heart of America where all life seemed to live 
in harmony with its surroundings. The town lay in the midst of a checker-
board of prosperous farms, with fields of grain and hillsides of orchards 
where, in spring, white clouds of blossom drifted above the green fields. . . . The 
countryside was, in fact, famous for the abundance and variety of its bird life, 
and when the flood of migrants was pouring through in spring and fall people 
traveled from great distances to observe them. . . . So it had been from the days 
many years ago when the first settlers raised their houses, sank their wells, and 
built their barns.1”
These are words from the classic Silent Spring, written by biologist Rachel 
Carson (Fig. 1) to open her first chapter, titled “A Fable for Tomorrow.” After paint-
ing this idyllic picture, the chapter goes on to describe “a strange blight” that 
began to afflict the town and its surround-
ing area. Fish died in streams, farm animals 
sickened and died, families were plagued with 
illnesses and occasional deaths. The birds had 
disappeared, their songs no longer heard—it 
was a “silent spring.” And on the roofs and lawns 
and fields remnants of a white powder could still 
be seen, having fallen from the skies a few 
weeks before.
Rachel Carson explained that no such town 
 existed, but that all of the problems she described had 
already happened somewhere, and that there was the 
very real danger that “. . . this imagined tragedy may  easily 
become a stark reality we all shall know.”2 She  published her 
book in 1962, during an era when pesticides and  herbicides 
1Rachel Carson, Silent Spring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, pp. 1, 2.
2Ibid., p. 3.
“
30

were sprayed widely on the landscape to  control pests in 
 agricultural crops, forests, and towns and  cities (Fig. 2). In Si-
lent Spring, Carson was particularly  critical of the widespread 
spraying of DDT. This pesticide was used to control Dutch elm 
disease, a fungus that invades trees and eventually kills them. 
The fungus is spread by elm bark beetles, and DDT was used 
to kill the beetles. In towns that employed DDT spraying, birds 
began dying off, until in some areas people reported their yards 
were empty of birds. Many thousands of songbirds were recov-
ered dead and analyzed in laboratories for DDT content; all had 
toxic levels in their tissues. DDT was also employed in spraying 
salt marshes for mosquito control, and the result was a drastic 
reduction in the fish-eating bald eagle and osprey.
FaLLOut. Rachel Carson brought two important qualities 
to her work: she was very careful to document every finding 
reported in the book, and she had a high degree of personal cour-
age. She was sure of her scientific claims, and she was willing to 
take on the establishment and defend her work. In spite of the 
fact that her work was thoroughly documented, the book ignited 
a firestorm of criticism from the chemical and agricultural estab-
lishment. Even respected institutions such as the American Medi-
cal Association joined in the attack against her.
Despite this criticism, Carson’s book caught the public’s 
eye, and it quickly made its way to the President’s Science 
Advisory Committee when John F. Kennedy read a serialized 
version of it in the New Yorker. Kennedy charged the com-
mittee with studying the pesticide problem and recommend-
ing changes in public policy. In 1963, Kennedy’s committee 
made recommendations that fully supported Carson’s thesis. 
Congress began holding hearings, public debate followed, 
and Carson’s voice was joined by others who called for new 
policies to deal not only with pesticides, but also with air and 
water pollution and more protection for wild areas. Finally, 
in 1969, Congress passed a bill known as the Environmental 
Policy Act, the first legislation to recognize the interconnect-
edness of ecological systems and human enterprises. Shortly 
after that, a commission appointed by President Richard Nixon 
to study environmental policy recommended the creation of 
a new agency that would be responsible for dealing with air, 
water, solid waste, the use of pesticides, and radiation stand-
ards. The new agency, called the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA), was given a mandate to protect the environ-
ment against pressures from other governmental agencies and 
from industry, on behalf of the public. The year was 1970, the 
same year that 20 million Americans celebrated the first Earth 
Day.
In what must be seen as a triumph of Rachel Carson’s work, 
DDT was banned in the United States and most other industrialized 
countries in the early 1970s. Unfortunately, Rachel Carson did not 
live long after her world-shaking book was published; she died of 
breast cancer in 1964. Her legacy, however, is a lasting one: she is 
credited not only with major reforms in pesticide policy, but with 
initiating an environmental awareness that eventually led to the 
modern  environmental movement and the creation of the EPA. 
MOving On. This is a story of science and the environment, 
but it is more than that; it is a story of a courageous woman who 
changed the course of history. In this chapter, we briefly explore 
the current condition of our planet and then introduce three 
themes that provide structure to the primary goal of this text: to 
promote a sustainable future.
Figure 1 Rachel Carson. 
Figure 2 Aerial spraying of pesticide on a tree farm. 
31

Science and the Environment
1  A Paradox: What Is the Real 
State of the Planet?
Paradox (n.): A statement exhibiting contradictory or in-
explicable aspects or qualities.3 A group of scientists from 
McGill University recently published a paper in which they 
identified a so-called environmentalist’s paradox.4 The para-
dox, they said, is this: over the past 40 years, human well-
being has been steadily improving, while natural ecosystems 
(from which we derive many goods and services) have been 
declining.
To explain this paradox, the authors advanced four 
 hypotheses:
1. The measurements of human well-being are flawed; it is 
actually declining.
2. Food production, a crucial ecosystem service that has 
been enhanced, outweighs the effects of declines in other 
ecosystem services.
3. Human technology makes us less dependent on ecosys-
tem services.
4. There is a time lag between ecosystem decline and 
human well-being; the worst is yet to come.
We will take a brief look at four important global trends 
and keep in mind these hypotheses (the scientific method 
and  hypotheses are explained later in the chapter) as we 
 engage in our initial examination of the state of our planet: 
(1) human population and well-being, (2) the status of vital 
ecosystem services, (3) global climate change, and (4) a loss 
of biodiversity. 
Population Growth and Human Well-Being
The world’s human population, more than 7.1 billion in 
2013, has grown by 2 billion in just the past 25 years. It is 
continuing to grow, at the rate of about 80 million persons 
per year. Even though the growth rate (now 1.2 %/year) 
is gradually slowing, the world population in 2050 could be 
9.3 billion, according to the most recent projections from 
the United Nations (UN) Population Division (Fig. 3). The 
2.2 billion persons added to the human population by 2050 
will all have to be fed, clothed, housed, and, hopefully, sup-
ported by gainful  employment. Virtually all of the increase 
will be in developing countries.
Human Development Index. Each year since 1990, the 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP) has pub-
lished a Human Development Report.5 A key part of the 
report is the Human Development Index (HDI), a compre-
hensive  assessment of human well-being in most countries of 
the world. With this index, well-being is measured in health, 
education, and basic living standards. In the 2010  report, 
worldwide trends in HDI were plotted over the 40  years 
since 1970 (Fig. 4). Even though there are some countries 
showing little or no progress, most of the 135  countries 
 analyzed show marked improvement over the past 40 years. 
It is this overall progress that has provided one side of the 
 environmentalist’s paradox. During that time, life expectancy 
rose from 59  years to 70, school enrollment climbed from 
55% to 70%, and per capita gross domestic product (GDP) 
doubled to more than $10,000. There has also been signifi-
cant progress in the number of countries achieving demo-
cratic rule. Studies have shown that the HDI correlates well 
with other indicators of well-being, such as literacy, gender 
equality, and overall “happiness.” As a result of these facts, 
the McGill team concluded that its first hypothesis is not 
supported; there are too many indications that human well-
being has indeed improved markedly.
Is It All Good? However, overall progress can, and does, 
mask serious inequalities. Economic growth has been ex-
tremely unequal, both between and within countries. And 
there are huge gaps in human development across the world, 
as Figure 4 shows. For example, in developing countries, an 
estimated 1.29 billion people still experience extreme pov-
erty,  existing on an income of $1.25 a day. More than 925 
million people—one out of every five in developing coun-
tries—remain undernourished. Some 8.1 million children 
per year do not live to see their fifth birthday. Addressing 
these tragic outcomes of severe poverty has been a major 
concern of the UNDP, and in 2000, all UN member coun-
tries adopted a set of goals—the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs)—to reduce extreme poverty and its effects 
on human well-being If the goals are achieved by the tar-
get date of 2015, more than 400 million people will be lifted 
out of extreme  poverty, and many millions of lives will be 
saved. Indeed, much progress has already been made in many 
3From Webster’s II New College Dictionary. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 
1995.
4Ciara Raudsepp-Hearne et al., Untangling the Environmentalist’s Paradox: Why 
Is Human Well-Being Increasing as Ecosystem Services Degrade? Bioscience 60: 
576–589. September 2010.
5United Nations Development Program, Human Development Report 2010: The 
Real Wealth of Nations. New York: UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org. August 30, 2011.
Figure 3 World population explosion. World population started a 
rapid growth phase in the early 1800s and has increased sixfold in the past 200 
years. It is growing by 80 million people per year. Future projections are based on 
assumptions that birthrates will continue to decline. (Data from UN Population 
Division, 2010 revision, and from Population Reference Bureau reports.)
2000
A.D.
2500
A.D.
1500
A.D.
1000
A.D.
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2100
2043
2024
2011
1999
1987
1975
1960
1930
1830
Billions of people
Year
32

Science and the Environment
Is the prospect of 2.2 billion more people by 2050 a 
recipe for disaster? Can we feed that many more people? 
Certainly we have demonstrated our ability to continue to 
feed a growing human population, but at what cost to the 
environment? Are there enough energy and water and other 
ecosystem resources for 2.2 billion more of us?
Ecosystem Goods and Services
Natural and managed ecosystems support human life and 
economies with a range of goods and services. As crucial 
as they are, there is evidence that these vital resources are 
not being managed well. Around the world, human societies 
are depleting groundwater supplies, degrading agricultural 
soils, overfishing the oceans, and cutting forests faster than 
they can regrow. The world economy depends heavily on 
many renewable resources, as we exploit these systems for 
goods—fresh water (water with less than 0.1% salt), all of 
our food, much of our fuel, wood for lumber and paper, 
leather, furs, raw materials for fabrics, oils and alcohols, 
and much more. Just three sectors—agriculture, forestry, 
and fishing—are responsible for 50% of all jobs worldwide 
and 70% of all jobs in sub-Saharan Africa, eastern Asia, 
and the Pacific islands.
These same ecosystems also provide a flow of services 
that support human life and economic well-being, such as 
the breakdown of waste, regulation of the climate, erosion 
control, pest management, maintenance of crucial nutrient 
cycles, and so forth. In a very real sense, these goods and 
services can be thought of as capital—ecosystem capital. 
Human well-being and economic development are absolutely 
dependent on the products of this capital—its income, so to 
speak. As a result, the stock of ecosystem capital in a nation 
and its income-generating capacity represents a major form 
of the wealth of the nation These goods and services are pro-
vided year after year, as long as the ecosystems producing 
them are protected.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Launched on 
World Environment Day, 2001, the Millennium Ecosystem 
Assessment (ME) took four years to gather available infor-
mation on the state of ecosystems across the globe. This 
monumental effort involved some 1,360 scientists from 
95 countries gathering, analyzing, and synthesizing informa-
tion from published, peer-reviewed research. The project fo-
cused especially on the linkages between ecosystem services 
and human well-being on global, regional, and local scales. 
Ecosystem goods and services (see Table 1) were grouped 
into provisioning services (goods like food and fuel), regu-
lating services (processes like flood protection), and cultural 
services (nonmaterial benefits like recreation). The reports 
are now published and are also available on the Internet.
In a summary report,6 the most prominent finding of the 
scientists was the widespread abuse and overexploitation of 
ecosystem resources. Humans have altered the world’s eco-
developing countries, as signaled by the overall rise in the 
HDI values.
Virtually all of the discouraging issues outlined by the 
UNDP are most severe in developing countries, where popu-
lation growth and fertility rates remain high. There is no 
doubt that these challenges will be easier to meet if popu-
lation growth is brought down. When other countries have 
lowered their population growth, they have also made great 
advances in education, health care, and greater freedom and 
opportunities for women.
Figure 4 Human Development Index, 1970–2010. Advances in 
the HDI have occurred across all regions and almost all countries. The fastest 
progress has been in East Asia and the Pacific, followed by South Asia. All but 
three of the 135 countries have a higher level of human development today than 
in 1970.
Zimbabwe
DR Congo
Zambia
Nepal
Oman
Russia
China
Indonesia
Guatemala
Saudi Arabia
Japan
1.0
HDI 
Year
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Z
N
I
G
O
Z
Z
D
R
C
I
C
Z
6Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Ecosystems and Human Well-Being:  Synthesis. 
Washington, DC: Island Press, 2005.
33

Science and the Environment
to substitute for natural goods and services (e.g., irrigation, 
artificial fertilizers, improved sanitation), and (4) the exist-
ence of a time lag between the loss of goods and services 
and their impact on human well-being, with the possibil-
ity of exceeding limits and bringing on ecosystem collapse. 
The McGill University team concluded that these last two 
hypotheses also help explain the environmentalist’s paradox, 
although not as clearly as hypothesis 2. They concluded that 
the paradox is not fully explained by any of the hypotheses, 
although hypothesis 1 was rejected. It also concluded that 
ecosystem conditions are indeed continuing to decline, with 
unknown and perhaps severe impacts on human well-being 
in the future. The most serious concern, one that affects all 
ecosystems, is global climate change.
Global Climate Change
The global economy runs on fossil fuel. Every day in 2012 we 
burned some 89 million barrels of oil, 340 billion cubic feet 
of natural gas, and 17 million tons of coal. All of this com-
bustion generates carbon dioxide (CO2), which is released to 
the atmosphere at a rate of 80 million tons a day. Because of 
past and present burning of fossil fuels, the CO2 content of 
the atmosphere increased from 280 parts per million (PPM) 
in 1900 to 395 PPM in 2012. For the past decade, the level of 
atmospheric CO2 has increased by 2 PPM per year, and given 
our dependency on fossil fuels, there is no end in sight.
Carbon dioxide is a natural component of the lower 
atmosphere, along with nitrogen and oxygen. It is required 
by plants for photosynthesis and is important to the Earth- 
atmosphere energy system. Carbon dioxide gas absorbs 
systems more rapidly and profoundly over the past 50 years 
than at any time in human history. More than 60% of the 
classes of ecosystem goods and services assessed by the 
team are being degraded or used unsustainably (Table 1). 
The scientists concluded that if this is not reversed, the next 
half-century could see deadly consequences for humans as 
the ecosystem services that sustain life are further degraded. 
The overall intent of the project is to build a knowledge 
base for sound policy decisions and management interven-
tions; it remains for policy makers and managers to act on 
that knowledge.
However, one type of provisioning ecosystem services 
has actually been enhanced over recent years: the production 
of crops, livestock, and aquaculture. This production has 
more than kept pace with population growth, meeting the 
basic needs of people everywhere and improving nutrition 
for millions. Consequently, human well-being has benefited 
from the increased food provisioning services, as shown by 
increases in life expectancy and health improvements. These 
benefits apparently outweigh the costs of ecosystem decline, 
although the loss of certain goods and services has had seri-
ous impacts on human well-being.
Paradox Resolved? The McGill team set out to explain 
the environmentalist’s paradox—the fact that human well-
being has been improving while natural ecosystems have 
been declining. It rejected hypothesis 1, which stated that 
human well-being is actually declining. The team concluded 
that hypothesis 2 was confirmed: enhanced food production 
outweighs the effects of declines in other ecosystem services. 
Two further hypotheses remain: (3) our use of technology 
tabLe 1
The Global Status of Ecosystem Services. Human use has degraded almost two-thirds of these identified 
services; 20% are mixed, meaning they are degraded in some areas and enhanced in others; and 17% have 
been enhanced by human use.
Ecosystem Services
Degraded
Mixed
Enhanced
Provisioning
(goods obtained from 
ecosystems)
Capture fisheries
Wild foods
Wood fuel
Genetic resources
Biochemicals
Fresh water
Timber
Fiber
Crops
Livestock
Aquaculture
Regulating
(services obtained from the 
regulation of ecosystem 
processes)
Air quality regulation
Regional and local climate  
 regulation
Erosion regulation
Water purification
Pest regulation
Pollination
Natural hazard regulation
Water regulation (flood  
 protection, aquifer recharge)
Disease regulation
Carbon sequestration (trapping  
 atmospheric carbon in trees, etc.)
Cultural
(nonmaterial benefits from 
ecosystems)
Spiritual and religious values
Aesthetic values
Recreation and ecotourism 
Source: Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Synthesis. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2005.
34

Science and the Environment
responsibility to report its assessment of climate change 
at five-year  intervals. The latest of these assessments, the 
Fourth Assessment Report (FAR), was released during 2007. 
The work of thousands of scientific expert reviewers and 
 hundreds of  authors, this assessment produced convincing 
evidence of human-induced global warming that is  already 
severely affecting global climate. Polar ice is  melting at 
an  unprecedented rate, glaciers are retreating, storms are 
increasing in intensity, and sea level is rising. Because the 
oceans are absorbing half of the CO2 being emitted, the 
seawater is becoming more acid; the Sound Science essay 
“When Oysters Became  Canaries” explores one conse-
quence of ocean acidification. The IPCC concluded that fu-
ture climate change could be catastrophic if something is not 
done to bring the rapidly rising emission of CO2 and other 
 greenhouse gases under control. With few exceptions, the 
scientists who have studied these phenomena have reached 
a clear consensus: this is a huge global problem, and it must 
be addressed on a  global scale.
Responses. There are real solutions to this problem, but 
they are not easy. The most obvious need is to reduce glo-
bal CO2 emissions (called mitigation). At issue for many 
countries is the conflict between the short-term economic 
impacts of reducing the use of fossil fuels and the long-term 
consequences of climate change for the planet and all its in-
habitants. Future climate changes are likely to disrupt the 
ecosystem goods and services essential to human well-being, 
and because the extreme poor depend especially on natural 
ecosystems, they will suffer disproportionately. International 
agreements to reduce greenhouse gas emissions have been 
forged, and some limited mitigation has been achieved.
Most observers believe that the best course forward is to 
aim toward an effective, binding international treaty to re-
duce emissions, but on a more immediate scale, for countries 
to act independently. The United States has backed away from 
any binding treaties, but the government is moving forward 
to regulate greenhouse gas emissions under existing air pol-
infrared (heat) energy radiated from Earth’s surface, thus 
slowing the loss of this energy to space. The absorption of 
infrared energy by CO2 and other gases warms the lower 
 atmosphere in a phenomenon known as the greenhouse 
 effect. This  effect is well known, and the greenhouse gases 
keep Earth at hospitable temperatures as they trap heat. 
 Although the concentration of CO2 is a small percentage of 
the atmospheric gases, increases in the volume of this gas 
 affect temperatures. Figure 5 graphs changes in carbon di-
oxide from 1958 to the present, and Figure 6 shows changes 
in global temperature since 1880. Both of these parameters 
are increasing—and rather steeply. This is not proof that 
the CO2 caused the  increase, but the argument based on the 
known greenhouse effect is quite convincing.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) was established by the UN in 1988 and given the 
Figure 5 Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. This 
record of CO2 has been measured at the Mauna Loa Observatory since 1958. The 
atmospheric content of CO2 has risen by 41% since the Industrial Revolution began.
(Source: Mauna Loa Observatory, Hawaii, NOAA Research Laboratory, Scripps Institution of 
Oceanography)
Atmospheric CO2 at Mauna Loa Observatory
Year
Parts per million
Scripps Institution of Oceanography
NOAA Earth System Research Laboroatory
1960
380
360
340
320
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Figure 6 Global temperatures 
since 1880. This plot shows the course of 
global temperatures as recorded by thousands 
of stations around the world. The baseline, 
or zero point, is the 20th century average 
temperature.
(Source: National Climatic Data Center, NOAA, 2011)
Annual Global Land and Ocean Temperature Anomalies
Anomaly (°C)
0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0
Anomaly (°F)
0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.2
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
0.4
35

Science and the Environment
SounD SCIEnCE
When oysters Became Canaries
Oysters are big busi-
ness on the U.S. West 
Coast, netting some 
$85 million a year 
and employing 3,000 
workers. The oyster of choice on that coast is 
Crassostrea gigas, a native of Japanese waters 
imported many years ago and planted in many 
coastal waters. Because this oyster species 
needs warm water in order to spawn and West 
Coast  waters are cold, oyster farms purchase 
so-called “seed, ” young oysters 2 to 3 mm 
in diameter that are raised in hatcheries (see 
illustration). They then “plant” the seed on 
selected sandy banks or in special trays that 
are suspended in coastal embayments, and the 
oysters grow to maturity in a year or two as 
they feed on natural food in the saline waters. 
Sue Cudd, co-owner of Whiskey Creek Shellfish 
Hatchery on Netarts Bay, Oregon, ships out 
millions of oyster seed on a good day to oyster 
farmers.
 At Whiskey Creek, oysters spawn under labo-
ratory conditions. A female oyster produces mil-
lions of eggs, which are then fertilized by male 
oysters. The fertile eggs, now held in tanks, de-
velop into swimming larvae, which start to form 
shells as they grow. The larvae settle down as 
they grow into “seed” oysters; all this time they 
have been bathed in filtered coastal seawater 
and provided with microscopic algae for food.
Unfortunately, the good days at Whiskey 
Creek came to a halt in the summer of 2007. 
During this time, oyster larvae and seed oysters 
began dying off, sometimes simply disappear-
ing from the incubation tanks. Owners Cudd 
and her husband, Mark Wiegardt, immediately 
started looking for the culprit; they quickly 
identified a naturally occurring pathogenic bac-
terium, Vibrio tubiashii, that had become estab-
lished in their tanks. They installed an expensive 
filtration system that removed the bacteria from 
incoming water, but the larvae continued to die. 
So it wasn’t a pathogen killing the baby oysters.
Then, in July 2008, all of the remaining lar-
vae in their tanks suddenly died. At the same 
time, the bay water brought into the tanks had 
turned acidic and colder. The timing was the key; 
this was water that had recently been brought 
up to the surface as offshore winds pushed the 
warmer surface water away, a process called 
upwelling. The pH of the upwelled water was in 
the range of 7.5; normal surface seawater pH is 
around 8.5, a 10-fold difference in acidity. The 
reason for the acidic waters was high concentra-
tions of CO2, released as plankton died and sank 
to the deeper waters and decomposed. However, 
new studies by oceanographers showed that 
waters rising from Pacific Ocean depths hold 
the CO2 from normal decomposition plus CO2 
absorbed from the atmosphere of past decades; 
the oceans have been acidified as they have 
been absorbing atmospheric CO2. It has been 
well understood for some years now that the 
oceans have taken up at least half of the CO2 
released as fossil fuels have been burned over 
the past 250 years. Now it begins to appear that 
ocean acidification is well under way and is now 
beginning to affect shellfish.
The solution for the Whiskey Creek Hatch-
ery owners was now clear; they had to avoid 
the acidic waters that could simply dissolve 
away the thin shells of the young oysters. They 
installed chemical monitors that measured the 
CO2 and pH of incoming waters and were able 
to time water withdrawals to daytime hours 
when natural algae were removing CO2 from 
the water for photosynthesis and avoid recently 
upwelled and nighttime hours where CO2 levels 
were elevated and pH lowered. Whiskey Creek 
Hatchery has recovered, and seed oysters are 
being shipped out once again. For a time, their 
oyster larvae were the  “canary in the cage,” 
a term that refers to the old practice by coal 
miners of bringing cages of canaries down into 
the mines with them. Because canaries are 
more sensitive to coal gas than are humans, 
the miners would quickly leave the mines if 
the canaries began dying. The oyster larvae 
were an early sign of a process that is now 
under way and looks to become increasingly 
serious—ocean acidification. As acidification 
intensifies, it is likely that more sturdy shellfish 
will succumb to the rising acid conditions, and 
whole coastal and coral ecosystems could be 
degraded, perhaps to the point of no return. 
The solution? Reduce the carbon emissions 
from burning fossil fuels
O
n
C
$
a
lution laws and to encourage renewable energy  development. 
Without doubt, this is one of the defining environmental  
issues of the 21st century. 
Loss of Biodiversity
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) defines bio-
diversity as “the variability among living organisms from all 
sources including terrestrial, marine, other aquatic ecosys-
tems, and the ecological complexes of which they are part; 
this includes diversity within species, between species and 
of ecosystems.”7 The rapidly growing human population, 
with its growing appetite for food, water, timber, fiber, and 
fuel, is accelerating the conversion of forests, grasslands, 
and wetlands to agriculture and urban development. The 
inevitable result is the loss of many of the wild plants and 
animals that occupy those natural habitats.  Pollution also de-
grades habitats— particularly aquatic and marine habitats— 
eliminating the species they support. Further, hundreds of 
species of mammals, reptiles, amphibians, fish, birds, and 
butterflies, as well as innumerable plants, are  exploited for 
their commercial value. Even when species are protected 
by law, many are hunted, killed, and marketed illegally. 
 According to the Global Biodiversity Outlook 3 (GBO 3) 
 assessment,8 the majority of wild plant and animal species 
are declining in their range and/or population size.
As a result, Earth is rapidly losing many of its species, 
although no one knows exactly how many. About 2 million 
7Convention on Biological Diversity. Text of Convention, Article 2. Use of Terms. 
http://www.cbd.int/convention/articles/?a=cbd-02
8Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Global Biodiversity 
Outlook 3. Montreal. 2010. www.cbd.int/gbo3. September 5, 2011.
36

Science and the Environment
that provide sustenance for 7 billion people. We have learned 
how to convert natural materials into an endless number of 
manufactured goods and structures, all useful for the success-
ful building of cities, roadways, vehicles, and all that makes 
up a 21st-century human world. We have successfully tapped 
into the abundant pool of carbon-based fuels laid down in 
the geological past, using it for energy to produce electricity, 
heat our homes, power our vehicles, and manufacture our 
products. All of these successes, however, carry with them 
hazards. Burning fossil fuels creates air pollutants that can 
make us sick and even raise the temperature of our planet; 
using chemicals to control diseases and pests leaves a residue 
of contaminants that can poison whole food chains—and 
ourselves; overharvesting forests and fisheries can lead to 
their collapse, erasing vital services that natural ecosystems 
provide.
Human actions have negative effects on the environment 
in two broad categories: cumulative impacts and unintended 
consequences. Sometimes we simply do too much of any 
one activity—too much burning, too much tree cutting, too 
much mining on steep slopes. Activities that would not pose 
a problem if a few people engaged in them are big problems 
if millions of people do. Sometimes it isn’t the accumulation 
of an activity; it is that we are not paying attention to how 
the world works. There are unintended consequences of using 
chemical pesticides, as we’ve seen, or of putting trash dumps in 
wetlands. This is where environmental science comes in. Sim-
ply put,  environmental science is the study of how the world 
works. Scientists help figure out ways to lower the negative im-
pacts of our actions, to find alternative ways to meet the same 
needs, and to better anticipate the likely effects of what we are 
doing.
All sorts of disciplines contribute to environmental  science: 
history, engineering, geology, physics, medicine,  biology, and so-
ciology, to name a few. It is perhaps the most multidisciplinary 
of all sciences. As you study environmental science, you have an 
opportunity to engage in something that can change your life 
and that will certainly equip you to better understand the world 
you live in now and will encounter in the future.
The Environmental Movement
To understand how the world works today, we need some 
sense of history. Although what we now term the environ-
mental movement began less than 60 years ago, it had its 
roots in the late 19th century, when some people realized that 
the unique, wild areas of the United States were disappearing.
The history of the environmental movement in the 
United States has been one in which environmental degrada-
tion, resource misuse, and disastrous events sparked scien-
tific study and sometimes grassroots action. Scientific study 
yielded information on how the world works. Individuals 
and groups worked as stewards to make changes. Policies 
were put into place to better protect resources and people 
from environmental degradation. Figure 7 is a timeline of 
some of the events and scientific findings, people, and policies 
of the American environmental movement that will come up 
throughout the text. 
species have been described and classified, but scientists esti-
mate that 5 to 30 million species may exist on Earth.  Because 
so many species remain unidentified, the exact number of 
species becoming extinct can only be estimated. However, 
GBO 3 reported that the abundance of vertebrate species 
fell by nearly a third between 1970 and 2006. The most dra-
matic declines have occurred in the tropics, in both ground-
dwelling and ocean species.
Risks of Losing Biodiversity. Why is losing biodiver-
sity so critical? Biodiversity is the mainstay of agricultural 
crops and of many medicines. The loss of biodiversity can 
only curtail development in these areas. Biodiversity is also 
a critical factor in maintaining the stability of natural sys-
tems and enabling them to recover after disturbances such 
as fires or volcanic eruptions. Most of the essential goods 
and services provided by natural systems are derived directly 
from various living organisms, and we threaten our own 
well-being when we diminish the biodiversity within those 
natural systems. These goods and services are especially im-
portant in sustaining the poor in developing countries. There 
are also aesthetic and moral arguments for maintaining bio-
diversity. Shall we continue to erase living species from the 
planet, or do we have a moral responsibility to protect and 
preserve the amazing diversity of life on Earth? Once a spe-
cies is gone, it is gone forever. Finding ways to protect the 
planet’s biodiversity is one of the key challenges of environ-
mental science. 
2  Environmental Science and the 
Environmental Movement
As you read this text, you will encounter descriptions of the 
natural world and how it works. You will also encounter a 
great diversity of issues and problems that have arisen because 
human societies live in this natural world. We use materials 
from it (goods taken from natural ecosystems); we convert parts 
of it into the built environment of our towns, cities, factories, 
and highways; and we transform many natural ecosystems into 
food-producing agricultural systems. We also use the environ-
ment as a place to dump our wastes—solids, liquids, gases—all 
proceeding from human activities, most of them legitimate, but 
all of them affecting the environment. The environment, then, 
includes the natural world, human societies, and the human-
built world; it is an extremely inclusive concept.
Environmental Science
Things go wrong in the environment, sometimes badly. 
We have already considered four trends (human popula-
tion growth, ecosystem decline, global climate change, loss 
of biodiversity) that signal to us that we are creating prob-
lems for ourselves that we ignore at our peril. Lest you think 
that all we do is create problems, however, consider some of 
the great successes human societies have achieved. We have 
learned how to domesticate landscapes and ecosystems, con-
verting them into highly productive food-producing systems 
37

Science and the Environment
ever, although economic expansion enabled most families to 
have a home, a car, and other possessions, certain problems 
became obvious. The air in and around cities was becoming 
murky and irritating to people’s eyes and respiratory systems. 
Rivers and beaches were increasingly fouled with raw sewage, 
garbage, and chemical wastes from industries, sewers, and 
dumps. Conspicuous declines occurred in many bird popula-
tions (including that of our national symbol, the bald eagle), 
aquatic species, and other animals. The decline of the bald 
eagle and other bird populations was traced to the accumula-
tion in their bodies of DDT, the long-lasting pesticide that had 
been used in large amounts since the 1940s. In short, it was 
clear that we were seriously contaminating our environment.
The Modern Environmental Movement. In 1962, bi-
ologist Rachel Carson wrote Silent Spring, presenting her sce-
nario of a future with no songbirds. Carson’s voice was soon 
joined by others, many of whom formed organizations to 
focus and amplify the voices of thousands more in demanding 
a cleaner environment. This was the beginning of the modern 
environmental movement, in which a newly motivated citi-
zenry demanded the curtailment of pollution, the cleanup of 
polluted environments, and the protection of pristine areas.
In the late 19th century, the indiscriminate killing of 
birds and animals and the closing of the frontier sparked a 
reaction. Around that time, several groups devoted to conser-
vation formed: the National Audubon Society, the National 
Wildlife Federation, and the Sierra Club, which was founded 
in California by naturalist John Muir, who helped popular-
ize the idea of wilderness. President Theodore Roosevelt 
promoted the conservation of public lands, and the national 
parks were formed.
The first half of the 20th century was marked by in-
creasing awareness of the environment. Unwise agricultural 
practices following World War I eventually helped create an 
environmental crisis—the Dust Bowl of the 1930s (enormous 
soil erosion in the American and Canadian prairielands). 
During the Great Depression (1930–1936), conservation 
provided a means of both restoring the land and providing 
work for the unemployed, such as workers in the Civilian 
Conservation Corps (CCC), who built trails and did erosion 
control in national parks and forests.
The two decades following World War II (1945–1965) 
were full of technological optimism. New developments, rang-
ing from rocket science to computers and from pesticides to 
antibiotics, were redirected to peacetime applications. How-
Figure 7 The American Environmental Movement. Selected events and scientific findings,  people, 
and policies of the environmental movement in the United States. 
Timeline of American Environmentalism
Policies
People
John Muir — Conservationist (6)
Teddy Roosevelt — President (7)
Dust Bowl (11)
Aldo Leopold — father of restoration ecology (6)
Rachel Carson — writer of “Silent Spring” (1, 22)
Garrett Hardin —“Tragedy of the Commons” (7)
Wangari Maathai — Green Belt Movement (1, 11)
Muhammad Yunus — Grameen Bank (9)
Events
1850
1860
1870
1880
1890
1830
1840
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Acid rain quantified (19)
Love Canal protests (22)
Bhopal chemical spill (22)
Chernobyl (15)
“Green Chemistry” coined (22)
Global population 
hits 7 billion (8)
Exxon Valdez oil spill (14)
Extinction of 
passenger pigeon (4)
First National Park (7)
Lacey Act (6)
Soil Conservation
Act (11)
Clean Water Act (20)
Montreal Protocol (19)
Clean Air Act (18, 19)
Environmental Protection Agency
formed (1, 2)
Safe Drinking Water Act (20)
Clean Air Act revised (19)
Superfund Act (22)
38

Science and the Environment
 demands  increased, a number of the more polluting indus-
tries, such as mining and utilities, pressed for a halt in regu-
lation, and some began demanding significant deregulation.
Today, there are political battles surrounding almost 
every environmental issue. Bitter conflicts have emerged over 
issues involving access to publicly owned resources such as 
water, grazing land, and timber. The Endangered Species Act, 
which protects wild plants and animals whose existence is 
threatened, has been a lightning rod for controversy. When 
the EPA develops regulations to address air and water pol-
lution, for example, some business special interests oppose 
the regulations and often environmental special interests 
support them. Climate change has been so controversial that 
it has triggered a host of antienvironmental groups. Instead 
of  civility and persuasive discussion, discourse on environ-
mental issues has become one of polemics and anger. As en-
vironmental public policies are developed and enforced, the 
controversies that accompany those policies remind us that 
politics always accompanies policy.
3 Three unifying Themes
What will it take to move our civilization in the direction of 
a long-term sustainable relationship with the natural world? 
The answer to this question is not simple, but we would like to 
present three themes that provide coherence to the  issues and 
topics covered in this text. In reality, these themes deal with 
how we should conceptualize our task of forging a  sustainable 
future (Fig. 8). Each theme is a concept that we believe is essen-
tial to environmental science. The first theme is  sustainability—
Pressured by concerned citizens, Congress created the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970 and passed 
numerous laws promoting pollution control and wildlife 
protection, including the National Environmental Policy 
Act of 1969, the Clean Air Act of 1970, the Clean Water 
Act of 1972, the Marine Mammals Protection Act of 1972, 
the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and the Safe Drinking 
Water Act of 1974. A disastrous hazardous waste problem 
in Love Canal, New York, prompted the Superfund Act of 
1980; scientific studies on acid rain, the decline of the ozone 
layer, and global climate change caused more environmental 
groups to form and policies to be put into place. Concerns 
about  hazardous waste disposal triggered the rise of the 
Green Chemistry Movement. 
Persons and organizations with a strong focus on envi-
ronmental concerns became known as environmentalists, and 
the resulting widespread development of this movement is often 
called environmentalism. As a result of these efforts, the air in 
our cities and the water in our lakes and rivers are far cleaner 
than they were in the late 1960s. Without a doubt, absent the en-
vironmental movement, our air and water would now be a toxic 
brew. By almost any measure, the environmental movement has 
been successful, at least in solving some pollution problems.
Environmentalism Acquires Critics. In the early stages 
of the environmental movement, sources of problems were 
specific and visible, and the solutions seemed relatively 
straightforward: install waste treatment and pollution con-
trol equipment and ban the use of very toxic pesticides, 
substituting safer pesticides, for example. At first, many 
industries conformed to the reforms, but as regulatory 
Figure 8 Three unifying themes. Sustainability, stewardship, and 
sound science are three vital concepts or ideals that can move societies 
toward a sustainable future if they are applied to public policies and private 
environmental actions.
Sustainability
Stewardship
Sound Science
Environmental
public policy
Individual
responsibility
39

Science and the Environment
mosphere, water, and land. In contrast, developing coun-
tries are experiencing continued population growth, yet 
are often unable to meet the needs of many of their people 
in spite of heavy exploitation of natural resources. As our 
modern societies pursue continued economic growth and 
consumption, we are apparently locked into an unsustain-
able mode. How do we resolve this dilemma? One answer 
is the concept of sustainable development.
Sustainable Development. Sustainable development is a 
term that was first brought into common use by the World 
Commission on Environment and Development, a group 
appointed by the United Nations. The commission made 
sustainable development the theme of its final report, Our 
Common Future, published in 1987. The report defined sus-
tainable development as a form of development or progress 
that “meets the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” 
The concept arose in the context of a debate between the 
 respective  environmental and developmental concerns of 
groups of developed and developing countries. Develop-
ment refers to the continued improvement of human well-
being, usually in the developing countries. Both developed 
and  developing countries have embraced the concept of sus-
tainable development, although the industrialized countries 
are usually more concerned about environmental sustain-
ability, while the  developing countries are more concerned 
about economic  development. The basic idea, however, is to 
maintain and  improve the well-being of both humans and 
ecosystems.
The concept of sustainable development is now so well 
entrenched in international circles that it has become almost 
an article of faith. It sounds comforting, so people want to 
believe that it is possible, and it appears to incorporate some 
ideals that are sorely needed, such as equity—whereby the 
needs of the present are actually met and future generations 
are seen as equally deserving as those living now. Sustainable 
development means different things to different people, how-
ever, as illustrated by the viewpoints of three important dis-
ciplines traditionally concerned with the processes involved. 
Economists are concerned mainly with growth, efficiency, 
and the optimum use of resources. Sociologists mainly focus 
on human needs and on concepts like equity, empowerment, 
social cohesion, and cultural identity. Ecologists show their 
greatest concern for preserving the integrity of natural sys-
tems, for living within the carrying capacity of the environ-
ment, and for dealing effectively with pollution. It can be 
argued, however, that sustainable solutions will be found 
mainly where the concerns of these three groups intersect, as 
illustrated in Figure 9.
There are many dimensions to sustainable development— 
environmental, social, economic, political—and no socie-
ties today have achieved it. Nevertheless, as with justice, 
equality, and freedom, it is important to uphold sustainable 
development as an ideal—a goal toward which all human 
societies need to be moving, even if we have not achieved it 
completely anywhere. For example, policies and actions in a 
 society that reduce infant mortality, increase the availability 
the practical goal toward which our  interactions with the 
natural world should be working. The second is sound 
 science—the basis for our understanding of how the world 
works and how human systems interact with it. The third 
theme is  stewardship—the actions and programs that manage 
natural resources and human well-being for the common good. 
We explore each of these themes here, appropriately beginning 
with sustainability.
Sustainability
A system or process is sustainable if it can be continued 
 indefinitely, without depleting any of the material or energy 
resources required to keep it running. The term was first 
 applied to the idea of sustainable yields in human endeavors 
such as forestry and fisheries. Trees, fish, and other biologi-
cal species normally grow and reproduce at rates faster than 
those required just to keep their populations stable. This 
built-in capacity allows every species to increase or replace a 
population following some natural disaster.
It is possible, then, to harvest a certain percentage 
of trees or fish every year without depleting the forest or 
 reducing the fish population below a certain base number. 
As long as the number harvested stays within the capacity of 
the population to grow and replace itself, the practice can be 
continued indefinitely. The harvest then represents a sustain-
able yield. It becomes unsustainable only when trees are cut 
or fish are caught at a rate that exceeds the capacity of their 
present population to reproduce and grow. The concept of a 
sustainable yield can also be applied to freshwater supplies, 
soils, and the ability of natural systems to absorb pollutants 
without being damaged.
The notion of sustainability can be extended to include 
ecosystems. Sustainable ecosystems are entire natural systems 
that persist and thrive over time by recycling nutrients, main-
taining a diversity of species, and using the Sun as a source of 
sustainable energy. As we’ll see, ecosystems are enormously 
successful at being sustainable
Sustainable Societies. Applying the concept of sustain-
ability to human systems, we say that a sustainable society 
is a society in balance with the natural world, continuing 
generation after generation, neither depleting its resource 
base by exceeding sustainable yields nor producing pollut-
ants in excess of nature’s capacity to absorb them. Many 
primitive societies were sustainable in this sense for thou-
sands of years.
When the concept of sustainability is applied to mod-
ern societies, we generally picture certain desirable, healthy 
characteristics of the people, their communities, and the 
ecosystems on which they depend. Many of our interac-
tions with the environment are not sustainable, however. 
This is demonstrated by such global trends as the decline 
of  biodiversity and essential ecosystems and the increased 
emissions of greenhouse gases. Although population growth 
in industrialized countries has almost halted, these coun-
tries are using energy and other resources at unsustainable 
rates, producing pollutants that are accumulating in the at-
40

Science and the Environment
 • A community transition from the present car-dominated 
urban sprawl of developed countries to the “smart 
growth” concepts of smaller, functional settlements and 
more livable cities.
This is not an exhaustive list, but it does give a glimpse of 
what a sustainable future might look like. One thing is cer-
tain: we cannot continue on our present trajectory and hope 
that everything will turn out well. The natural world—our 
life support system—is being degraded, its ecosystem capi-
tal eroded. One essential tool for achieving sustainability is 
sound science.
Sound Science
Some environmental issues are embroiled in controversies so 
polarized that no middle ground seems possible. On the one 
side are those who argue using seemingly sound scientific facts 
and well-found theories. On the other are those who disagree 
and present opposing explanations of the same facts. Both 
groups may have motives for arguing their case that are not 
all apparent to the public. In the face of such controversy, 
many people are understandably left confused. It is our objec-
tive to give first a brief overview of the nature of science and 
the scientific method so that you can evaluate for yourself the 
two sides of such controversies and then to show how science 
forms the foundation for understanding controversial issues.
The Scientific Method. In its essence, science is simply a 
way of gaining knowledge; that way is called the scientific 
method. The term science further refers to all the knowl-
edge gained through that method. We employ the term 
sound  science to distinguish legitimate science from what 
can been called junk science, information that is presented 
as valid  science but that does not conform to the rigors of 
the  methods and practice of legitimate science. Sound science 
involves a disciplined approach to understanding how the 
natural world works, an approach that has become known 
as the scientific method.
Assumptions. To begin, the scientific method rests 
on four basic assumptions that most of us accept without 
 argument. The first assumption is that what we perceive with 
our basic five senses represents an objective reality; that is, 
our perceptions are not some kind of mirage or dream. The 
second assumption is that this “objective reality” functions 
according to certain basic principles and natural laws that 
remain consistent through time and space.
The third assumption, which follows directly from the 
second, is that every result has a cause and every event in turn 
will cause other events. In other words, we assume that events 
do not occur without reason and that there is an explainable 
cause behind every happening. The fourth and final assump-
tion is that, through our powers of observation, manipula-
tion, and reason, we can discover and understand the basic 
principles and natural laws by which the universe functions.
Although assumptions, by definition, are premises that 
are simply accepted, the fact is that the assumptions underly-
ing science have served us well and are borne out by everyday 
of family planning, improve the air quality, provide abun-
dant and pure water, preserve and protect natural ecosystems, 
reduce soil erosion, reduce the release of toxic chemicals to 
the  environment, and restore healthy coastal fisheries are all 
moving that society in the right direction— toward a sus-
tainable future. At the same time, these actions are all quite 
measurable, so progress in achieving sustainable development 
can be assessed. Communities and organizations are forging 
 sustainable  development indicators and goals to track their 
progress, such as the Environmental Sustainability Index 
(produced by Yale University, 1999–2005), which evaluated 
a society’s natural resources and its stewardship of those 
 resources and the  people they support.
An Essential Transition. The transition to a truly sus-
tainable civilization is hard to picture at present. It  requires 
achieving a stable human population that recognizes the 
finite limits of the ability of Earth’s systems to produce 
 resources and absorb wastes and that acts accordingly. To 
achieve sustainability will require a special level of dedica-
tion and commitment to care for the natural world and to 
act with justice and equity toward one another. What will it 
take to make the transition to a sustainable future? There is 
broad agreement on the following major points:
 • A population transition from a continually increasing 
human population to one that is stable or even declining.
 • A resource transition to an economy that is not dedicated 
to growth and consumption, but instead relies on nature’s 
income and protects ecosystem capital from  depletion.
 • A technology transition from pollution-intensive eco-
nomic production to environmentally friendly processes—
in particular, moving from fossil fuel energy to renewable 
energy sources.
 • A political/sociological transition to public policies that 
embrace a careful and just approach to people’s needs 
and that eliminate large-scale poverty.
Figure 9 Sustainable solutions. If the concerns of sociologists, econo-
mists, and ecologists can be brought into intersection, sustainable solutions in a 
society are much more achievable.
Sustainable
solutions
Socially
desirable
Economically
feasible
Ecologically
viable
41

Science and the Environment
Even experimentation, as we will discuss shortly, is con-
ducted to gain another window of observation. Simply put, 
in all science, careful observation is the keystone. So how can 
we be sure that observations are accurate? Well, as a matter 
of fact, not every reported observation is accurate, for reasons 
ranging from honest misperceptions or instrument error to 
calculated mischief. Therefore, an important aspect of science, 
and a trait of scientists, is to be skeptical of any new report 
until it is confirmed or verified. As observations are confirmed 
by more and more investigators, they gain the status of fac-
tual data. Things or events that do not allow such confirma-
tion—a reported visit by Martian aliens, for  example—are 
very questionable from a scientific standpoint.
Various observations by themselves, like the pieces of a 
puzzle, are often put together into a larger picture—a model 
of how a system works. To give a simple example, we ob-
serve that water evaporates and leads to moist air and that 
water from moist air condenses on a cool surface. We also 
observe clouds and precipitation. Putting these observations 
together logically, we derive the concept of the hydrologic 
cycle. Water evaporates and then condenses as air is cooled, 
condensation forms clouds, and precipitation follows. Water 
thus makes a cycle from the surface of Earth into the atmos-
phere and back to Earth Note how this simple example in-
corporates the four assumptions described previously: there 
is an objective reality, it operates according to principles, 
every result has a cause, and we can discover the principles 
 according to which reality operates. Note also how the ex-
ample broadens our everyday experiences of the evaporation 
of water and the falling of rain into an understanding of a 
cycle  involving both.
So, the essence of science and the scientific method may 
be seen as a process of making observations and logically 
integrating those observations into a model of how some 
natural system works. To be sure, many areas of science get 
more complex and difficult to comprehend. Still, the basic 
process— constructing a logically coherent picture of causes 
and effects from basic observations—is the same.
Where, then, does experimentation, that additional hall-
mark of science, fit in?
Experimentation. Experimentation is simply setting 
up situations to make more systematic observations regard-
ing causes and effects. For example, the number of chemical 
reactions one can readily observe in nature is limited. How-
ever, in the laboratory it is possible to purify elements or 
compounds, mix them together in desired combinations and 
proportions, and carefully observe and measure how they 
react (or fail to react). From the way chemicals react, chem-
ists have constructed a coherent cause-and-effect picture, 
the atomic theory, and they have determined the attributes 
of each element. Similarly, biologists put organisms into 
specific situations in which they can carefully observe and 
measure their responses to particular conditions or treat-
ments (Fig. 11). To solve a particular problem (e.g., What is 
the cause of this event?), a more or less systematic line of ex-
perimentation is used. This is where the sequence consisting 
of observation, hypothesis, test (experiment), and explana-
tion comes in.
experience. For example, we suffer severe consequences if we 
do not accept our perception of fire as real. Similarly, our 
experience confirms that gravity is a predictable force acting 
throughout the universe and that it is not subject to unpre-
dictable change. And the same can be said for any number 
of other phenomena that we observe. If our car fails to start, 
we know that there is a logical reason (such as lights left on), 
and we can get it jump-started.
Thus, whether we are conscious of the fact or not, we all 
accept the basic assumptions of science in the conduct and 
understanding of our everyday lives. Scientists and  scientific 
investigations focused on the natural world (the natural 
 sciences) extend the boundaries of everyday experience, 
deepen our understanding of cause-and-effect relationships, 
and enable us to have a greater appreciation of the princi-
ples and natural laws that seem to determine the behavior 
of all things, from the outcome of a chemical reaction to the 
 functioning of the biosphere.
Observation. The foundation of all science and scientific 
discovery is observation. Indeed, many branches of science, 
such as natural history (the study of where and how various 
plants and animals live, mate, reproduce, etc.), astronomy, 
anthropology, and paleontology, are based almost entirely on 
observation because experimentation is either inappropriate 
or impossible. For example, it simply is impossible to conduct  
experiments on stars or past events. Figure 10 shows how ob-
servations alone can lead to answers or explanations of some 
natural phenomena.
Figure 10 Steps of the scientific method. The process leading to 
the formation of theories and the postulation of natural laws and concepts is a 
continual interplay among observations, hypotheses, tests (experiments), explana-
tions or theories, and further refinement.
Observations
Questions
Further
questions, tests,
and observations
Concepts,
principles,
natural laws
Formulation
of theories
consistent with
observations
Hypothesis
Answers
Answers
Further
observations
Further
questions
Experiment
Supports
hypothesis
Contradicts
hypothesis
42

Science and the Environment
(e.g., the hydrologic cycle). At first, the conceptual frame-
work is termed a hypothesis because it is really a tentative 
explanation as to how various observations are related. It 
becomes a theory only after much testing and confirmation 
showing that it is logically consistent with all observations 
(Fig. 10).
Through logical reasoning, theories will generally sug-
gest or predict certain events. If an event predicted by a 
theory is indeed observed, the observation provides evidence 
for the truth of the theory. Predictions require experiments, 
testing, further data gathering, and more observation. When 
theories reach a state of providing a logically consistent 
framework for all relevant observations and when they can 
be used to reliably predict outcomes, they deserve to be ac-
cepted. For example, we have never seen atoms directly (or, 
until recently, even indirectly), but innumerable observations 
and experiments are coherently explainable by the theory 
that all gases, liquids, and solids consist of various combina-
tions of slightly over a hundred kinds of atoms. Hence, we 
fully accept the atomic theory of matter.
Science has successfully brought us a high degree of 
understanding of the natural world and has also brought a 
host of technologies based on that understanding. Doesn’t 
this success mean that our theories about how the world 
works must be true? A philosopher of science would answer, 
“No, not necessarily.” The best we can do is to establish a 
theory beyond a reasonable doubt. Theories are always less 
than absolutely certain, because we can never know whether 
some other theory exists that will do a better job of explain-
ing the data. Generally speaking, our confidence in scientific 
explanations should be proportional to the evidence sup-
porting them.
Natural Laws and Concepts. Like a theory, the sec-
ond assumption underlying science—that the universe func-
tions according to certain basic principles and natural laws 
that remain consistent through time and space—cannot be 
established with absolute certainty. Still, every observation 
and test that scientists have performed up to the present have 
borne it out. All our observations, whether direct or through 
experimentation, demonstrate that matter and energy behave 
neither randomly nor even inconsistently, but in precise and 
predictable ways. We refer to these principles by which we can 
define and precisely predict the behavior of matter and energy 
as natural laws. Examples are the Law of Gravity, the Law of 
Conservation of Matter, and the various Laws of Thermody-
namics. Our technological success in space exploration and 
many other fields is in no small part due to our recognition of 
these principles and our precise calculations based on them. 
Conversely, trying to make something work in a manner con-
trary to a natural law invariably results in failure.
In many situations, the outcome of scientific work results 
in well-established explanations that must be expressed in 
the mathematical language of probability and statistics. This 
is especially true of biological phenomena such as predator– 
prey relationships and the effects of pesticides. Accordingly, 
here it is appropriate to speak of concepts rather than laws. 
Concepts are perfectly valid explanations of data gathered 
from the natural world, and they can also be predictive, but 
Hypotheses. Let’s consider the problem of the death 
of oyster larvae at the Whiskey Creek hatchery (see Sound 
Science). What was killing the oyster larvae in the incuba-
tion tanks? The first step in solving the problem was to 
make educated guesses as to the cause. Each such educated 
guess is a hypothesis. Each hypothesis is then tested by mak-
ing further field observations or conducting experiments to 
determine whether or not the hypothesis really accounts 
for the observed effect. The owners found high numbers of 
pathogenic bacteria in the tanks (hypothesis: the bacteria 
were killing the larvae). They installed a new filtration sys-
tem that removed bacteria before they could multiply, essen-
tially an experiment. The larvae still died. They rejected that 
hypothesis. Then a crucial observation was made about the 
timing of the bay water brought into the tanks, water that 
had come from recently upwelled coastal surface water. This 
water had higher acidity (lower pH) than usual (hypothesis: 
acid waters were killing the larvae by dissolving their shells). 
By monitoring the pH of incoming water, the owners were 
able to avoid the acid waters and time water withdrawals 
to daytime hours when the pH was higher. The results were 
dramatic: the larvae were able to thrive and grow. The hy-
pothesis was confirmed, and the larval death was satisfac-
torily explained. The experimental results brought what 
started out as a hypothesis to the status of a satisfactory ex-
planation. Figure 10 shows how such a process moves from 
observations to hypotheses, experiments, and a satisfactory 
answer.
Theories. We have already noted how various specific 
observations (e.g., evaporation, precipitation) may fit to-
gether to give a logically coherent conceptual framework 
Figure 11 Experiment demonstrating the importance of my-
corrhizae. Mycorrhizae is a root–fungus symbiosis that greatly enhances the 
ability of a plant to absorb nutrients. The pine seedlings shown were grown under 
identical conditions, except that the seedling on the left was grown with mycor-
rhizal fungi and the one on the right was grown without the fungi.
43

Science and the Environment
 procedures of the scientific method, controversies arise that 
pit one group against another, with both groups claiming 
that they have science on their side. For example, we will 
make the claim that the global climate is changing because 
of human activities A few scientists disagree with this claim, 
although for most the evidence is convincing. There are at 
least four reasons why such controversies occur.
1. New information. We are continually confronted by 
new observations—the hole in the ozone layer, for in-
stance. It takes some time before all the hypotheses 
regarding the cause of what we have observed can be 
adequately tested. During this time, there may be honest 
disagreement as to which hypothesis is most likely. Such 
controversies are gradually settled by further observa-
tions and testing, but the process leads into the second 
reason for continuing controversy.
2. Complex phenomena. Certain phenomena, such as the 
hole in the ozone layer, do not lend themselves to  simple 
tests or experiments. Therefore, it is difficult and time 
consuming to confirm the causative role of one factor or 
to rule out the involvement of another. Gradually, dif-
ferent lines of evidence come together to support one 
hypothesis and exclude another, enabling the issue to be 
resolved. When is there enough evidence to say unequiv-
ocally that one hypothesis is right and another wrong? 
At some point, the scientists working in the appropriate 
field will reach a consensus in making that judgment.
3. Multiple perspectives. The third reason for controversy 
is that multiple perspectives may be involved. This is 
particularly true in environmental science because many 
issues have social, economic, or political ramifications. 
For example, there is no controversy regarding nuclear 
power, as long as it is considered at the purely scientific 
level of physics. However, when it comes to deciding 
whether to promote the further use of nuclear energy 
to generate electrical power, controversy arises because 
 different groups have different perspectives about the 
relative costs, risks, and benefits involved.
4. Bias. The fourth reason for controversy is that there 
are many vested interests that wish to maintain and 
promote disagreement because they stand to profit by 
doing so. For example, tobacco interests argued for 
years that the connection between smoking and illness 
had not been established and that more studies were 
necessary. By harping on the absence of absolute proof 
(a scientific impossibility anyway) and downplaying the 
overwhelming body of evidence supporting the con-
nection between smoking and illness, the tobacco lobby 
succeeded in keeping the issue controversial and thereby 
delayed regulatory restrictions on smoking. In fact, some 
businesses hire “product-defense firms,” whose strategy 
is to do everything possible to challenge scientific evi-
dence damaging to their products or interests.
Some controversy is the inevitable outcome of the  
scientific process itself, but much of it is attributable to 
 less-noble causes. Unfortunately, the media and the public 
they don’t reach the status of laws. They model the way 
we believe the natural world works and enable us to make 
qualified predictions of future outcomes. Thus, we might say 
that, on the basis of our understanding of the effects of DDT 
(a potent pesticide) on mosquitoes and on the basis of our 
observation that mosquitoes can, and do, develop resistance 
to DDT, continued spraying of the local salt marshes with 
DDT to eradicate unwelcome mosquitoes is likely to result in 
the development of a more resistant mosquito population in 
the future, an unwelcome outcome. Here the concept of pest 
resistance may be used to modify public policy. In general, 
explanations in biology do not lead to the development of 
statements with such high predictability that we are justified 
in calling them laws.
The Role of Instruments in Science. Complex instru-
mentation is another hallmark of science, one that often gives 
it an aura of mystery. Yet, regardless of complexity, all scien-
tific instruments perform one of three basic functions. First, 
they may extend our powers of observation, as do telescopes, 
microscopes, X-ray machines, and CAT scans, for example. 
Second, instruments are used to quantify observations—that 
is, they enable us to measure exact quantities. For example, 
we may feel cold, but a thermometer enables us to measure 
and quantify exactly how cold it is. Comparisons, communi-
cation, and verification of different observations and events 
would be impossible if it were not for such measurement and 
quantification. Third, instruments such as growth chambers 
and robots help us achieve conditions and perform manipu-
lations required to make certain observations or perform cer-
tain experiments.
All instruments used in science need to be subjected to 
testing and verification to be sure that they are giving as ac-
curate a representation of reality as we can attain with their 
use. The need for this can be seen in the case of instruments 
measuring ocean temperatures Failure to calibrate the instru-
ments properly led to a serious underestimation of ocean 
temperature changes. It is safe to say that modern scientific 
instruments have made possible many important discoveries 
that were out of reach of the human senses.
The Scientific Community. It is important to understand 
that science and its outcomes take place in the context of a 
scientific community and a larger society. There is no single 
authoritative source that makes judgments on the validity 
of scientific explanations. Instead, it is the collective body of 
scientists working in a given field who, because of their com-
petence and experience, establish what is sound science and 
what is not. They do so by communicating their findings to 
each other and to the public as they publish their work in 
peer-reviewed journals. The process of peer review is crucial; 
it requires experts in a given field to analyze the results of 
their colleagues’ work. Careful scrutiny is given to research 
publications, with the objective of rooting out poor or sloppy 
science and affirming work that is clearly meritorious.
Controversies. Even with these checks and balances that 
work to establish scientific knowledge and with all the 
44

Science and the Environment
reached such an intensity and such a scale that we are now 
one of the major forces affecting nature. Our influence on 
the natural ecosystems that support most of the world econ-
omy and process our waste is strong and widespread, and 
we need to know how to manage the planet so as to main-
tain a sustainable relationship with it. As a result, the infor-
mation gathered by scientists needs to be accurate, credible, 
and communicated clearly to policy makers and the public, 
and the policy makers need to handle that information re-
sponsibly 
Stewardship
The third of our themes is stewardship—the actions and pro-
grams that manage natural resources and human well-being 
for the common good. Stewardship is a concept that can be 
traced back to ancient civilizations. A steward was put in 
charge of his master’s household, responsible for maintain-
ing the welfare of the people and the property of the owner. 
Because a steward did not own the property himself, the 
steward’s ethic involved caring for something on behalf of 
someone else.
Applying this concept to the world today, stewards 
are those who care for something—from the natural world 
or from human culture—that they do not own and that 
they will pass on to the next generation. Modern-day en-
vironmental stewardship, therefore, incorporates an ethic 
that guides actions taken to benefit the natural world and 
other people. It recognizes that even our ownership of 
land is  temporary; the land will be there after we die, and 
others will own it in turn. Stewardship is compatible with 
the goal of sustainability, but it is different from it, too, 
because stewardship deals more directly with how sus-
tainability is to be achieved—what actions are taken, and 
what values and ethical considerations are behind those 
actions.
Who 
Are 
the 
Stewards? How 
is 
stewardship 
achieved? Sometimes stewardship leads people to try to 
stop the  destruction of the environment or to stop the 
pollution that is degrading human neighborhoods and 
health. For example, Rachel Carson (from our opening 
story) was a steward who alerted the public about the 
dangers of pesticides and their role in decimating bird 
populations. Francisco Pineda (Fig.  12,) is a farmer in 
El Salvador who organized rural communities to pro-
test the damages to local irrigation streams by Canadian 
mining giant Pacific Rim. Their challenges led the Sal-
vadoran government to stop the mining by Pacific Rim, 
and Pineda received the 2011 Goldman Environmental 
Prize. Stewardship is not without risks, however: Pineda 
is under 24-hour police protection because three of his 
colleagues have been murdered by supporters of the min-
ing project. The late Wangari Maathai (the first  Kenyan 
woman to earn a Ph.D.) founded the Green Belt Move-
ment to help rural Kenyan women. The grassroots move-
ment  eventually involved more than 6,000 groups of 
women, who planted 47 million trees in Kenya. Maathai 
may be unaware of the true nature of the information and 
will often give equal credibility to opposing views on an 
issue. This can be seen, for example, in the media’s cover-
age of global climate change, where the opinions of a few 
industry-sponsored deniers are often given equal coverage 
with the overwhelming scientific consensus. This leads us to 
the topic of junk science.
Junk Science. Junk science traditionally refers to infor-
mation that is presented as scientifically valid but that 
does not conform to the rigors imposed by the scientific 
community. In recent years, another use of this term has 
appeared that has created some confusion. In some cases, 
people with a bias have used junk science to refer to any-
thing that threatens their preferred viewpoint; conversely, 
sound science  becomes anything that supports their view-
point. One example of this is the use of the term “junk 
science” by people who do not  support the Endangered 
Species Act. They label as “junk  science” the legitimate use 
of computer models to make  predictions about the sur-
vival of endangered species. This limits scientific input to a 
much smaller number of studies and could mean we make 
decisions without the full range of information we might 
have.
In contrast, true junk science can take many forms: 
the presentation of selective results (picking and choosing 
only those results that agree with one’s preconceived ideas), 
 politically motivated distortions of scientifically sound infor-
mation, and the publication of poor work in quasi- scientific 
(unreviewed) journals and books. Quite often, junk science 
is generated by special interest groups trying to influence the 
public debate about science-related concerns. The result is 
that the junk science may be given equal  respectability with 
the sound science in the public arena. Information presented 
by the Tobacco Institute, for example, is clearly suspect, due 
to its corporate-related funding. In particular, junk science 
has been heavily employed in the debate surrounding climate 
change and what to do about it in the United States.
Evaluating Issues. Whether scientist or layperson, we can 
use facets of the scientific method to deal with controversies 
and to develop our own capacity for logical reasoning. Here 
are some basic questions to ask:
 • What are the data underlying a particular claim? Can 
they be satisfactorily confirmed?
 • Do the explanations and theories follow logically from 
the data?
 • Are there reasons that a particular explanation is 
 favored? Who profits from having that explanation 
 accepted broadly?
 • Is the conclusion supported by the community of scien-
tists with the greatest competence to judge the work? 
If not, it is highly suspect.
In sum, sound science is absolutely essential to forg-
ing a sustainable relationship with the natural world. Our 
planet is dominated by human beings—our activities have 
45

Science and the Environment
The flip side of this problem is seen when wealthier, more 
politically active, and often predominantly white communi-
ties receive a disproportionately greater share of facility im-
provements, such as new roads, public buildings, and water 
and sewer projects.
People of color are seizing the initiative to correct 
these wrongs, creating citizen groups and watchdog agen-
cies to bring effective action and to monitor progress. For 
example, Chattanooga’s Southside community is populated 
largely by African Americans. This part of Chattanooga 
was bypassed when the city underwent a huge renewal 
that changed its reputation from being the dirtiest city in 
America to the “Renaissance City of the South” Formed in 
2010 by Southside community members, Chattanooga Or-
ganized for Action (COA) has quickly become a voice for 
social justice. In 2011, COA organized the restoration of 
funding for family planning programs for low-income and 
minority women and forced a more thorough cleanup of a 
former chemical plant site in Southside owned by Velsicol 
Chemical Corporation, among other actions.
Justice is especially crucial for the developing world, 
where unjust relationships often leave people without land, 
with inadequate food, and in poor health. Extreme poverty 
is the condition of more than a billion people; this poverty is 
often brought on by injustices within societies where wealthy 
elites maintain political power and, through corruption and 
nepotism, steal money and give corporations preferential 
treatment. It takes significant government reform to turn this 
situation around so that the poor can achieve justice in se-
curing property rights and gain greater access to ecosystem 
goods and services.
Some of the poverty of the developing countries can 
be attributed to unjust economic practices of the wealthy 
was beaten and jailed when she went on to protest gov-
ernment corruption. Eventually, she was appointed dep-
uty environment minister under a new Kenyan president 
and received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2004 (Fig. 13)—the 
first environmental  activist to receive that honor.
More often, stewardship is a matter of everyday peo-
ple caring enough for each other and for the natural world 
that they do the things that are compatible with that care. 
These include participating fully in recycling efforts, pur-
chasing cars that pollute less and use less energy, turning 
off the lights in an empty room, refusing to engage in the 
conspicuous consumption constantly being urged on them 
by commercial advertising, supporting organizations that 
promote sustainable practices, staying informed on en-
vironmentally sensitive issues, and expressing their citi-
zenship by voting for candidates who are sympathetic to 
environmental concerns and the need for sustainable de-
velopment.
Justice and Equity. The stewardship ethic is concerned 
not only with caring for the natural world, but also with 
establishing just relationships among humans. This con-
cern for justice is seen in the United States in the environ-
mental justice movement. The major problem addressed by 
the movement is environmental racism—the placement of 
waste sites and other hazardous industries in towns and 
neighborhoods where most of the residents are nonwhite. 
Figure 12 Goldman Prize winner, 2011. At the risk of his life, 
Francisco Pineda organized opposition to a damaging mining operation by the 
Canadian mining company Pacific Rim. “My work is as an environmentalist; this 
is the principle for my life. When I began to understand the impact of the mining 
exploration, I couldn’t stay quiet.”
(Source: Goldman Environmental Prize).
Figure 13 Stewardship at work. Wangari Maathai receiving the 2004 
Nobel Peace Prize from Ole Danbolt Mjøs, chairman of the Norwegian Nobel 
Committee. She is an example of unusual environmental stewardship at work.
46

Science and the Environment
STEWARDSHIP
Exploring a Stewardship Ethic
One of the major con-
cerns of philosophers 
is the development of 
codes of practice and 
thought that define right 
and wrong, known as ethics. Ethics is about 
the good—those values and virtues we should 
encourage—and about the right—our moral 
duties as we face practical problems. Ethics, 
therefore, is a “normative” discipline—it tells 
us what we ought to do. Some things are right, 
and some things are wrong. How do we know 
what we ought to do? In other words, how does 
an ethic work? A fully developed ethic has four 
ingredients:
1. Cases. These refer to specific acts and ask 
whether a particular act is morally justified. 
The answer must be based on moral rules.
2. Moral rules. These are general guidelines 
that can be applied to various areas of 
concern, such as the rules that govern how 
we should treat endangered species.
3. Moral principles. Moral rules are based 
on more-general principles, which are the 
broadest ethical concepts. They are consid-
ered to be valid in all cases. An example is 
the principle of distributive justice, which 
states that all persons should be treated 
equitably.
4. Bases. Ethical principles are justified by 
reference to some philosophical or theo-
logical basis. This is the foundation for an 
ethical system.
A stewardship ethic is concerned with right 
and wrong as they apply to actions taken to 
care for the natural world and the people in it. 
Because a steward is someone who cares for the 
natural world on behalf of others, we might ask, 
“To whom is the steward responsible?” Many 
would answer, “The steward is responsible to 
present and future generations of people who 
depend on the natural world as their life-support 
system.” For people with religious convictions, 
stewardship stems from a belief that the world 
and everything in it belongs to a higher being; 
they may be stewards on behalf of a higher 
power. For others, stewardship becomes a mat-
ter of concern that stems from a deep under-
standing and love of the natural world and the 
necessary limitations on our use of that world.
Is there a well-established stewardship 
ethic? Insofar as human interests are con-
cerned, ethical principles and rules are fairly 
well established, even if they are often violated 
by public and private acts. However, there is no 
firmly established ethic that deals with care for 
natural lands and creatures for their own sake. 
Most of our ethic concerning natural things re-
ally deals with how those things serve human 
purposes; that is, our current ethic is highly 
anthropocentric. For example, a basic ethical 
principle from the UN Declaration on Human 
Rights and the Environment is “All persons have 
the right to a secure, healthy, and ecologically 
sound environment.” Here, the point of the 
healthy environment is for humanity. There are 
several underlying reasons for a stewardship 
ethic, some stronger than others. 
Many organizations have developed stew-
ardship principles for their own guidance, and 
these principles can sometimes serve as broader 
guidelines for society, although they usually 
address specific areas of concern and are often 
anthropocentric. One excellent group is the For-
est Service Employees for Environmental Ethics 
(www.fseee.org), with a mission of protecting 
national forests and bringing reform to the U.S. 
Forest Service by advocating environmental 
 ethics. The group is active in halting unauthor-
ized logging and protecting Forest Service 
 employees from unjust disciplinary actions, 
as well as lobbying in Congress to maintain 
 stewardship of the National Forests.
Here are some of the issues that a steward-
ship ethic must grapple with in order to be truly 
helpful in accomplishing our stated goal of pro-
viding the “actions and programs that manage 
natural resources and human well-being for the 
common good”:
1. How to define the common good in cases 
where conflicting needs emerge, such as 
the economic need to extract resources 
from natural systems versus the need to 
maintain those systems in a healthy state.
2. How to balance the needs of present gen-
erations against those of future genera-
tions.
3. How to preserve species when doing so 
clearly means limiting some of the property 
rights commonly enjoyed by people and 
organizations.
4. How to encourage people and govern-
ments to exercise compassion and care for 
others who suffer profoundly from a lack of 
access to the basic human needs of food, 
shelter, health, and gainful work.
5. How to promote virtues that are conducive 
to stewardship of the natural world, such 
as benevolence, accountability, frugality, 
and responsibility. (There are many others.)
6. How to limit excessive consumption while 
at the same time allowing people the 
freedom to choose their lifestyles. In other 
words, how do you balance individual en-
vironmental rights and responsibilities with 
those of the broader community?
O
c
i
c
t
industrialized countries. The current pattern of international 
trade is a prime example. The industrialized countries have 
maintained inequities that discriminate against the develop-
ing countries by taxing and restricting imports from the de-
veloping countries and by flooding the world markets with 
agricultural products that are subsidized (and, therefore, 
priced below real cost). This is the number one issue at every 
meeting of the World Trade Organization, where global trade 
agreements are negotiated Such barriers  deprive people in 
developing countries of jobs and money that would go far to 
improve their living conditions. Although  international jus-
tice is a thorny issue, it is part of the mission of stewardship 
to address it.
4  Moving Toward a Sustainable 
Future
Without doubt, one of the dominant trends of our times is 
globalization—the accelerating interconnectedness of human 
activities, ideas, and cultures. For centuries, global connec-
tions have brought people together through migration, trade, 
and the exchange of ideas. What is new about the current 
scene is the increasing intensity, speed, extent, and impact of 
connectedness, to the point where its consequences are pro-
foundly changing many human enterprises. These changes 
are most evident in the globalization of economies, cultural 
patterns, political arrangements, environmental resources, 
47

Science and the Environment
that “business as usual” is not sustainable. Many global 
trends are on a collision course with the fundamental sys-
tems that maintain our planet as a tolerable place to live. A 
finite planet cannot continue to grow by 80 million persons 
annually without significant detrimental effects. The cur-
rent degradation of ecosystems, atmospheric changes, losses 
of species, and depletion of water resources inevitably lead 
to a point where resources are no longer adequate to sup-
port the human population without significant changes in 
the way we live.
The news is not all bad, however. Food production 
has improved the nutrition of millions in the developing 
world, life expectancy continues to rise, and the percent-
age of individuals who are desperately poor continues 
to decline. Population growth rates continue to fall in 
many countries. A rising tide of environmental awareness 
in the industrialized countries has led to the establish-
ment of policies, laws, and treaties that have improved 
environmental protection. Professional groups such as 
ecologists, climatologists, and engineers are proposing 
scientific and technological solutions to environmental 
problems.
Numerous caring people are beginning to play an im-
portant role in changing society’s treatment of Earth. For 
example, in January 2011, a group of 70 engineers pro-
duced a report proposing engineering development goals9 
and stated, “. . . the engineers of today, and the future, will 
need to be innovative in the application of sustainable so-
lutions and increasingly engaged with the human factors 
that influence their decisions.” Likewise, people in business 
have formed the Business Council for Sustainable Develop-
ment, economists have formed the International Society for 
Ecological Economics, religious leaders have formed the 
 National Religious Partnership for the Environment, and 
 environmental philosophers are calling for a new ethic of 
“caring for creation.”
The movement toward sustainability is growing as 
people, businesses, and governments slowly but surely 
begin to change direction. Some examples: wind energy 
is the fastest-growing source of electricity; cap-and-trade 
markets are being established to curb carbon emissions; 
car-sharing companies are springing up in our cities; chem-
ists have embraced the initiatives of “green chemistry”; 
microfinance is opening up people’s small-scale business 
opportunities; “green investments” are attracting increas-
ing capital; and the nations of the world are working 
on agreements to bring down greenhouse gas emissions. 
These developments show that people’s behavior toward 
the environment can be transformed from exploitative to 
conserving.
and  pollution. For many in the world, globalization has 
brought undeniable improvements in well-being and health: 
as economic exchanges have connected people to global mar-
kets, information exchanges have improved public health 
practices, and agricultural research has improved crop yields. 
For others, however, globalization has brought the dilution 
and even destruction of cultural and religious ideals and 
norms and has done little to improve economic well-being. 
Whether helpful or harmful, globalization is taking place, 
and it is important not only to recognize its impacts, but also 
to point out where its impacts are harmful or undesirable. 
Moving toward a sustainable future will occur in the context 
of globalization.
Social Changes
The major elements of globalization may be the economic 
reorganization of the world and changes wrought by so-
cial media. These transformations have been facilitated by 
the globalization of communication, whereby people are 
instantly linked through the Internet, satellite, and cable. 
Social media play a role not only in the economy, but also 
in the rapid mobilization of people during times of change 
such as the 2011 riots in Egypt, Greece, and Libya. Other 
components of the global economic reorganization are the 
relative ease of transportation and financial transactions 
and the dominance of transnational corporations (e.g., 
Nokia, Roche, Philips Electronics, Nestlé) with unprec-
edented wealth and power. Moreover, economic changes 
bring cultural, environmental, and technological changes 
(to name a few) in their wake. Western diet, styles, and cul-
ture are marketed throughout the world, to the detriment of 
local customs and diversity.
Environmental Changes
On the one hand, the increased dissemination of informa-
tion has made it possible for environmental organizations 
and government agencies to connect with the public and has 
enabled people to become politically involved with  current 
issues. It has also enabled consumers to find more envi-
ronmentally friendly consumer goods and services, such as 
shade-grown coffee and sustainably harvested  timber. On 
the other hand, globalization has contributed to some no-
toriously harmful outcomes, such as the worldwide spread 
of emerging diseases like the SARS virus, H1N1 swine influ-
enza, and AIDS; the global dispersion of exotic species; the 
trade in hazardous wastes; the spread of persistent organic 
pollutants; the radioactive fallout from nuclear accidents; the 
exploitation of oceanic fisheries; the destruction of the ozone 
layer; and global climate change. These outcomes must be 
addressed in the move toward a sustainable future.
A new Commitment
People in all walks of life—scientists, sociologists, workers 
and executives, economists, government leaders, and clergy, 
as well as traditional environmentalists—are recognizing 
9Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Population: One Planet, Too Many People? 
2011. http://www.imeche.org/Libraries/2011_Press_Releases/Population_report.sflb.
ashx. September 21, 2011.
48

Science and the Environment
8. Define sustainability and sustainable development. What is a 
sustainable society?
 9. List five transitions that are necessary for a future sustain-
able civilization.
 10. Describe the origins of stewardship and its modern 
 applications.
 11. What is an ethic, and what are some of the difficult ques-
tions confronting the stewardship ethic?
 12. What are the concerns of the environmental justice  movement?
13. How does justice become an issue between the industrialized 
countries and the developing countries?
14. What is globalization? What are its most significant  elements?
15. Cite some of the recent developments in the movement 
 toward sustainability.
 1. What information made Rachel Carson concerned about 
chemical pollution?
 2. What is the paradox of human population and well-being?
 3. Cite four global trends that indicate that the health of planet 
Earth is suffering.
 4. Define environment, and describe the general development 
and successes of modern environmentalism.
 5. What are the concepts behind each of the three unifying 
themes—sound science, sustainability, and stewardship?
 6. Explain the role of assumptions, observation, experimen-
tation, and theory formation in the operation of scientific 
 research and thinking.
 7. Cite some reasons for the existence of controversies within 
science, and carefully distinguish between sound science and 
junk science.
REviEw QuEStionS
REvISITInG THE THEMES
sustainability
The story of DDT and other chemicals widely broadcast over vast areas of 
land only to be revealed later as serious water and soil pollutants is a great 
example of unsustainable  actions. Many unsustainable practices result 
from a combination of cumulative impacts and unintended 
consequences. For example, we did not expect that DDT 
would affect the food chain. At first, DDT seemed a wise 
way to protect food supplies and eliminate malaria. As we 
gathered more information, we discovered the unintended 
consequences of those actions. Likewise, as the human 
population expands, the effects of individuals are multiplied. Both natural 
and managed ecosystems are being pressed to provide increasing goods 
and services. We may have reached the limit in some resources, and most 
of the ways we use the other resources are currently unsustainable. In ad-
dition, we extract and burn fossil fuels much faster than they could ever 
be replenished, bringing on global climate change, and we tolerate the 
continued loss of biodiversity. Many suffer from hunger and other effects 
of poverty. The Millennium Development Goals are moving us in a better 
direction, but it remains to be seen if those goals will be met. A movement 
toward sustainability is under way, and it will occur within the context of 
globalization.
sound science
Our brief look at the global environment was based largely on the infor-
mation uncovered by sound science. The Millennium Ecosystem Assess-
ment and the  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change demonstrate 
the crucial value of scientific study of the status of and 
trends in global ecosystems and the ways in which human 
systems affect them. Environmental science itself is a 
multidisciplinary enterprise, one that can readily lead to disputes and 
misuse. To understand these, it is essential to understand the scientific 
method as a disciplined way to investigate the natural world. Rachel 
Carson is a good example of a scientist who communicated sound sci-
ence to popular audiences. The issue of “junk science” points to the 
importance of a functioning scientific community and the need for an 
educated public able to evaluate opposing claims of scientific support 
for a given issue.
stewardship
Although current cultures and religions place some 
value on stewardship, it is not always a fundamental 
part of the way we think about caring for the natu-
ral world and for our fellow humans. If it were, there 
would not be the widespread degradation of essential 
ecosystems and the devastating impacts of poverty and 
injustice. However, many people work toward care for the natural 
world and its human inhabitants. Rachel Carson is an example of a 
person using her expertise to promote stewardship and advocating for 
policies that would better reflect sustainability. Francisco Pineda and 
Wangari Maathai also exemplify stewardship in this chapter. It is no 
easy matter to establish a valid stewardship ethic to guide the actions 
and programs that manage natural resources and human well-being 
for the common good.
v
p
r
w
e
injustice Howe
f
c
w
w
g
c
m
I
t
t
s
49

Science and the Environment
Text Credits
Source: Silent Spring by Rachel Carson. Published 1962 by Houghton Mifflin; 
Table 1: Source: Based on “Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Ecosystems and 
Human Well-Being: Synthesis” from Millennium Ecosystem Assessment website; 
Figure 4: “Worldwide trends in the Human Development index,” from 2010 Human 
Development Report. Copyright © 2010 by United Nations Publications. Reprinted 
with permission. All rights reserved.; Figure 5: “Atmospheric CO2 at Mauna Loa 
Observatory (Fig. 5),” Scripps CO2 Program, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 
La Jolla, CA. Reprinted with permission.
 3. Study Table 1, pick one of the vital ecosystem services listed 
there, and investigate the reasons why it is placed where it is 
by the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.
 4. Set up a debate between proponents and opponents of build-
ing a new coal-fired power plant. Use the strategies of sound 
science and junk science to conduct the debate, and show 
how a perverted use of these terms can help to obscure 
the real issues. Other interesting debate options include the 
“ozone hoax” and global warming; the Internet can provide 
ample material for both sides of the debate.
 1. Imagine a class debate between people representing the devel-
oping countries and people representing the developed coun-
tries. Characterize the arguments of the two sides in terms 
of the issues surrounding population growth, energy use, re-
source use, and sustainable development. Then describe what 
should be the common interests between the two.
 2. Some people say that the concept of sustainable development 
either is an oxymoron or represents going back to some kind of 
primitive living. Develop an argument contradicting this opin-
ion, and give your own opinion on sustainable development.
thinking EnviRonmEntally
 3. Encourage sound science on a national level by research-
ing and voting in favor of political candidates who support 
your environmental viewpoint. Share your views with your 
friends and relatives.
 4. Investigate the placement of waste-treatment facilities and 
industrial plants in your city or community, especially if 
they are in the planning stage. If they are aimed at poorer or 
largely nonwhite communities, join the local population in 
protesting these situations.
 1. Find out whether there is an environmental organization or 
club on your campus or in your community. Join it if there 
is, or help to create one if there isn’t. Once in the organiza-
tion, join efforts to maintain awareness of important envi-
ronmental issues and problems.
 2. Use letters to the local newspapers or visits to town meet-
ings to raise awareness in your community about sustain-
able systems and sustainable societies. Examples of issues to 
raise include smart growth; cluster zoning, which provides 
a healthy mix of open space and buildings; recycling; and 
ways to encourage public transit systems.
making a DiffEREncE
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cREDitS
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): Silia Photo/Shutterstock; (bottom right): Photodisc/Getty Images/
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt; (top right): Joseph Sohm/Visions of America/
Glow Images, Inc.; (bottom right): Steve Byland / Fotolia; (top left): Rachel 
Carson Counci/Newscom; (top right): brt COMM / Alamy;  (top right) John 
Sylvester / Alamy; (top left): Casper Wilkens/iStockphoto; (bottom left): AP 
Photo/Las Cruces Sun-News, Norm Dettlaff; (bottom center): Science Images/
UIG/Getty Images; (top center): Joseph Sohm/Visions of America/Glow 
Images, Inc.; (top left): Michael Amaranthus/Mycorrhizal Applications, Inc.;  
(top left): Goldman Environmental Prize; (top right): AFP/Getty Images; (top 
left): Sveta/iStockphoto; (top left): globestock/iStockphoto
50

Science and the Environment
concepts Valid explanations of data from the natural world that 
often allow predictions but do not reach the level of validity of 
natural laws.
development A term referring to the continued improvement of 
human well-being, usually in the developing countries.
environment The combination of all things and factors external to 
the individual or population of organisms in question.
environmentalism An attitude or movement involving concern 
about pollution, resource depletion, population pressures, loss of 
biodiversity, and other environmental issues. Usually also implies 
action to address those concerns.
environmentalist Any person who is concerned about the 
degradation of the natural world and is willing to act on that 
concern.
environmental movement The upwelling of public awareness 
and citizen action that began during the 1960s regarding 
environmental issues.
environmental racism Discrimination against people of color 
whereby hazardous industries are sited in nonwhite neighborhoods 
and towns.
environmental science The multidisciplinary branch of science 
concerned with environmental issues.
equity An ethical principle where people’s needs are met in an 
impartial and just manner.
experimentation In the practice of science, the testing of hypotheses 
by setting up situations where cause and effect are investigated, 
using careful measurements of conditions and responses.
goods Products, such as wood and food, that are extracted from 
natural ecosystems to satisfy human needs.
greenhouse effect An increase in the atmospheric temperature 
caused by increasing amounts of carbon dioxide and certain other 
gases that absorb and trap heat, which normally radiates away 
from Earth.
gross domestic product The total value of all goods and services 
exchanged in a year within a country.
hypothesis A tentative guess concerning the cause of an observed 
phenomenon that is then subjected to experiment to test its logical 
or empirical consequences.
junk science Information presented as valid science but unsupported 
by peer-reviewed research. Often, politically motivated and 
biased results are selected to promote a particular point of view.
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) A comprehensive set of 
goals aimed at addressing the most important needs of people in 
the developing countries to improve their well-being, adopted by 
the United Nations at the UN Millennium Summit in 2000.
mitigation Reducing greenhouse gas emissions by a variety of 
strategies and policies.
model In the scientific method, observations may be put together 
to form a larger picture of how a system works, called a model.
natural laws Generalizations derived from our observations of 
matter, energy, and other phenomena. Though not absolute, 
natural laws have been empirically confirmed to a high degree 
and are often derivable from higher-level theory.
natural sciences Those scientific disciplines that study the natural 
world, from subatomic particles to the cosmos.
observations Things or phenomena that are perceived through one 
or more of the basic five senses in their normal state. In addition, 
to be accepted as factual, observations must be verifiable by 
others.
scientific method The process of making observations and logically 
integrating those observations into a model of how the world 
works. Often involves forming hypotheses, experimenting, and 
conducting further testing for confirmation.
services Ecosystem functions that are essential to human life 
and economic well-being, such as waste breakdown, climate 
regulation, and erosion control. These can be further categorized 
as regulating, supporting, and provisioning services.
sound science The basis for our understanding of how the world 
works and how human systems interact with it. It stems from 
scientific work based on peer-reviewed research and is one of the 
unifying themes of this text.
steward/stewardship A steward is one to whom a trust has been 
given. As one of the unifying themes of this text, stewardship 
is the actions and programs that manage natural resources and 
human well-being for the common good.
sustainability A property whereby a process can be continued 
indefinitely without depleting the energy or material resources 
on which it depends. As one of the unifying themes of the text, 
sustainability is the practical goal toward which our interactions 
with the natural world should be working.
sustainable development Development that provides people with 
a better life without sacrificing or depleting resources or causing 
environmental impacts that will undercut the ability of future 
generations to meet their needs.
sustainable society A society that functions in a way so as not to 
deplete the energy or material resources on which it depends. 
Such a society interacts with the natural world in ways that 
maintain existing species and ecosystems.
sustainable yield The taking of a biological resource (e.g., fish 
or forests) in a manner that does not exceed the capacity of the 
resource to reproduce and replace itself.
theory A conceptual formulation that provides a rational 
explanation or framework for numerous related observations.
gloSSaRy
51

This page intentionally left blank 

Basic Needs  
of Living 
Things
From Chapter 3 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Learning Objectives
 1. Organisms in Their Environ-
ment: Explain how the science 
of ecology can be described as a 
hierarchy of questions; describe 
the questions different types of 
ecologists ask, and anticipate 
different experiments they might 
do, all within the same natural 
systems.
 2. Environmental Factors: Explain 
how organisms need specific con-
ditions and resources to survive; 
define an organism’s niche.
 3. Matter in Living and  Nonliving 
Systems: Explain how living 
things need materials to build 
tissues and energy to carry out 
life processes such as photosyn-
thesis and cellular respiration.
 4. Matter and Energy: List the 
simple laws that control the 
transformation of energy from 
one type to another and its flow 
through Earth’s systems and back 
into space.
 5. The Cycling of Matter in Ecosys-
tems: Explain the biogeochemical 
cycles of matter (particularly the 
elements of carbon, phosphorus, 
nitrogen, and sulfur) as they 
cycle through living and nonliv-
ing spheres. 
Basic Needs  
of Living 
Things
O
n may 12, 2008, a massive earthquake shook Sichuan Province, China. It 
closed roads, caused buildings to collapse, and triggered mudslides. The 
earthquake and an estimated 11,600 aftershocks over the next several 
weeks left more than 88,000 dead or missing and up to 5 million people homeless.
The earthquake also damaged two reserves for China’s giant 
pandas: the Wolong Giant Panda Reserve Center in southwest 
 Sichuan Province and the nearby Chengdu Panda Breeding and 
 Research Center. Enclosures were destroyed, pandas were frightened 
and escaped, and food was difficult to obtain. Although most 
of the pandas were unharmed in the earthquake, one was 
missing, and an adult female named maomao was killed. 
In the face of this bad news, two weeks after the earthquake, 
to the relief of keepers and the great rejoicing of panda conser­
vationists, a pregnant female gave birth. Eventually, the pandas 
in the earthquake area had to be moved to other facilities.
a sad day. China’s sorrow and concern for the 
pandas made international news. maomao‘s funeral 
was covered on the Internet and television. Why so 
much concern about pandas in a disaster that harmed 
so many humans? The giant panda is a cultural icon of 
China, beloved and found in books and stories. Sadly, it is 
endangered, with only about 1,600 pandas still alive in 
China
Quake
epicenter
Historic Giant 
Panda range
54

the wild, many in small reserves, and another approximately 270 
in captivity. Despite their endangered species status, giant pandas 
 remain under pressure from habitat loss and poaching. To many 
Chinese citizens, the loss of a giant panda and the fear that they 
might be even closer to extinction after the earthquake were 
 sorrows added to the tremendous loss of human life. The survival 
of most of the protected pandas brought joy in a time of despair.
Panda survivaL. The giant panda lives on bamboo, 
found in broad­leaved forests in a decreasing habitat in China. 
Care for the  declining panda population involves not only care 
for their individual health and the interbreeding population, but 
also protection of their habitat, including their food source. Often 
populations decline because damage is done to a habitat or food 
resource rather than to individuals directly. The panda and its 
food, bamboo, give us an opportunity to look at the fundamental 
science behind the survival of organisms in their natural spaces.
In this chapter, we will follow the panda and the bamboo 
as examples of organisms living in their environment. All organ­
isms get nutrients and energy from the environment and use 
them to build their body tissues and carry out activities such as 
moving, getting food, protecting themselves, reproducing, and 
getting rid of wastes. Pandas and bamboo both need ways to 
deal with the conditions under which they live—the amount of 
light, food, and water available, for example. We will see how 
the basic functions of organisms fit into the scientific discipline 
of ecology. We will explore basic physical rules about matter 
and energy and how they control the lives of organisms in their 
environments. To do this, we will need to understand some basic 
chemistry and physics. At the chapter’s end, we will look at the 
global movements of important nutrients and how those huge 
cycles both affect individual organisms and are affected by 
human activities.
1  Organisms in Their Environment
Bamboo is a group of about 1,000 related types in the grass 
family, but unlike most grasses you may be familiar with, 
bamboos are woody and evergreen. As a group, bamboo is 
the fastest-growing plant on Earth. The areas in which bam-
boo is found are a function of several factors—its habitat 
requirements, its evolutionary history (where it first devel-
oped), and its interactions with other organisms, including 
humans. Bamboo needs certain resources (such as sunlight 
and water) to survive. A panda also needs certain resources 
to survive, including bamboo (as a food source). The distri-
bution and abundance of the giant panda are likewise func-
tions of its requirements for survival, its growth, and the 
history of interaction between pandas and other species, 
especially humans. To understand why giant pandas are in 
decline and what conditions bamboo requires for growth, we 
turn to the science of ecology.
The Hierarchy of Ecology
Ecology (from Oikos, meaning “house or home”) is the study 
of all processes influencing the distribution and abundance 
of organisms and the interactions between living things and 
their environment. A very basic understanding of ecological 
terms and concepts will help later as we look at how changes 
in the environment affect living things.
Ecologists studying the conservation of giant pandas ask 
an array of different questions. They investigate what type of 
soil bamboo requires to grow most rapidly or look for the 
factors that influence successful breeding. They might also 
study land use around Sichuan Province to see how it affects 
giant panda habitat. Any of these inquiries constitutes an 
 ecological question, and several different branches of ecology 
exist to address them. Ecology can be described as a group 
of different, but related, disciplines: a hierarchy of studies. 
Scientists in different branches of the discipline might oper-
ate at different scales and ask different questions about the 
same system. The concept of ecological hierarchy is depicted 
in Figure 1.
As we investigate the science of ecology, we will look 
at these different levels in the hierarchy. We start by exam-
ining individual organisms at the species level. We will see 
how species are grouped into larger categories and how 
these groups interact. Species exist in specific habitats be-
cause those habitats provide the nutrients and other factors 
that a species needs to survive; we will look at how those 
needs are met. Lastly, we will take a broader view of matter 
and energy, and how energy and nutrients cycle through the 
various systems on Earth. All of these different processes are 
interlinked. Ecologists study the connections as well as the 
whole.
Species. A species is a group of individuals that share cer-
tain characteristics distinct from other such groups (robins 
versus redwing blackbirds, for example). Species are classi-
fied into closely related groups called genera (singular, genus), 
and they in turn are grouped into families. These are grouped 
into larger groups: orders, classes, phyla (singular, phylum), 
kingdoms, and domains. The official scientific name of any 
species is always Latin and has two parts: the genus name 
and the species epithet, or descriptive term. For example, the 
giant panda’s name, Ailuropoda melanoleuca (“black-and-
white cat-foot”), tells us first the genus (Ailuropoda) and 
second a descriptive word (the species epithet, melanoleuca). 
Although the giant panda is in the bear family (Ursidae), it 
is considered so different from other bears that it is the only 
species in this genus. In contrast, when we say “bamboo,” 
we actually mean a group of about 1,000 related species in 
the same subcategory of the grass family. The bamboo eaten 
by the giant panda is composed of members of two of these 
bamboo species.
Basic Needs of Living Things 
55

Basic Needs of Living Things 
Biosphere
Levels of organization within an organism
Landscape
Community
Population
Ecosystem 
organisms,
sun, and rain.
Organ
Organism
Tissue
Cell
Biome
Figure 1 The hierarchy of life. Organisms can be seen as a hierarchy of complex systems from cells to 
tissues to organs to systems to whole individuals. Likewise, individuals function in a set of increasingly complex 
systems that make up the disciplines of ecology. These include populations, communities, ecosystems, and land­
scapes. The very largest regions are called biomes. Together, all living things make up the biosphere.
56

Basic Needs of Living Things 
Sometimes it is difficult to determine exactly what consti-
tutes a species. The biological definition of a species is all mem-
bers that can interbreed and produce fertile offspring. Members 
of different species generally do not interbreed. This definition 
is good for many organisms, but does not work for those that 
do not need to mate to produce offspring. In those cases, scien-
tists use a variety of other classification methods. New species 
can arise over periods of time through evolution, and species 
classifications are occasionally altered to reflect this.
Populations. Each species in a biotic community is repre-
sented by a certain population—that is, by a certain number 
of individuals that make up the interbreeding, reproducing 
group. The distinction between population and species is 
that population refers only to those individuals of a certain 
species that live within a given area—for example, all of the 
gray wolves in Yellowstone National Park. Species is all in-
clusive, such as all of the gray wolves in the world.
Biotic Communities. The grouping of populations we ob-
serve when studying a forest, grassland, or pond is referred 
to as the area’s biota (bio means “living”) or biotic com-
munity. The biota includes all vegetation, from large trees 
through microscopic algae, and all animals, from large mam-
mals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians through earthworms, 
tiny insects, and mites. It also includes microscopic creatures 
such as bacteria, fungi, and protozoans.
The particular kind of biotic community found in a given 
area is, in large part, determined by abiotic (nonliving, chemi-
cal, and physical) factors. Abiotic factors include the amount 
of water or moisture present, climate, salinity (saltiness), and 
soil type. Sometimes, we quickly refer to a community by 
its most obvious members, such as the dominant plants. For 
example, we might describe a “hemlock/beech forest” or an 
“oak/hickory forest” (Fig. 2). This is because vegetation is eas-
ily observed (it doesn’t usually run away) and is a strong indi-
cator of the environmental conditions of a site.
The species within a community depend on one another. 
For example, certain animals will not be present unless certain 
plants that provide food and shelter are also present. In this 
way, the plant community supports (or limits by its absence) 
the animal community. In addition, every plant and animal spe-
cies is adapted to cope with the abiotic factors of its region. 
For example, every species that lives in a temperate region is 
adapted in one way or another to survive the winter season, 
which includes a period of freezing temperatures (Fig. 3). These 
interactions among organisms and their environments will be 
discussed later. For now, keep in mind that the populations of 
different species within a biotic community are constantly inter-
acting with each other and with the abiotic environment.
Ecosystems. An ecosystem is an interactive complex of 
communities and the abiotic environment affecting them 
within a particular area. Forests, grasslands, wetlands, 
sand dunes, and coral reefs each contain specific species 
in  particular spatial areas and are all distinct ecosystems. 
 Humans are parts of ecosystems, too, and some branches of 
ecology, such as urban ecology, focus on human-dominated 
Figure 2 Predictable vegetation. An oak/hickory forest is dominated by 
oak and hickory trees, which define the type of forest habitat other species experi­
ence.
Figure 3 Winter in the forest. many trees and other plants of 
temperate forests are so adapted to the winter season that they actually require  
a period of freezing temperature in order to grow again in the spring.
57

Basic Needs of Living Things 
Tropical rain forests, grasslands, and deserts are  biomes 
A biome is a large area of Earth’s surface that shares cli-
mate and has similar vegetation. Biomes are much larger 
than landscapes. For example, grasslands (such as prairies) 
are geographical regions whose locations can be predicted 
by their rainfall and temperatures. On different continents, 
they may have different particular species, but they are still 
grasslands, described by the dominant type of vegetation. 
As with ecosystems, there are generally no sharp boundaries 
between biomes. Instead, one grades into the next through 
transitional regions. The term biome is limited to terrestrial 
systems. There are major categories of aquatic and wetland 
ecosystems that are determined primarily by the depth, salin-
ity, and permanence of water in them
systems. Other ecologists study the interaction between hu-
mans and non-human ecosystems, such as salt marshes or 
the open ocean, which are deeply affected by humans.
While it is convenient to divide the living world into dif-
ferent ecosystems, you will find that there are seldom distinct 
boundaries between them and that they are not totally isolated 
from one another. Many species occupy (and are a part of) 
two or more ecosystems or, as in the case of migrating birds, 
may move from one ecosystem to another at different times.
Transitional regions between ecosystems are known as 
ecotones. An ecotone shares many of the species and char-
acteristics of both ecosystems it passes through. Ecotones 
may lack unique (and contain fewer overall) species than 
bordering ecosystems, as in the ecotone between grassland 
and forest shown in Figure 4a. Alternatively, ecotones may 
also house and support more different species than those 
they pass through, as in the marshy ecotone that often occurs 
 between the open water of a lake and dry land (Fig. 4b).
Landscapes and Biomes. Clusters of interacting ecosys-
tems like forests, open meadows, and rivers together consti-
tute landscapes. Landscape ecologists study issues such as 
how much suitable habitat will be left for fish to lay eggs 
in a riverbed if the surrounding forest is clear-cut or how 
far squirrels will be able to travel if the forest is broken into 
small segments. Landscapes are usually on a scale humans 
can  envision; for example, if you look out at the horizon and 
see a forest merge into a field or meadow, you are seeing a 
landscape. However, landscapes can also be observed on  
a large scale: one could also pull back from Earth and look 
at large areas of its surface that have similar characteristics 
(such as dominant vegetation). Many scientists use digital 
technology tools such as Geographic Information  Systems 
(GIS) to study landscape features. They also use remote 
 sensing, including images from satellites (Fig. 5).
Figure 4 Ecotones. (a) Ecosystems are not isolated from one another. One ecosystem blends into the next through a transitional region—an ecotone—that  contains 
many species common to both systems, though in lower numbers than in those systems. (b) An ecotone may create a unique habitat that harbors specialized  species not 
found in either of the ecosystems bordering it. For example, cattails, reeds, and lily pads typically grow in the ecotone between land and freshwater ponds.
Deciduous forest
ecosystem
Population
Grassland
ecosystem
Grassland-forest
ecotone
(a)
(b)
Ecosystem I
Land-water
ecotone
Ecosystem II
Terrestrial
species
Aquatic
species
Deciduous forest
species
Grassland
species
Figure 5 Landscape Ecology. Here a researcher demonstrates a mapping 
tool used in landscape ecology. This is a prototype of a Geographical Information 
System (GIS) called Soilfit.
58

Basic Needs of Living Things 
grown under controlled conditions in which one factor is var-
ied while other factors are held constant. Such experiments 
demonstrate that, for every factor, there is a certain level 
at which the organisms grow or survive most; an  optimum 
(plural, optima). At higher or lower levels than the optimum, 
the organisms do less well, and at further extremes, they may 
not be able to survive at all (Fig. 6). This pertains to almost 
any abiotic factor that might be tested.
The point at which the best response occurs is the op-
timum, but this may be a range of several degrees (or other 
units), so it is common to speak of an optimal range. The en-
tire span that allows any growth at all is called the range of 
tolerance. The points at the high and low ends of the range of 
tolerance are called the limits of tolerance.  Between the op-
timal range and the high or low limit of tolerance are zones 
of stress. In other words, as the factor is raised or lowered 
from the optimal range, the organisms experience increasing 
stress, until, at either limit of tolerance, they cannot survive.
A Fundamental Biological Principle. Based on the con-
sistency of observations and experiments, the following is 
considered to be a fundamental biological principle: Every 
species has an optimal range, zones of stress, and limits of 
tolerance with respect to every abiotic factor, and these char-
acteristics vary between species. For instance, some plants 
cannot tolerate any freezing temperatures; others can toler-
ate slight freezing; and some actually require several weeks 
of freezing temperatures to complete their life cycles. Some 
species have a very broad range of tolerance, whereas others 
have a much narrower range.
The range of tolerance for any factor affects more than 
just the growth of individuals. Because the health and vigor of 
individuals affect their ability to reproduce, the survival of the 
next generation is also affected, which in turn influences the 
population as a whole. Consequently, the population density 
(individuals per unit area) of a species is greatest where all 
conditions are optimal, and it decreases as any one or more 
conditions depart from the optimum. You expect to see the 
most bamboo in the places where all conditions are best for 
bamboo and less where conditions are not so favorable.
Law of Limiting Factors. In 1840, Justus von Liebig stud-
ied the effects of chemical nutrients on plant growth. He 
observed that restricting any one of the many different nutri-
ents at any given time had the same effect: it limited growth. 
A factor that limits growth is called (not surprisingly) a limit-
ing factor. If any one factor is outside the optimal range, it 
will cause stress and limit the growth, reproduction, or even 
survival of a population. This observation is referred to as 
the law of limiting factors or Liebig’s law of the minimum.
A limiting factor may be a problem of too much instead 
of a problem of too little. For example, plants may be stressed 
or killed not only by underwatering or underfertilizing, but 
also by overwatering or overfertilizing, which are common 
pitfalls for beginning gardeners. Note also that the limiting 
factor may change from one time to another and that if one 
limiting factor is corrected, growth will increase only until an-
other factor comes into play. For instance, temperature may 
Biosphere. Regardless of how we choose to categorize and 
name different ecosystems, they are interconnected and inter-
dependent. Terrestrial ecosystems are connected by the flow 
of rivers and by migrating animals. Sediments and nutrients 
washing from the land may nourish or pollute the ocean. 
Seabirds and marine mammals connect the oceans with the 
land, and all biomes share a common atmosphere and water 
cycle. All the species on Earth live in ecosystems, and eco-
systems are interconnected so that all living things form one 
huge system called the biosphere. This concept is analogous 
to the idea that the cells of our bodies form tissues, tissues 
form organs, organs are connected into organ systems, and 
all are interconnected to form the whole body.
2 Environmental Factors
Let’s look back at the giant panda eating bamboo at the re-
serve. Why are pandas living there and not in another part of 
the world? The answer is both the environment and history. 
The bamboo and the panda have evolved to live in the envi-
ronment of the reserve, with the physical, chemical, and bio-
logical factors it contains. As already discussed, we describe 
these factors as either biotic (living) or abiotic (nonliving). 
The factors can be further characterized as either conditions 
or resources. Conditions are any factors that vary in space 
and time, but that are not used up or made unavailable to 
other species. These include temperature (extremes of heat 
and cold as well as average temperature), wind, pH (acid-
ity), salinity (saltiness), and fire. Resources are any factors—
biotic or abiotic—that are consumed by organisms. These 
include water, chemical nutrients (like nitrogen and phos-
phorus), light (for plants), oxygen, food (like the bamboo for 
the panda), and space for resting or nesting.
Some factors can be conditions in one situation and re-
sources in another. For example, plants in the desert compete 
for water as a resource; however, in a pond, water is a condi-
tion for which plants like water lilies and cattails need spe-
cial adaptations and for which they are not competing.
The degree to which each factor is present or absent pro-
foundly affects the ability of organisms to survive. However, 
each species may be affected differently by each factor, and its re-
sponse determines whether or not it will occupy a given region.
Optimums, Zones of Stress, and  
Limits of Tolerance
Different species thrive with different combinations of envi-
ronmental factors. This principle applies to all living things, 
both plants and animals. Bamboo thrives in full sun and 
warm temperatures, with plenty of water and well-drained, 
nitrogen-rich soil. In contrast, desert cacti are  generally 
adapted for low amounts of water, poor soil fertility, and 
extremes of heat and cold. Aquatic systems also vary in 
their environmental factors and residents—for example, the 
amounts of freshwater and saltwater determine the varieties 
of fish and other organisms present.
Organismal ecologists study the adaptations of organ-
isms to specific environmental factors. Organisms can be 
59

Basic Needs of Living Things 
 species has its own niche. An ecological niche is the sum of 
all of the conditions and resources under which a species can 
live: what and where it feeds, what it feeds on, where it finds 
shelter and nests, and how it responds to abiotic factors.
Similar species can coexist in the same habitat but have 
separate niches. Competition is minimized because potential 
competitors are using different resources. For example, bats 
and swallows both feed on flying insects, but they do not com-
pete because bats feed on night-flying insects and swallows 
feed during the day.
In the next section, we will see how organisms take these 
materials from the environment and use them to grow and 
maintain their bodies and do activities necessary for survival.
3  Matter in Living and Nonliving 
Systems
Living organisms need to be able to take in matter and en-
ergy from their environment to grow and function. For 
example, the bamboo that grows in the panda reserve can 
survive only because it is able to take the Sun’s energy and 
combine it with materials from the soil, air, and water around 
it to make the basic building blocks of its own tissues and to 
power its cellular activities. In turn, the giant panda will eat 
be limiting in the early spring, nutrients may be limiting in the 
winter, and water may be limiting if a drought occurs.
While one factor may be limiting at a given time, sev-
eral factors outside the optimum may combine to cause ad-
ditional stress or even death. In particular, pollutants may 
act in a way that causes organisms to become more vul-
nerable to disease or drought. Such cases are examples of 
synergistic effects, or synergisms, which are defined as two 
or more factors interacting in a way that causes an effect 
much greater than one would anticipate from each of the 
two acting separately.
Habitat and Niche. Habitat refers to the kind of place—
defined by the plant community and the physical environ-
ment—where a species is biologically adapted to live. For 
example, deciduous forests, swamps, and grassy fields are 
types of habitats. Different types of forests (for instance, 
coniferous versus tropical) provide markedly different habi-
tats and support different species of wildlife. Because some 
organisms operate on very small scales, we use the term 
 microhabitat for things like puddles, spaces sheltered by 
rocks, and holes in tree trunks that might house their own 
small community (Fig. 7).
Even when different species occupy the same habi-
tat, competition may be slight or nonexistent because each 
Figure 6 Survival curve. For every factor 
influencing growth, reproduction, and survival, there 
is an optimum level. Above and below the optimum, 
stress increases until survival becomes impossible at 
the limits of tolerance. The total range between the 
high and low limits is the range of tolerance.
Rate of growth
Optimum
Celsius
temperature
8°
18°
28°
38°
Limit
of
tolerance
Limit
of
tolerance
Death
occurs
Death
occurs
Increasing
stress
Increasing
stress
Range of tolerance
Optimal range
60

Basic Needs of Living Things 
How can these relatively few building blocks make up 
the countless materials of our world, including the tissues of 
living things? Picture each kind of atom as a different-sized 
Lego® block. Like Legos, atoms can build a great variety of 
things. Also like Legos, natural materials can be taken apart 
into their separate constituent atoms, and the atoms can then 
be reassembled into different materials. All chemical reactions, 
whether occurring in a test tube, in the environment, or in-
side living things (and whether they occur very slowly or very 
quickly), involve rearrangements of atoms to form different 
kinds of matter.
Atoms do not change during the disassembly and reas-
sembly of different materials. A carbon atom will always re-
main a carbon atom. In chemical reactions, atoms are neither 
created nor destroyed. The same number and kind of differ-
ent atoms exist before and after any reaction. This constancy 
of atoms is regarded as a fundamental natural law, the Law 
of Conservation of Matter. Nuclear reactions differ from the 
chemical reactions we are discussing and can result in the 
splitting of an atom of one element into multiple atoms of 
another element. However, this is a very specific, rare  instance 
and is not a chemical reaction. 
Now we turn our attention to the ways atoms are put 
together, which atoms make up the bulk of the bodies of 
living organisms, and how atoms are incorporated into 
 organisms.
Molecules and Compounds. A molecule consists of two 
or more atoms (either the same kind or different kinds) 
bonded in a specific way. The properties of a material de-
pend on the exact way in which atoms are bonded to form 
molecules as well as on the atoms themselves. A compound 
consists of two or more different kinds of atoms that are 
bonded. For example, the fundamental units of oxygen gas, 
which consist of two bonded oxygen atoms, are molecules 
(O2) but not compounds. By contrast, when an oxygen atom 
binds with hydrogen atoms to create water, it is both a mol-
ecule and a compound (H2O).
On the chemical level, the cycle of growth, reproduction, 
death, and decay of organisms is a continuous process of 
using various molecules and compounds from the environ-
ment (food), assembling them into living organisms (growth), 
disassembling them (decay), and repeating the process.
Four Spheres
During growth and decay, atoms move from the environ-
ment into living things and then return to the environment. 
To picture this process, think of the environment as three 
open, nonliving systems, or “spheres,” interacting with the 
biosphere (Fig. 8). The atmosphere is the thin layer of gases 
(including water vapor) separating Earth from outer space. 
The hydrosphere is water in all of its liquid and solid com-
partments: oceans, rivers, ice, and groundwater. The litho-
sphere is Earth’s crust, made up of rocks and minerals. 
Matter is constantly being exchanged within and between 
these four spheres.
the  bamboo and get energy and matter necessary to build 
its own tissues and to do the work it needs to do in each 
of its cells. To understand this simple ecological relationship, 
we need to know some basic chemistry and physics. Later, 
we will explore what happens to energy and matter as they 
move through the biosphere.
Basic Units of Matter
Matter is defined as anything that occupies space and has mass. 
This definition covers all solids, liquids, and gases as well as 
all living and nonliving things. Matter is composed of atoms—
very small pieces—that are combined to form molecules, which 
in turn can be combined into more complex structures.
Atoms. The basic building blocks of all matter are atoms. 
Only 94 different kinds of atoms occur in nature, and these 
are known as the naturally occurring elements. Atoms are 
made up of protons, neutrons, and electrons, which in turn 
are made up of still smaller particles. For example, lead (Pb) 
is an element. An atom of lead is the smallest amount of lead 
existing that has the characteristics of lead. A lead atom has 
a characteristic number of protons (positive particles), neu-
trons (neutral particles), and electrons (negative particles).
Figure 7 Habitat and niche. For part of their lives, these damselflies live 
in the pool of water trapped by a type of tropical plant; the tiny pool is a micro­
habitat. The specific conditions required by the damselfly, such as the pool and the 
types of food it eats there or where it lays its eggs as an adult, are its niche.
61

Basic Needs of Living Things 
 atmosphere are normally stable, but under some circum-
stances, they react chemically to form new compounds. 
For example, ozone is produced from oxygen in the upper 
 atmosphere Plants take carbon dioxide in from the atmos-
phere, usually through their leaves. Animals usually take 
oxygen in through some type of specialized organ such as a 
lung, but some, like earthworms, can simply absorb oxygen 
through their skin.
Hydrosphere. While the atmosphere is a major source of 
carbon and oxygen for organisms, the hydrosphere is the 
source of hydrogen. Each molecule of water consists of two 
hydrogen atoms bonded to an oxygen atom, so the chemi-
cal formula for water is H2O. A weak attraction known as 
 hydrogen bonding exists between water molecules.
Water is an important molecule for living things and 
usually needs to be available in liquid form. Water occurs in 
three different states. At temperatures below freezing, hydro-
gen bonding holds the molecules in position with respect to 
one another, and the result is a solid crystal structure (ice or 
snow). At temperatures above freezing but below vaporiza-
tion, hydrogen bonding still holds the molecules close but al-
lows them to move past one another, producing the liquid 
state. Vaporization (evaporation) occurs as hydrogen bonds 
break and water molecules move into the air independently. 
As temperatures are lowered again, all of these changes of 
state go in the reverse direction. Generally, water undergoes 
melting and evaporation, but sometimes water molecules 
leave snow or ice and go directly into the air. This is sublima-
tion (Fig. 9). Moving from one state to another either releases 
or requires a great deal of energy. This is one reason why 
many animals sweat to cool off: changing from the liquid 
Atmosphere. The lower atmosphere is a mixture of mol-
ecules of three important gases—oxygen (O2), nitrogen 
(N2), and carbon dioxide (CO2)—along with water vapor 
and trace amounts of several other gases. The gases in the 
Figure 8 The four spheres of Earth’s environment. The biosphere 
is all of life on Earth. It depends on, and interacts with, the atmosphere (air), the 
hydrosphere (water), and the lithosphere (soil and rocks).
(Source: Adapted from Geosystems, 5th ed., by Robert W. Christopherson, © 2005 Pearson 
Education, Inc.)
Biosphere
(Living systems)
Hydrosphere
Atmosphere
Lithosphere
Figure 9 Water and its three states. (a) Water consists of 
molecules, each of which is formed when two hydrogen atoms bond 
to an oxygen atom (H2O). (b) In water vapor, the molecules are sepa­
rate and independent. (c) In liquid water, the weak attraction be­
tween water molecules known as hydrogen bonding gives the water 
its liquid property. (d) At freezing temperatures, hydrogen bonding 
holds the molecules firmly, giving the solid state—ice.
(b)
O
H
H
Gas
(water
vapor)
Solid
(ice)
Liquid
(water)
Sublimation
Deposition
Condensation
Vaporization/
evaporation
Freezing
Melting
(d)
(c)
(+)
(−)
Water molecule
(a)
62

Basic Needs of Living Things 
Organic Compounds
Your body, like that of the panda or even the bamboo it eats, 
is composed of relatively large chemical compounds in a 
number of broad categories, such as proteins, carbohydrates 
(sugars and starches), lipids (fatty substances), and nucleic 
acids (DNA and RNA). These compounds usually contain 
six key elements: carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), 
 nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and sulfur (S) (Table 1).  Living 
things need other elements as well, sometimes in smaller, but 
no less important, amounts.
Unlike the relatively simple molecules that occur in the 
environment (such as CO2, H2O, and N2), the key chemi-
cal elements in living organisms bond to form very large, 
complex molecules. The chemical compounds making up 
to gas state requires heat and removes it from the organism. 
Despite the changes of state, the water molecules themselves 
retain their basic chemical structure of two hydrogen atoms 
bonded to an oxygen atom; only the relationship between 
the molecules changes.
Lithosphere. All the other elements that are required by 
living organisms, as well as the approximately 72 elements 
that they do not require, are found in the lithosphere, in 
the form of rock and soil minerals. A mineral is a natu-
rally occurring solid, made by geologic processes; it is a 
hard, crystalline structure of a given chemical composition 
(Fig. 10). Most rocks are made up of relatively small crys-
tals of two or more minerals, and soil generally consists of 
particles of many different minerals. Each mineral is made 
up of dense clusters of two or more kinds of atoms bonded 
by an attraction between positive and negative charges on 
the atoms
Interactions. Air, water, and minerals interact with each 
other in a simple, but significant, manner. Gases from the 
air and ions (charged atoms) from minerals may dissolve in 
water. Therefore, natural water is inevitably a solution con-
taining variable amounts of dissolved gases and minerals. 
This solution is constantly subject to change because vari-
ous processes may remove any dissolved substances in it or 
additional materials may dissolve in it. Molecules of water 
enter the air by evaporation and leave it again via condensa-
tion and precipitation Thus, the amount of moisture in the air 
fluctuates constantly. Wind may carry dust or mineral par-
ticles, but the amount changes constantly because the parti-
cles gradually settle out from the air. These interactions are 
summarized in Figure 11. The materials in these three spheres 
interact with the biosphere as living organisms take materials 
from the spheres and use them to create complex molecules 
in their bodies. We will discuss the process of building these 
molecules next.
Figure 10 Minerals. minerals (hard, crystalline compounds) are composed 
of dense clusters of atoms of two or more elements. The atoms of most elements 
gain or lose one or more electrons, becoming negative (2) or positive (1) ions, 
and form a predictable pattern held closely together. This photograph is of a min­
eral, gypsum in a mine in Texas.
O
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
+
+
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N N
OC
O
O
C
O
O
O
OO
O O
O
O
O O
O
Precipitation
Evaporation
Mineral dissolving
Crystallization
Air
Water
Dissolved
minerals
Mineral
Dissolved
gases
– +
– +
–
+
–
+
– +
– +
– +
–
+
–
+
– +
+
– +
+
– +
+
–
–
+
–
–
+
–
–
–
+
+
Figure 11 Interrelationship among air, water, and miner-
als. minerals and gases dissolve in water, forming solutions. Water evaporates 
into air, causing humidity. These processes are all reversible: minerals in solution 
recrystallize, and water vapor in the air condenses to form liquid water.
63

Basic Needs of Living Things 
carbon–carbon nor carbon–hydrogen bonds. While this is 
the general rule, some exceptions occur; by convention, a 
few compounds that contain carbon bonds, such as carbon 
dioxide, are still considered inorganic.
All plastics and countless other human-made com-
pounds are also based on carbon bonding and are, chemi-
cally speaking, organic compounds. To resolve any confusion 
this may cause, the compounds making up living  organisms 
the  tissues of living organisms are referred to as organic. 
Some of these molecules may contain millions of atoms. 
These molecules are constructed mainly from carbon atoms 
bonded into chains, with hydrogen and oxygen atoms at-
tached. Nitrogen, phosphorus, or sulfur may be present 
also, but the key common denominator is carbon–carbon 
and carbon–hydrogen or carbon–oxygen bonds.  Inorganic, 
then, refers to molecules or compounds with neither 
tabLe 1
Elements Found in Living Organisms and the Locations of Those Elements in the Environment
Biologically Important Molecule or Ion in  
Which the Element Occursa
 
Location in the Environmentb
Element (Kind of Atom)
Symbol
Name
Formula
Atmosphere
Hydrosphere
Lithosphere
Carbon
C
Carbon dioxide
CO2
X
X
X (CO3)
Hydrogen
H
Water
H2O
X
(Water itself)
Atomic oxygen  
(required in respiration)
O
Oxygen gas
O2
X
X
Molecular oxygen  
(required in photosynthesis)
O2
Water
H2O
(Water itself)
Nitrogen
N
Nitrogen gas
Ammonium ion
Nitrate ion
N2
NH4
NH3
X
X
X
X
Via fixation
X
X
Sulfur
S
Sulfate ion
SO4
2
X
X
Phosphorus
P
Phosphate ion
PO4
3
X
X
Potassium
K
Potassium ion
K+
X
X
Calcium
Ca
Calcium ion
Ca2
X
X
Magnesium
Mg
Magnesium ion
Mg2
X
X
Trace Elementsc
Iron
Fe
Iron ion
Fe2, Fe3
X
X
Manganese
Mn
Manganese ion
Mn2
X
X
Boron
B
Boron ion
B3
X
X
Zinc
Zn
Zinc ion
Zn2
X
X
Copper
Cu
Copper ion
Cu2
X
X
Molybdenum
Mo
Molybdenum ion
Mo2
X
X
Chlorine
Cl
Chloride ion
Cl2
X
X
Note: These elements are found in all living organisms—plants, animals, and microbes. Some organisms require certain elements in addition to the ones listed. For 
example, humans require sodium and iodine.
aA molecule is a chemical unit of two or more atoms that are bonded. An ion is a single atom or group of bonded atoms that has acquired a positive or negative 
charge as indicated.
bX means that element exists in the indicated sphere.
cOnly small or trace amounts of these elements are required.
64

Basic Needs of Living Things 
energy that you are familiar with. What do the various forms 
of energy have in common? They affect matter, causing 
changes in its position or state. For example, the release of 
energy in an explosion causes things to go flying—a change 
in position. Heating water causes it to boil and change to 
steam, a change of state. On a molecular level, changes of 
state are actually also movements of atoms or molecules. For 
instance, the degree of heat energy contained in a substance 
is a measure of the relative vibrational motion of the atoms 
and molecules of the substance. Therefore, we can define 
 energy as the ability to move matter.
Energy Basics
Energy can be categorized as either kinetic or potential 
 (Fig.  12). Kinetic energy is energy in action or motion. 
Light, heat, physical motion, and electrical current are 
all forms of kinetic energy. Potential energy is energy in 
 storage. A substance or system with potential energy has 
the capacity, or potential, to release one or more forms of 
kinetic energy. A stretched rubber band has potential en-
ergy; it can send a paper clip flying. Numerous chemicals, 
such as gasoline and other fuels, release kinetic energy—
heat, light, and  movement—when ignited. The potential 
energy contained in such chemicals and fuels is called 
chemical energy.
are referred to as natural organic compounds and the 
 human-made ones as synthetic organic compounds. The 
term organic can have a completely different meaning, such 
as in organic farming
To summarize: the elements essential to life (C, H, O, 
and so on) are present in the atmosphere, hydrosphere, 
or lithosphere in relatively simple molecules. In the  living 
 organisms of the biosphere, on the other hand, these ele-
ments are organized into highly complex organic com-
pounds. In the case of the panda and bamboo, simple 
molecules and atoms in the soil, air, and water are combined 
to form the tissues of bamboo and eaten, digested, and re-
combined to make the tissues of the giant panda. When the 
bamboo or panda dies, the reverse process occurs through 
decomposition and decay. Each of these processes is dis-
cussed in more detail later in the chapter. Next, we discuss 
energy, the force that helps change chemical matter into sub-
stances that support life.
4  Matter and Energy
The universe is made up of matter and energy. Recall that 
matter is anything that occupies space and has mass. By con-
trast, light, heat, movement, and electricity do not have mass, 
nor do they occupy space. These are the common forms of 
Kinetic Energy
FORMS OF ENERGY
Potential Energy
Four Types of Chemical Potential Energy
Gasoline
Firewood
Explosives
Battery
Motion
Electrical power
Light and
other forms of
radiation
Heat
Reservoir behind
hydroelectric dam
High
pressure
Figure 12 Forms of energy. Energy is 
distinct from matter in that it neither has mass nor 
occupies space. It has the ability to act on matter, 
though, changing the position or the state of the 
matter. Kinetic energy is energy in one of its active 
forms. Potential energy is the potential that systems 
or materials have to release kinetic energy.
65

Basic Needs of Living Things 
Laws of Thermodynamics. Because energy can be con-
verted from one form to another, numerous would-be in-
ventors over the years have tried to build machines that 
produce more energy than they consume. One common idea 
was to use the output from a generator to drive a motor 
that in turn would be expected to drive a generator to keep 
the cycle going and yield additional power in the bargain 
(a perpetual- motion machine). Unfortunately, all such de-
vices have one feature in common: They don’t work. When 
all the inputs and outputs of energy are carefully measured, 
they are found to be equal. There is no net gain or loss 
in total energy. This observation is now accepted as a fun-
damental natural law, the Law of Conservation of Energy. 
It is also called the First Law of Thermodynamics, and it 
can be expressed as follows: Energy is neither created nor 
 destroyed, but may be  converted from one form to another. 
What this law really means is that you can’t get something 
for nothing.
Imaginative “energy generators” fail for two reasons: 
First, in every energy conversion, a portion of the  energy 
is converted to heat energy. Second, there is no way of 
trapping and recycling heat energy without expending 
even more energy in doing so. Consequently, in the ab-
sence of energy inputs, any and every system will sooner 
or later come to a stop as its energy is converted to heat 
and lost. This is now accepted as another natural law, the 
 Second Law of Thermodynamics, and it can be expressed 
as  follows: In any energy conversion, some of the usable 
Energy may be changed from one form to another in 
 innumerable ways (Fig. 13). Besides understanding that po-
tential energy can be converted to kinetic energy, it is es-
pecially important to recognize that kinetic energy can 
be converted to potential energy. (Consider, for example, 
charging a battery or pumping water into a high-elevation 
reservoir.) We shall see later in this section that photosyn-
thesis does just that.
Because energy does not have mass or occupy space, it 
cannot be measured in units of weight or volume. Instead, 
energy is measured in other kinds of units. One of the most 
common energy units is the calorie, which is defined as the 
amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 gram 
(1 milliliter) of water 1 degree Celsius. This is a very small 
unit, so it is frequently more convenient to use the kilocalo-
rie (1 kilocalorie 5 1,000 calories), the amount of thermal 
(heat) energy required to raise 1 liter (1,000 milliliters) of 
water 1 degree Celsius. Kilocalories are sometimes denoted 
as “Calories” with a capital “C.” Food Calories, which 
measure the energy in given foods, are actually kilocalories. 
Temperature measures the molecular motion in a substance 
caused by the kinetic energy present in it.
If energy is defined as the ability to move matter, then 
no matter can be moved without the absorption or release 
of energy. Indeed, no change in matter—from a few atoms 
coming together or apart in a chemical reaction to a major 
volcanic eruption—can be separated from its respective 
change in energy.
Figure 13 Energy conversions. 
Any form of energy except heat can  
spontaneously transform into any  
other form. Heat is a form of energy 
that flows from one system or object to 
another because the two are at different 
temperatures; therefore, heat can  
spontaneously transform only to  
something cooler.
+
–
Light
Black surface
Heat
Heat
Motor
Motion
Turbine
Generator
Electrical
energy
Chemical energy       Heat energy       Kinetic energy       Electrical energy
Light energy       Heat energy
Electrical energy       Kinetic energy
Electrical energy       Light  +  Heat energy
Water
High-pressure
steam
66

Basic Needs of Living Things 
 energy is always lost. Thus, you can’t get something for 
nothing (the first law), and in fact, you can’t even break 
even (the second law)!
Entropy. The principle of increasing entropy underlies the 
loss of usable energy and its transformation to heat energy. 
Entropy is a measure of the degree of disorder in a system, 
so increasing entropy means increasing disorder. Without en-
ergy inputs, everything goes in one direction only—toward 
increasing entropy.
The conversion of energy and the loss of usable energy 
to heat are both aspects of increasing entropy. Heat energy 
is the result of the random vibrational motion of atoms and 
molecules. It is the lowest (most disordered) form of  energy, 
and its spontaneous flow to cooler surroundings is a way 
for that disorder to spread. Therefore, the Second Law of 
Thermodynamics may be more generally stated as  follows: 
Systems will go spontaneously in one direction only—to-
ward increasing entropy (Fig. 14). The second law also states 
that systems will go spontaneously only toward lower po-
tential energy, a direction that releases heat from the sys-
tems.
It is possible to pump water uphill, charge a battery, 
stretch a rubber band, and compress air. All of these require 
the input of energy in order to increase the potential energy 
of a system. The verbs pump, charge, stretch, and compress 
reflect the fact that energy is being put into the system. In 
contrast, flow in the opposite direction (which releases en-
ergy) occurs spontaneously (Fig. 15).
Whenever something gains potential energy, therefore, 
keep in mind that the energy is being obtained from some-
where else (the first law). Moreover, the amount of usable 
energy lost from that “somewhere else” is greater than the 
amount gained (the second law). We now relate these con-
cepts of matter and energy to organic molecules, organisms, 
ecosystems, and the biosphere.
Energy Changes in Organisms
Picture someone building a fire in a fireplace. The wood is 
largely composed of complex organic molecules. These mol-
ecules required energy to form, and therefore, their chemical 
bonds contain high potential energy. Lighting a fire causes 
a series of reactions that break these molecules and release 
energy. When released, the energy contained in those bonds 
can be used to do work. This chemical reaction involves 
 oxidation, a loss of electrons, usually accomplished by the 
addition of oxygen (which causes burning). The heat and 
light of the flame are the potential energy being released 
as kinetic energy. In contrast, most inorganic compounds, 
such as  carbon dioxide, water, and rock-based minerals, are 
nonflammable because they have very low potential energy. 
Thus, the production of organic material from inorganic 
material represents a gain in potential energy. Conversely, 
the breakdown of organic matter releases energy. Inside the 
cells of the giant panda eating bamboo, the reaction that 
Figure 14 Entropy. Systems go spontaneously only in the direction of in­
creasing entropy. This spray can illustrates the idea. It took energy to concentrate 
a liquid in the can. Once it is dispersed, the energy is dissipated and entropy is 
increased.
takes place is similar to that of burning wood in a fireplace, 
except that it occurs in a set of small steps and is much more 
controlled.
Producers and Photosynthesis. The relationship be-
tween the formation and breakdown of organic matter, 
where  energy is gained and released from chemical bonds, 
forms the basis of the energy dynamics of ecosystems. 
 Producers (primarily green plants) make high-potential- 
energy organic molecules for their needs from low- potential-
energy raw materials in the environment—namely, carbon 
dioxide, water, and a few dissolved compounds of nitro-
gen, phosphorus, and other elements (Fig. 16). This “uphill” 
conversion is possible because producers use chlorophyll 
to absorb light energy, which “powers” the production of 
the complex, energy-rich organic molecules. On the other 
hand, consumers (all organisms that live on the production 
of  others) obtain energy for movement and growth from 
 feeding on and breaking down organic matter made by 
 producers (Fig. 17).
Green plants use the process of photosynthesis to make 
sugar (glucose, which contains stored chemical energy) from 
carbon dioxide, water, and light energy (Fig. 16). This proc-
ess, which also releases oxygen gas as a by-product, is de-
scribed by the following chemical equation:
Photosynthesis
(An energy-demanding process)
  6 CO2   1 12 H2O  →  C6H12O6 1 6 O2 1 6 H2O
carbon dioxide  water  light energy glucose   oxygen  water
  (gas)     input              (gas) 
 (low potential energy)          (high potential energy)
67

Basic Needs of Living Things 
Light energy
Sugar
C6H12O6
6 O2
Carbon dioxide
6 CO2
Water
6 H2O
Oxygen
Atmosphere
Photosynthesis
6 O2
Figure 16 Producers as chemical fac-
tories. Using light energy, producers make 
glucose from carbon dioxide and water, releasing 
oxygen as a by­product. Breaking down some of 
the glucose to provide additional chemical energy, 
they combine the remaining glucose with certain 
nutrients from the soil to form other complex 
organic molecules that the plant then uses for 
growth.
Tank
High potential
energy
Energy
input
Energy
output
Pump
Low potential
energy
(a)
(b)
CO2
Water
Minerals
Nutrients
Low potential
energy
Heat
energy
output
High
potential
energy
(biomass)
Cell
respiration
Energy
output
+
–
Pho
tos
ynth
esis
 
Light
energy
input
Figure 15 Storage and release of potential energy. (a) A simple physical example of the storage and release 
of potential energy. (b) The same principle applied to ecosystems.
68

Basic Needs of Living Things 
cell. Most commonly, cell respiration involves the breakdown 
of glucose, and the overall chemical equation is basically the 
reverse of that for photosynthesis:
Cell Respiration
(An energy-releasing process)
C6H12O6 1 6 O2  → 6 CO2 1 6 H2O 1 energy
   glucose   oxygen  carbon dioxide  water
(high potential energy)         (low potential energy)
The purpose of cell respiration is to release the potential 
energy contained in organic molecules to perform the activi-
ties of the organism. Note that oxygen is released in pho-
tosynthesis but consumed in cell respiration to break down 
glucose to carbon dioxide and water. All organisms need 
to perform cell respiration, even producers like bamboo. In 
order to have the oxygen they need, animals like giant pan-
das eating bamboo, and deer grazing on grass (Fig. 17), must 
obtain oxygen through some type of respiratory organ. This 
means that their ability to use food depends on the availabil-
ity not only of food, but also of oxygen. Many  animals, such 
as deer, use lungs to obtain oxygen and release carbon diox-
ide. Oxygen is more limited in water, and fish use gills to ob-
tain it, but many aquatic places are severely oxygen limited.
In keeping with the Second Law of  Thermodynamics, 
converting the potential energy of glucose to the energy 
 required to do the body’s work is not 100% efficient. The 
energy released from glucose is stored in molecules that work 
like compressed springs—that is, they store the energy so that 
the body can use it in cells later. But the number of “energy 
units” that come from respiration is not nearly as high as 
the amount of solar energy required for the photosynthesis 
of glucose. Cell respiration is only 40–60% efficient. This is 
a great example of the Second Law of Thermodynamics at 
work. The rest of the energy is released as waste heat, and this 
is the source of body heat. This heat output can be measured 
in animals (cold-blooded or warm-blooded) and in plants.
Gaining Weight. The basis of weight gain or loss be-
comes apparent in this context. If you consume more calories 
Chlorophyll in the plant cells absorbs the kinetic energy 
of light and uses it to remove the hydrogen atoms from water 
(H2O) molecules. The hydrogen atoms combine with carbon 
atoms from carbon dioxide to form a growing chain of car-
bons that eventually becomes a glucose molecule. After the 
hydrogen atoms are removed from water, the oxygen atoms 
that remain combine with each other to form oxygen gas, 
which is released into the air. Water appears on both sides of 
the equation because 12 molecules are consumed and 6 mol-
ecules are newly formed during photosynthesis.
The key energy steps in photosynthesis take the hydro-
gen from water molecules and join carbon atoms together 
to form the carbon–carbon and carbon–hydrogen bonds of 
glucose. These steps convert the low-potential-energy bonds 
in water and carbon dioxide molecules to the high-potential-
energy bonds of glucose.
Within the Plant. The glucose produced in photo-
synthesis serves three purposes in the plant: (1) Glucose, 
with the addition of other molecules, can be the backbone 
used for making all the other organic molecules (proteins, 
carbohydrates, and so on) that make up the stem, roots, 
leaves, flowers, and fruit of the plant. (2) It takes energy to 
run the cell activities of plants, such as growth. This energy 
is obtained when the plant breaks down a portion of the glu-
cose to release its stored energy in a process called cell respi-
ration, which is discussed later. (3) A portion of the glucose 
produced may be stored for future use. For storage, the glu-
cose is generally converted to starch, as in potatoes or grains, 
or to oils, as in many seeds. This stored energy is what is 
available to be eaten by consumers (Fig. 17).
None of these reactions, from the initial capture of light 
by chlorophyll to the synthesis of plant structures, takes place 
automatically. Each step is catalyzed by specific  enzymes, 
proteins that promote the synthesis or breaking of chemical 
bonds. The same is true of cell respiration.
Cell Respiration. Inside each cell, organic molecules 
may be broken down through a process called cell respira-
tion to release the energy required for the work done by that 
Food
6 O2
+
Glucose
C6H2O
Cell
respiration
Undigested
6 CO2
+
Water
6 H2O
Energy
Used for growth,
maintenance repair,
lost as heat
Released as waste
Passes
through
Figure 17 Consumers. 
Only a small portion of the food in­
gested by a consumer is assimilated 
into body growth and repair. Some 
food provides energy in chemical 
bonds that are broken by the process 
of cell respiration: this is the reverse 
process of photosynthesis, and waste 
products are carbon dioxide, water, 
and various mineral nutrients. A third 
portion is not digested and becomes 
fecal waste.
69

Basic Needs of Living Things 
energy-holding mechanism in each cell; nitrogen is  contained 
in every protein; and sulfur bonds help proteins stay in the 
right shape. There are many other necessary nutrients. Some 
are only necessary in very small amounts. For example, to 
make the protein hemoglobin, which carries oxygen in blood, 
small amounts of iron are needed.
According to the Law of Conservation of Matter, atoms 
cannot be created or destroyed, so recycling is the only possi-
ble way to maintain a dynamic system. To see how recycling 
takes place in the biosphere, we now focus on the pathways 
of four key elements heavily affected by human activities: 
carbon, phosphorus, nitrogen, and sulfur. Because these 
pathways are circular and involve biological, geological, and 
chemical processes, they are known as the biogeochemical 
cycle. 
The Carbon Cycle
The global carbon cycle is illustrated in Figure 18. Boxes 
represent major “pools” of carbon, and arrows represent 
the movement, or flux, of carbon from one compartment 
to another. For descriptive purposes, it is convenient to 
start the carbon cycle with the “reservoir” of carbon di-
oxide (CO2  molecules present in the air). Through pho-
tosynthesis and further metabolism, carbon atoms from 
CO2 become the carbon atoms of the organic molecules 
making up a plant’s body. The carbon atoms can then be 
eaten by an animal, such as the panda, and become part 
of the tissues of all the other organisms in the ecosystem. 
About half of the carbon-containing molecules are respired 
by plants and animals, and half are deposited to the soil 
(a large reservoir) in the form of detritus (dead plant and 
animal matter). Respiration by organisms in the soil that 
eat dead matter returns more carbon to the atmosphere (as 
CO2). The cycle is different in the oceans: Photosynthesis 
by phytoplankton and macroalgae removes CO2 from the 
huge pool of  inorganic carbonates in seawater, and feed-
ing moves the organic carbon through marine food webs. 
Respiration by the biota returns the CO2 to the inorganic 
carbon compounds in solution.
Some other significant processes exist. The figure in-
dicates two in particular: (1) diffusion exchange between 
the atmosphere and the oceans; and (2) the combustion of 
fossil fuels, which releases CO2 to the atmosphere. Some 
geological processes of the carbon cycle are not shown in 
Figure 18. For example, the fossilization of dead plants and 
animals produced coal deposits in many areas of Earth. 
This process removed vast amounts of carbon  dioxide from 
the atmosphere and trapped it underground. Burning the 
coal and oil created by this process releases the CO2 to the 
atmosphere. For another example, limestone (such as that 
formed by ancient corals) also keeps carbon out of circula-
tion; however, the weathering of exposed limestone releases 
carbon into the aquatic system.
Because the total amount of carbon dioxide in the at-
mosphere is about 765 Gt (gigaton, or 1,000 metric tons) 
and photosynthesis in terrestrial ecosystems removes about 
from food than your body needs, the excess may be con-
verted to fat and stored, and you gain weight as a result. In 
contrast, the principle of dieting is to eat less and exercise 
more, to create an energy demand that exceeds the amount 
of energy contained in your food.
The overall reaction for cell respiration is the same as 
that for simply burning glucose. Thus, it is not uncommon to 
speak of “burning” our food for energy. There are other ways 
of releasing stored energy from food that do not require oxy-
gen. Such anaerobic respiration includes fermentation, as in 
the process used to make wine. Yeast cells use anaerobic res-
piration to convert grape sugars into usable energy, releasing 
alcohol as a by-product. However, these methods are less ef-
ficient than oxidation, and organisms that use them do not 
thrive unless oxygen is severely limited.
Photosynthesis and cell respiration are necessary for life 
on Earth to survive. In the next section, we will see how the 
energy that fuels photosynthesis moves through Earth’s sys-
tems after traveling from the Sun.
One-Way Flow of Energy
What happens to all the solar energy entering ecosystems? 
Most of it is absorbed by the atmosphere, oceans, and land, 
heating them in the process. The small fraction (2–5%) cap-
tured by living plants is either passed along to the consum-
ers and detritivores (organisms that live on dead or decaying 
organisms) that eat them or degraded into the lowest and 
most disordered form of energy—heat—as the plants de-
compose. Eventually, all of the energy entering ecosystems 
escapes as heat. According to the laws of thermodynamics, 
no energy will actually be lost. So many energy conversions 
are taking place in ecosystem activities, however, that en-
tropy is increased, and all the energy is degraded to a form 
unavailable to do further work. That heat energy may stay 
in the atmosphere for some period of time, but will eventu-
ally be re-radiated out into space. The ultimate result is that 
 energy flows in a one-way direction through ecosystems and 
eventually leaves Earth; it is not lost to the universe, but it is 
no longer available to ecosystems, so it must be continually 
 resupplied by sunlight.
Energy flow is one of the two fundamental processes that 
make ecosystems work. In contrast with the flow of energy, 
we talk about the cycling of nutrients and other elements, 
which are continually reused from those already available 
on Earth.
5  The Cycling of Matter 
in Ecosystems
Earlier we saw that the molecules that make up cells, which 
in turn make up tissues, contain certain key elements. In 
bamboo, for example, all organic molecules contain carbon; 
photosynthesis requires water (hydrogen and oxygen) and 
carbon dioxide (carbon and oxygen); potassium is part of the 
70

Basic Needs of Living Things 
its excess can stimulate unwanted algal growth in freshwater 
systems.
The phosphorus cycle is illustrated in Figure 19. Like 
the carbon cycle, it is depicted as a set of pools of phos-
phorus and fluxes to indicate key processes. Phosphorus ex-
ists in various rock and soil minerals as the inorganic ion 
phosphate (PO4
32). As rock gradually breaks down, phos-
phate and other ions are released in a slow process. Plants 
absorb PO4
32 from the soil or from a water solution, and 
once the phosphate is incorporated into organic compounds 
by the plant, it is referred to as organic  phosphate. Moving 
through food chains, organic phosphate is transferred from 
producers to the rest of the ecosystem. As with carbon, at 
each step it is highly likely that the organic compounds con-
taining phosphate will be broken down in cell respiration 
or by decomposers, releasing PO4
32 in urine or other waste 
material. Phosphate is then reabsorbed by plants to start the 
cycle again.
Phosphorus enters into complex chemical reactions with 
other substances that are not shown in this simplified version 
of the cycle. For example, PO4
32 forms solid, insoluble com-
pounds with a number of cations (positively charged ions), 
120 Gt/year, a carbon atom cycles from the atmosphere 
through one or more living things and back to the atmos-
phere about every six years.
Human Impacts. Human intrusion into the carbon cycle is 
significant. As we will see shortly, we are diverting (or remov-
ing) 40% of the photosynthetic productivity of land plants to 
support human enterprises. By burning fossil fuels, we have 
increased atmospheric carbon dioxide by 35% over prein-
dustrial levels In addition, until the mid-20th century, defor-
estation and soil degradation released significant amounts of 
CO2 to the atmosphere. However, more recent reforestation 
and changed agricultural practices have improved this some-
what.
The Phosphorus Cycle
The phosphorus cycle is similar to the cycles of other mineral 
nutrients—those elements that have their origin in the rock 
and soil minerals of the lithosphere, such as iron, calcium, 
and potassium. We focus on phosphorus because its shortage 
tends to be a limiting factor in a number of ecosystems and 
Combustion
Fossil fuel
Soils
Oceans
Limestone formation
and weathering
Photosynthesis
Conversion of organic 
deposits to coal, oil, gas 
and tar sands
Plant and animal
respiration 
Detrititus deposited 
to soils  
Decomposer
respiration 
Ocean
release
of CO2
Ocean
absorption
of CO2 
Atmosphere
CO2
Figure 18 The global carbon cycle. Boxes in the figure refer to pools of carbon, and arrows refer to the movement, or flux, 
of carbon from one pool to another.
71

Basic Needs of Living Things 
The Nitrogen Cycle
The nitrogen cycle (Fig. 20) has similarities to both the car-
bon cycle and the phosphorus cycle. Like carbon, nitrogen 
has a gas phase; like phosphorus, nitrogen acts as a limiting 
factor in plant growth. Like phosphorus, nitrogen is in high 
demand by both aquatic and terrestrial plants.
The nitrogen cycle is otherwise unique. Most notably, 
unlike in the other cycles, bacteria in soils, water, and sedi-
ments perform many of the steps of the nitrogen cycle.
The main reservoir of nitrogen is the air, which is about 
78% nitrogen gas (N2). This form of nitrogen is called 
 nonreactive nitrogen; most organisms are not able to use it 
in chemical reactions. The remaining forms of nitrogen are 
called reactive nitrogen (Nr) because they are used by most 
organisms and can make chemical reactions more easily.
Plants in terrestrial ecosystems (“non-N-fixing produc-
ers” in Figure 20) take up Nr as ammonium ions (NO4
1) or 
nitrate ions (NO3
2). The plants incorporate the  nitrogen into 
essential organic compounds such as proteins and  nucleic 
acids. The nitrogen then moves from producers through 
consumers and, finally, to decomposers (organisms that live 
on dead plant and animal matter are referred to as “hetero-
trophs” in Figure 20). At various points, nitrogen wastes are 
released, primarily as ammonium compounds. A  group of 
soil bacteria, the nitrifying bacteria, oxidizes the ammonium 
to nitrate in a process that yields energy for the bacteria. 
such as iron (Fe31), aluminum (Al31), and calcium (Ca31). 
Phosphorus can bind with these ions to form chemical pre-
cipitates (solid, insoluble compounds) that are largely una-
vailable to plants. The precipitated phosphorus can slowly 
release PO4
32 as plants withdraw naturally occurring PO4
32 
from soil, water, or sediments.
Human Impacts. The most serious human intrusion into 
the phosphorus cycle comes from the use of phosphorus- 
containing fertilizers. Phosphorus is mined in several loca-
tions around the world (e.g., Florida in the United States) 
and is then made into fertilizers, animal feeds, detergents, 
and other products. Phosphorus is a common limiting factor 
in soils and, when added to croplands, can greatly stimulate 
production.
Unfortunately, human applications have tripled the 
amount of phosphorus reaching the oceans. This increase is 
roughly equal to the global use of phosphorus fertilizer in 
agriculture. Humans are accelerating the natural phospho-
rus cycle as it is mined from the earth and as it subsequently 
moves from the soil into aquatic ecosystems, creating prob-
lems as it makes its way to the oceans. There is essentially no 
way to return this waterborne phosphorus to the soil, so the 
bodies of water end up overfertilized. This leads in turn to 
a severe water pollution problem known as eutrophication 
Eutrophication can cause the overgrowth of algae, too many 
bacteria, and the death of fish.
Agriculture,
lawns
Mining of
phosphate rock
Sedimentation
formation of
phosphate rock
Phosphate
in soil
Phosphate
dissolved in
water
Algae
Phytoplankton
Phosphate taken up
by plants. Fixed into
organic phosphate
in plant biomass.
Cell respiration
Phosphate
excreted
Fertilizer
Rain runs off
Leaching of
fertilizer
Feeding by
heterotrophs
Millions
of years
Figure 19 The global phosphorus cycle. Phosphorus is a limiting factor in many ecosystems. Note that the cycle is not 
connected to the atmosphere, which limits biosphere recycling.
72

Basic Needs of Living Things 
nitrogen fixation; the ammonium then comes down with 
rainfall. The second is the industrial fixation of  nitrogen 
in the manufacture of fertilizer; the Haber-Bosch proc-
ess converts nitrogen gas and hydrogen to ammonia, by an 
 industrial process using fossil fuels. This is the main source 
of agricultural fertilizer. The third is a consequence of the 
combustion of fossil fuels, during which nitrogen from coal 
and oil is oxidized; some nitrogen gas is also oxidized during 
high-temperature combustion. These last two processes lead 
to nitrogen oxides (NOx) in the atmosphere, which are soon 
converted to nitric acid and then brought down to Earth as 
acid precipitation
Denitrification. Denitrification is a microbial process that 
occurs in soils and sediments depleted of oxygen. A number 
of microbes can take nitrate (which is highly oxidized) and 
use it as a substitute for oxygen. In so doing, the nitrogen 
is reduced (it gains electrons) to nitrogen gas and released 
back into the atmosphere. In sewage treatment systems, deni-
trification is a desirable process and is promoted to remove 
nitrogen from the wastewater before it is released in soluble 
form to the environment
At this point, the nitrate is once again available for uptake 
by green plants—a local ecosystem cycle within the global 
cycle. In most ecosystems, the supply of Nr is quite limited, 
yet there is an abundance of nonreactive N—if it can be ac-
cessed. The nitrogen cycle in aquatic ecosystems (not shown 
in Figure 20) is similar.
Nitrogen Fixation. A number of bacteria and cyanobacte-
ria (chlorophyll-containing bacteria, formerly referred to as 
blue-green algae) can use nonreactive N through a process 
called biological nitrogen fixation. In terrestrial ecosystems, 
the most important among these nitrogen-fixing microbes 
live in nodules on the roots of legumes, the plant family that 
 includes peas and beans. The legume provides the bacteria 
with a place to live and with food (carbohydrates and pro-
teins) and gains a source of nitrogen in return. From legumes, 
nitrogen enters the food web. The legume family includes a 
huge diversity of plants. Without them, plant production 
would be sharply impaired due to a lack of available nitrogen.
Three other important processes also “fix” nitrogen. 
One is the conversion of nitrogen gas to the ammonium form 
by discharges of lightning in a process known as  atmospheric 
Nitrogen gas
(N2) in air
N-fixing
by lightning
Manure
compost
Denitrification
Nitrogen
oxides in air
Industrial
N-fixation
N-compounds
Fertilizer
Non-legume
crops
Animals
Heterotrophs 
Fossil fuel
combustion
Non-N-fixing
producers
Soil bacteria
Nitrate
compounds
NO3
–
Soil bacteria
Ammonium
compounds
NH4
+
Nitrogen-
fixing producers
Legumes
Cyanobacteria
Figure 20 The global nitrogen cycle. Like phosphorus, nitrogen is often a limiting factor. Its cycle heavily involves  different 
groups of bacteria.
73

Basic Needs of Living Things 
ecological effects has been called the nitrogen cascade, in rec-
ognition of the sequential impacts of Nr as it moves through 
environmental systems, creating problems as it goes.
The Sulfur Cycle
Sulfur is the last element we will investigate. Sulfur is im-
portant to living things because it is a component of many 
proteins, hormones, and vitamins. Sulfur is often linked in 
nature with oxygen atoms, as in sulfate (SO4) (Fig. 21). Most 
of Earth’s sulfur is found in rocks and minerals,  including 
deep ocean sediments. Weathering of rocks and volcanic ac-
tivity sends sulfur into the atmosphere or soil. Sulfur also 
gets into the air when fossil fuels are burned and when 
mined metals are processed. In soil, sulfate can be taken up 
by plants and microorganisms. In air, sulfur dioxide (SO2) 
contributes to acid rain when it combines with water vapor 
and forms sulfuric acid. Sulfates are added to water bodies as 
sulfur compounds fall from the atmosphere or are weathered 
from rocks. There they can be serious pollutants.
Human Impacts. The largest human impact of the sulfur 
cycle is the addition of sulfur oxides to the atmosphere and 
the addition of sulfates to water. Unlike phosphorus and 
 nitrogen, sulfur is not usually directly added to soils in order 
Human Impacts. Human involvement in the nitrogen cycle 
is substantial. Many agricultural crops are legumes (peas, 
beans, soybeans, alfalfa), so they draw nitrogen from the air, 
thus increasing the rate of nitrogen fixation on land. Crops 
that are nonleguminous (corn, wheat, potatoes, cotton, and 
so on) are heavily fertilized with nitrogen derived from in-
dustrial fixation. Both processes benefit human welfare pro-
foundly. Also, fossil fuel combustion fixes nitrogen from the 
air (Fig. 19). However, human actions more than double the 
rate at which nitrogen is moved from the atmosphere to the 
land.
The consequences of this global nitrogen fertilization 
are serious. Nitric acid (and sulfuric acid, produced when 
sulfur is also released by burning fossil fuels) has destroyed 
thousands of lakes and ponds and caused extensive damage 
to forests Nitrogen oxides in the atmosphere contribute to 
ozone pollution, global climate change, and stratospheric 
ozone depletion Surplus nitrogen has led to “nitrogen satura-
tion” of many natural areas, whereby nitrogen can no longer 
be incorporated into living matter and is released into the 
soil. Washed into surface  waters, nitrogen makes its way to 
estuaries and coastal areas of oceans, where, just like phos-
phorus, it triggers a series of events leading to eutrophica-
tion, resulting in dead seafood, detriments to human health, 
and areas of oceans that are unfit for fish This complex of 
Water
Factory
Volcano
Plants
Animals
Land
Wetlands
Sea spray
Mining
Atmosphere
Soil
Figure 21 The global sulfur cycle. Sulfur spends little time in the atmosphere. Part of the cycle does rely on bacteria, but 
less than nitrogen’s cycle. Like all three other cycles, the sulfur cycle is sped up by human activity.
74

Basic Needs of Living Things 
SUSTAINABILITy
Planetary Boundaries
Ancient peoples thought 
that Earth had an 
edge—if you took a ship 
too far, perhaps you and 
your crew would fall 
right off. Today, some scientists suggest that 
Earth has a metaphorical edge: a boundary 
where use of a particular resource becomes so 
great that it alters natural cycles and changes 
ecosystems. Reaching a point where dramatic 
changes are likely is called the tipping point, 
and the levels of change at which this might 
occur are called planetary boundaries, a term 
coined by Johann Rockström and his col­
leagues at Stockholm University, who together 
published a paper in 2009 entitled “Planetary 
Boundaries: Exploring the Safe Operating 
Space for Humanity.” In that paper, they esti­
mate that a safe boundary for nitrogen would 
be to “limit industrial and agricultural fixation 
of N2 to 35 Tg N/yr.”1 (A terragram (Tg) is one 
billion kilograms.)
The innovation of the Haber­Bosch process 
for fixing nitrogen allowed humans to produce 
more food on the same amount of land than 
was possible previously. One estimate is that 
without nitrogen fertilizer, we would have 
needed four times the agricultural land in 2000 
that we did in 1900 and half of all continental 
land would be needed for agriculture. The down­
side of so much fertilizer is that it washes into 
oceans, where it and other pollutants produce 
“dead zones” where oxygen is limited and most 
life cannot survive. Likewise, the use of fossil 
fuels has brought advantages to humans, but 
the acid rain created by the burning of these 
fuels kills lake fish.
Humanity might be reaching planetary 
boundaries or tipping points—where we 
 suddenly experience ecological change that 
is difficult to reverse and that causes great 
changes to our ability even to feed ourselves. 
Just as a ship might have a lookout, scientists 
have an important role in helping us understand 
the world so that we can recognize when we are 
approaching or have passed planetary bounda­
ries. If we have a way to estimate the conse­
quences of what we are trying to do, such as this 
paper suggests, then both scientists and others 
will be involved in measuring those conse­
quences and finding solutions for problems that 
arise. One place to start is to calculate your own 
nitrogen footprint. Just like a carbon footprint, a 
nitrogen footprint is calculated from your activi­
ties and tells you something about your own ef­
fect on the globe. You can find resource footprint 
calculators by searching on the Web. Scientists 
play a role in helping to make more efficient use 
of fertilizer and to make technologies to remove 
nitrogen from smoke in burning of fossil fuels. 
These advancements, coupled with the will of in­
dividuals to consume less and be wise consum­
ers, are parts of the solution to avoid taking our 
global ship across a planetary boundary.
A
t
e
t
y
1Rockström, J. et al., 2009. “Planetary Boundaries: Exploring 
the Safe Operating Space for Humanity.” Ecology and Society 
14(2): 32.
tabLe 2  Major Characteristics of the Carbon, 
Phosphorus, and Nitrogen Cycles
Nutrient
Major 
Source
Interesting 
Feature
Human Impact
Carbon
Air
Taken in directly  
by plant leaves
Burning fuel moves  
it to air from  
underground
Phosphorus
Rock
No atmospheric  
component
Fertilizer use adds  
it to waterways
Nitrogen
Soil/Air
Bacteria drive  
the cycle
Fertilizer moves  
it to soil, burning  
moves it to air
Sulfur
Rock
Spends only a  
short time in  
the atmosphere
Burning moves it  
to air, rain and  
mining move it  
to soil and water
to improve their fertility. However, soil and water sulfate 
levels are increased by human action. Acid rain and water 
pollution are the major effects. For example, in heavily devel-
oped areas of the Everglades, the percent of sulfates in water 
is 60 times what it would normally be expected to be Sulfate 
compound aerosols (small particles or drops) also play a role 
in the climate. They act to temporarily cool the atmosphere, 
although the compounds cause other problems when they 
fall to earth.
Comparing the Cycles
The four cycles we have looked at in depth differ in some 
important ways (Table 2). Carbon is found in large amounts 
in the atmosphere in a form that can be directly taken in by 
plants, so carbon is rarely the limiting factor in the growth 
of vegetation. Both nitrogen and phosphorus are often lim-
iting factors in ecosystems. Phosphorus has no  gaseous at-
mospheric component (though it can be found in airborne 
dust particles) and thus, unless added to an ecosystem artifi-
cially, enters very slowly. Nitrogen is unique because of the 
importance of bacteria in driving the cycle forward.  Sulfur 
can get into the atmosphere, but only for a short time. It is 
also different from the others because of its concentration in 
mining runoff.
All four cycles have been sped up considerably by 
human actions. Nitrogen compounds in the atmosphere 
contribute to acid rain, and carbon dioxide is being moved 
from underground storage in carbon molecules to the atmos-
phere, where it acts as a greenhouse gas. Both nitrogen and 
 phosphorus are put on soil as fertilizer or get into water from 
sewage and runoff. Both act in water to promote overgrowth 
of algae Sulfur adds to acid rain and to water pollution.
75

Basic Needs of Living Things 
In this chapter, we introduced the various fields of ecol-
ogy and showed that the science of ecology encompasses 
living things and their relationships with each other and the 
environment. We looked at two ecological levels in greater 
detail in this chapter—what is happening with individuals 
(organismal ecology) and what is happening to the large-
scale movement of matter and energy through the biosphere 
(ecosystem ecology). To understand the flow of matter and 
energy, we also included some background on the basics of 
atoms, molecules, and the laws of energy. 
Although we have focused on carbon, phosphorus, 
 nitrogen, and sulfur, cycles exist for oxygen, hydrogen, iron, 
and all the other elements that play a role in living things. 
While the routes taken by distinct elements may differ, all of 
the cycles are going on simultaneously, and all come together 
in the tissues of living things. As elements cycle through 
 ecosystems, energy flows in from the Sun and through the 
living members of the ecosystems. The links between these 
two fundamental processes of ecosystem function are shown 
in Figure 22.
Light
energy
input
Food flow
Primary
consumers
Detritus
feeders
Detritus:
dead
plant and
animal
material
Decomposers:
fungi and
bacteria
Third-order
consumers 
Inorganic
nutrient
returns
Heat
energy
output
Environmental
sources of
inorganic
nutrients:
CO2, H2O,
N, P, K, 
Ca, Fe
Inorganic
nutrient
input
Energy
Nutrients
Producers:
energy-rich
and
nutrient-rich
organic
matter
Secondary
consumers,
secondary
detritus
feeders
Figure 22 Nutrient cycles and energy flow. The movement of nutrients (blue arrows), energy (red arrows), and both 
(brown arrows) through the ecosystem. Nutrients follow a cycle, being used over and over. Light energy absorbed by producers is 
 released and lost as heat energy as it is “spent.”
76

Basic Needs of Living Things 
REvISITINg THE THEMES
sound science
Ecology is the science of living things and the abiotic and 
biotic components interacting with them. Ecologists can 
study on a variety of levels. In this chapter, we looked at 
organismal ecology and ecosystem ecology—that is, how 
materials work in individual animals and how matter and energy flow 
throughout the world.
much of this chapter is about how the basic processes of the natural 
world work, focusing on matter and energy. Both matter and energy 
are limited. matter cycles in the form of molecules (sets of atoms) 
through living things and the abiotic environment. Energy flows in one 
 direction—from the Sun, through activities on Earth, and back out into 
space. Using the giant panda and its food (the bamboo plant) as our 
examples, we demonstrated basic principles of organization within their 
bodies and the flow of energy and materials through their systems. The 
bamboo plant has a specific niche, or set of parameters, within which 
it needs to live. These resources and conditions include the amount of 
rainfall and nutrients it needs, for example. Because it has chlorophyll, 
bamboo is able to undergo photosynthesis. In this chemical process, in­
organic building blocks are turned into more­complex organic molecules 
whose bonds contain more chemical energy than their original compo­
nents do. This energy can be released when the panda eats the bamboo 
and its body burns those molecules through a controlled process of cellu­
lar respiration. Energy is lost at each step of this energy path. In order to 
build the bodies of the bamboo and its consumer, the panda, a number 
of nutrients need to be available. The cycles for four of these (carbon, 
phosphorus, nitrogen, and sulfur) were described. Humans affect these 
biogeochemical cycles by actions such as the burning of fossil fuels and 
the fertilization of agricultural land.
sustainability
The science in this chapter that leads to specific manage­
ment actions is primarily that surrounding the needs 
of individual species in terms of habitat and niche, the 
 consequences of limits on nutrients and energy, and the impacts of 
human effects on biogeochemical cycles.  For instance, the science 
surrounding habitat and niche underlies our understanding of why 
some types of organisms are particularly vulnerable to extinction . The 
science underlying the nitrogen and phosphorus cycles is important 
to management decisions about water pollution . Finally, the science 
about carbon and nitrogen cycles aids in our understanding of air pol­
lution and global climate change . The sustainability essay provides a 
good example of how science is used to identify boundaries, and this 
can be used to manage our global environment—in this case, the nitro­
gen cycle.
The giant panda helps us look at basic processes within organisms 
and the flow of matter and energy. 
stewardship
The giant panda, focused on throughout this  chapter, is in decline. 
It has a particular habitat, which is shrinking because 
of competition with human activities. As stewards, 
the panda conservationists in China and around the 
world are protecting not only the panda, but also its 
habitat. Human activity also speeds up biogeochemical 
cycles, and this can have global effects. All of us have 
to be stewards not only of the nutrients in our world, but also of the 
natural processes that move chemicals from one part of a cycle to 
another. Stewardship involves protecting not only resources but eco­
system functions. 
I
o
t
w
h
c
s
T
m
o
s
E
b
s
o
8. Give four examples of potential energy. In each case, how 
can the potential energy be converted into kinetic energy?
9. State two energy laws. How do they relate to entropy?
10. What is the chemical equation for photosynthesis? Examine 
the origin and destination of each molecule referred to in the 
equation. Do the same for cellular respiration.
11. Describe the biogeochemical cycle of carbon as it moves into 
and through organisms and back to the environment. Do the 
same for phosphorus, nitrogen, and sulfur.
12. What are the major human impacts on the carbon,  phosphorus, 
and nitrogen cycles?
 1. Distinguish between the biotic community and the abiotic 
environmental factors of an ecosystem.
 2. Define and compare the terms species, population, and 
 ecosystem.
 3. Compared with an ecosystem, what are an ecotone, a 
 landscape, a biome, and a biosphere?
 4. How do the terms organic and inorganic relate to the biotic 
and abiotic components of an ecosystem?
 5. What are the six key elements in living organisms?
 6. What features distinguish between organic and inorganic 
molecules?
 7. In one sentence, define matter and energy, and demonstrate 
how they are related.
Review QuesTioNs
77

Basic Needs of Living Things 
 3. Using your knowledge of photosynthesis and cell respira-
tion, draw a picture of the hydrogen cycle and the oxygen 
cycle. (Hint: Consult the four cycles in the text for  guidance.)
 4. Look up everything you can find about iron seeding of 
the oceans, and see if you can decide what you think we 
should do.
 1. From local, national, and international news, compile a list 
of ways humans are altering abiotic and biotic factors on a 
local, regional, and global scale. Analyze ways in which local 
changes may affect ecosystems on larger scales and ways in 
which global changes may affect ecosystems locally.
 2. Use the laws of conservation of matter and energy to de-
scribe the consumption of fuel by a car. That is, what are the 
inputs and outputs of matter and energy? (Note: Gasoline is 
a mixture of organic compounds containing carbon–hydro-
gen bonds.)
ThiNkiNg eNviRoNmeNTaLLy
 3. Take one of the biogeochemical cycles and try to track your 
impact on it. This is most easily done with carbon. Search on 
the Web under “carbon footprint.”
 1. Find the closest farm that does not use artificial fertilizer. 
Many are listed on Web sites under the terms “community 
supported agriculture” or “CSA.” See if you can arrange a 
visit. See what they do to lower their impact on the nitrogen 
and phosphorus cycles and still maintain fertile soil.
 2. Visit the EPA’s Web site to find out how you can help protect 
your local watershed. Its project database allows you to get 
involved in monitoring, cleanups, and restorations in your 
area.
makiNg a DiffeReNce
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cReDiTs
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): Altmarkfoto/iStockphoto; (bottom right): GlobalP/iStockphoto; (top 
right): Mifippo/iStockphoto; (bottom right): Alex Staroseltsev/Shutterstock; (center 
left): Olga Khoroshunova/Fotolia; (center): Pete Oxford/Nature Picture Library; 
(bottom right): LYNN M. STONE/Nature Picture Library; (top left): Jerry and 
Marcy Monkman/EcoPhotography.com/ Alamy; (bottom right): Richard T. Wright; 
(bottom right): louise murray / Alamy; Derek Croucher / Alamy; (bottom left): 
Pascal Goetgheluck / Photo Researchers, Inc.; (top): khunaspix/Fotolia; (top right): 
Olga Khoroshunova/Fotolia
abiotic Pertaining to factors or things that are separate and 
independent from living things; nonliving.
atmosphere The thin layer of gases surrounding Earth. Nitrogen, 
oxygen, water vapor, and carbon dioxide are major gases, while 
many minor gases are also present in trace amounts.
atom The fundamental unit of all elements.
biogeochemical cycle The repeated pathway of particular nutrients 
or elements from the environment through one or more organisms 
and back to the environment. The cycles include the carbon cycle, 
the nitrogen cycle, the phosphorus cycle, and so on.
biome A group of ecosystems that are related by having a similar 
type of vegetation governed by similar climatic conditions. 
Examples include prairies, deciduous forests, arctic tundra, 
deserts, and tropical rain forests.
biosphere The overall ecosystem of Earth. The sum total of all 
the biomes and smaller ecosystems, which ultimately are all 
interconnected and interdependent through global processes such 
as the water cycle and the atmospheric cycle.
biota The sum total of all living organisms. The term usually is 
applied to the setting of natural ecosystems.
biotic community All the living organisms (plants, animals, and 
microorganisms) that live in a particular area.
calorie A fundamental unit of energy. The amount of heat required 
to raise the temperature of 1 gram of water 1 degree Celsius. 
All forms of energy can be converted to heat and measured in 
calories. Calories used in connection with food are kilocalories, 
or “big” calories, the amount of heat required to raise the 
temperature of 1 liter of water 1 degree Celsius.
gLossaRy
78

Basic Needs of Living Things 
cell respiration The chemical process that occurs in all living cells 
whereby organic compounds are broken down to release energy 
required for life processes. For respiration, higher plants and 
animals require oxygen and release carbon dioxide and water 
as waste products, but certain microorganisms do not require 
oxygen.
chemical energy The potential energy that is contained in certain 
chemicals; most importantly, the energy that is contained in 
organic compounds such as food and fuels and that may be 
released through respiration or burning.
compound Any substance (gas, liquid, or solid) that is made up of 
two or more different kinds of atoms bonded together. (Contrast 
element.)
conditions Abiotic factors (e.g., temperature) that vary in time and 
space but are not used up by organisms.
consumers In an ecosystem, those organisms that derive their 
energy from feeding on other organisms or their products.
crystal A solid form of matter made up of regularly repeating units 
of atoms, ionic compounds, or molecules.
denitrification The process of reducing oxidized nitrogen 
compounds present in soil or water to nitrogen gas to the 
atmosphere, conducted by certain bacteria and now utilized in the 
treatment of sewage effluents.
detritivores Organisms (fungi, soil insects, bacteria) that feed on 
dead or decaying organic matter, important in completing the 
breakdown of organic matter to inorganic constituents.
detritus The dead organic matter, such as fallen leaves, twigs, and 
other plant and animal wastes, that exists in any ecosystem.
ecology The study of all processes influencing the distribution 
and abundance of organisms and the interactions between living 
things and their environment.
ecosystem An interactive complex of communities and the abiotic 
environment affecting them within a particular area. Ecosystems 
have characteristic forms, such as deserts, grasslands, tundra, 
deciduous forests, and tropical rain forests.
ecotone A transitional region between two adjacent ecosystems 
that contains some of the species and characteristics of each one 
and also certain species of its own.
element A substance that is made up of one and only one distinct 
kind of atom. (Contrast compound.)
energy The capacity to do work. Common forms of energy are 
light, heat, electricity, motion, and the chemical bond energy 
inherent in compounds such as sugar, gasoline, and other fuels.
entropy A degree of disorder; increasing entropy means increasing 
disorder.
enzyme A protein that promotes the synthesis or breaking of 
chemical bonds.
First Law of Thermodynamics The empirical observation, 
confirmed innumerable times, that energy is never created or 
destroyed but may be converted from one form to another (e.g., 
electricity to light). Also called the Law of Conservation of 
Energy. (See also Second Law of Thermodynamics.)
Geographic Informations Systems A digital technology enabling 
the location and imaging of landscapes by use of satellite signals. 
It employs hardware, software, and data to display many forms 
of geographic information.
habitat The specific environment (woods, desert, swamp) in which 
an organism lives.
hydrosphere The water on Earth, in all of its liquid and solid 
compartments: oceans, rivers, lakes, ice, and groundwater.
kinetic energy The energy inherent in motion or movement, 
including molecular movement (heat) and the movement of waves 
(hence, radiation and therefore light).
landscape A group of interacting ecosystems occupying adjacent 
geographical areas.
Law of Conservation of Energy See First Law of Thermo dynamics.
Law of Conservation of Matter The law stating that, in chemical 
reactions, atoms are neither created nor changed nor destroyed; 
they are only rearranged.
law of limiting factors The law stating that a system may be 
limited by the absence or minimum amount (in terms of that 
needed) of any required factor. Also known as Liebig’s law of 
minimums. (See limiting factor.)
limiting factor A factor primarily responsible for determining the 
growth or reproduction of an organism or a population. The 
limiting factor in a given environment may be a physical factor 
such as temperature or light, a chemical factor such as a particular 
nutrient, or a biological factor such as a competing species.
limits of tolerance The extremes of any factor (e.g., temperature) 
that an organism or a population can tolerate and still survive 
and reproduce.
lithosphere The Earth’s crust, made up of rocks and minerals.
matter Any gas, liquid, or solid that occupies space and has mass. 
(Contrast energy.)
mineral Any hard, brittle, stone-like material that occurs naturally 
in Earth’s crust. All minerals consist of various combinations 
of positive and negative ions held together by ionic bonds. A 
pure mineral, or crystal, is one specific combination of elements. 
Common rocks are composed of mixtures of two or more 
minerals.
molecule The smallest unit of two or more atoms forming 
a compound. A molecule has all the characteristics of the 
compound of which it is a unit.
natural organic compounds The organic compounds that make 
up living organisms, to be distinguished from synthetic organic 
compounds, like plastics.
niche (ecological) The total of all the relationships that bear on 
how an organism copes with the biotic and abiotic factors it faces.
nitrogen cascade The detrimental complex of ecological effects 
brought on by reactive nitrogen (Nr) that has been added to 
natural systems by the burning of fossil fuels and the fertilization 
of agricultural crops.
nitrogen fixation The process of chemically converting nitrogen 
gas (N2) from the air into compounds such as nitrates (NO3) or 
ammonia (NH3) that can be used by plants in building amino 
acids and other nitrogen-containing organic molecules.
nonreactive nitrogen The main reservoir of nitrogen as nitrogen 
gas in the atmosphere.
optimum The condition or amount of any factor or combination 
of factors that will produce the best result. For example, the 
amount of heat, light, moisture, nutrients, and so on that will 
produce the best plant growth.
organic phosphate Phosphate (PO4–3) bonded to an organic 
molecule.
oxidation A chemical reaction that generally involves a breakdown 
of some substance through its combining with oxygen. Burning 
and cellular respiration are examples of oxidation. In both cases, 
organic matter is combined with oxygen and broken down to 
carbon dioxide and water.
photosynthesis The chemical process carried on by green plants 
through which light energy is used to produce glucose from 
carbon dioxide and water. Oxygen is released as a by-product.
population A group within a single species whose individuals can 
and do freely interbreed.
potential energy The ability to do work that is stored in some 
chemical or physical state. For example, gasoline is a form of 
potential energy because the ability to do work is stored in the 
chemical state and is released as the fuel is burned in an engine.
producers In an ecosystem, those organisms (mostly green plants) 
that use light energy to construct their organic constituents from 
inorganic compounds.
range of tolerance The range of conditions within which an organism 
or population can survive and reproduce—for example, the range 
from the highest to the lowest temperature that can be tolerated. 
Within the range of tolerance is the optimum, or best, condition.
reactive nitrogen All forms of nitrogen in ecosystems that are 
usable by organisms, as opposed to the nonreactive nitrogen in 
the form of nitrogen gas.
79

Basic Needs of Living Things 
species All the organisms (plant, animal, or microbe) of a single 
kind. The “single kind” is determined by similarity of appearance 
or by the fact that members do or can mate and produce fertile 
offspring. Physical, chemical, or behavioral differences block 
breeding between species.
synergism The phenomenon whereby two factors acting together 
have a greater effect than would be indicated by the sum of their 
effects separately—as, for example, the sometimes fatal mixture 
of modest doses of certain drugs in combination with modest 
doses of alcohol.
synergistic effects Where two or more factors interact to affect 
organisms in a way that makes the impact greater than from the 
two acting separately.
zones of stress Regions where a species finds conditions tolerable 
but suboptimal. The species survives but is under stress.
remote sensing A system of imaging the Earth from satellites, or 
of accessing data from devices that are distant from the scientist.
resources Biotic and abiotic factors that are consumed by 
organisms.
Second Law of Thermodynamics The empirical observation, 
confirmed innumerable times, that in every energy conversion 
(e.g., from electricity to light), some of the energy is converted 
to heat and some heat always escapes from the system because it 
always moves toward a cooler place. Therefore, in every energy 
conversion, a portion of energy is lost, and since, by the First Law 
of Thermodynamics, energy cannot be created, the functioning of 
any system requires an energy input.
solution A mixture of molecules (or ions) of one material in 
another; most commonly, molecules of air or ions of various 
minerals in water. For example, seawater contains salt in solution.
80

The golden frog (Atelopus zeteki) of Panama, a highly endangered species, now lives 
only in captivity. The last known populations were removed from an area of Panama 
(inset) where a deadly fungus was known to be invading.
Learning Objectives
 1. Dynamics of Natural Populations: 
Explain three model ways popu-
lations grow, and describe the 
graph that would illustrate each.
 2. Limits on Populations: Explain 
factors that limit populations, 
including those that increase as 
populations become more dense 
(such as predation and resource 
limitation) and factors that 
are unrelated to the population 
 density.
 3. Community Interactions: Define 
the types of interactions that can 
occur between species in a com-
munity and the effect of those 
interactions on each species.
 4. Evolution as a Force for Change: 
Describe the major ideas in the 
theory of evolution, such as 
inheritance and natural selection, 
and list examples of adaptations 
organisms have for survival.
 5. Implications for Human Manage-
ment: Describe at least three 
ways in which humans alter  
features in the environment  
to change population growth 
patterns.
Populations 
and 
Communities
COSTA RICA
PANAMA
COLOMBIA
Changuinola
Guabalá
Isla de
Coiba
Golfo de
Panamá
Caribbean
Sea
Pacific
Ocean
Serranía
de Tabasará
David
Santiago
Cristóbal
Colón
El Porvenir
Ailigandi
San
Miguelito
La Palma
Panama
City
Arraiján
Las
Tablas
Volcán
0
100 km
0
100 miles
I
magine you are sitting outside on a summer evening listening to a chorus of frogs. 
In North America, you might hear bullfrogs or spring peepers through the coming 
dusk. Their calls mark the breeding grounds of these species and are common 
sounds of spring and summer. In the rain forest of Central America, you might hear 
a chorus of an entirely different set of amphibians—many of which are small and 
beautifully colored. However, one you won’t hear is the golden frog (also called the 
golden toad) of Panama, Atelopus zeteki.
The golden frog, revered as a national symbol in Panama, is depicted in 
local mythology, sculpture, toys, lottery tickets, posters, and calendars. It is  
 famous for its poisonous skin, which in adulthood has a bright black-and-yellow 
warning coloration. Unlike most other frogs and toads (of the group Anura, a 
subgroup of amphibians), it doesn’t sing. Instead, the golden frog, a rare anuran 
that lacks eardrums, waves an arm to communicate with others of its species.
threatened. Unfortunately, devastation of Panama’s 
tropical forests (which has caused habitat loss over the years), 
as well as overcollection for the pet trade have left golden 
frog populations at low levels. A new threat has also 
appeared—a chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendro-
batidis), which is decimating frog populations around 
the globe and threatening many with extinction. In 
From Chapter 4 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, 
Dorothy F. Boorse. Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Populations and Communities
2007, concerned that the fungus was moving through areas 
of Panama and leaving dead and dying amphibians in its 
wake, conservationists made a bold move. They went into 
a remote jungle area, collected all of the amphibians (in-
cluding golden frogs) that they could and removed them 
to Panama’s El Valle Amphibian Conservation Center. This 
effort, unprecedented in conservation history, was docu-
mented in the film Leap of Faith: Saving  Panama’s Golden 
Frogs. A BBC video production crew also filmed the removal 
of what was then the last known population of golden frogs 
in the wild.
Limits. The golden frog is a good example of the problems a 
rare species can face when multiple limits affect it at once, and 
of the extreme measures necessary for its survival and preserva-
tion. Under changing environmental conditions, species can often 
adapt or find a new niche or area to exploit. However, as seen 
with the golden frog, environmental changes can also put species 
in danger of extinction. In this chapter, we will look at how popu-
lations grow, what types of limitations populations can face, how 
populations of different species interact with each other, how 
species change over time, and what changes humans impose on 
populations and groups of species.
1  Dynamics of Natural Populations
Like the golden frogs in their rain-forest habitats, each 
species in an ecosystem exists as a population; that is, each 
exists as a reproducing group. A population is a group 
of members of the same species living in an area, and the 
populations of different species living together in one area 
are known as a community. Ecologists often want to know 
the pattern of change in the numbers of individuals in a 
population. In any population, this is easy to figure out 
if you have enough information. Births and immigration 
cause the population to grow, and deaths and emigration 
cause the population to shrink. This can be described by a 
simple equation:
(Births 1 Immigration) 2 (Deaths 1 Emigration) 
 
5 Change in population number
This equation shows the change in population, or pop-
ulation growth. If births plus immigration are more or less 
equal to deaths plus emigration over time, the population is 
said to be in equilibrium. But often, populations are either 
increasing or decreasing—that is, their population growth is 
not zero. If you take the amount a population has changed 
and divide it by the time it had to change, you get the pop-
ulation growth rate. Imagine there is a very small popula-
tion just coming into a new ecosystem. A scientist might be 
 interested in figuring out how fast a population could grow, 
how many individuals there are right now, or even what the 
future population size will be, using the current population 
and the growth rate. In order to calculate these parameters, 
scientists use population growth curves—graphs of how pop-
ulations grow. Here we will look at several examples that 
represent broad types of growth patterns.
Population Growth Curves
In a natural setting, there are several patterns populations 
can follow as they grow or decline over time. A constant 
population growth rate is the simplest type of growth to 
model. However, constant growth is not something you 
would  expect to find in nature, but it serves as a good com-
parison to other growth patterns because the equation is so 
simple:
Population number at the start 1 (A constant 3 Time) 
 
5 Population number at the end
That is, the number at the end of a period of time is equal to 
the number at the beginning plus a constant multiplied by 
the number of time units. This is illustrated by the straight 
orange line in Figure 1.
Exponential Increase. Every species has the capacity to in-
crease its population when conditions are favorable. For ex-
ample, a beetle population growing in a bag of cereal could 
double every week (the first week 2, then 4, then 8, then 
16 beetles). Such a series is called an exponential increase. 
This sort of growth results in a population explosion. In con-
trast to our first example of constant growth, exponential 
Population
Generations
S-curve
J-curve
Constant
growth
Carrying capacity (K)
Figure 1 Three simple models of population growth. 
Constant growth is represented by the orange line, exponential growth by 
the green line, and logistic growth by the red line. The carrying capacity is 
 represented by the black line.
82

Populations and Communities
the growth of the population slows until the population size 
remains steady, while the population growth equals zero. 
Second, the maximum rate of population growth occurs 
halfway to carrying capacity. If you wanted, for example, to 
harvest the maximum number of worms, you would do bet-
ter to keep your worm population at half of carrying capac-
ity, not at a larger or smaller number.
The population growth figures calculated using these 
simple models rarely match the exact growth figures found 
in real life, but many populations show J-shaped explo-
sions followed by crashes (Fig. 2). J-curves come about 
when there are unusual disturbances, such as the introduc-
tion of a foreign species, the elimination of a predator, 
the sudden alteration of a habitat, or the arrival in a new 
section of habitat, all of which can allow rapid growth of 
a population. This growth is, however, followed by some 
type of crash. In some cases, huge overshoots of K by one 
population result in a collapse of the habitat for many 
species.
Other populations, often those controlled by complex 
relationships between species, show some type of S-curve, fol-
lowed by cycles of lower and higher numbers roughly around 
K (Fig. 2). Many shoot somewhat above carrying capacity 
and then a little below, and eventually they cycle around the 
carrying capacity. This is illustrated in Figure 2.
Biotic Potential Versus Environmental 
Resistance
The rate at which members of a species reproduce under 
 unlimited conditions (which we saw in the equations above 
as r) is a measure of its biotic potential. This is the number 
of offspring (live births, eggs laid, or seeds or spores set in 
plants) that members of species may produce under ideal 
growth does not add a constant number of individuals to the 
population for each time period. Instead, the doubling time 
of the population remains constant. That is, if it takes two 
days to go from 8 worms to 16 worms, it will take two days 
to go from 1,000 worms to 2,000 worms. This is the reason 
such growth is described as an “explosion.”
If we plot numbers over time during an exponential in-
crease, the pattern produced is commonly called a J-curve 
because of its shape (Fig. 1). To calculate the growth rate 
of a population undergoing exponential growth, you need to 
know the number in the population right now, the time pe-
riod, and the number of offspring individuals can produce in 
a given amount of time if resources are unlimited. This last 
value is often designated rmax, or just r.
The equation for exponential growth can be described 
as follows:
Starting population 3 A constant (e) multiplied
 
by itself a certain number of times 5 Ending population
The number of times you multiply e by itself is equal to 
the value of r (the potential to produce offspring) multiplied 
by time. Under unlimited conditions, organisms with a high 
value of r will have more-rapid population growth than will 
those with a low r value. Exponential growth can only con-
tinue indefinitely if there are no limits to the size the popula-
tion can reach, but in nature this is extremely rare.
There are a few times when exponential growth occurs 
in nature. For example, beetles getting into a big sack of ce-
real is a good example of a population explosion. However, 
exponential growth cannot continue indefinitely. There is an 
upper limit to the population of any particular species that 
an ecosystem can support. This limit is known as the car-
rying capacity (K) (Fig. 1). More precisely, the carrying ca-
pacity is the maximum population of a species that a given 
habitat can support without being degraded over the long 
term—in other words, a sustainable system.
Logistic Growth. Eventually, as a population increases, 
two outcomes occur: (1) The population keeps growing until 
it exhausts essential resources, often food, and then dies 
off precipitously due to starvation or other problems (this 
 results in a crash following the J-curve, Fig. 2). Alternatively, 
(2) some processes can slow population growth so that it lev-
els off at or near carrying capacity. The simplest version of 
this latter pattern is known as logistic growth. Plotting this 
type of growth on a graph results in an S-shaped curve and 
thus is called an S-curve (Fig. 1). The point at which it lev-
els off is the carrying capacity (K). The equation for logistic 
growth can be explained this way:
Starting population 1 (Reproductive capacity (r) 
 3 Population 3 A number that represents how far 
 the population is from the carrying capacity)  
  5 Ending population
There are two things to notice about the logistic growth 
curve. First, as the population nears the carrying capacity, 
?
Population held in balance
by environmental resistance
Population
Generations
Overgrazing
and then
dying off due
to starvation
Population
explosion
Carrying
capacity (K)
Figure 2 Real-life growth. In real populations, exponential growth is 
often followed by a crash (blue line), and logistic growth is often modified so that 
the population fluctuates around K (red line). Real-life populations often do not 
follow idealized equations, but such simple models help us to understand possible 
outcomes.
83

Populations and Communities
conditions. The biotic potentials of different species vary 
tremendously, averaging from less than one birth per year 
in certain mammals and birds to millions per year for many 
plants and some invertebrates. To have any effect on the size 
of subsequent generations, however, the young must survive 
and reproduce in turn. Survival through the early growth 
stages to become part of the breeding population is called 
recruitment.
Environmental Resistance. Unlimited population growth 
is seldom seen in natural ecosystems because biotic and abi-
otic factors cause mortality (death) in populations. Among 
the biotic factors that cause mortality are predation, para-
sites, competition, and lack of food. Among the abiotic fac-
tors are unusual temperatures, moisture, light, salinity, and 
pH; lack of nutrients; and fire. The combination of all the 
biotic and abiotic factors that may limit a population’s in-
crease is referred to as environmental resistance (Fig. 3).
Sometimes environmental resistance lowers reproduc-
tion as well as causing mortality directly. For example, the 
loss of suitable habitat often prevents animals from breed-
ing, and certain pollutants affect reproduction adversely. 
These situations are still defined as environmental resist-
ance, because they either block a population’s growth or 
cause its decline. Additionally, environmental resistance can 
cause migration patterns to change, as when animals leave a 
drought-stricken area. Migration can lower or increase local 
populations.
Reproductive Strategies. The interplay of environmental 
resistance and biotic potential drives the success of two com-
mon reproductive strategies in the natural world. The first 
is to produce massive numbers of young, but then leave sur-
vival to the whims of nature. This strategy often results in 
very low recruitment. Animals with this strategy have life his-
tories with rapid reproduction, rapid movement, and often a 
short life span. This strategy is highly successful if a species 
is adapted to an environment that can suddenly change and 
become very favorable, like a rain-fed temporary pond. Or-
ganisms with this strategy are usually small and tend to have 
huge boom-and-bust populations. Because these organisms 
usually have a high r, they are sometimes called r-strategists 
or r-selected species. They are also often called “weedy” or 
“opportunistic” species. A familiar example of this type of 
species is the housefly, which multiplies quickly but also has 
a high mortality rate.
In contrast, the second strategy is to have a much lower 
reproductive rate (that is, a lower biotic potential) but then 
SouND SCIENCE
The Story Behind the Numbers: 
It’s a Wormy Project!
Scientists often make 
models (equations or 
other ways of simplifying 
the world) so that we can 
understand it. One way 
to better understand a model such as a population 
growth curve is to apply it to a situation and figure 
out what the result would be. Suppose for a mo-
ment that you are searching the Internet and come 
upon a great new get-rich-quick scheme—worm 
farming. You order a kit, get a small number of 
starter worms, and plan to raise them in buckets 
and sell the ones you raise for composting.
In the first month, there are two worms 
(worms are hermaphroditic—that is, they con-
tain both male and female organs—but they 
do mate). After a week, you sift the soil and 
find four worms, after two weeks six worms, 
and every week, regardless of the number of 
worms you started with, you have two more 
worms. This would be a good example of con-
stant growth. If you started with a population of 
2 worms and it displayed a constant growth rate 
of 2 worms per week for four weeks, the popu-
lation number at the end would be 10 worms  
(2 1 (2 3 4) 5 10). At the end of 24 weeks, 
you would have 50 worms (2 1 (2 3 24) 5 50).
In contrast, with exponential growth, your 
two starter worms produce very different results. 
Suppose the two worms have an r = 0.60 and 
a reproductive time 
period of one week. 
(Such an r value is prob-
ably higher than worms 
have in real life, but it 
works for our example. 
Many organisms have 
r values below 0.1 be-
cause most females do 
not reproduce in each 
time  period.) Over four 
weeks, the population 
size is not much dif-
ferent than it is with 
constant growth: 
 2 3 e0.60 3 4 5 22 
worms. However, 
24 weeks of exponen-
tial growth would yield an enormous ending  
population of more than 3.5 million  
(2 3 e0.60 3 24 5 3,588,150) worms.
Logistic growth for your worms would work 
slightly differently. Suppose you started the 
population with 2 worms where r = 0.60 and 
K = 2,000 worms. Four weeks after starting the 
worm colony, you would have 33 worms. (Each 
week is calculated separately—by the fourth 
week, the calculation is 20.8 1 (0.60 3 20.8 3 
((2,000 2 20.8)/2000)) 5 33 worms. Twenty-
four weeks after the worm colony started, you 
would have 2,000 worms. They would have 
rapidly increased and then slowed, reaching car-
rying capacity in week 22 and remaining there.
Scientists use models like these to describe 
what is happening in real-world populations. 
In real life, however, populations often differ 
from these idealized equations. For example, 
sometimes populations have cycles of high and 
low numbers, driven by resources or by other 
species.
S
m
o
t
u
A group of earthworms
84

Populations and Communities
care for and protect the young until they can compete for re-
sources with adult members of the population. An elephant 
or a bird like the California condor is a good example. This 
strategy works best where the environment is stable and al-
ready well populated by the species. Organisms with such a 
strategy are larger, longer lived, and well adapted to normal 
environmental fluctuations. Because their populations are 
more likely to fluctuate around the carrying capacity, they 
are sometimes called K-strategists or K-selected species. They 
are also called equilibrial species (Table 1).
Characteristics such as the age at first reproduction 
and the length of life are a part of an organism’s life his-
Figure 3 Biotic potential and environmental 
resistance. A stable population in nature is the result 
of the interaction between factors tending to increase 
population and factors tending to decrease population.
Pop
ulat
ion
 de
nsi
ty
Biotic Potential
Reproductive rate
Ability to migrate (animals)
or disperse (seeds)
Ability to invade new habitats
Defense mechanisms
Ability to cope with adverse
conditions
Environmental Resistance
Lack of food or nutrients
Lack of water
Lack of suitable habitat
Adverse weather conditions
Predators
Disease
Parasites
Competitors
Critical number
0
Increasing
resistance
Increasing
potential
tabLe 1  General Characteristics of 
r-strategists and K-strategists
r-strategists
K-strategists
Environment
Advantage if less stable
Advantage if more stable
Size
Smaller
Larger
Life span
Shorter
Longer
Age at first 
reproduction
Younger
Older
offspring
More
Fewer
Parental care
Little or none
Long and involved
Population 
stability
Wild fluctuations
Mostly stable
tory—the progression of changes an organism undergoes in 
its life. Species such as the housefly and the elephant have 
very different life histories that reflect two extreme sets of 
adaptations. These life histories can be visualized in a graph 
called a survivorship curve, in which the number remaining 
from a group all born at the same time is shown decreasing 
over time until the maximum life span for the species is met. 
Some species, like humans, have relatively low mortality in 
early life, and most live almost the full natural life span for 
that species. This survivorship pattern is depicted as Type I 
in  Figure 4. Some species have many offspring that die young, 
and only a few live to the end of a life span, such as oysters 
and dandelions. These are examples of Type III survivor-
ship. Generally, r-strategists show the Type III pattern and 
K-strategists experience the Type I pattern. Some species are 
not easily defined as either r-strategists or K-strategists. They 
may also have an intermediate survivorship pattern, depicted 
as Type II. Squirrels and corals are likely to fall into this in-
termediate category. Species actually form a continuum of 
these survivorship curves, much as they do in terms of the 
characteristics of r- and K-strategists.
We have examined species in decline, such as the giant 
panda. We will also study species experiencing rapid increase, 
such as pest species overtaking habitats. The reason we look at 
population growth equations is to show that there is a predict-
able connection between species characteristics, such as biotic 
potential (r), and their patterns of growth lived out in differ-
ent life histories. As we will see in Section 4, there are foresee-
able ways that environmental pressures work on species with  
different biotic potentials.
85

Populations and Communities
in the population. The higher the population density (the 
number of individuals per unit area) is, the more that factor 
plays a role. In other cases, a factor like a tornado may keep 
a population from increasing, but the strength of the tornado 
has nothing to do with the density of the organisms in the 
population. We will see both of these types of limits in the 
next section.
Density Dependence and Density 
Independence
Rabbits thrive in a field with lush grass. As rabbits become 
more plentiful, foxes and coyotes may find it easier to catch 
and eat more of them and less of something else. This could 
slow the population growth of the rabbits. In this example, 
predation acts as a density-dependent limit on a population. 
A density-dependent limit is one that increases as popula-
tion density increases—such as a disease or a food shortage. 
The environmental resistance caused by this limit increases 
mortality. Conversely, as population density decreases, the 
environmental resistance lessens, allowing the population to 
recover.
Other factors in the environment that cause mortality 
are density-independent limits—those whose effects are in-
dependent of the crowding of the population. For example, 
millions of a species of now-extinct Rocky Mountain locusts 
were once blown by a gale into glaciers in the West, where 
they can be found buried in ice and snow (Fig. 5a,b). This is 
a good example of a density-independent cause of mortal-
ity. Similarly, a fire that sweeps through a forest may kill all 
small mammals in its wake. Although density-independent 
factors can be important sources of mortality, they are not 
involved in maintaining population equilibrium in the way 
we saw in the logistic equation. Because logistic growth oc-
curs when populations become more crowded (and as they 
There is also a predictable pattern to the way species are 
affected by large-scale human activities. While there are many 
exceptions, it is often the case that r-strategists become pests 
when humans alter the environment and that K- strategists 
become more rare, endangered, or extinct. Houseflies, dan-
delions, and cockroaches increase with human activity, while 
eagles, bears, and oaks decline. Some exceptions to this rule 
include rare opportunistic species (r-strategists) that are so 
separated from new habitat that in spite of a high biotic po-
tential, they cannot succeed.
In sum, whether a population grows, remains stable, or 
decreases is the result of interplay between its biotic poten-
tial and environmental resistance. In general, a population’s 
biotic potential remains constant; it is changes in environ-
mental resistance that allow populations to increase or cause 
them to decrease. Population balance is a dynamic balance, 
which means that additions (births and immigration) and 
subtractions (deaths and emigration) are occurring contin-
ually, and the population may fluctuate around a median. 
Some populations fluctuate very little, whereas others fluc-
tuate widely. As long as decreased populations restore their 
numbers and the ecosystem’s capacity is not exceeded, the 
population is considered to be at equilibrium.
2 Limits on Populations
The carrying capacity of a habitat reflects how large a popula-
tion can be sustained there, but it may not explain what is ac-
tually limiting the population. In the case of the golden frog, 
habitat loss forced the frogs to compete for living space and 
resources, destruction of streams killed their eggs, and a fun-
gus spread rapidly through an already weakened population. 
Sometimes these limiting factors, such as crowding or dis-
ease, have a greater effect when there are more individuals 
Figure 4 Survivorship curves. Some organisms, like 
humans (Type I), experience low mortality throughout their lives, 
and most live to old age. Others (Type III), represented by an  
oyster, have many offspring, most of which die early. Still  
others are intermediate (Type II), here represented by a squirrel. 
Type I and Type III roughly correspond to the K-strategists and 
r-strategists.
Age in relative units
Number of survivors (log scale)
10
1
100
1,000
0
Type III
Type II
Type I
86

Populations and Communities
approach their carrying capacity), logistic growth is some-
times referred to as density-dependent population growth.
In the natural world, a population is subject to the sum 
of all the biotic and abiotic environmental factors around it. 
Many of these factors may cause mortality in a population, 
but only those that are density dependent are capable of reg-
ulating the population, or keeping it in equilibrium.
Environmental scientists distinguish between top-down 
and bottom-up regulation. Top-down regulation is the con-
trol of a population (or species) by predation, such as the 
control of rabbits by their predators, coyotes. In bottom-up 
regulation, the most important control of a population oc-
curs as a result of the scarcity of some resource, as would 
occur if the rabbits ran out of food. Because species interact 
in communities, the factor that controls a population will de-
termine what effects adding or removing a species may have 
Figure 5 Density-independent population control. (a) The Rocky 
Mountain locust, Melanoplus spretus was once quite common in Western North 
America. It is now extinct. (b) Millions of the members of this species died and 
were frozen in glaciers such as this one. Weather events such as windstorms, hur-
ricanes, and freezes can be density-independent population controls.
(a)
(b)
on an ecosystem. Such relationships can cascade down a 
chain, so that the removal of one species even has effects on 
species that don’t directly interact with it. This phenomenon 
is attributed to keystone species, as we will see in Section 3.
Critical Number
We’ve discussed natural mechanisms that keep populations 
near their carrying capacity rather than allowing them to 
grow indefinitely, but in nature, populations also decline. 
There are no guarantees that a population will recover from 
low numbers. Extinctions can and do occur in nature. The 
survival and recovery of a population depend on a cer-
tain minimum population base, which is referred to as the 
population’s critical number. You can see the idea of criti-
cal number at work in a pack of wolves, a flock of birds, 
or a school of fish. Often, the group is necessary to provide 
protection and support for its members. In some cases, the 
critical number is larger than a single pack or flock, because 
interactions between groups may be necessary as well. In any 
case, if a population is depleted below the critical number 
needed to provide such supporting interactions, the surviv-
ing members become more vulnerable, breeding fails, and 
extinction is almost inevitable.
The loss of biodiversity is one of the most disturbing 
global environmental trends. Human activities are clearly re-
sponsible for the decline, and even the extinction, of many 
plants and animals. This is happening because many human 
impacts are not density dependent; they can even intensify 
as populations decline. Examples are alteration of habitats, 
introduction of alien species, pollution, hunting, and other 
forms of exploitation. Concern for these declines eventually 
led to the Endangered Species Act, which calls for the recov-
ery of two categories of species. Species whose populations 
are declining rapidly are classified as threatened. If the popu-
lation is near what scientists believe to be its critical number, 
the species may be classified as endangered. These defini-
tions, when officially assigned by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, set in motion a number of actions aimed at the re-
covery of the species in question.
3 Community Interactions
Now that we have described population growth as a dy-
namic interplay between biotic potential and environmental 
resistance, we can look at the ways populations interact in 
a whole community. Picture all of the possible relationships 
between two species (A and B) as being positive (helpful), 
negative (harmful), or neutral for each species. These rela-
tionships are depicted in Table 2.
87

Populations and Communities
One species might be unaffected and the other harmed 
(amensalism, 0–) through an accidental interaction such as 
an elephant stepping on a flower or a plant making a poi-
son as a part of its normal metabolism that harms another 
organism. Similarly, it is theoretically possible to have a (00) 
interaction, but there is no name for this, and presumably 
the interaction would be a weak one. The following looks in 
depth at the most important species interactions.
Predation
In any relationship in which one organism feeds on another, 
the organism that does the feeding is called the predator and 
the organism that is fed on is called the prey. Predation is a 
conspicuous process in all ecosystems. Predation ranges from 
the classic predator-prey interactions between carnivores 
(meat eaters) and herbivores (plant eaters) to herbivores 
feeding on plants and parasites feeding on their hosts.
Parasites: A Special Kind of Predator. Parasites are or-
ganisms—either plants or animals—that become intimately 
associated with their “prey” and feed on it over an extended 
period of time, typically without killing it. However, some-
times they weaken it so that it becomes more prone to being 
killed by predators or adverse conditions. The plant or ani-
mal that is fed on is called the host. Parasites include a range 
of species, such as tapeworms, microscopic disease-causing 
bacteria, viruses, protozoans, and fungi (Fig. 6). Parasites can 
feed on their hosts in different ways. Tapeworms take energy 
from the intestine of a host animal, whereas parasitic plants 
tap into the sap of other plants.
Parasitic organisms affect the populations of their host 
organisms in much the same way that predators affect their 
prey—in a density-dependent manner. As the population 
density of the host increases, parasites and their vectors 
The name of each type of interaction is given in the table. 
For example, a relationship in which one member benefits and 
the other is harmed (12) is predation. Parasitism is a subset 
of predation, as is herbivory (animals eating plants). A (2 2) 
relationship is one in which both species are harmed. This 
would include competitive relationships where both species 
use a scarce resource. Competition between different species 
is called interspecific competition, and competition between 
members of the same species is called intraspecific competi-
tion. In contrast, a relationship between species in which both  
benefit (11) is called a mutualism. Commensalism occurs when 
one species is benefited and the other is not affected (10).
The most important interactions are predation, compe-
tition, mutualism, and commensalism, but there are  others. 
Figure 6 Several types of parasites. Nearly 
every biological group has at least some members that 
are parasitic. Shown here are (a) mistletoe, a plant para-
site; (b) an intestinal parasite found in drinking water 
(Giardia sp); (c) lampreys, organisms that parasitize 
many types of fish; and (d) athlete’s foot fungus on a 
human foot.
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
tabLe 2  The Major Types of Interactions 
Between Two Species. Interactions 
can be defined by whether the impact on 
each species is positive, negative,  
or neutral.
Interaction 
Name
Effect on 
Species A
Effect on 
Species B
Example
Predation
1
2
Wolves eat moose
Competition
2
2
Two rabbit species eat 
the same grass
Mutualism
1
1
Lichens (fungus/alga)
Commensalism
1
0
Water buffalo/egret
Amensalism
0
2
A plant makes a poison 
that accidentally harms 
another plant
No effect
0
0
Very little interaction
88

Populations and Communities
moose population is usually followed by a rise in the wolf 
population, followed by a decline in the moose population 
and then a decline in the wolf population. The data can 
be interpreted as follows: Fewer wolves represent low en-
vironmental resistance for the moose, so the moose popu-
lation increases. Then the abundance of moose represents 
optimal conditions (low environmental resistance) for the 
wolves, and the wolf population increases. More wolves 
mean higher predation on the moose (high environmental 
resistance); again the moose population falls. The decline in 
the moose population is followed by a decline in the wolf 
population, because now there are fewer prey (high envi-
ronmental resistance) for the wolves.
Deep snow (which makes it more difficult to get food) 
and an infestation of ticks in 1996 caused substantial mor-
tality. However, the dramatic fall in the moose population 
in 1996 cannot be attributed entirely to predation by the 
small number of wolves. The sharp decline in moose is 
thought to be responsible for keeping the wolf population 
low, as there were few calves for them to catch. Wolves 
are generally incapable of bringing down an adult moose 
in good physical condition. The animals they kill are the 
young and those weakened by another factor, such as sick-
ness or old age.
The observation that wolves are often incapable of kill-
ing moose that are mature and in good physical condition is 
extremely significant. This is what often prevents predators 
from eliminating their prey. As the prey population is culled 
down to healthy individuals who can escape attack, the pred-
ator population will necessarily decline unless it can switch 
to other prey. The predators are limited by the availability of 
their crucial food resource. Meanwhile, the survivors of the 
prey population are healthy and can readily reproduce the 
next generation. Thus, a predator-prey relationship involves 
both top-down (on the prey) and bottom-up (on the preda-
tor) population regulation. Furthermore, some factors such 
as weather can be both density-independent or dependent. 
For example, when a deep freeze occurs, many organisms 
may die, but the effect is not necessarily more dramatic if the 
population is higher.
(agents that carry the parasites from one host to another, 
such as disease-carrying insects) have little trouble finding 
new hosts. Therefore, infection rates increase, causing higher 
mortality. Conversely, when the population density of the 
host is low, the transfer of infection is less efficient. This re-
duces the levels of infection and allows the host population 
to recover.
A tremendous variety of organisms may be parasitic. 
Various worms are well-known examples, but certain proto-
zoans, insects, and even mammals (vampire bats) and plants 
(dodder) are also parasites. Many plant diseases and some 
animal diseases (such as athlete’s foot, Figure 6d) are caused 
by parasitic fungi. Indeed, virtually every major group of or-
ganisms has at least some members that are parasitic. Para-
sites may live inside or outside their hosts, as the examples 
shown in Figure 6 illustrate.
In medicine, a distinction is generally made between 
bacteria and viruses that cause disease (known as pathogens) 
and parasites, which are usually larger organisms. Ecologi-
cally, however, there is no real distinction. Bacteria are for-
eign organisms, and viruses are organism-like entities feeding 
on, and multiplying in, their hosts over a period of time. 
Some fungi are parasites, and some are also referred to as 
disease causing. Therefore, disease-causing bacteria and vi-
ruses can be considered highly specialized parasites.
Regulation of Prey. As some populations are limited 
by parasites, many studies have shown that herbivores are 
often regulated by their predators—a type of top-down 
control. A well-documented example is the interaction be-
tween wolves and moose on Isle Royale, a 45-mile-long is-
land in Lake Superior that is now a national park. During a 
hard winter around 1900, a small group of moose crossed 
lake ice to the island and stayed. Their population grew 
considerably in the absence of predators. Then, in 1949, 
a small pack of wolves also managed to reach the island. 
The isolation of the island provided an ideal opportunity 
to study a simple predator-prey system, and in 1958, wild-
life biologists began carefully tracking the populations of 
the two species (Fig. 7). As seen in the figure, a rise in the 
Figure 7 Predator-prey 
relationships. The fluctuations in the wolf 
and moose populations on Isle Royale are 
shown from 1955 until 2011.
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2200
2400
Year
Wolves
Moose
Moose
Wolves
2010
89

Populations and Communities
Predator Removal. Eliminating predators or other nat-
ural enemies of herbivores upsets basic plant-herbivore rela-
tionships in the same way as introducing an animal without 
natural enemies disrupts normal population controls on the 
introduced species. In much of the United States, for exam-
ple, white-tailed deer populations were originally controlled 
by wolves, mountain lions, and bears. Many of these ani-
mals were killed because they were believed to be a threat to 
livestock and humans. At present, deer populations in many 
areas would increase to the point of overgrazing if humans 
didn’t hunt them in place of these natural predators. Indeed, 
population explosions do occur where hunting is prevented. 
If the St. Matthew reindeer population had been kept in 
check by predators, for example, their population might not 
have increased to the point at which they overgrazed the veg-
etation on the island.
Keystone Species. In the case of white-tailed deer, the 
removal of a number of predator species allowed the deer 
population to explode. However, sometimes the removal 
of a single species can cause a cascade of effects that affect 
far more than just the other species with which they prima-
rily interact. For example, in the West Coast kelp forest, the 
sea otter (Enhydra lutris) eats sea urchins, which in turn eat 
kelp (Fig. 9). As a result, hundreds of other species, includ-
ing the young of many fish, are able to survive in the kelp 
forests. Overhunting of sea otters broke this food chain and 
left the urchins unchecked. Sea urchins ate kelp down to the 
sea floor, creating areas called “urchin barrens.” Subsequent 
protection of the otter has allowed it to return, again pro-
tecting the entire habitat. Scientists refer to the sea otter as 
a keystone species, in recognition of its crucial role in main-
taining ecosystem biotic structure (in architecture, the key-
stone is a fundamental part of the support and structure of 
a building). The presence of the keystone species moderates 
other species that would otherwise take over the area (the 
sea urchin) or eat the most important species in the habitat 
(the kelp). Keystone species allow less-competitive species 
to flourish as well, thereby increasing overall diversity. Key-
stone species do not have to be predators, as shown in this 
example, but they often are predators themselves.
A parasite can also work in conjunction with a larger 
predator to control a given herbivore population. When 
parasitic infection breaks out in a dense population of her-
bivores, individuals weakened by infection are more easily 
removed by predators, leaving a smaller, but healthier, pop-
ulation. Relationships between a prey population and sev-
eral natural enemies are generally much more stable and less 
prone to wide fluctuations than are those that involve only 
a single predator or parasite, because different predators or 
parasites come into play at different population densities.
Plant-Herbivore Dynamics. Herbivores prey on plants. 
Just as too many wolves can bring the moose population dan-
gerously low, too many herbivores can do the same to their 
plant food. In turn, whenever the predator populations are 
low, the prey populations encounter low environmental re-
sistance and can overshoot their carrying capacity. These im-
balances can lead to problems in the surrounding ecosystem.
Overgrazing. If herbivores eat plants faster than they 
can grow, the plants will eventually be depleted, and animals 
that eat the plants will suffer. A classic example is the case of 
reindeer on St. Matthew Island, a 128-square-mile island in 
the Bering Sea. In 1944, a herd of 29 reindeer was brought 
onto the island, where they had no predators; this lack of pre-
dation allowed an increase of the herd to 6,000 individuals 
by 1963, when most were malnourished and food had dis-
appeared. During the winter of 1963–1964, nearly the entire 
herd died of starvation; there were only 42 surviving animals 
in 1966. Overgrazing is a common outcome in agricultural 
systems as well (Fig. 8). The Food and Agriculture organiza-
tion of the United Nations (FAO) estimated that the world’s 
cattle population increased from 720 million to 1.5 billion 
between 1950 and 2001; domestic sheep increased from 1.04 
billion to 1.75 billion during the same period. These increases 
have caused overgrazing of more than 20% of rangeland.
Overgrazing demonstrates that no population can escape 
ultimate limitation by environmental resistance, although the 
form of environmental resistance and the consequences may 
differ. If a population is not held in check, it may explode, 
overgraze, and then crash (exhibiting a J-curve and subse-
quent drop) as a result of starvation.
Figure 8 Plant-herbivore interaction: Overgrazing. Domestic 
animals such as these goats can overgraze land as well.
Figure 9 Keystone species. The sea otter eats sea urchins, which eat kelp 
in the Pacific Northwest.
90

Populations and Communities
against others that would cause the most direct competition 
for those resources—members of the same species. Because 
territoriality is competition for space with resources, a lack 
of suitable territories is a density-dependent limitation on a 
population—the larger the population grows, the more in-
tense the competition for space is.
Territoriality as an Advantage. Territoriality may 
seem like a negative factor, but it actually protects a popula-
tion and ensures that some of its members will get enough 
resources to survive. What if the population had no terri-
tories? If so, when resources were scarce, two things might 
happen: First, every encounter with another member of the 
species could end in a potentially lethal fight. Second, instead 
of some members getting enough resources to raise the next 
generation, it might be possible for all members to get only a 
portion of what they need, and a large percentage—or all—
of the population would die.
Whether between species or between members of the 
same species, competition harms both participants. It lowers 
their fitness and the production of offspring. Territoriality is 
an adaptation that lowers the direct effects of competition on 
members of the same species. Individuals unable to claim a 
territory are usually the young of the previous generations. 
Some may survive on the fringes and will get an opportu-
nity to hold a territory later. Others may be driven to dis-
perse, which may open new habitats to the species. Some 
may die without ever getting territories, but as a whole, ter-
ritories protect the population from dying out. As you might 
expect, territoriality is most likely in species with long life 
spans, multiple years to reproduce, parental care of young, 
and other characteristics of K-strategists. Territoriality is an 
adaptation that helps organisms disperse and stabilizes pop-
ulations.
Impact on the Species. The observation that indi-
viduals compete for scarce resources led Charles Darwin to 
identify the “survival of the fittest” as one of the forces in 
nature leading to evolutionary change in species. Those in-
dividuals in a competing group of young plants, animals, or 
Competition
Recall from Table 2 that there are species interactions in 
which both species are harmed. This result usually means 
that species are competing for some scarce resource. Each 
species has a niche, the conditions and resources under which 
a species can live. Species are said to have overlapping eco-
logical niches when they compete with each other. Competi-
tion can also occur between members of the same species. In 
the case of both types of competition, between and within 
species, you might expect that, over time, there would be a 
pressure to lower the overlap and have less negative interac-
tion. Indeed, this is the case.
Intraspecific Competition. When members of the same 
species compete with each other, it is called intraspecific 
competition. This type of competition can occur over dif-
ferent types of resources. In many species, some members 
defend a territory, or limited space. The males of many spe-
cies of songbirds claim a territory that they will defend vigor-
ously at the time of nesting. Their song warns other males to 
keep away (Fig. 10). The males of many carnivorous mam-
mals, including dogs, stake out a territory by marking it with 
urine. The smell warns others to stay away. If other dogs do 
encroach, there may be a fight, but in most species, a large 
part of the battle is intimidation—an actual fight rarely re-
sults in serious physical harm. Sometimes, as in sea anemo-
nes, individuals can band together to defend a territory for a 
colony (Fig. 11).
In territoriality, what is really being protected by the de-
fender or sought after by the invader is the claim to an area 
suitable for nesting, space for establishing a harem, or ad-
equate food resources. Hence, the territory is defended only 
Figure 10 Territoriality. This male red-winged blackbird sings to defend 
his territory.
Figure 11 Competition. Organisms encrusting this coral reef compete 
for living space. Many have early life stages that live in the water and must set-
tle down on a surface and attach in order to continue to grow. Sometimes sea 
anemone colonies such as these will fight for living space.
91

Populations and Communities
These examples simply mean that ecosystems are het-
erogeneous (variable) enough to support species with many 
different niches. Similarly, changes over time can allow mul-
tiple species to live in the same place. For example, the spring 
wildflowers of temperate deciduous forests (lady slippers, he-
patica, trillium) sprout from perennial roots or bulbs in the 
early part of that season. While they would not be able to 
outcompete trees for light during the summer, these plants 
take advantage of the light that can reach the forest floor 
before the trees grow leaves.
Species that seem to be in competition can coexist in 
the same habitat, but have separate niches. Competition is 
minimized because potential competitors are using different 
resources. For example, woodpeckers, which feed on insects 
in deadwood, do not compete with birds that feed on seeds. 
Bats and swallows both feed on flying insects, but they do 
not compete because bats feed on night-flying insects and 
swallows feed during the day. Sometimes the “resource” 
can be the space used by different species as they forage for 
food. This is illustrated in Figure 12, which shows five species 
of warblers that coexist in the spruce forests of Maine. The 
birds feed at different levels in the trees and on different parts 
of the trees. This is called resource partitioning—the division 
of a resource and specialization in different parts of it. Subse-
quent study of these warblers has shown that when competi-
tion is more intense, they separate themselves even more.
All of these examples show that species can live in the 
same habitat because their adaptations, including behavior, 
limit competition. By limiting those competitive interactions, 
each species can put more energy into reproduction. How-
ever, the reason that many species can share a habitat is not 
simply because their niches prevent them from competing. 
Instead, when species live in the same place, competition can 
change some of their characteristics so that they use only a 
portion of their potential niche (which they could have used 
all of when living alone). For more discussion on this, see 
Sound Science, “Studying Finches: The Life of a Scientist” 
and Figure 13.
Mutualism
In contrast to competition, mutualism is an arrangement 
between two species whereby both benefit. There are many 
mutualistic relationships. For example, the relationship be-
tween pollinators (such as bees, which receive nutrition from 
flowers) and plants they pollinate (which receive pollination) 
is an example of mutualism (Fig. 14a). Some estimates infer 
that 70% of plant species have mutualistic relationships 
with fungi connected to their roots. The fungi benefit from 
the plant nutrition and in exchange make it easier for the 
plants to take in nitrogen and other soil nutrients. Lichens 
are actually a mutualistic relationship between a fungus and 
an alga (Fig. 14b). In animals, one example of a mutualism 
is the relationship of the anemone fish and the sea anemone. 
The fish protects the anemone from predation by the but-
terfly fish, and in turn, the anemone’s stinging tentacles (to 
which the anemone fish is immune) protect the fish from 
other predators.
microbes that are able to survive and reproduce, while oth-
ers are not, demonstrate superior fitness to the environment. 
Indeed, every factor of environmental resistance is a selective 
pressure resulting in the survival and reproduction of those 
individuals with a genetic endowment that enables them to 
better cope with their surroundings. This is the essence of 
natural selection, which is discussed in Section 4.
Intraspecific competition, therefore, has two distinct im-
pacts on the population of a species. In the short term, it can 
lead to the density-dependent regulation of a species popula-
tion through such factors as territoriality and self-thinning, 
which is a phenomenon whereby crowded organisms such as 
trees become less numerous as they grow bigger. Intraspecific 
competition can also lead, however, to long-term changes as 
the species adapts to its environment. Those better able to 
compete are the ones who survive and reproduce, and their 
superior traits are passed on to successive generations.
Interspecific Competition. Now we turn to the effects of 
competition between different species, or interspecific com-
petition. Consider a natural ecosystem that contains hun-
dreds of species of green plants, all competing for nutrients, 
water, and light. What prevents one plant species from driv-
ing out others? How do species survive competition? The 
most obvious answer is that sometimes they do not. If two 
species compete directly in many respects, as sometimes oc-
curs when a species is introduced from another continent, 
one of the two species generally perishes in the competition. 
This is the competitive exclusion principle. For example, the 
introduction of the European rabbit to Australia (described 
later in Section 5) has led to the decline and disappearance of 
several small marsupial animal species due to direct competi-
tion for food and burrows.
In fact, competitive exclusion would be expected to 
be the norm in circumstances where a habitat is very sim-
ple and species require the same resources. However, in na-
ture, we often see many species occupying the same habitats 
without becoming extinct. This has intrigued scientists. G. 
E. Hutchinson, a famous limnologist (a scientist who studies 
freshwater systems), once wrote a paper asking about this 
phenomenon: “A homage to Santa Rosalia or Why are there 
so many kinds of animals?”1 Hutchinson suggested, and fur-
ther work has supported, that the answer lies in variability 
over space and time. Differences in topography, type of soil, 
and so on mean that the landscape is far from uniform, even 
within a single ecosystem. Instead, it is composed of numer-
ous microclimates or microhabitats. The specific abiotic con-
ditions of moisture, temperature, light, and so on differ from 
location to location and through the course of time. This is 
true even in lakes, where tiny pockets of water may have dif-
ferent temperatures, chemistry, or light conditions. Often 
just when one competitor begins to get the upper hand, the 
seasons change and a different species benefits. Thus, the ad-
aptation of a species to specific conditions enables it to thrive 
and overcome its competitors in one location or time, but 
not in another.
1The American Naturalist, Vol. XCIII, No. 870, May–June 1959, pp. 145–159.
92

Populations and Communities
60
40
20
0
Foraging height (ft)
Yellow-rumped
warbler
Black-throated
green warbler
Blackburnian
warbler
Bay-breasted
 warbler
Cape May warbler
Figure 12 Resource 
partitioning. Five species of 
North American warblers experience 
less competition than it might first 
appear because they feed at different 
heights and in different parts of trees.
Santiago
Daphne Major
Santa Cruz
Los Hermanos
0
100 km
Isabela
Fernandina
Espanola
Genovesa
Floreana
6
9
12
15
Beak depth (mm)
0
16
32
48
Daphne
G. fuliginosa
G. fortis
6
9
12
15
Beak depth (mm)
0
16
32
48
Santa Cruz
6
9
12
15
Beak depth (mm)
0
2
4
6
Los Hermanos
G. fortis
G. fuliginosa
Figure 13 Character displacement/release. Finches of two species have different beak sizes when they occur 
together but do not when the species occur separately. (Source: Evolution of Character Displacement in Darwin’s Finches” by Peter R. 
Grant and B. Rosemary Grant, from SCIENCE, July 2006, Volume 313(5784). Copyright © 2006 by AAAS. Reprinted with permission.) 
93

Populations and Communities
In contrast to commensalism is amensalism, where one 
species is harmed while the other is unaffected. Usually, this 
is accomplished by the natural chemical compounds pro-
duced by an organism, which are harmless to itself but harm-
ful to other organisms around it. An example is the black 
walnut tree, which secretes a chemical compound from its 
roots that can harm or kill other plants in the area.
In summary, the relationships between two species or 
between two members of one species can be described by the 
positive, negative, or neutral effects on the individuals. These 
potential outcomes are studied by ecologists. Not only do re-
lationships such as predation, competition, mutualism, and 
commensalism affect individuals, but also they are part of 
the constant pressure that causes species to adapt to environ-
mental change.
Some of these relationships with positive and nega-
tive effects stem from a type of symbiosis—a relationship 
in which two species live closely connected to each other. 
Many of the examples of parasites, predators, prey, com-
mensalisms, and mutualisms we have studied are symbiotic. 
As we’ve seen, these relationships can be beneficial (as when 
mutualisms benefit both parties) or detrimental (as in the 
case of parasites and host).
4  Evolution as a Force 
for Change
Predation and competition are two important mechanisms 
that keep natural populations under control. They also sup-
port the survival of individuals with qualities that can lower 
the impacts of negative interactions. Predators and prey be-
come well adapted to each other’s presence. Predators are 
rarely able to eliminate their prey species, largely because the 
prey has various defenses against its predators. Intraspecific 
competition also represents a powerful force that can lead 
to improved adaptations of a species to its environment. In-
terspecific competition, by contrast, promotes adaptations in 
the competitors that allow them to specialize in exploiting 
Commensalism
Commensalism is more rare. It occurs when two species in-
teract and one is benefited while the other is unaffected. An 
example would be cattle egrets and water buffalo: the grazer 
stirs up insect prey, and the bird follows it and eats the in-
sects (Fig. 15). Commensalism also includes animals that 
hitch rides on other species without harming them or grow 
on them for support. Many orchids exist in this type of rela-
tionship—they grow as vines on large trees, but do not harm 
or feed off of them like parasitic plants.
Figure 15 Commensalism. A cattle egret eats insects stirred up by a graz-
ing water buffalo, which is neither harmed nor benefited by the egret’s  
presence.
Figure 14 Mutualism. (a) Pollinators and their flowering plants are mutualists. (b) A lichen is a mutualism 
between a fungus and an alga living symbiotically.
(a)
(b)
94

Populations and Communities
SouND SCIENCE
Studying Finches: The Life 
of a Scientist
How do scientists 
know what hap-
pened to species 
in the past? For 
the most part, 
they look at what happens today. They 
look for physical patterns and mecha-
nisms and at DNA and other parts of 
cells to see patterns that suggest rela-
tionships.
Darwin himself first observed evidence 
of past speciation. In 1835, Darwin col-
lected a number of finches from different 
islands of the Galápagos archipelago 
during his famous voyage on the HMS 
Beagle. Later, in consultation with orni-
thologist John Gould, Darwin speculated 
that differences in size and beak structure 
of the finches could have happened after 
subpopulations of an original parental 
species were isolated from one another on 
separate islands.
Although Darwin himself did not 
work out the details of how the differ-
ent Galápagos finches evolved, modern 
scientists have found what looks to be 
the most likely explanation. It is probable 
that at some time in the past, a few 
finches from the South American 
mainland were blown westward 
by a strong storm and became the 
first terrestrial birds to inhabit the 
relatively new (10,000-year-old) 
volcanic islands of the Galápagos. 
Later, some birds dispersed to 
nearby islands, where they were 
separated from the main popula-
tion. These subpopulations encoun-
tered different selective pressures 
and became specialized for feeding 
on different things (cactus fruit, 
insects, and seeds, to name a 
few). In time, when the changed 
populations dispersed back to their 
original islands, they were different 
enough from the parent species 
that interbreeding among them did 
not occur, and the changed popula-
tions were distinguishable as new 
species.
Peter and Rosemary Grant have studied 
the Galápagos finches for decades. They have 
investigated the fact that when the finch 
 Geospiza magnirostris arrived on the same 
 island as the similar species Geospiza fortis, 
the two species competed heavily for food 
seeds. Over 25 years of study, the scientists 
showed that the beak sizes of both species 
changed and competition was reduced as the 
finches began to eat slightly different-sized 
seeds. In populations where each species was 
alone, the beaks remained in a middle size. 
This is called character displacement, a physi-
cal change that lessens competition when two 
species co-occur (see Fig. 13).
The Grants have spent six months of every 
year in the Galápagos since 1973 and have 
studied the fates of hundreds of birds, taking 
blood samples and measurements. This type 
of careful study is useful in understanding how 
evolution occurs.
H
k
p
i
t
Some of Darwin’s finches. The similarities among these birds attest to their common ancestor. 
Selective pressures to feed on different foods have caused modification and speciation in adapt-
ing subpopulations. (Source: From Biology: Life on Earth, 4th ed., by Teresa Audesirk and Gerald  Audesirk, 
copyright © 1994 by Prentice Hall, Inc., reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, 
NJ 07458.)
Peter and Rosemary Grant have spent decades studying finches
Camarhynchus
pallidus
Camarhynchus
heliobates
Camarhynchus
psittacula
Camarhynchus
parvulus
Geospiza magnirostris
Geospiza fortis
Geospiza
fulginosa
Finchlike
insect eaters
Ancestral South American finch 
Geospiza
difficilis
Certhidia olivacea
Geospiza scandens
seed
crushers
Warblerlike
insect eaters
95

Populations and Communities
specific traits favoring the survival of certain individuals is 
known as natural selection.
Discovered independently by Charles Darwin and Al-
fred Russell Wallace, these concepts were first presented 
in detail by Darwin in his book On the Origin of Species 
by Means of Natural Selection (1859). The modification 
of the gene pool of a species by natural selection over the 
course of many generations is the sum and substance of 
biological evolution. Darwin and Wallace deserve tremen-
dous credit for constructing their theory purely from their 
own observations, without any knowledge of genetics. The 
role of genetic information wasn’t discovered until several 
decades later. Our modern understanding of DNA, mu-
tations, and genetics supports the theory of evolution by 
natural selection.
Adaptations to the Environment
The gene pool of a population is continually tested by the 
selective pressures exerted by environmental resistance. In-
deed, virtually all traits of an organism can be seen as fea-
tures that adapt the organism for survival and reproduction, 
or, in Darwinian terms, fitness. Such characteristics of or-
ganisms include the adaptations needed for coping with cli-
matic and other abiotic factors; obtaining nutrients, energy, 
and water; defending against predation and disease-causing 
or parasitic organisms; finding or attracting mates (or polli-
nating and setting seed); and migrating and dispersing. These 
are summarized in Figure 18.
The fundamental question about any trait is this: Does 
it increase survival and reproduction of the organism? If the 
answer is yes, the trait will be maintained through natural 
selection. Consequently, various organisms have evolved 
different traits that accomplish the same function. For ex-
ample, the ability to run fast, to fly, or to burrow and pro-
tective features such as quills, thorns, or an obnoxious smell 
or taste all help reduce predation and can be found in vari-
ous organisms.
a resource. This specialization can lead to resource parti-
tioning, which allows many potential competitors to share 
a basic resource—such as water in the soil, as illustrated by 
prairie grasses with long tap roots and those with short fi-
brous roots, shown in Figure 16. In this section, we discuss 
how these various adaptations have come about.
Selective Pressure
Most young plants and animals in nature do not survive, in-
stead falling victim to various environmental resistance fac-
tors. These factors—such as predators, parasites, drought, 
lack of food, and temperature extremes—are known as 
selective pressures. These pressures can affect which indi-
viduals survive and reproduce and which are eliminated. If 
a predator is present, for example, prey animals with traits 
that protect them or that allow them to escape from their 
enemies (such as coloration that blends in with the back-
ground) tend to survive and reproduce (Fig. 17). Those with-
out such traits tend to become the predator’s dinner. Any 
individual with a genetic trait that slows it down or makes 
it conspicuous will tend to be eaten. Thus, predators func-
tion as a selective pressure, favoring the survival of traits 
that enhance the prey’s ability to escape or protect itself 
and causing the elimination of any traits handicapping the 
organism’s escape. The need for food can also be seen as 
a selective pressure acting on the predator. Characteristics 
that enhance survival, such as keen eyesight and swift speed, 
benefit survival and reproduction. Sometimes predators use 
the ability to blend in as an advantage, too. The process of 
Dandelion:
Tap root
Grass: Fibrous
root system
Figure 16 Resource partitioning in plants. Prairies have plants 
with short fibrous roots and others with long tap roots that use different areas of 
water in the soil.
Figure 17 Cryptic coloration. The ability to hide (as this chameleon 
does) is a defense against predation, but it also can be an adaptation that allows 
predators to sneak up on or wait for prey.
96

Populations and Communities
Heavy fur
Animals
Plants
Flying south
Hibernation
Deciduous habit
Hardiness to cold
Bulb
Long, thin snout
for digging out
anthills
Long neck
to reach
treetops
Quick-moving
tongue
Extensive roots
and root hairs
for absorbing
water and nutrients
Broad, thin leaf for
absorbing light energy
Running ability
Bad smell
Quills
Protective
coloration
Thorns
Rosette form.
Out of reach of
grazing animals
Poisonous
chemicals
Exotic plumage
Elaborate
“headgear”
Odors given
off as sex
attractants
Various flowers
attract specific
insects as
pollinators 
Parachute or
wing for
wind dispersal
Clinging burs
EXAMPLES OF ADAPTATIONS
Coping
with
abiotic
factors
(example:
cold)
Obtaining
food
Escaping
predation
Finding and
attracting
mates;
pollination
Migration;
seed
dispersal
Figure 18 Adaptation for survival and reproduction. The five general features listed at the left are 
essential for the continuation of every species. Each feature is found in each species as particular adaptations that 
enable the species to survive or reproduce. Across the various species, a multitude of adaptations will accomplish 
the same function. Thus, a tremendous diversity of species exists, with each species adapted in its own  
special way.
97

Populations and Communities
because of deaths from poaching, lead poisoning, and habitat 
destruction. Only nine condors were left in the wild. To save 
the species from extinction, wildlife biologists captured the 
remaining wild condors and initiated a breeding program. As 
of March 2011, there were 369 condors, 178 of which were 
in captivity. This is still not a viable breeding population, but 
the wild condors are now forming pairs and nesting.
Keys to Survival. There are four key variables among 
species that will affect whether or not a viable population of 
individuals is likely to survive new conditions: (1) geographi-
cal distribution, (2) specialization to a given habitat or food 
supply, (3) genetic variation within the gene pool of the spe-
cies, and (4) the reproductive rate relative to the rate of envi-
ronmental change.
Consider how these factors work. It is unlikely that any 
change will affect all locations uniformly or equally. There-
fore, a species such as the housefly—which is present over 
most of Earth, has no requirements for a specialized habi-
tat or food supply, and possesses a high degree of genetic 
 variation—is likely to survive almost any conceivable al-
teration in Earth’s environment. The California condor, on 
the other hand, requires an extensive habitat of mountains, 
 ravines, and the carcasses of large animals to eat but has 
 little genetic variation in its population. The less vulnerable 
species are likely to be r-strategists, described in Section 1. 
The more vulnerable species are likely to be K-strategists, 
although many species fall somewhere in between these ex-
tremes, and in some cases, even very rapidly reproducing 
species can be vulnerable if there is enough environmental 
change. The factors affecting survival of these two species 
types are summarized in Figure 19.
Genetic Change. Assuming the survival of a viable 
population, how fast can that population evolve further ad-
aptations to enable it to better cope with new or changing 
conditions? Over the lifetime of the individual, there is no ge-
netic change—and hence no genetic adaptation. In the popu-
lation, genetic variation is brought about over generations by 
The Limits of Change. As we saw in the opening essay, 
the Panamanian golden frog is facing a new, powerful selec-
tive pressure—a disease-causing fungus. In such a position, a 
species may experience three outcomes:
1. Adaptation. The population of survivors may gradually 
adapt to the new condition through natural selection.
2. Migration. The surviving population may migrate and 
find an area where conditions are suitable.
3. Extinction. Failing the first two possibilities, extinction 
is inevitable.
Migration and extinction need no further explanation. 
The critical question is: What factors determine whether a 
species will be able to adapt to new conditions instead of 
becoming extinct?
Recall that adaptation occurs as selective pressures and 
eliminates those individuals that cannot tolerate the new 
condition. For adaptation to occur, there must be some indi-
viduals with traits (alleles—variations of genes or new com-
binations of genes) that enable them to survive and reproduce 
under the new conditions. Even with such genetic variation, 
there must also be enough survivors to maintain a viable 
breeding population. If a breeding population is maintained, 
the process of natural selection should lead to increased ad-
aptation over successive generations. If a viable population 
is not maintained at any stage, extinction results. In the case 
of the golden frog, the species has not yet been able to adapt 
to the fungus, in part because the frog was already facing 
pressure from habitat loss. The frog had to be removed to 
captivity by humans to prevent extinction. However, there 
are some golden frogs that have survived the fungus. If their 
genes can be preserved, it is possible that someday the frog 
will come back from the brink of extinction and be reintro-
duced to the wild.
In a similar example, the California condor (a very large 
scavenger) had declined to about 20 birds by the early 1980s 
Rapid changes to
environment
Factors affecting survival of a species
Extinction
Survival
Adaptation
Speciation
Changing
abiotic
factors
• Narrow distribution
• Small population
• Limited genetic variation
• Large size
• Low biotic potential
• Small number of offspring
• Long generation time
• Limited ability to migrate
• Wide distribution
• Large population
• High degree of genetic
  variation
• Small size
• High biotic potential
• Large number of offspring
• Short generation time
• Ability to migrate
Rapid changes to
environment
Slow changes to
environment
Figure 19 Vulnerable and highly adaptive species. Species differ broadly in their vulnerability to 
environmental changes. When confronted with rapid change in the environment, a housefly population is likely  
to explode and a condor population is likely to decline.
98

Populations and Communities
to interbreed, all the genes will continue to mix through the 
entire population, keeping it as one species. The second pre-
requisite is that separated subpopulations must be exposed 
to different selective pressures. As the separated populations 
adapt to these pressures, they may gradually become so dif-
ferent that they are not considered the same species. Thus, 
they are unable to interbreed with one another, even if they 
come together again later. Consider the example of the arctic 
and gray foxes. Many generations ago, they may have been 
part of a single ancestral population, separated eventually 
by glaciation. In the Arctic, selective pressures favor indi-
viduals that have heavier fur (to protect them from the cold); 
shorter tail, legs, ears, and nose (the shortness helps conserve 
body heat); and white fur (which helps the animals hide in 
the snow). In the southern regions, selective pressures favor 
individuals with a thinner coat to dissipate excessive body 
heat and fur that blends in with darker surroundings. The 
geographic isolation of the two subpopulations over many 
generations made it possible for one ancestral fox population 
to develop into two separate species (Fig. 20).
As we might expect, we also see new species arise in 
real time today, and we have examples of species forming 
rapidly. The saltmarsh cordgrass, Spartina angelica, is one 
such species. It developed as a hybrid of two other related 
species: Spartina alterniflora, a native of North America, 
and Spartina maritima, a native of England. The two do not 
usually interbreed. Spartina alterniflora, accidentally intro-
duced to England’s mud flats, did not thrive there, but when 
it bred with Spartina maritima, the hybrid daughter species 
(S. angelica) spread rapidly. It has a different number of 
chromosomes from either parent and does not interbreed 
successfully with either parent species. Now, where there 
were two similar species, there are three, and the daughter 
a number of mechanisms, including hybridization, mutation, 
and crossover (a process by which sections of chromosomes 
are swapped). Bacteria, for example, readily exchange small 
bits of genetic material with other bacteria, and recent stud-
ies have shown that microbes sometimes insert their genetic 
material into other organisms, including mammals, bringing 
new DNA variations into the genome. Genetic variation is 
the norm in living things.
The Evolution of Species. The newest estimates are that 
there are around 8.7 (1/2 1.3) million species of plants, 
animals, and microbes currently in existence, all living and 
functioning in ecosystems and all contributing to an amaz-
ing biodiversity. This estimate changes with new information 
because, of course, we haven’t discovered most of the organ-
isms that exist on Earth. However, biodiversity is diminish-
ing because present species are becoming extinct faster than 
new species are appearing. In order to understand why, we 
need to understand how new species appear.
The infusion of new variations from mutations and 
the pressures of natural selection serve to adapt a species 
to the biotic community and the environment in which it 
exists. Over time, in this process of adaptation, the final 
“ product”—giraffe, anteater, redwood tree—may be so dif-
ferent from the population that started the process that it is 
considered a different species. This is one aspect of the proc-
ess of speciation.
Two Species from One. The same process also may 
result in two or more species developing from one original 
species. There are only two prerequisites. The first is that the 
original population must separate into smaller populations 
that do not interbreed with one another. This reproductive 
isolation is crucial because if the subpopulations continue 
Ancestral fox population
Subpopulations spread northward
and southward and separate
Environmental conditions differ, giving different selective
pressures, causing the animals to evolve into different species
Adaptations to cold
climate: heavy fur;
short tail, ears, legs,
and nose; light color
Adaptations to warm
climate: thin fur;
long tail, ears, legs,
and nose; dark color
Northern population
Southern population
Arctic fox
Gray fox
Figure 20 Evolution of new species. A population 
spread over a large area may face various selective pressures. If the 
population splits so that interbreeding does not occur, the different 
pressures may result in the subpopulations evolving into new spe-
cies. Two species of foxes show the pattern we would expect if this 
had occurred.
99

Populations and Communities
average rate of a plate’s movement is about 6 centimeters 
(2.4 inches) per year, but over 100 million years, this adds 
up to almost 8,000 kilometers (5,000 miles) in the fastest-
moving segments. The plate boundaries are locked by fric-
tion and hence are regions of major disturbances.
Adjacent tectonic plates move with respect to each other 
by separating (as in mid-ocean ridges), sliding past each 
other (at fault lines like the San Andreas Fault in California), 
or colliding. These plate movements have large environmen-
tal effects. A catastrophic earthquake off the Pacific coast 
of To¯ hoku, Japan, on March 11, 2011, resulted from the  
Pacific plate sliding under the North American plate, form-
ing a rift under the sea floor 300 kilometers (186 miles) long, 
pulling eastern Japan closer to North America by 4 meters 
(13 feet) and even slightly changing Earth’s axis. The sud-
den uplift triggered a powerful tsunami (tidal wave) that 
displaced an enormous quantity of seawater and sent waves 
up to 10 kilometers (6 miles) inland in the Sendai area of 
Japan. The tsunami triggered a number of nuclear accidents 
at the Fukushima II Nuclear Power Plant. The earthquake 
and  tsunami resulted in more than 15,845 deaths, with thou-
sands more missing or injured. Such movements of the crust 
shape our world. Over geologic time, plate collisions pro-
duce volcanic mountain chains and uplift regions into moun-
tain ranges similar to the way the hoods of colliding cars 
crumple. An example of mountains caused by this type of 
movement is the Himalayas. The fact that volcanic eruptions 
and earthquakes continue to occur is evidence that tectonic 
plates are continuing to move today, as they have over mil-
lions of years. In fact, volcanoes and earthquakes mark the 
boundaries between the plates and have provided some of 
the best evidence for the plate tectonic theory.
In addition to the periodic catastrophic destruction 
that may be caused in localized regions by earthquakes 
and volcanic eruptions, tectonic movement may gradually 
lead to major shifts in climate in three ways. First, as con-
tinents gradually move to different positions on the globe, 
their climates change accordingly. Second, the movement of 
continents alters the direction and flow of ocean currents, 
which in turn has an effect on climate. Third, the uplifting 
of mountains alters the movement of air currents, which also 
affects climate. (For example, see the rain-shadow effect in 
Fig. 10–7.)
Large-scale changes in Earth’s crust have been part of 
evolutionary pressures that have increased diversity. As 
continents moved to their present position, they isolated or-
ganisms into broad regions. Sometimes scientists divide the 
world into six zoogeographic regions—areas of Earth’s sur-
face with distinctive animal groups. Australia, for example, 
is part of the Australasian region and is home to almost all 
of the animals with pouches—the marsupials. Australia is 
located on the Indo-Australian tectonic plate. Its separation 
from other continents appears to be very ancient, which ex-
plains why so many species in the Australasian region are 
unique: They have had millions of years to evolve separately 
from species on other continental plates.
Sometimes the place where several tectonic plates meet 
will have an unusual mix of species. For example, the  country 
species has a different set of characteristics and can live in a 
slightly different niche than either parent species.
In sum, new species are not formed from scratch; they 
are formed only by the modification of existing species. Dif-
ferent selective pressures act on the constant variation of ge-
netic material that naturally occurs. Combined with isolation 
and other processes (such as the unusual hybridization that 
occurred in the genus Spartina), new adaptations can arise. 
This concept is consistent with the observation that groups 
of closely related species are generally found in nature, in-
stead of distinct species without close relatives. Patterns 
among larger groups suggest the same thing—that organisms 
can be grouped into large, closely related groups differenti-
ated by older or newer characteristics.
Although it can be difficult to imagine, overwhelming 
evidence from today and patterns from the past inform us 
that the present array of plants, animals, and microbes has 
developed through evolution over long periods of time and 
in every geographic area on Earth. This is the source of our 
current biodiversity.
Drifting Continents
Geographic isolation of populations is the foundation of the 
process of speciation. The slow movement of Earth’s conti-
nents has allowed the isolation of broad groups of organ-
isms. Using evidence from geology, German scientist Alfred 
Wegener proposed in 1915 that about 225 million years ago 
the continents were connected into a giant landmass called 
Pangaea. This is part of a theory that the continents have 
been in motion (and continue to move) since Earth formed. 
Wegener’s theory was hotly debated for decades until, by 
the mid-20th century, the evidence for drifting continents 
became irrefutable. His theory has blossomed into a grand 
theory known as plate tectonics. This theory helps us to 
understand earthquakes and volcanic activity and is key to 
understanding the geographic distribution of present-day 
biota.
Much of the interior of Earth is molten rock, kept hot 
by the radioactive decay of unstable isotopes remaining from 
the time when the solar system was formed (about 5 billion 
years ago). Earth’s crust, the lithosphere—which includes 
the bottoms of oceans as well as the continents—is a rela-
tively thin layer (ranging from 10 to 250 kilometers, or 16 
to 160 miles) that can be visualized as huge slabs of rock 
floating on an elastic layer beneath. This is much like crack-
ers floating next to each other in a bowl of soup. These slabs 
of rock are called tectonic plates. Some 14 major plates and a 
few minor ones make up the lithosphere (Fig. 21a).
Within Earth’s molten interior, hot material rises toward 
the surface and spreads out at some locations, while cooler 
material sinks toward the interior at other locations. Riding 
atop these convection currents, the plates move slowly, but 
inexorably, with respect to one another. The spreading proc-
ess of the past 225 million years has broken up the original 
mass of Pangaea and brought the continents to their present 
positions. It also accounts for the other interactions between 
tectonic plates, such as volcanoes and earthquakes. The 
100

Populations and Communities
Figure 21 Drifting continents and plate tectonics. (a) Similarities in the types of rock, the distribution of fos-
sil species, and other lines of evidence indicate that 225 million years ago all the present continents were formed into one 
huge landmass that we now call Pangaea. (b) The 14 major tectonic plates making up Earth’s crust and their directions of 
movement. (Source: From Geosystems: An Introduction to Physical Geography, 5th ed., by Robert W. Christopherson, copyright © 2005 by 
Prentice Hall, Inc., reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458.)
120°
80°
160°
160°
120°
0°
10°
80°
40°
PANTHALASSA
TETHYS
         SEA
(EURASIA)
(NORTH
AMERICA)
(SOUTH
    AMERICA)
(AFRICA)
(INDIA)
(AUSTRALIA)
(ANTARCTICA)
P
A
N
G
A
E
A
 










 
 
   





 












  
 
 









 
















 










  











 










 







 

 
JUAN DE FUCA
PLATE
COCOS
PLATE
NAZCA
PLATE
SOUTH AMERICAN
PLATE
AFRICAN PLATE
ARABIAN
PLATE
ANTARCTIC PLATE
EURASIAN PLATE
Collision
Zone
Subduction
Zone
PHILIPPINE
PLATE
PACIFIC
PLATE
CAROLINE
PLATE
FIJI
PLATE
INDO-AUSTRALIAN PLATE
Spreading ridge offset
by transform faults
PACIFIC PLATE
CARIBBEAN
PLATE
NORTH AMERICAN PLATE
PACIFIC
OCEAN
ATLANTIC 
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN
Equator
Tropic of Cancer
Tropic of Capricorn
Antarctic Circle
80°
80°
0°
20°
40°
20°
40°
60°
60°
20°
40°
0°
20°
40°
60°
80°
100°
120°
140°
160°
40°
60°
20°
80°
160°
140°
120°
100°
0
3,000 KILOMETERS
0
ROBINSON PROJECTION
3,000 MILES
1,500
1,500 
Subduction zone
Motion of plate
Spreading ridge offset
by transform faults
(b)
(a) 225 million years ago
of Indonesia, which consists of about 17,000 islands, is 
 located on the junction of three tectonic plates—the Pacific, 
Eurasian, and Indo-Australian plates. Papua New Guinea is 
part of the Indo-Australian plate and has plants and animals 
similar to those in Australia. Other islands have biota more 
like those in parts of Asia. The island of Sulawesi lies right on 
a line between plates and has been formed by islands being 
pushed together. It is home to an odd combination of animals 
and plants with relatives in far distant parts of the world.
Because they have been isolated on islands, many 
 Indonesian species have changed over time, developing ad-
aptations not seen in their Asian or Australian relatives. 
Both Australia, long separated from other continents, and 
 Indonesia have a high number of species that occur nowhere 
else in the world. Australia and Indonesia serve as examples 
of how long-term, large-scale changes, such as the movement 
of continents and the rise of islands, can change the environ-
ment for organisms and increase their diversity.
101

Populations and Communities
bird colonies; however, they did not understand the impact 
of the rodents until they used infrared cameras to capture 
night images of nesting birds. There they saw the mice di-
rectly preying on much larger baby birds. Restoration of sea 
bird populations requires removal of these mice; such re-
moval has been found to be effective in trial cases (Fig. 22).
Plants. Introduced species can have a devastating effect on 
plants as well as animals. Prior to 1900, the dominant tree 
in the eastern deciduous forests of the United States was the 
American chestnut, which was highly valued for both its 
high-quality wood and its prolific production of chestnuts, 
eaten by wildlife and people alike. In 1904, however, a fun-
gal disease called the chestnut blight was accidentally intro-
duced when some Chinese chestnut trees carrying the disease 
were planted in New York. The fungus spread through 
5  Implications for Human 
Management
Ecologists study populations and communities for a 
number of reasons. One is simply to further our under-
standing of the world. Another is to better manage natu-
ral resources by protecting declining species such as the 
condor and the golden frog and by controlling pest spe-
cies such as the chytrid fungus and the spotted knapweed. 
It is also important for us to study our own impacts on 
populations, as many of the causes of explosive growth or 
decline in populations stem from human actions, such as 
the removal of an important species or the introduction of 
non-native species.
The keystone species mentioned in Section 3 are such an 
integral part of their ecosystems that their removal, as we 
discussed, can cause the collapse of the whole ecosystem. For 
instance, beavers were once one of the dominant ecological 
forces in eastern North American, creating openings in for-
ests and wetlands that became habitats for other species and 
allowed them to survive. The loss of beavers due to the fur 
industry and habitat destruction removed them from much 
of the North American landscape, to the detriment of species 
that rely on small wetland meadows.
Introduced Species
Humans have altered population equilibria by introducing 
species from foreign ecosystems. These introductions alter 
community and population ecology relationships such as 
competition and predation. Over the past 500 years, and 
especially now that there is vast global commerce, thou-
sands of species of plants, animals, and microbes have been 
accidentally or deliberately introduced onto new conti-
nents and islands. A recent attempt to quantify the eco-
nomic losses due to introduced species in the United States 
estimated the total cost to be in excess of $138 billion per 
year.
Invading Animals. A classic example of the impact an in-
troduced species can have on a native ecosystem comes from 
Australia, where rabbits were introduced for sport hunting 
in 1859. Lacking predators, the rabbit population exploded 
and devastated vast areas of rangeland by overgrazing, dam-
aging the health of both native marsupials and ranchers’ 
sheep. The problem was temporarily brought under control 
by introducing a disease-causing virus in rabbits; however, 
the rabbits adapted to the virus and repopulated the area. 
Removal of rabbits on some islands resulted in restoration 
of the island vegetation. On the mainland, the rabbit is 
 Australia’s most destructive pest animal.
In 2008, researchers on Gough Island in the South 
 Atlantic were shocked to discover one of the biggest reasons 
for the decline of nesting sea birds: predation by mice. Mice 
and rats have been introduced to thousands of oceanic is-
lands by ships. Often, the descendants of those first immi-
grants grow to be much larger than ordinary members of the 
species. Researchers knew there were many rodents on sea 
Figure 22 Invasive animals. (a) Rodents such as this house mouse often 
overrun oceanic islands when they are introduced by ships. Unfortunately, they 
have few predators and often grow larger than on mainlands. Invasive rodents 
are one of the chief causes of decline for sea birds. (b) This albatross chick is very 
vulnerable to rodent predators.
(a)
(b)
102

Populations and Communities
may not be seen as pests by many people, domestic cats have 
often proved to be effective predators and have decimated 
small animal populations where they have been allowed to 
roam free. They are responsible for greatly diminished song-
bird populations in urban and suburban areas, including 
parks.
The problems of introduced species may also be ex-
ported as well as imported. In 1982, several species of  
jellyfish-like animals known as ctenophores were trans-
ported from the East Coast of the United States to the Black 
Sea and the Sea of Azov in eastern Europe. The ctenophores 
have cost Black Sea fisheries an estimated $250 million and 
have completely shut down fisheries in the Sea of Azov be-
cause they kill larval fish directly and deprive larger fish of 
food (Fig. 24b).
Lessons. There are two ecological lessons to be learned 
from the introduction of undesirable species. First, the 
regulation of populations is a matter of complex inter-
actions among the members of the biotic community. 
Second, the relationships are specific to the organisms in 
each particular ecosystem. Therefore, when a species is 
transported over a physical barrier from one ecosystem to 
another, it is unlikely to fit into the framework of relation-
ships in the new biotic community. In most cases, it finds 
the environmental resistance of the new system too severe 
and dies out. No harm is then done. In some instances, the 
introduced species simply joins the native flora or fauna 
and does no measurable harm. The new species has then 
become naturalized. In the worst cases, the transported 
species becomes invasive. It finds physical conditions and 
a food supply that are hospitable, together with an insuf-
ficient number of natural enemies to stop its population 
growth. Then its population explodes and it drives out 
native species by outcompeting them for space, food, or 
other resources (if not by predation). Fortunately, only 
a small percentage of successfully transplanted species  
become invasive.
the forests, killing nearly every American chestnut tree by 
1950. Although oaks filled in where the chestnuts died, the 
ecological and commercial loss was incalculable. There is 
hope, however, because researchers have recently crossbred 
the American and Chinese chestnuts, creating a hybrid that 
is both 94% native and resistant to the blight. However, it 
will be several decades before enough of the hybrids are pro-
duced to make them available for sale to nurseries and the 
general public.
There are also examples of introduced plant species in 
the United States that have caused ecological damage. Kudzu, 
a vigorous vine introduced in 1876 from Japan for animal 
fodder and erosion control, is a famous example. Kudzu in-
vaded forests and now occupies more than 3 million hectares 
(7 million acres) of the Deep South (Fig. 23).
Pests. Most of the important insect pests we try to  control—
Japanese beetles, fire ants, apple snails, and gypsy moths, for 
example—are species introduced from other continents. The 
rabbits of Australia are another good example. While they 
Figure 23 Introduced plant species. Kudzu overgrowing forests.
Figure 24 Introduced species. (a) Zebra mussels introduced from Europe are now spread throughout the Great Lakes and the Missis-
sippi valley. The only benefit from these aliens is that they can dramatically increase water clarity where they are numerous, but that is far out-
weighed by the harm they do. (b) Ctenophores, originating along the Atlantic Coast in the southern United States and introduced into Europe, 
have destroyed fishing in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
(a)
(b)
103

Populations and Communities
tal resistance, which often include several natural enemies 
as well as all the abiotic factors. The natural enemy that 
is introduced could even end up as an invasive pest itself. 
In short, to prevent doing more harm than good, a great 
deal of research needs to be done before a natural enemy is 
introduced.
Most invasive species are not problems in their na-
tive lands. Their impact is different in a new setting, 
however, because ecosystems on different continents or 
remote islands have been isolated by physical barriers 
for millions of years. Consequently, the species within 
each ecosystem have developed adaptations to other spe-
cies within their own ecosystem, and these do not pre-
pare them to interact with species that have developed in 
other ecosystems.
Remedies. Invasive species are such a concern for the 
health of ecosystems that there are state and federal  agencies 
 working to slow their entry and spread. The National 
 Invasive Species Information Center, for example, acts as 
a clearinghouse of information on invasive species in the 
United States. The United States has a number of regula-
tions about invasive species, including the Nonindigenous 
Aquatic  Nuisance Prevention and Control Act of 1990 and 
the  National Invasive Species Act of 1996.
Another solution to the takeover by an invasive spe-
cies is to introduce a natural enemy. Indeed, this approach 
has been used in a number of cases, including in that of 
the spotted knapweed. Unfortunately, control with a 
natural enemy is more easily said than done. Recall that 
control is a consequence of many factors of environmen-
SouND SCIENCE
The Biological Detective: The Case 
of Spotted Knapweed
Millions of acres in the 
western United States 
are infested with a plant 
that produces more 
seeds than do others 
and is barely edible to grazers such as cattle, 
whose growth is harmed by the plant’s toxins. 
Spotted knapweed (Centaurea biebersteinii), a 
member of the Aster family, was accidentally 
introduced into the United States as seeds from 
Europe in the late 1800s. It thrives here not only 
because its seeds can remain in the ground for 
five years, sprouting whenever there is an open-
ing (high biotic potential), but also because it 
has few natural predators (low environmental 
resistance).
Many herbivores eat specific plants and have 
adaptations that allow them to get around the 
plant’s defenses, but when plants are moved 
from one place to another, their accompanying 
herbivores are sometimes not moved. Without 
the limit of environmental resistance, the plant 
outcompetes other plants for light and water.
For years, scientists searched for a control 
for knapweed, and in the early 1970s, they 
thought they had the ideal solution. They intro-
duced a gallfly that specializes in eating spotted 
knapweed, hoping to avoid the problems that 
occur when generalist herbivores are moved 
from one part of the globe to another and eat 
numerous species. It should have worked. The 
gallfly lays its eggs in the knapweed flowers. 
Larvae hatch and trigger the plant tissues to 
grow a gall, which protects the insect. The 
larvae overwinter in the galls and emerge in 
the spring. Because spotted knapweed plants 
have to put a great deal of energy into making 
the woody tissue in the galls, they make fewer 
seeds. This should have made the population 
decline, but the decline was not as high as 
expected. Why? Recently, scientists have discov-
ered part of the answer to the mystery.
In a study reported in 2008 in the journal 
 Ecological Applications, researcher Dean  Pearson 
and his colleagues at the U.S. Forest Service’s 
Rocky Mountain Research Station found that 
part of the answer lies in the relationship be-
tween the gallfly and local deer mice.* Gallfly 
larvae are eaten by native deer mice, which also 
eat seeds and other insects. Because there are  
so many spotted knapweed plants, there are 
plenty of gallflies. Because there are plenty of 
gallflies, there are plenty of deer mice. But the 
deer mice also eat the seeds of other native 
plants. Because the native plants make many 
fewer seeds than the introduced spotted knap-
weed, the knapweed seeds remaining can still 
outgrow the native plants. This unexpectedly 
complex set of relationships means that even 
a biological control agent chosen because of 
its specificity to one host may have unintended 
consequences.
M
w
a
t
s
Spotted knapweed
*D. E. Pearson and R. M. Callaway, “Weed Biocontrol Insects 
Reduce Native Plant Recruitment Through Second-Order Ap-
parent Competition,” Ecological Applications 18 (2008): 
1489–1500.
104

Populations and Communities
REVISITING THE THEMES
sound science
The golden frog of Panama is in decline. The frog’s popu-
lation is controlled by a disease-causing fungus as well as 
by human impacts like habitat loss and degradation. The 
chytrid fungus itself is not well controlled because it is an introduced 
exotic species, occurring in places where organisms have not evolved 
adaptations to it. This example illustrates some of the ideas of the chap-
ter, such as the limits to population growth, the relationships between 
parasites (or pathogens) and hosts, the problem of introduced species, 
and the role humans can play in managing ecosystems.
The science of population and community ecology allows people to 
better understand why species live where they do and what drives their 
abundances. Populations can be controlled by abiotic factors such as 
precipitation or by a complexity of biotic factors such as competition, 
predation, mutualism, and commensalism—all important relationships. 
Species typically have one of two reproductive strategies in their life 
history. Opportunistic or r-selected species make many small offspring, 
reproduce early, and do not care for their young, most of which die. In 
contrast, equilibrial or K-selected species have fewer offspring at older 
ages and care for the young. These differences correlate to differences in 
the ways in which populations grow: r-selected species often overshoot 
their carrying capacity and crash, while K-selected species are more 
likely to rise slowly and then fluctuate around the carrying capacity. 
Either way, all species are limited. When a few individuals start a new 
population, the growth may initially be exponential, but the population 
cannot maintain continual growth. Finally, sound science shows us that 
biological systems change because they are constantly varying geneti-
cally and because the environment changes over space and time to exert 
different selection pressures.
sustainability
To follow the best management practices for sustain-
ability can sometimes be difficult. This was shown with 
numerous examples of human actions resulting in nega-
tive unexpected consequences, particularly with the introduction of rab-
bits into Australia and with the attempts to slow the spread of spotted 
knapweed. However, in this chapter, we see that best management 
means paying attention to the relationships in a community that al-
ready exist and to constraints such as carrying capacity. The movement 
of species from a place where they have coevolved in a community to 
other places lacking those evolutionary relationships was highlighted 
as a particular problem that often results in either the explosion of an 
unwanted pest or the collapse of some other species. We have had to 
develop agencies and policies to minimize problems from the transport 
of species. We also saw, in the case of the golden frog, that drastic 
action in the short term may be required to protect species until longer-
term solutions can be found.
stewardship
When questions arise about what’s best for populations 
and communities, the answers indicate that what seems 
to benefit one species (importing a plant or animal, 
for example) may not benefit another. A species decline can result 
from activities that disrupt its environment on scales of time or space 
that it cannot adjust to. This is definitely the case with the golden 
frog, which has had to adapt to too many environmental changes in 
a short time span. The destruction of its forest habitat, for example, 
has benefited human enterprises but has also harmed other popula-
tions. Human impacts are not always to blame, however. Disruptive 
changes can occur simply through natural shifts in an ecosystem 
(such as a forest fire). One might ask, “If change is natural, why are 
we concerned about species loss?”. In this text we will ask how we 
can continue to support the needs of people for agriculture and other 
activities, while still maintaining healthy community structures in our 
ecosystems.
This chapter also shows that interactions such as predation and 
competition can be positive parts of ecosystems even when we might 
have a gut feeling that they are negative. They act as checks and bal-
ances on populations. For example, we saw that natural predators and 
competition keep species in check in the places where they have evolved 
in a community. Likewise, it might seem like territoriality would be a bad 
thing, but these behaviors actually lower competition and ensure that 
some members of the species survive.
s
W
a
t
f
l )
s
T
a
n
ti
t d
s
T
l
b
chytrid fungus i
1. What are three basic population growth curves? When 
might you see them in nature?
 2. Define biotic potential and environmental resistance, and 
give factors of each. Which generally remains constant, and 
which controls a population’s size?
 3. Differentiate between the terms critical number and carrying 
capacity. What is density dependence?
 4. Explain the difference between r- and K-strategists. Where 
do these terms come from, and what are the characteristics 
of each broad category?
 5. Describe the predator-prey relationship between the moose 
and wolves of Isle Royale. What other factors influence 
these two populations?
Review Questions
6. Distinguish between intraspecific and interspecific competi-
tion. How do they affect species as a form of environmental 
resistance?
 7. What is meant by territoriality, and how does it limit the ef-
fects of competition in nature?
 8. What problems arise when a species is introduced from a 
foreign ecosystem? Why do these problems occur?
 9. What are selective pressures, and how do they relate to nat-
ural selection?
 10. Describe several types of adaptations a species might have 
that would allow it to survive in a dry environment, escape 
predation, or lower competition with another species.
105

Populations and Communities
 11. What factors determine whether a species will adapt to a 
change or whether the change will render it extinct?
 12. How may evolution lead to the development of new species 
(speciation)?
 13. What is plate tectonics, and how does this theory explain 
past movements of the continents? How have past tectonic 
movements affected the present-day distribution of plant 
and animal species on Earth’s surface?
thinking enviRonmentally
 1. Describe, in terms of biotic potential and environmental 
resistance, how the human population is affecting natural 
ecosystems.
 2. Explain the key differences between r- and K-strategists, 
their life histories, and their reactions to environmental 
changes. Where do the r and K come from in population 
equations? What do they stand for?
 3. Consider the various kinds of relationships humans have 
with other species, both natural and domestic. Give exam-
ples of relationships that (a) benefit humans but harm other 
species, (b) benefit both humans and other species, and  
(c) benefit other species but harm humans. Give examples 
in which the relationship may be changing—for instance, 
from exploitation to protection. Discuss the ethical issues 
involved in changing relationships.
 4. Consider the research of the Grants over decades of work on 
the Galápagos. Why is such research important? How does 
this basic science benefit us as we try to protect ecosystem 
functions?
 5. Describe how a human action such as removing a top preda-
tor or adding a species can have an impact on many species 
in an ecosystem.
making a DiffeRenCe
 1. If you can, plant native plants instead of alien ones in your 
garden. Otherwise, seeds from introduced plants could es-
cape into the surrounding ecosystems. Native grasses, flow-
ers, shrubs, and trees are more likely to attract native birds, 
butterflies, and other insects.
 2. Visit a nearby national park or nature reserve. Talk to the 
rangers to find out about any threatened species and how 
they are being protected. Get involved by volunteering at 
your local nature center or wildlife refuge. Go wildlife or 
bird watching in nearby parks. Wildlife-based recreation 
creates millions of jobs and supports local businesses.
 3. If you are a hunter or fisherman, use non-lead shot and 
fishing gear so birds eating spent shot or lost sinkers will 
not suffer lead poisoning. Follow the regulations regarding 
seasons and catch limits, and report poachers to your local 
wildlife agency.
 4. When choosing outdoor recreational activities, consider 
cross-country skiing and canoeing instead of snowmobil-
ing or motor boating. These activities are quieter, and they 
increase your chances of seeing wildlife. Loud noises, espe-
cially in winter, disturb animals when they need to rest and 
conserve energy.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
CReDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): Justin Black/Shutterstock; (bottom left): Joel Sartore/Getty Images; 
(top right): Kokhanchikov/Shutterstock; (top left): The Natural History Museum 
/ The Image Works; (center left): Nigel Hicks/Dorling Kindersley; (top left): 
galam/Fotolia; (top right): Phanie / SuperStock; (bottom left): James L. Amos/
National Geographic/Getty Images; (bottom right): John Watney / Photo 
Researchers, Inc.; (bottom left): Images of Africa Photobank / Alamy; (bot-
tom right): Michael S. Nolan / age fotostock / SuperStock; (bottom left):  
William Leaman / Alamy; (top right): Charles Stirling (Diving) / Alamy; (center): 
Stubblefield Photography/Shutterstock; (left): David Hosking / Alamy; (top left): 
Stephen P. Parker/Photo Resesearchers, Inc.; (top right): Bernard J. Nebel; (bot-
tom left): Pj Malsbury/iStockphoto; (bottom left): Susanna Sez El Pais Photos/
Newscom; (top left): Bernard J. Nebel; (top right): Natural Visions / Alamy; (bottom 
left): Jeff Lepore/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (bottom center): Craig K. Lorenz/Photo 
Researchers, Inc.; (center right): Andreas Von Einsiedel/Dorlng Kindersley; (bottom 
right): Krys Bailey / Alamy; (top left): LightScribe/iStockphoto; (bottom left): Doug 
Smith/MCT/Newscom; (bottom right): NHPA /SuperStock; (right): John W. Bova/
Photo Researchers, Inc.
Text Credits
Figure 13: “Evolution of Character Displacement in Darwin’s Finches” by Peter 
R. Grant and B. Rosemary Grant, from SCIENCE, July 2006, Volume 313(5784). 
Copyright © 2006 by AAAS. Reprinted with permission.; Page 95, Figure 21: Figure 
from Geosystems: an Introduction to Physical Geography, 6th Edition by Robert W. 
Christopherson, 2006. Copyright © 2006 by Pearson Education, Inc. Reprinted by 
permission. All rights reserved. 
106

Populations and Communities
amensalism An interaction between species whereby one species is 
harmed, while the other is unaffected.
biological evolution The theory, attributed to Charles Darwin and 
Alfred Russell Wallace, that all species now on Earth descended 
from ancestral species through a process of gradual change 
brought about by natural selection.
biotic potential Reproductive capacity. The potential of a species 
for increasing its population and/or distribution. The biotic 
potential of every species is such that, given optimum conditions, 
its population will increase. (Contrast environmental resistance.)
carnivore An animal that feeds more or less exclusively on other 
animals.
carrying capacity The maximum population of a given species that 
an ecosystem can support without being degraded or destroyed in 
the long run. Represented symbolically by K.
commensalism A relation between two species in which one is 
benefited and the other is not affected.
community In ecological contexts, a community is defined as the 
group of populations of different species of plants, animals, and 
microbes living together in one area.
competition In ecology, the interaction between members of the 
same species or between different species for essential resources 
or access to those resources.
critical number The minimum number of individuals of a given 
species that is required to maintain a healthy, viable population 
of the species. If a population falls below its critical number, it 
will likely become extinct.
density-dependent An attribute of population-balancing factors, 
such as predation, that increase and decrease in intensity in 
proportion to population density. May lead to population stability.
density-independent Mortality to a population that occurs 
regardless of the population density. Tends to be destabilizing to 
populations.
environmental resistance The totality of factors such as adverse 
weather conditions, shortages of food or water, predators, and 
diseases that tend to cut back populations and keep them from 
growing or spreading. (Contrast biotic potential.)
equilibrium Referring to populations, the condition where births 
plus immigration are more or less equal to deaths plus emigration 
over time.
exponential increase The growth produced when a base population 
increases by a given percentage (as opposed to a given amount) 
each year. An exponential increase is characterized by doubling 
again and again, each doubling occurring in the same period of 
time. It produces a J-shaped curve.
fitness The state of an organism whereby it is adapted to survive 
and reproduce in the environment it inhabits.
herbivore An organism such as a rabbit or deer that feeds 
primarily on green plants or plant products such as seeds or nuts. 
Such an organism is said to be herbivorous. (Synonym: primary 
consumer.)
host In feeding relationships, particularly parasitism, refers to 
the organism that is being fed upon (i.e., the organism that is 
supporting the feeder).
interspecific competition Competition for resources between 
members of two or more species.
intraspecific competition Competition for resources between 
members of the same species.
keystone species A species whose role is essential for the survival 
of many other species in an ecosystem.
K-strategist A reproductive strategy for a species whereby there is 
a low reproductive rate but good survival of young due to care 
and protection by adults. Such species often have populations 
close to the carrying capacity. 
life history The progression of changes an organism undergoes in 
its life from birth to death.
mutualism A close relationship between two organisms from 
which both derive a benefit.
natural selection The evolutionary process whereby the natural 
factors of environmental resistance tend to eliminate those 
members of a population that are least well adapted to cope with 
their environment and thus, in effect, tend to select those best 
adapted for survival and reproduction.
parasites Organisms (plant, animal, or microbial) that attach 
themselves to another organism, the host, and feed on it over 
a period of time without killing it immediately, although 
usually doing harm to it. Parasites are commonly divided into 
ectoparasites—those that attach to the outside of their hosts—and 
endoparasites—those that live inside their hosts.
pathogen An organism, usually a microbe, that is capable of 
causing disease. Such an organism is said to be pathogenic.
plate tectonics The theory, proposed by Alfred Wegener, that 
postulates the movement of sections of the Earth’s crust, creating 
earthquakes, volcanic activity, and the buildup of continental 
masses over long periods of time, also known as continental drift.
population A group within a single species whose individuals can 
and do freely interbreed.
population density The number of individuals per unit of area.
population explosion The exponential increase observed to occur 
in a population when conditions are such that a large percentage 
of the offspring are able to survive and reproduce in turn. A 
population explosion frequently leads to overexploitation and 
eventual collapse of the ecosystem.
population growth rate The change in population numbers divided 
by the time over which that change occurs.
predation A conspicuous process in all ecosystems, any situation 
where one organism feeds on another living organism.
predator An animal that feeds on another living organism, either 
plant or animal.
prey An organism that is fed on by a predator.
recruitment The maturation and successful entry of young into an 
adult breeding population.
reproductive isolation One of the processes of speciation, 
involving anything that keeps individuals or subpopulations from 
interbreeding.
reproductive strategy A life history property of a species that 
involves a balance between reproduction and death. (See 
r-strategist and K-strategist.)
r-strategist A reproductive strategy of a species that involves 
producing large numbers of young (a high reproductive rate) and 
survival of smaller numbers over time. Also called opportunistic 
species.
selective pressure An environmental factor that causes individuals 
with certain traits that are not the norm for the population to 
survive and reproduce more than the rest of the population. The 
result is a shift in the genetic makeup of the population. Selective 
pressure is a fundamental mechanism of evolution.
symbiosis The intimate living together or association of two kinds 
of organisms.
tectonic plates The huge slabs of rock in the lithosphere that have 
moved around and produced major changes in the surface of 
Earth; they are still moving, creating earthquakes and tsunamis 
when they do. See plate tectonics.
territory The area defended by an animal in territorial behavior.
tsunami A series of ocean waves (often called tidal waves) 
originating with underwater or coastal earthquakes and moving 
rapidly across ocean expanses, often resulting in major inundations 
of coastal areas.
glossaRy
107

This page intentionally left blank 

Volcano. Iceland’s Eyjafjallajökull volcano shut down airspace for days in April 2010, 
 injecting millions of tons of ash into the air but did not kill people or spew lava as many 
 volcanoes do.
Learning Objectives
 1. Characteristics of Ecosystems: 
Describe how matter and energy 
flow through ecosystems by 
 moving from one trophic level 
to another.
 2. The Flow of Energy Through the 
Food Web: Explain three main 
ideas relating trophic pyramids 
with the relative numbers and 
biomasses of different levels in a 
food chain.
 3. From Ecosystems to Global Biomes: 
Define and recognize characteris-
tics of major broad regions called 
biomes, major aquatic regions, and 
factors that determine their place-
ment on the globe.
 4. Ecosystem Reponses to Distur-
bance: Explain the effects of 
ecological disturbances, such as 
a fire or volcanic eruption, which 
are normal in ecosystems and 
can even be beneficial.
 5. Human Values and Ecosystem 
Sustainability: Describe ways 
that humans alter ecosystem 
services both positively and neg-
atively, and explain why we need 
to manage ecosystems to protect 
their components from overuse.
Ecosystems:
Energy, 
Patterns, and 
Disturbance
C
louds of smoke and ash accompanied rumblings of the earth as Iceland’s 
volcano at Eyjafjallajökull (“EY-ya-fyat-lah-YOH-kuht”) belched awake on 
April 14, 2010. The tremblors that had affected the area over the previous 
month increased, and a billowing cloud of ash erupted into a plume that rose 9 kil-
ometers (30,000 feet) into the air. The ash spread across Western Europe, clouding 
the sky and closing down all air travel for days, the largest air traffic disruption since 
World War II. Thousands of travelers were stranded as the volcano spewed particles 
and gases into the atmosphere. Ash fell on the ground for miles, making the grasses 
unfit for consumption by cattle and horses and making driving impos-
sible. Even so, Eyjafjallajökull was a moderate volcano, without 
the massive lava flows and mudslides that accompany 
many volcanic eruptions. People were relatively safe and, 
except for the cessation of air travel, life returned to 
normal quickly.
PreParatiOn. The eruption of Mount 
Pinatubo on June 15, 1991, in the Philippines was 
larger and had more-serious global effects (Fig. 1). 
The eruption of this volcano, with no recorded his-
tory of eruptions, blew the top of the densely for-
ested mountain into the air. This was the beginning 
of a process that spilled between 6 and 16 cubic 
From Chapter 5 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
kilometers of ash into the atmosphere, along with 20 million 
tons of sulfur dioxide and 10 billion metric tons of magma. 
Small particles known as aerosols were thrown into the air 
and traveled around the globe, blocking sunlight and lowering 
the global temperature by 0.5°C (0.9°F). More aerosols were 
produced by this volcanic eruption than any since Krakatoa in 
1883. The sulfur found in the aerosols combined with water to 
form sulfuric acid, a component of acid rain. Fortunately, even 
though the volcano had not erupted in years prior to the event, 
scientists were able to predict that it would, as seismic activity 
picked up in the months before the eruption, and they suc-
cessfully prompted the largely successful evacuation of 60,000 
people. Unfortunately, people did die in the aftermath, when 
typhoon rains and wet ash combined to collapse roofs and 
from illness due to crowded emergency housing. Today, years 
after the eruption, parts of Mount Pinatubo still lie denuded as 
periodic landslides move material down the hillside.
rebuiLding. Volcanoes, triggered by the movements of 
tectonic plates, relieve pressure building under the earth’s crust 
and spread minerals into the soil. They may build new lands 
altogether by causing islands, such as the Hawaiian Islands, to 
rise out of the ocean. Often, volcanic eruptions kill many of the 
organisms living in their immediate vicinity, but such organisms 
return and recolonize in a process of succession. In this chapter, 
we will look at ecosystems and how they function, including the 
processes that occur after a disturbance like a wild fire, large 
flood, volcano, or retreat of a glacier. These processes offer us a 
chance to better understand the workings of an ecosystem.
 We will look at how basic processes such as photosynthesis 
and respiration in individuals play out in complex systems and how 
energy moves from one part of the community to another. We will 
see how concepts like ranges of tolerance and limiting factors, 
which we applied to individuals, apply to large groups and control 
their distributions over large portions of Earth. We will also look at 
how ecosystems change over time as a result of disturbances such 
as volcanoes. We’ll see how vital ecosystems are to human well-
being and look at efforts to assign value to the goods and services 
we derive from them. We will also see that ecosystem sustainabil-
ity is being severely challenged by human use.
It is a popular belief that nature will be in balance if left 
alone. You will learn in this chapter, however, that an ecosystem 
is a dynamic system in which changes are constantly occurring. 
The notion of a balanced ecosystem, then, must be carefully 
defined. We will ask questions about balance, or equilibrium, 
in ecosystems: What does it mean for an ecosystem to be “in 
balance”? Are populations normally in a state of equilibrium? 
What happens when a major disturbance (like a fire) interrupts 
the “balance” in an ecosystem? Can ecosystems and the natural 
populations in them change over time yet maintain the important 
processes that make them sustainable?
Our objective in this chapter is to examine more of the basic 
mechanisms that underlie the sustainability of all ecosystems, 
including those heavily influenced by human use. We will look at 
the values, goods, and services of ecosystems and their impor-
tance to humans. The chapter concludes with some perspectives 
on the challenge of managing ecosystems and a summary of  
ecosystem sustainability issues.
(a)
Figure 1 Recovery from volcanic eruption. (a) The eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo in 1991. (b) Changes in the ecosystem from that eruption continued 
even 15 years later. Sections of the hillsides remain denuded as intermittent land-
slides removed vegetation.
(b)
110

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
ergy in the form of chemical bonds and nutrients in the 
form of molecules in the bodies of the prey are then used 
by the next trophic level (feeding level)—the predators—for 
energy and other physiological needs. This breakdown of 
chemical bonds to release energy is called cellular respira-
tion. Recall that plants need to respire, too.
You can imagine two things from this. First, organisms 
can be linked into feeding chains—the grass to the mouse, 
to the snake, to the eagle, for example. Such food chains de-
scribe where the energy and nutrients go as they move from 
one organism to another. We usually refer to this as energy 
moving “up” the food chain. Second, you can imagine that 
the energy and nutrients are not all passed up the chain 
from one level to the next. Because of the energy laws we 
discussed, there is inefficiency every time one organism eats 
another. While it is interesting to trace these feeding path-
ways, it is important to recognize that food chains seldom 
exist as isolated entities. Mice feed on several kinds of plants, 
are preyed on by several kinds of animals, and so on. Some 
organisms, including humans, eat at more than one level in 
the food chain. Consequently, virtually all food chains are 
interconnected and form a complex web of feeding relation-
ships—the food web (Fig. 2).
Rather than simply asking what predators are eating 
snakes and how they affect the snake population or what 
mice are eating and how food availability affects mice, we 
ask different types of questions in ecosystem ecology—those 
that focus on trophic levels in general, in order to study big-
ger trends in the movement of energy and materials. Exam-
ples of these questions include the following: How much of 
the Sun’s energy do the plants in the meadow trap? How 
much do they use, and how much is available to plant eat-
ers? How many predators can the ecosystem support? These 
questions emphasize the broader aspects of the flow of en-
ergy and materials through ecosystems, not through indi-
vidual species. In order to answer these questions, ecologists 
divide members in the food web into categories.
Trophic Categories
All organisms in the biosphere can be categorized as either 
autotrophs or heterotrophs, depending on whether they 
produce the organic compounds they need to survive and 
grow. Green plants, photosynthetic single-celled organisms, 
and chemosynthetic bacteria are autotrophs (auto 5 self; 
troph  5 feeding) because they produce their own organic 
material from inorganic constituents in their environment 
through the use of an external energy source. They are also 
referred to as producers. Organisms that must consume or-
ganic material to obtain energy are heterotrophs (hetero 5 
other; troph 5 feeding). Heterotrophs may be divided into 
numerous categories, the two major ones being consumers 
(which eat living prey) and decomposers (which break down 
dead organic material and can include scavengers, detritus 
feeders, and chemical decomposers). Together, producers, 
consumers, and decomposers produce food, pass it along 
1 Characteristics of Ecosystems
Mt. Pinatubo is located on the island of Luzon in the Philip-
pines, an area with one of the largest forests in the coun-
try and home to some of the few remaining individuals of 
the national bird, the highly endangered Philippine eagle. 
We will look at this area to better understand the charac-
teristics of ecosystems. The forest around Mt. Pinatubo, 
like all ecosystems, contains communities of interacting spe-
cies and their abiotic factors. However, the species living 
in this ecosystem, or any other ecosystem, may function on 
very different scales, which makes it difficult to delineate a 
fixed boundary for ecosystems. For example, the lowland 
rain-forest ecosystem contains migratory birds that live there 
only seasonally. Some species inhabiting the ecosystem may 
also have little to no interaction with each other, such as the 
orchids high on branches of trees and organisms that live in 
leaf litter.
The rain forest around Mt. Pinatubo contrasts sharply 
with the treeless spaces of Iceland, where Eyjafjallajökull 
sent ash into the air. As we will see later in the chapter, 
what lives in an ecosystem is a function not only of char-
acteristics of the regional climate, but of the landscape’s 
history—including the actions of humans. Even so, there 
are predictable patterns to the distribution of ecosystems 
around the globe. Ecosystems that have a similar type of 
vegetation and similar climactic conditions are grouped into 
broader areas called biomes, such as the tropical rainforest 
biome. (We will look at biomes in more depth in  Section 4.)
Just as the study of communities raises questions about 
relationships that cannot be answered by looking at spe-
cies separately, the study of ecosystems allows us to under-
stand concepts that cannot be predicted by understanding 
community interactions alone. For example, community 
relationships such as predation and parasitism provide the 
mechanisms for the flow of  energy—as well as the flow of 
carbon, nitrogen, and  phosphorus—through the natural 
world. But these community relationships may not tell us 
about ecosystem properties, such as how much photosyn-
thesis occurs in all plants or how much water can be ab-
sorbed by all of the plants at once. In this chapter, we will 
pull together the concepts of abiotic forces and biotic in-
teractionsto look at characteristics of ecosystems—specifi-
cally, trophic  levels, productivity, and consumption.
Trophic Levels, Food Chains, and Food Webs
Imagine a grassy meadow containing a variety of plants. 
Plants use energy from the Sun through the process of 
photosynthesis to produce complex chemical chains from 
more-simple molecules such as carbon dioxide and water. 
These plants can then be eaten by their predators, such as 
grasshoppers, mice, or even elk (remember that herbivory 
is a subset of predation). In turn, the grasshopper could be 
eaten by its predator, a bird; the mouse eaten by an owl; 
and the elk fed on by a parasite or eaten by a wolf. En-
111

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
Polar bear
Arctic fox
Seal pup
(b)
Ringed seal
Arctic cod
Carnivorous zooplankton
Ice biota
(diatoms)
Herbivorous
zooplankton
Beluga whale
Bowhead whale
Benthic
invertebrates
Bearded
seal
Arctic
cod
Small
fish
Zooplankton
Phytoplankton
Sea ducks
Loon
Arctic terns
(a)
Rabbit
Grass
Corn
Other Plants
Human
Snake
Fox
Squirrel
Mouse
Cattle
Hawk
Figure 2 Food webs. (a) The arrows show herbivores feeding on plants and carnivores feeding on herbiv-
ores. Specific pathways, such as that from nuts to squirrels to foxes, are referred to as food chains. A food web 
is the collection of all food chains, which are invariably interconnected. (b) The marine food web in the offshore 
Beaufort Sea (north of Alaska and Canada) in spring.
112

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
Consumers. All organisms other than producers in an 
ecosystem feed on organic matter as their source of energy. 
These heterotrophs include not only all animals, but also 
fungi (mushrooms, molds, and similar organisms) and most 
bacteria. For ease of discussion, heterotrophs are often 
divided into consumers, which eat living prey, and de-
composers, which break down dead organic material. Con-
sumers encompass a wide variety of organisms, ranging in 
size from plankton to blue whales. Among consumers are 
such diverse groups as protozoans, worms, fish, shellfish, 
insects, reptiles, amphibians, birds, and mammals (includ-
ing humans).
For the purpose of understanding ecosystem structure, 
consumers are divided into various subgroups according 
to their food source. Animals—as large as elephants or as 
small as mites—that feed directly on producers are called 
primary consumers or herbivores (herb 5 grass). Animals 
that feed on primary consumers are called secondary con-
sumers. Thus, mice, which feed on vegetation, are primary 
consumers, whereas snakes are secondary consumers be-
cause they feed on mice (Fig. 4). There may also be third 
(tertiary), fourth (quaternary), or even higher levels of 
consumers. Many animals occupy more than one position 
on the consumer scale. For instance, humans are primary 
consumers when they eat vegetables, secondary consumers 
when they eat beef, and tertiary consumers when they eat 
fish that feed on smaller fish that feed on algae. Secondary 
and higher-order consumers are also called carnivores (carni 
5 meat). Consumers that feed on both plants and animals 
are called omnivores (omni 5 all).
food chains, and return the starting materials to the abiotic 
parts of the environment (Fig. 3).
Producers. As we have seen, producers are organ-
isms that capture energy from the Sun or from chemi-
cal reactions to convert carbon dioxide (CO2) to organic. 
Most producers are green plants. Through the process of 
photosynthesis, these plants use light energy to convert CO2 
and water to organic compounds such as glucose (a sugar) 
and then release oxygen as a by-product. Plants use a vari-
ety of molecules to capture light energy in photosynthesis, 
but the most predominant of these is chlorophyll, a green 
 pigment. Hence, plants that photosynthesize are  easily iden-
tified by their green color. In some producers, additional 
red or brown photosynthetic pigments (in red and brown 
algae, for example) may mask the green. Producers range 
in diversity from microscopic photosynthetic bacteria and 
 single-celled algae through medium-sized plants such as 
grass, daisies, and cacti to gigantic trees. Every major ecosys-
tem, both aquatic and terrestrial, has its particular producers 
that are actively engaged in photosynthesis.
Interestingly, there are bacteria, including some in the 
hot springs at Yellowstone National Park, that are able to 
use the energy in some inorganic chemicals to form organic 
matter from CO2 and water. This process is called chemo-
synthesis, and the organisms using it are producers, too. 
Producers are absolutely essential to every ecosystem. The 
photosynthesis and growth of producers such as green plants 
constitute the primary production of organic matter, which 
sustains all other organisms in the ecosystem.
Autotrophs
Make their own organic matter
from inorganic nutrients and an
environmental energy source
Heterotrophs
Must feed on organic matter for energy
Producers
Consumers
Decomposers:
organisms that feed on
dead organic material
Primary consumers/herbivores:
animals that feed
exclusively on plants
Secondary consumers/
carnivores:
animals that feed on
primary consumers
Higher orders of
consumers/carnivores:
animals that feed on
other carnivores
Parasites:
plants or animals that become
associated with another plant
or animal and feed on it over
an extended period of time
Omnivores:
animals that feed on
both plants and animals
Chemical decomposers:
fungi and bacteria that
cause rotting
Detritus feeders:
organisms that feed
directly on detritus
Scavengers:
eat larger dead things, may
also eat living things some of 
the time.
Photosynthetic
green plants:
use chlorophyll to
absorb light energy
Photosynthetic bacteria:
use purple pigment to
absorb light energy
Chemosynthetic bacteria:
use high-energy inorganic
chemicals such as
hydrogen sulfide
Figure 3 Trophic 
categories. A summary of how 
living organisms are ecologically 
categorized according to how they 
get their energy.
113

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
Detritus is composed largely of cellulose because it con-
sists mostly of dead leaves, the woody parts of plants, and 
animal fecal wastes. Nevertheless, it is still organic and high 
in potential energy for those organisms that can digest it—
namely, decomposers. Scavengers, such as vultures, help 
break down large pieces of organic matter; detritus feeders, 
such as earthworms, eat partially decomposing organic mat-
ter; and chemical decomposers (various species of fungi and 
bacteria as well as a few other microbes) break down dead 
material on the molecular scale. Decomposers act as any 
other consumer does, using the organic matter as a source of 
both energy and nutrients. Some, such as termites, can digest 
woody material because they maintain decomposer microor-
ganisms in their guts in a mutualistic, symbiotic relationship. 
The termite (a detritus feeder) provides a cozy home for mi-
crobes (chemical decomposers) and takes in cellulose, which 
the microbes digest for both their own and the termites’ ben-
efit (Fig. 6). The decomposers, breaking down detritus, serve 
as the primary consumers in this food chain. The detritus is 
similar to the “producer” trophic level, and the decomposers 
have their own predators that form higher trophic levels.
Most decomposers use oxygen for cell respiration, 
which breaks detritus down into carbon dioxide, water, 
and mineral nutrients. Likewise, there is a release of waste 
heat, which you may observe as the “steaming” of a manure 
or compost pile on a cold day. The release of nutrients by 
decomposers is vitally important to the primary producers 
because it is the major source of nutrients in most ecosys-
tems. However, some decomposers (certain bacteria and 
yeasts) meet their energy needs through the partial break-
down of glucose, which can occur in the absence of oxygen. 
This modified form of cell respiration, called fermentation, 
results in end products such as ethyl alcohol, methane gas, 
Decomposers. A very large proportion of the primary pro-
ducer trophic level is not consumed in the grazing food web. As 
this material dies (leaves drop, grasses wither, and so on), it is 
joined by the fecal wastes and dead bodies from higher trophic 
levels and is referred to as detritus. This represents the starting 
point for a separate food web. In many cases, most of the energy 
in an ecosystem flows through the detritus food web (Fig. 5).
Third
level
consumer
Second
level
consumer
First
level
consumer
Producers
Figure 4 A grassland food chain. A grassland food chain, showing the 
producers (plants) and the first-, second-, and third-order consumers (mouse, 
snake, and hawk, respectively).
• Scavengers
• Earthworms
• Bacteria and fungi (= decomposers)
Earthworm
Bacteria
Soil,
fungi
Protozoans
Mite
Springtail
Pseudoscorpion
Detritus
Decomposers
• Millipedes
• Protozoans
• Insect larvae
Larger
consumers
Figure 5 Detritus food web. Several types of decomposers work to break up large, small, and tiny bits of 
dead organic matter. These organisms in turn are eaten by other, higher-level consumers. In the detritus food web, 
the role of the producer is played by dead plant and animal matter.
114

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
in a mutualistic, symbiotic relationship similar to that just 
described for termites. As a result, both cattle and termites 
release methane.
Limits on Trophic Levels. How many trophic levels are 
there? Usually, there are no more than three or four in ter-
restrial ecosystems and sometimes five in marine systems 
(Fig. 2). This answer comes from straightforward observa-
tions. If you were to capture all of the organisms on each 
trophic level over a particular area or volume, dry them, 
and weigh them, you would find a pattern: The biomass, 
or total combined (net dry) weight, would be roughly 90% 
less at each higher trophic level for a terrestrial ecosystem  
(Fig. 7). For example, if you dried and weighed all of the 
grass and other producers in an acre of grassland, you might 
have 907 kilograms (1 ton or 2,000 lbs) per acre. If you 
could capture, dry, and weigh all of the herbivores (eve-
rything from grasshoppers to bison) in the same acre, you 
would find the biomass of herbivores would be about 90.7 
kilograms (200 lbs) per acre. Following that pattern, the 
same acre would yield about 9.7 kilograms (20 lbs) of pri-
mary carnivores (animals living on grasshoppers and bison) 
if you captured, dried, and weighed them. At this rate, you 
can’t go through very many trophic levels before the bio-
mass approaches zero. If you graphed the different levels 
of producer and consumer mass, you would have what is 
commonly called a biomass pyramid (Fig. 7). We’ll see the 
reason for this pattern as we look at where energy and nu-
trients go.
and acetic acid. In nature, anaerobic, or oxygen-free, envi-
ronments commonly exist in the sediments of lakes, marshes, 
and swamps and in the guts of animals, where oxygen does 
not penetrate readily. Methane gas is commonly produced in 
these locations. A number of large grazing animals, including 
cattle, maintain fermenting bacteria in their digestive systems 
Figure 6 Termite gut. Termites can live on cellulose-based woody matter 
because their guts contain a consortium of symbiotic microbes able to digest 
cellulose. In this electron micrograph, the symbionts are on the left and the 
termite intestinal wall is on the right.
Figure 7 A biomass pyramid. A graphical representation of the biomass (the total combined mass of 
organisms) at successive trophic levels has the form of a pyramid, with about 10% of the energy contained in one 
trophic level being incorporated into the bodies of the next trophic level, giving each level a smaller biomass.
Total combined
mass of
all carnivores
Total combined
mass of
all herbivores
Total combined
mass of
all producers
Biomass of third trophic
level
Biomass of second
trophic level
Biomass of
first
trophic
level
=
Total combined
mass of third
order consumers
Biomass of fourth trophic
level
=
=
=
Segments of pyramid show
relative biomass at
each trophic level
Third
level
consumer
Second
level
consumer
First
level
consumer
Producers
10
1
1/10
100
115

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
food web. In an ecosystem, therefore, only the portion of 
food that becomes the body tissue of the consumer can 
become food for the next organism in the food chain. In-
corporating matter and energy from a lower trophic level 
into the body of a consumer is often referred to as second-
ary production, and like primary production, it can be ex-
pressed as a rate (the amount of growth of the consumer, or 
consumer trophic level) over time.
The inefficiency of trophic levels means two things. 
First, individuals at higher levels in the biomass pyramid 
represent a greater amount of the Sun’s energy for the 
same amount of body tissue. For example, a pound of 
hamburger requires a great deal more photosynthesis to 
create than a pound of soybeans. This may be counterin-
tuitive, because we just saw that there is less energy at each 
trophic level, but it requires a great deal more energy to 
produce a top-order consumer than a mid-level consumer 
and, likewise, more energy to produce a mid-level con-
sumer than a producer of the same body weight. It usually 
also takes a longer time to produce a top-order consumer 
than a mid-level consumer or a producer. The top-order 
consumer also requires more water and other resources for 
a unit of body weight. 
Second, some materials are difficult to get rid of (such as 
chemicals that dissolve in fat) and therefore remain through-
out an organism’s life. These chemicals remain in the bod-
ies of predators at higher rates than in their prey and thus 
biomagnify or bioaccumulate (build up in the tissues) as you 
go up the food chain. This is the reason that some toxins 
build up in the tissues of higher-order consumers such as ea-
gles and tuna.
Aquatic Systems
For simplicity, the focus of this chapter has been on ter-
restrial ecosystems. Keep in mind, though, that exactly the 
same processes occur in aquatic ecosystems. As aquatic 
plants and algae absorb dissolved carbon dioxide and min-
eral nutrients from the water, they use photosynthesis to 
produce food and dissolved oxygen that sustain consum-
ers and other heterotrophs. Likewise, aquatic heterotrophs 
return carbon dioxide and mineral nutrients to the aquatic 
environment.
There are two differences between aquatic and terres-
trial systems in this regard, however. First, the transfer of 
energy is often more efficient in an aquatic system. There 
are also more cold-blooded animals here, and less energy 
is required to run the bodies of cold-blooded creatures 
than warm-blooded creatures. It also takes less energy to 
support body weight in water than on land or in the air. 
Consequently, when less energy is used at each level, more 
energy is available to the next level, and food chains can 
be longer.
Second, aquatic systems do not always result in the 
same kind of biomass pyramid as terrestrial systems. If 
you went out to a lake and captured all of the algae, all of 
the zooplankton eating the algae, all of the fish that live 
2  The Flow of Energy 
in Ecosystems
In most ecosystems, sunlight (or solar energy) is the initial 
source of energy absorbed by producers through the process 
of photosynthesis. The only exceptions are rare ecosystems, 
such as those near the ocean floor, where the producers are 
chemosynthetic bacteria. Primary production—the produc-
tion of organic molecules from the Sun’s energy through 
photosynthesis—captures only about 2%, at most, of in-
coming solar energy. Even though this seems like a small 
fraction, the resulting terrestrial net production—estimated 
at some 120 gigatons (billion metric tons, 1.1 billion U.S. 
tons) of organic matter per year—is enough to fuel all of 
the life in a biome. In a given ecosystem, the actual biomass 
of primary producers at any given time is referred to as the 
 standing-crop biomass. Both biomass and primary pro-
duction vary greatly in different ecosystems. For example, 
a forested ecosystem maintains a very large biomass com-
pared with tropical grassland because so much carbon is 
captured in the wood of trees. However, the rate of primary 
production could be higher in the grassland; grazing ani-
mals might simply eat the produced organic matter. Conse-
quently, standing biomass is not always a good measure of 
productivity.
The Fate of Food
Whereas 60–90% of the food that consumers eat, digest, 
and absorb is oxidized (burned) for energy, the remaining  
10–40%, which is converted to the body tissues of the con-
sumer, is no less important. This is the fraction that enables a 
body to grow, maintain, and repair itself. A portion of what 
is ingested by consumers is not digested, but simply passes 
through the digestive system and out as fecal wastes. For 
consumers that eat plants, this waste is largely cellulose, the 
material of plant cell walls. It is often referred to as fiber, 
bulk, or roughage, and some of it is a necessary part of the 
diet. The intestines need to push some fiber through them so 
that they can stay clean and open. Waste products can also 
include compounds of  nitrogen, phosphorus, and any other 
elements present, in addition to the usual carbon dioxide 
and water. These by-products are excreted in the urine (or as 
similar waste in other kinds of animals) and returned to the 
environment. 
Energy Flow and Efficiency
As the biomass pyramid suggests, when energy flows from 
one trophic level to the next, only a small fraction is actu-
ally passed on. This is due to three things: (1) Much of the 
preceding trophic level is biomass that is not consumed by 
herbivores, (2) much of what is consumed is used as energy 
to fuel the heterotroph’s cells and tissues, and (3) some of 
what is consumed is undigested and passes through the or-
ganism as waste (e.g., feces). Thus, there is a tremendous 
inefficiency at each trophic level, and energy is lost to the 
116

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
regions (or even localized areas) may have distinct biotic 
communities, creating an amazing variety of ecosystems, 
landscapes, and biomes.
A biome can be defined as a large geographical biotic 
community, controlled by climate. They are usually named 
after the dominant type of vegetation, such as deciduous for-
est or grassland. While the Greater Yellowstone region is an 
ecosystem (and possibly could be viewed as more than one), 
it is contained within a vast geographical region, or global 
biome, called the northern temperate forest. Like ecosystems, 
biomes have fuzzy edges. Aquatic areas such as the tidal zone 
and the open ocean can also be characterized by temperature 
and light and divided into categories. These are not typically 
called biomes, but function similarly.
The Role of Climate
The climate of a given region is a descrip tion of the average 
temperature and precipitation—the weather—that may be 
expected on each day throughout the entire year. Climates 
in different parts of the world vary widely. Equatorial re-
gions are continuously warm, with high rainfall and no 
discernible seasons. Above and below the equator, tempera-
tures become increasingly seasonal (characterized by warm 
or hot summers and cool or cold winters); the farther we go 
toward the poles, the longer and colder the winters become, 
until at the poles it is perpetually cold. Likewise, colder 
temperatures are found at higher elevations, so that there 
are even snowcapped mountains on or near the  equator 
(Fig. 9).
on  zooplankton, and all of the fish that live on fish, and if 
you then dried and weighed them in their group, you might 
find a reverse biomass pyramid (Fig. 8). The reason for this 
 upside-down pyramid is that the fish that live on fish are the 
oldest and largest and the algae have very short life spans 
and turn over rapidly. Thus, there might be more biomass 
in the fish, but they had to eat many times that amount of 
algae to form that tissue. The algae actually in the water at 
any one time can be small, but they have an extremely rapid 
rate of new production.
3  From Ecosystems 
to Global Biomes
Just as photosynthesis processes and basic energy laws trans-
late into broad patterns in food chain length in an ecosystem, 
broad patterns in ecosystems translate into a pattern we see 
all over the globe: There is a predictable set of organisms 
that live under particular conditions, such as deserts occur-
ring in dry areas and rain forests occurring in very wet areas, 
for example. We can now use the concepts of optimums and 
limiting factors and the concepts of differences in light and 
productivity to gain a better understanding of why  different 
Biomass of larger fish
Biomass of small fish
Biomass of zoo (animal)
plankton
Biomass of phyto (plant)
plankton
Figure 8 Reverse pyramid in aquatic systems. In aquatic systems 
such as this lake, there is a small amount of algae and a much greater biomass 
of large fish at any one moment. This is because the turnover is very high and life 
spans are so short at the lower trophic levels. The longer life spans of the upper 
trophic levels mean that the biomass of a fish, for example, includes all of its 
growth over a period of time.
Figure 9 Effects of latitude and altitude. Decreasing temperatures, 
which result in the biome shifts depicted, occur with both increasing  latitude 
(distance from the equator) and increasing altitude. (Source: Redrawn from Geosys-
tems, 5th ed., by Robert W. Christopherson. Copyright © 2005 by Pearson  Prentice 
Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458.)
Ice and snow
Ice and
snow
Tundra
Tundra
Needleleaf forest
Needleleaf
forest
Temperate
deciduous forest
Temperate
deciduous
forest
Tropical
rain forest
Tropical
rain forest
Increasing latitude from the equator
Increasing altitude from sea level
117

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
PACIFIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Tundra Permafrost
Tundra Interfrost
Boreal Semi-arid
Boreal Humid
Temperate Semi-arid
Temperate Humid
Mediterranean Warm
Mediterranean Cold
Desert Tropical
Desert Temperate
Desert Cold
Tropical Semi-arid
Tropical Humid
Ice
60°
60°
30°
30°
0°
150°
120°
90°
60°
30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
ARCTIC OCEAN
ARCTIC OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
INDIAN OCEAN
ARABIAN
SEA
CORAL
SEA
Equator
Tropic of Capricorn
Tropic of Cancer
0
2,000
4,000
Kilometers
6,000
8,000
Figure 10 World distribution of the major terrestrial biomes. Photos and climate data for 
these biomes are maintained by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s Earth Observatory.
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
Annual precipitation in an area also may vary greatly, 
from virtually zero to well over 250 centimeters (100 in.) 
per year. Precipitation may be evenly distributed through-
out the year or concentrated in certain months, dividing 
the year into wet and dry seasons. A given climate will 
support only those species that find the temperature and 
precipitation levels within their ranges of tolerance. Popu-
lation densities will be greatest where conditions are op-
timal and will decrease as any condition departs from 
the optimum . A species will be excluded from a region 
(or local areas) where any condition is beyond its limit 
of  tolerance. How will this variation affect the biotic 
 community?
Biome Examples. Individual ranges of tolerance, particu-
larly for temperature and precipitation, determine where 
dominant species can live. In turn, the distribution of these 
species describes the placement of the biomes. To illustrate, 
let us consider six major types of biomes and their global dis-
tribution. Table 1 describes these terrestrial biomes and their 
major characteristics, and Figure 10 shows the distribution 
of the biomes as they occur globally. Within the temperate 
zone (between 30° and 50° of latitude), the amount of rain-
fall is the key limiting factor. The temperate deciduous forest 
biome is found where annual precipitation is 75–200 centim-
eters (30–80 in.). Where rainfall tapers off or is highly sea-
sonal (25–150 cm or 10–60 in. per year), the grassland and 
prairie biomes are found, and regions receiving an average of 
less than 25 centimeters (10 in.) per year are occupied by a 
desert biome.
The effect of temperature, the other dominant param-
eter of climate, is largely superimposed on that of rainfall. 
That is, 75 centimeters (30 in.) or more of rainfall per year 
will usually support a forest, and generally temperature will 
determine the type of forest that grows there. For example, 
broad-leaved  evergreen species, which are extremely vigor-
ous and fast growing but cannot tolerate freezing tempera-
tures, predominate in the tropical rain forest. By dropping 
their leaves and becoming dormant each autumn, deciduous 
trees are well adapted to freezing temperatures. Therefore, 
wherever rainfall is sufficient, deciduous forests predominate 
in temperate  latitudes. Most deciduous trees, however, can-
not tolerate the extremely harsh winters and short summers 
that occur at higher latitudes and higher elevations. These 
northern regions and high  elevations are occupied by the co-
niferous forest biome, because conifers are better adapted to 
those conditions.
Temperature by itself limits forests only when it becomes 
low enough to cause permafrost (permanently frozen sub-
soil). Permafrost prevents the growth of trees, because roots 
118

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
and temperature and rainfall conditions is given in Figure 11. 
The average temperature for a region varies with both latitude 
(distance from equator) and altitude (distance from sea level), 
as shown in Figure 9.
Examples of Aquatic Systems. The biome category 
is reserved exclusively for terrestrial systems. However, 
there are major categories of aquatic and wetland ecosys-
tems similar to biomes that are determined primarily by the 
depth, salinity, and permanence of water in them. Among 
these ecosystems are lakes, marshes, streams, rivers, es-
tuaries, bays, and ocean systems. As units of study, these 
aquatic systems may be viewed as ecosystems, as parts of 
cannot penetrate deeply enough in these conditions to pro-
vide adequate support. However, a number of grasses, clo-
vers, and other small flowering plants can grow in the topsoil 
above permafrost. Consequently, where permafrost sets in, 
the coniferous forest biome gives way to the tundra biome 
(Table 1). At still colder temperatures, the tundra gives way 
to permanent snow and ice cover.
The same relationship of rainfall effects being primary 
and temperature effects secondary applies in deserts. Any re-
gion receiving less than about 25 centimeters (10 in.) of rain 
per year will be a desert, but the unique plant and animal 
species found in hot deserts are different from those found in 
cold deserts. A summary of the relationship between biomes 
tabLe 1 Major Terrestrial Biomes
Biome
Climate and Soils
Dominant Vegetation
Dominant Animal Life
Geographic Distribution
Deserts
Very dry; hot days, cold 
nights; rainfall less than  
10 in. (25 cm)/yr; soils thin 
and porous
Widely scattered thorny 
bushes and shrubs, cacti
Rodents, lizards, snakes, 
numerous insects, owls, 
hawks, small birds
North and southwest 
Africa, parts of the 
Middle East and Asia, 
Southwestern North 
America
Grasslands and Prairies
Seasonal rainfall, 10 to 60 
in. (25–152 cm)/yr; fires 
frequent; soils rich and 
often deep
Grass species, both tall 
and short; bushes and 
woodlands in some areas
Large grazing mammals 
(bison, wild horses; 
kangaroos); prairie dogs, 
coyotes, lions; termites 
important
Central North America, 
central Asia, subequatorial 
Africa and South America, 
southern India, northern 
Australia
Tropical Rain Forests
Nonseasonal; annual 
average temperature 28°C; 
rainfall frequent, heavy; 
average over 95 in. (240 
cm)/yr; soils thin, poor in 
nutrients
High diversity of broad-
leafed evergreen trees, 
dense canopy, vines
Enormous biodiversity; 
exotic, colorful insects, 
amphibians, birds, snakes; 
monkeys, tigers, jaguars
Northern South America, 
Central America, western 
central Africa, islands in 
Indian and Pacific Oceans, 
Southeast Asia
Temperate Forests
Seasonal; temperature 
below freezing in winter; 
summers warm, humid; 
rainfall from 30–80 in. 
(76–203 cm)/yr; soils well 
developed
Broad-leafed deciduous 
trees, some conifers; 
shrubby undergrowth, 
ferns, mosses
Squirrels, raccoons, 
opossums, skunks, deer, 
foxes, black bears, snakes, 
amphibians, many soil 
organisms, birds
Western and central 
Europe, eastern Asia, 
eastern North America
Coniferous Forests
Seasonal; winters long, 
cold; precipitation light in 
winter, heavier in summer; 
soils acidic, with leaf litter
Coniferous trees (spruce, 
fir, pine, hemlock), some 
deciduous trees (birch, 
maple)
Large herbivores (mule 
deer, moose, elk); mice, 
hares, squirrels; lynx, bears, 
foxes; nesting area for 
migrating birds
Northern portions of North 
America, Europe, Asia, 
extending southward at 
high elevations
Tundra
Bitter cold, except for 
short growing season with 
long days and moderate 
temperatures; precipitation 
low; soils thin—and below, 
permafrost
Low-growing sedges, dwarf 
shrubs, lichens, mosses, and 
grasses
Year round: lemmings, 
arctic hares, arctic foxes, 
lynx, caribou; summers: 
abundant insects, many 
migrant shorebirds
North of the coniferous 
forest in Northern 
Hemisphere, extending 
southward at elevations 
above the coniferous forest
Note: See http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Experiments/Biome/index.php and click on the links for different biomes for photos and climatic data.
w
119

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
landscapes, or as major biome-like features such as seas or 
oceans. Table 2 lists the six major aquatic systems and their 
primary characteristics.
Microclimate and Other Abiotic Factors
A specific site may have temperature and moisture conditions 
that are significantly different from the overall climate of the 
region in which it is located. For example, a south- facing 
slope, which receives more direct sunlight in the Northern 
Hemisphere, will be relatively warmer and hence drier than 
a north-facing slope (Fig. 12). Similarly, the temperature range 
in a sheltered ravine will be narrower than that in a more 
exposed location, and so on. The conditions found in a spe-
cific localized area are referred to as the microclimate of that 
location. In the same way that different climates determine 
the major biome of a region, different microclimates result in 
variations of ecosystems within a biome. For example, while 
the Greater Yellowstone region may be in the northern tem-
perate forest biome, it includes areas of grassland and, above 
the tree line on mountains, areas of permafrost. This pattern 
of changing habitat with elevation means that the tops of 
mountains function ecologically as if they were more polar 
than their actual latitude (Fig. 9).
Soil type and topography also contribute to the diversity 
found in a biome, because these two factors affect the availabil-
ity of moisture. In the eastern United States, for example, oaks 
and hickories generally predominate on rocky, sandy soils and 
on hilltops, which retain little moisture, whereas beeches and 
maples are found on richer soils, which hold more moisture, 
and red maples and cedars inhabit low, swampy areas. In the 
transitional region between desert and grassland, with 25–50 
centimeters (10–20 in.) of rainfall per year, a soil capable of 
holding water will support grass, but a sandy soil with little 
ability to hold water will support only desert species.
Biome Productivity. All biomes have varying levels of pri-
mary productivity. Those that have high productivity may 
help support organisms from other biomes. For example, 
many seabirds migrate through salt marshes and live off 
the vast productivity there before traveling to other places. 
Highly productive biomes, like rain forests, also remove car-
bon dioxide from the atmosphere and trap it . Biomes with 
high productivity aren’t better than others, though. Low-
productivity biomes can have other important roles, such as 
habitat for rare species.
Why are some biomes or types of ecosystems more pro-
ductive than others? Figure 13 presents (a) the average  annual 
Cold
Temperature
Hot
Dry
Precipitation
Wet
Polar and alpine
Cool
Temperate
Hot
Dry tundra
Cool desert
Temperate desert
Hot desert
Moist tundra
Spruce-fir forest
Deciduous forest
Tropical forest
Short grass
Tall grass
Grasslands
Figure 11 Climate and 
major biomes. Moisture 
is generally the overriding 
 factor determining the type of 
biome that may be supported 
in a region. Given adequate 
moisture, an area will likely 
support a forest. Temperature, 
however, determines the kind 
of forest. The situation is similar 
for grasslands and deserts. At 
cooler temperatures, there is a 
shift toward less precipitation 
because lower temperatures 
 reduce evaporative water loss. 
Temperature  becomes the over-
riding factor only when it is low 
enough to sustain permafrost. 
(Source: Redrawn from Geo-
systems, 5th ed., by Robert W. 
Christopherson. Copyright  
© 2005 by Pearson Prentice 
Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, 
NJ 07458.)
120

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
Very dry
North
South
NORTHERN HEMISPHERE
Wind, direct sun
(increases evaporation)
Warmer
and drier
Rocky
soil
(water
drains out)
Floodplain
Continuously wet
Cooler
and moister
Sheltered, shaded
(low evaporation)
Rich soil
(holds water)
Figure 12 Microclimates. Abiotic 
factors such as terrain, wind, and type 
of soil create different microclimates by 
 influencing temperature and moisture in 
localized areas.
Figure 13 Productivity of different ecosystems. (a) The annual net primary productivity of different 
ecosystems, (b) the percentage of different ecosystems over Earth’s surface area, and (c) the percentage of global 
net primary productivity. The outlined column for open ocean in (b) shows that the open ocean is such a high per-
centage of Earth’s surface that it is off the scale relative to all of the other ecosystems. (Source: Biology: Concepts 
and Connections, 4th Edition, by Neil A. Campbell, Jane B. Reece, Lawrence G. Mitchell and Martha R. Taylor. 
Copyright © 2003 by Pearson Education. Reprinted with permission.)
Algal beds and reefs
Temperate evergreen forest
Tropical seasonal forest
Swamp and marsh
Savannah
Woodland and shrubland
Cultivated land
Temperate grassland
Upwelling zones
Continental shelf
Lake and stream
Tundra
Open Ocean
Desert and semidesert scrub
Extreme desert, rock, sand, ice
Temperate deciduous forest
Boreal forest (taiga)
Tropical rain forest
Estuary
500
Average annual net
primary productivity (g/m2/yr)
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
0.1
0.9
2,500
1.0
3.8
1,400
1.5
7.1
1,600
0.4
2.3
2,000
2.9
7.9
900
1.3
4.9
1,200
2.4
9.6
800
3.3
22
2,200
0.3
1.2
1,300
1.7
3.5
700
2.7
9.1
600
1.8
5.4
600
0.1
0.1
500
5.2
360
5.6
0.4
0.3
250
1.6
0.6
140
65.0*
24.4
125
3.5
0.9
90
4.7
0.04
3.0
1
3
Percentage of global
surface area (%)
2
4
5
6
0
5
Percentage of global net
primary productivity (%)
10
15
20
25
0
Terresttrial biomes
Aquatic ecosystems
(a)
(b)
(c)
121

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
tabLe 2 Major Aquatic Systems
Aquatic Systems
Major Environmental 
Parameters
 
Dominant Vegetation
 
Dominant Animal Life
 
Distribution
Lakes and Ponds 
(freshwater)
Bodies of standing water; 
low concentration of 
dissolved solids; seasonal 
vertical stratification of 
water
Rooted and floating plants, 
phytoplankton
Zooplankton, fish, insect 
larvae, turtles, ducks, geese, 
swans, wading birds
Physical depressions 
in the landscape where 
precipitation and 
groundwater accumulate
Streams and Rivers 
(freshwater)
Flowing water; low level of 
dissolved solids; high level 
of dissolved oxygen; often 
turbid from runoff
Attached algae, rooted 
plants
Insect larvae, fish, 
amphibians, otters, 
raccoons, wading birds, 
ducks, geese
Landscapes where 
precipitation and 
groundwater flow by gravity 
toward oceans or lakes
Inland Wetlands  
(freshwater)
Standing water, at times 
seasonally dry; thick organic 
sediments; high nutrients
Marshes (grasses, reeds); 
cattail swamps (water-
tolerant trees); bogs 
(sphagnum moss, shrubs)
Amphibians, snakes, 
numerous invertebrates, 
wading birds, alligators, 
turtles
Shallow depressions, poorly 
drained, often occupy sites 
of lakes and ponds that have 
filled in
Estuaries (mixed)
Variable salinity; tides create 
two-way currents; often rich 
in nutrients, turbid
Phytoplankton, rooted 
grasses (salt-marsh grass), 
mangrove swamps in tropics 
with salt-tolerant trees, 
shrubs
Zooplankton, rich shellfish, 
worms, crustaceans, fish, 
wading birds, sandpipers, 
ducks, geese
Coastal regions where rivers 
meet the ocean; may form 
bays behind sandy barrier 
islands
Coastal Ocean  
(saltwater)
Tidal currents promote 
mixing; nutrients high
Phytoplankton, large 
benthic algae, turtle grass, 
symbiotic algae in corals
Zooplankton; rich bottom 
fauna of worms, shellfish, 
crustaceans; coral colonies, 
jellyfish, fish, turtles, gulls, 
terns, sea lions, seals, 
dolphins, penguins, whales
From coastline outward 
over continental shelf; coral 
reefs abundant in tropics
Open Ocean  
(saltwater)
Great depths (to 11,000 m, 
36,100 ft); all but upper 200 
m (656 ft) dark and cold; 
poor in nutrients except in 
upwelling regions
Phytoplankton, sargassum 
weed
Zooplankton and fish 
adapted to different depths; 
seabirds, whales, tuna, 
sharks, squid, flying fish
Covering 70% of Earth, 
from edge of continental 
shelf outward
net primary productivity, (b) the percentage of different eco-
systems over Earth’s surface, and (c) the percentage of global 
net primary productivity attributed to 19 of the most impor-
tant ecosystems. Some key relationships between  abiotic fac-
tors and specific ecosystems can be seen in the data.  Tropical 
rain forests both are highly productive and contribute consid-
erably to global productivity; they cover a large area of the 
land and are characterized by ideal climatic conditions for 
photosynthesis—warm temperatures and abundant rainfall. 
The open oceans cover 65% of Earth’s surface, so they ac-
count for a large portion of global productivity, yet their ac-
tual rate of production is low enough that they are veritable 
biological deserts. Although light, temperature, and water 
are abundant, primary production in the oceans is limited by 
the scarcity of nutrients—a good lesson in the significance of 
 limiting factors. The seasonal effects of differences in latitude 
122

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
project, suggests that succession is more complicated, some-
thing we will discuss shortly.
In the most basic version of succession, pioneer 
 species—the first to colonize a newly opened area in the 
 aftermath of a fire, flood, volcanic lava flow, or other large 
disturbance—start the process. As these grow, they create 
conditions that are favorable to longer-lived colonizers, and 
succession is driven forward by the changing conditions 
that pave the way for other species. Driving succession 
forward by improving conditions for subsequent species is 
known as facilitation.
The succession of species does not go on indefinitely. A 
stage of development is eventually reached in which there 
appears to be a dynamic balance between all of the species 
and the physical environment. In the past, this final state was 
called a climax ecosystem because the assemblage of species 
continues on in space and time. The term climax ecosystem is 
still used, but many ecologists are moving away from its use 
because they believe it implies more stability than actually 
occurs in nature. In the real world, even climax communities 
experience change. Also, within the area of a climax ecosys-
tem there may be patches of disturbance that open spaces for 
new growth. Some parts of the ecosystem may be in an ear-
lier stage of succession; sometimes there are several “final” 
stages, with adjoining ecosystems in the same environment 
at different stages. We will discuss some of these alternatives 
later in the chapter.
Three classic examples of succession are presented next: 
primary and secondary succession on land and succession in 
aquatic ecosystems.
Primary Succession. If an area lacks plants and soil— 
such as might occur after volcanic eruption or the recession 
of a  glacier—the process of initial invasion and progression 
from one biotic community to the next is called primary 
 succession. An example is the gradual invasion of a bare 
rock or gravel surface by what eventually becomes a cli-
max forest ecosystem. Bare rock is an inhospitable environ-
ment. It has few places for seeds to lodge and germinate or 
for seedlings to survive. However, certain species, such as 
some mosses, are able to exploit this environment. Their 
tiny spores (specialized cells that function reproductively) 
can lodge and germinate in minute cracks, and moss can 
withstand severe drying simply by becoming dormant. 
With each bit of moisture, moss grows and gradually forms 
a mat that acts as a sieve, catching and holding soil parti-
cles as they are broken from the rock or as they blow or 
wash by. Thus, a layer of soil gradually accumulates, held 
in place by the moss (Fig. 14).
The mat of moss and soil provides a suitable place for 
seeds of larger plants to lodge. The larger plants in turn col-
lect and build additional soil, and eventually there is enough 
soil to support shrubs and trees. In the process, the fallen 
leaves and other litter from the larger plants smother and 
eliminate the moss and most of the smaller plants that initi-
ated the process. Thus, there is a gradual succession from 
can also be seen by comparing productivity in tropical, tem-
perate, and boreal (coniferous) forests.
The biosphere consists of a great variety of environ-
ments, both aquatic and terrestrial. In each environment, 
plant, animal, and microbial species are adapted to all the 
abiotic factors. In addition, they are adapted to each other, 
in various feeding and nonfeeding relationships. Each envi-
ronment supports a group of organisms interacting with each 
other and with the environment in a way that perpetuates or 
sustains the entire group. Every ecosystem is tied to others 
through species that migrate from one system to another and 
through exchanges of air, water, and minerals common to 
the whole planet.
4  Ecosystem Responses 
to Disturbance
People often picture ecosystems at equilibrium, as stable 
environments in which species interact constantly in well-
balanced predator-prey and competitive relationships. This 
idea has led to the popular idea of “the balance of nature”: 
natural systems maintain a delicate balance over time that 
lends them great stability. A more recent understand-
ing of ecosystems, however, shows that they operate in a 
dynamic, changing way. Species’ abundances and ecosys-
tem characteristics are not unchanging. Rather, the land-
scape is composed of a shifting mosaic of patches, much 
like patches of lava and unburned areas after a volcano. 
Volcanoes such as those in Iceland and the Philippines 
give us a great example of how ecosystems respond to a 
 disturbance—a significant change that kills or displaces 
many community members.
Ecological Succession
After a disturbance like a fire or volcanic eruption, new 
plants grow from the soil, new trees sprout, and eventually 
the original forest stands are replaced by new and different 
stands. First, however, these communities go through a se-
ries of intermediate stages. This phenomenon of transition 
from one biotic community to another is called ecological 
succession. Ecological succession occurs because the physi-
cal environment may be gradually modified by the growth of 
a biotic community itself, such that the area becomes more 
favorable to another group of species and less favorable to 
the current occupants. Views on ecological succession have 
changed over time as scientists have done studies on changes 
near retreating glaciers and moving dune ecosystems. In the 
past, succession was viewed as a very predictable and orderly 
process through a series of stages to a stable end point. That 
view is useful for understanding generally how ecosystems 
change. However, new work, particularly through large-
scale studies at Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites 
or the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) 
123

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
Year
(a)
(b)
Crab-
grass
Pine
forest
Tall
grass-
herba-
ceous
plants
0–1
1–3
Hard-
woods
come 
in
30–70
Hard-
wood
forest
climax
70+
Pines
come 
in
3–10
10–30
moss through small plants and, finally, to trees or whatever 
the regional climate supports, yielding the biomes typical of 
different climatic regions.
Secondary Succession. When an area has been cleared by 
fire, human activity, or flooding and then left alone, plants 
and animals from the surrounding ecosystem may gradually 
reinvade the area—through a series of distinct stages called 
secondary succession. The major difference between primary 
and secondary succession is that secondary succession starts 
with preexisting soil. Thus, the early, prolonged stages of 
soil building are bypassed. Hence, the process of reinvasion 
begins with different species. The steps leading from aban-
doned agricultural fields in the eastern United States back 
to deciduous forests provide a classic example of secondary 
succession (Fig. 15).
Aquatic Succession. Natural succession also takes place 
in lakes or ponds. Succession occurs because soil particles 
inevitably erode from the land and settle out in ponds or 
lakes, gradually filling them. Aquatic vegetation produces 
detritus that also contributes to the filling process. As the 
buildup occurs, terrestrial species from the surrounding 
Figure 14 Primary succession on bare rock. Moss invades bare rock 
and acts as a collector, accumulating a layer of soil sufficient for additional plants 
to become established.
Figure 15 Secondary succession. (a) Reinvasion of an 
agricultural field by a forest ecosystem occurs in the stages shown.  
(b) Hardwoods (in this case, species of oak) are growing up underneath 
and displacing pines in eastern Maryland.
124

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
Fire and Succession. Fire is an abiotic factor that has par-
ticular relevance to succession. It is a major form of distur-
bance common to terrestrial ecosystems, as we saw in the 
Yellowstone National Park example. About 80 years ago, 
forest managers interpreted the potential destructiveness of 
fire to mean that all fire was bad, whereupon they embarked 
on fire prevention programs that eliminated fires from many 
areas. Unexpectedly, fire prevention did not preserve all eco-
systems in their existing state. In pine forests of the south-
eastern United States, for instance, economically worthless 
scrub oaks and other broad-leaved species began to displace 
the more valuable pines. Grasslands were gradually taken 
over by scrubby, woody species that hindered grazing. Pine 
forests of the western United States that were once clear and 
open became cluttered with the trunks and branches of trees 
that had died in the normal aging process. This deadwood 
became the breeding ground for wood-boring insects that 
ecosystem can advance in the ecotone and aquatic species 
must move farther out into the lake. In time, the shoreline 
advances toward the center of the lake until, finally, the 
lake disappears altogether (Fig. 16). Here the climax ecosys-
tem may be a bog or a forest. Just as disturbances affect ter-
restrial ecosystems, disturbances such as droughts—or even 
large floods and erosion—can send aquatic succession back 
to an earlier stage.
Disturbance and Resilience
In order for natural succession to occur, the spores and seeds 
of various invading plants and the breeding populations of 
various invading animals must already be present in the vi-
cinity. Ecological succession is not a matter of new species 
developing or even old species adapting to new conditions; 
it is a matter of populations of existing species taking advan-
tage of a new area as conditions become favorable. Where 
do these early-stage species come from if their usual fate is to 
be replaced by late-stage or climax species? They come from 
surrounding ecosystems in the early stages of succession. 
Similarly, the late-stage species are recruited from ecosys-
tems in the later stages of succession. In any given landscape, 
therefore, all stages of succession are likely to be represented 
in the ecosystems. This is the case because disturbances 
constantly create gaps or patches in the landscape. When a 
variety of successional stages is present in a landscape, as op-
posed to one single climax stage, a greater diversity of spe-
cies can be expected; in other words, biodiversity is enhanced 
by disturbance.
If certain species have been eliminated, natural succes-
sion will be blocked or modified. For example, Iceland was 
colonized by the Norse in the 11th century, and, as a result, 
trees were cut until, in 1850, not a tree was left standing 
(Fig. 17). Iceland had become a barren, tundra-like  habitat. 
Succession was unable to proceed naturally, and Iceland 
has remained treeless. (See Sustainability,  “Ecological Res-
toration: Aldo Leopold and the Shack on the Prairie.”)
Figure 16 Aquatic succession. In this photograph, taken 
in Banff National Park in the Canadian Rockies, you can visualize 
the lake that used to exist in the low-level area. It is now filled 
with sediment and covered by scrub willow. Spruce and fir forest is 
gradually encroaching.
Figure 17 Iceland. Forests that originally covered much of this island na-
tion were totally stripped for fuel in the 18th and 19th centuries. With  
natural succession impossible, Iceland has remained barren and tundra-like, as 
seen here.
125

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
habitat that supports a greater diversity of wildlife than does 
a uniform, aging conifer forest.
Long-Term Ecosystem Studies. A great deal of our under-
standing of ecosystem changes comes from studies of changes 
in fields after fires, on mountain slopes after volcanoes, and 
near retreating glaciers. However, as human-caused changes 
to the environment have become global in scope, our stud-
ies have had to become longer and cover wider areas. Two 
ongoing research efforts of note help us to better understand 
ecosystems. The first is a system of ecosystems designated as 
Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites. These 26 sites 
represent different types of ecosystems and different levels of 
human disturbance. At each site and between sites, research 
projects focus on five core areas:
1. Pattern and control of primary production;
2. Spatial and temporal distribution of populations selected 
to represent trophic structure;
3. Pattern and control of organic matter accumulation in 
surface layers and sediments;
4. Patterns of inorganic inputs and movements of nutrients 
through soils, groundwater, and surface waters;
5. Patterns and frequency of site disturbances.
Some of these sites, such as the Hubbard Brook Experimen-
tal Station, which was critical to the discovery of the prob-
lem of acid rain, have been studied for decades.
The second ecosystem study initiative, funded by the 
National Science Foundation, is the National Ecological 
Observatory Network (NEON), a network operating in the 
United States and Puerto Rico. It is a system for collecting 
data about ecosystems and climate, pulling them together, 
and making them available for scientists to study. The data 
will be available to the public as well. NEON’s mission is 
to “enable understanding and forecasting of the impacts 
of climate change, land-use change and invasive species on 
continental-scale ecology—by providing infrastructure and 
consistent methodologies to support research and education 
in these areas.”1 Planned for years, construction on NEON 
infrastructure was begun in 2011.
Resilience. The ability of an ecosystem to return to nor-
mal functioning after a disturbance, such as a fire or flood, 
is called its resilience. Fire can appear to be a highly destruc-
tive disturbance to a forested landscape. Nevertheless, fire 
releases nutrients that nourish a new crop of plants, and in a 
short time, the burned area is repopulated with trees and is 
indistinguishable from the surrounding area. The processes 
of replenishment of nutrients, dispersion by surrounding 
plants and animals, rapid regrowth of plant cover, and suc-
cession to a forest can all be thought of as resilience mecha-
nisms (Fig. 19). Resilience helps maintain the sustainability of 
ecosystems.
proceeded to attack live trees. In California, the regeneration 
of redwood seedlings began to be blocked by the prolifera-
tion of broad-leaved species.
Scientists now recognize that fire, which is often started 
by lightning, is a natural and important abiotic factor. As 
with all abiotic factors, different species have different de-
grees of tolerance to fire. In particular, the growing buds of 
grasses and pines are located deep among the leaves or nee-
dles, where they are protected from most fires. By contrast, 
the buds of broad-leaved species, such as oaks, are exposed, 
so they are sensitive to damage from fire. Consequently, in 
regions where these species coexist and compete, periodic 
fires tip the balance in favor of pines, grasses, or redwood 
trees. In relatively dry ecosystems, where natural decomposi-
tion is slow, fire may also help release nutrients from dead 
organic matter. Some plant species even depend on fire. The 
cones of lodgepole pine, for example, will not release their 
seeds until they have been scorched by fire.
Ecosystems that depend on the recurrence of fire to 
maintain their existence are referred to as fire climax eco-
systems. The category includes various grasslands and pine 
forests (Fig. 18). Fire is being increasingly used as a tool in the 
management of such ecosystems. In pine forests, if ground 
fires occur every few years, relatively little deadwood accu-
mulates. With only small amounts of fuel, fires usually just 
burn along the ground, harming neither pines nor wildlife 
significantly.
Crown fires, such as the fierce Yellowstone fires that 
occurred in 1980, sometimes occur naturally because not 
every area is burned on a regular basis. In fact, exceed-
ingly dry conditions can make a forest vulnerable to crown 
fires even when no large amounts of deadwood are present. 
Even crown fires, however, serve to clear deadwood and 
sickly trees, release nutrients, and provide for a fresh eco-
logical start. Burned areas soon become productive meadows 
as secondary succession starts anew. Thus, periodic crown 
fires create a patchwork of meadows and forests at differ-
ent stages of succession that lead to a more-varied, healthier 
Figure 18 Ground fire. Periodic ground fires are necessary to preserve 
the balance of pine forests. Such fires remove excessive fuel and kill competing 
species.
1NEON. 2012. Mission. http://www.neoninc.org/about/mission477. May11, 2012.
126

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
Ecosystem resilience has its limits, however. If forests 
are removed from a landscape by human intervention and 
the area is prevented from undergoing reforestation by 
overgrazing, the soil may erode, leaving a degraded state 
that carries out few of the original ecosystem’s functions. 
As in Iceland, some disturbances may be so profound that 
they can overcome normal resilience mechanisms and cre-
ate an entirely new and far less productive ecosystem. This 
new ecosystem can also have its own resilience mechanisms, 
which may resist any restoration to the original state. We 
can view this as a “tipping point”—a situation in an eco-
system where a small action catalyzes a major change in the 
state of the system.
Tipping points act as levers that can change a system to 
be better able—or less able—to function as an ecosystem. 
They stimulate the action of feedback loops, where system 
dynamics influence a system in ways that amplify (positive 
loop) or dampen (negative loop) the behavior of the sys-
tem. For example, predator-prey cycles function as negative 
feedback loops that keep both populations from exploding 
in terms of numbers and then crashing. Removal of preda-
tors (to favor the prey species) would be a tipping point that 
could allow the positive feedback of prey reproduction to 
bring devastation to their plant food supply.
You might wonder why it matters if an ecosystem such 
as the forests of Iceland moves into an alternative state, such 
Disturbances
Clearing &
overgrazing
Fire
Resilience mechanisms
Nutrient release to soil
Regrowth by remnant roots and seeds
Invasions from neighboring ecosystems
Rapid restoration of energy flow & nutrient 
   cycling
Successional dynamics
Resilience overcome
by nature and severity
of disturbances
Degraded grassland
Mature forest (climax)
Stage 2
Succession over time
Stage 3
Stage 4
Stage 1
Figure 19 Resilience in ecosystems. Disturbances in ecosystems are usually ameliorated by a 
number of resilience mechanisms that restore normal ecosystem function in a short time.
as an Iceland with no trees, and stays there. After all, don’t 
treeless, cold places exist? As we will see below, ecosystems 
provide a number of services valuable to humans and other 
species. These include large-scale effects such as lowering 
flood surges, maintaining soil, maintaining even ground tem-
peratures, and taking up carbon dioxide.
If just a few parts of the planet moved from one type of 
ecosystem to another, it really wouldn’t matter. The prob-
lem is one of frequency. Large-scale human actions tend 
to lower ecosystem services such as flood control, wind-
erosion control, and carbon dioxide storage. They tend to 
produce ecosystems either with very low productivity or 
with high primary productivity but low food chain length 
(such as a lake with too many nutrients). Such ecosystems 
tend to have less physical complexity and lower biological 
 diversity. 
5  Human Values and Ecosystem 
Sustainability
Ecosystems have existed for millions of years, maintaining 
natural populations of biota and the processes that these carry 
out (which in turn sustain the ecosystems). One of the reasons 
for studying natural ecosystems is that they are models of 
sustainability. In this chapter, we started with trophic levels 
127

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
SuSTAinABiLiTy
Ecological Restoration: Aldo Leopold 
and the Shack on the Prairie
Conservationist Aldo 
Leopold (1887–1948) sat 
in a converted chicken 
coop writing at a table. 
His essays on the value 
of nature and the damage inflicted by unthinking 
use and his scientific papers on the impacts of 
fire and of predator suppression were to change 
the course of history. Around him lay acres of 
degraded farmland, its sandy soil depleted by 
years of unrelenting use, its plants gone, sparse 
grasses standing as tufts across the eroded 
fields. In 1935, Leopold had bought this land 
near the Wisconsin River and begun its restora-
tion. For years, he brought friends, neighbors, 
and students to the farm, encouraging them to 
sow seeds of prairie plants and promote the use 
of fire as a restoring agent. Gradually, the ag-
ricultural weed pests were outcompeted by the 
native grasses, shrubs, and flowers. Wild lupine, 
its purple flowers flecking the horizon, vied for 
space with purple coneflower and wild indigo. 
Native butterflies returned, along with the 
prairie voles and 13 lined ground squirrels. The 
work he did at the “shack,” as his home away 
from home was called, paralleled the restoration 
of native prairie at the University of Wisconsin 
Madison Arnold Arboretum, begun by Leopold 
and other scientists. It was the beginning of the 
field of restoration ecology.
The potential for restoration of any ecosys-
tem rests on the following three assumptions: 
(1) abiotic factors must have remained unaltered 
or, if not, can at least be returned to their origi-
nal state; (2) viable populations of the species 
formerly inhabiting the ecosystem must still 
exist; and (3) the ecosystem must not have been 
upset by the introduction of one or more foreign 
species that cannot be eliminated and that may 
preclude the survival of reintroduced native spe-
cies. If these conditions are met, revival efforts 
have the potential to restore 
the ecosystem to some sem-
blance of its former state.
Restoration ecologists use 
a set of actions described in a 
primer on ecological restoration 
published by the Society for  
Ecological Restoration in 
2004.* The basic processes 
include taking an inventory, 
developing a model of the 
desired ecosystem in structural 
and functional terms, setting 
goals for the restoration efforts, 
designing an implementation 
plan, and carrying out the plan. 
For example, it may be neces-
sary to remove all herbaceous 
vegetation and then plow 
and plant the land with na-
tive grasses. To maintain the 
prairie, it may be necessary 
to burn it regularly or, in the 
case of larger landholdings, 
to introduce bison. Clear per-
formance standards should be 
stated, along with the means 
of evaluating progress. Finally, 
the results of the implementa-
tion plan should be monitored 
and strategies developed for 
the long-term protection and 
maintenance of the restored ecosystem.
Leopold practiced these strategies on his 
own land in Wisconsin, bringing a broken and 
eroded abandoned farm back to a health it 
had not seen for years. In his well-known Sand 
County Almanac, as well as his other essays, 
Leopold wrote of this goal of understanding the 
natural world and caring for it. Leopold died try-
ing to control a brush fire, but his work lives on 
in a whole field of endeavor. .
C
L
i
c
H
*Society for Ecological Restoration, International Science and 
Policy Working Group, The SER International Primer on Eco-
logical Restoration (2004). Available at www.ser.org.
and then examined the flow of energy and nutrients in an 
ecosystem. These discussions have focused on how natural 
ecosystems work in theory. In reality, however, it is Earth’s 
specific ecosystems that we depend on for goods and services 
(also known as ecosystem capital). Is our use of natural and 
managed ecosystems a serious threat to their long-term sus-
tainability? Many ecosystem scientists believe that it is.
Appropriation of Energy Flow
As we have seen, it is the Sun that energizes the processes of 
energy flow and nutrient cycling. Humans make heavy use of 
the energy that starts with sunlight and flows through natu-
ral and agricultural ecosystems. Agriculture, for example,  
provides most of our food. To produce food, we have con-
verted almost 11% of Earth’s land area from forest and grass-
land biomes to agricultural ecosystems. Grasslands sustain our 
domestic animals for labor, meat, wool, leather, and milk. For-
est biomes provide us with 3.3 billion cubic meters (117 billion 
cubic feet) of wood annually for fuel, building material, and 
paper. Finally, some 15% of the world’s energy consumption 
is derived directly from plant material, like firewood and peat.
Calculations of the total annual global net primary pro-
duction of land ecosystems range around 120 petagrams 
(1 petagram 5 1 billion metric tons) of dry matter, including 
agricultural as well as the more natural ecosystems (Fig. 20). 
128

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
quences . Climate change is one consequence of these altera-
tions.
Currently, global climate change is one of the most seri-
ous environmental issues facing society. The burning of fossil 
fuels has increased the level of carbon dioxide in the atmos-
phere to the point where, by the mid–21st century, it will 
have doubled since the beginning of the Industrial Revolu-
tion. Methane is also released from the drying and decom-
position of areas that used to be permafrost and from cattle. 
Because both carbon dioxide and methane are powerful 
greenhouse gases, a general warming of the atmosphere is 
occurring, leading to many other effects on Earth’s climate . 
Numerous ecosystems are being affected by the changes, and 
it is questionable whether they can function sustainably in 
the face of such rapid changes. The threat of disturbance on 
such an enormous scale is a major reason why many nations 
of the world have begun to take steps to reduce emissions of 
greenhouse gases.
Value of Ecosystem Capital
How much are natural ecosystems worth to us? To the 
poor in many developing countries, the products of nat-
ural ecosystems keep life going and may enable them to 
make economic gains that can lift them from deep pov-
erty. Theirs is a direct and absolute dependence. For exam-
ple, 1.6 billion people, many of them the world’s poorest, 
depend on forests for much of their sustenance (in the 
form of fuelwood, construction wood, wild fruits, herbs, 
animal fodder, and bush meat). Their access to these eco-
system goods is often uncertain. Those of us in the devel-
oped world, however, are susceptible to a very different 
In 1986, researchers calculated that humans appropriate 
around 30% of this total production for agriculture, grazing, 
forestry, and human-occupied lands.2 More-recent calcula-
tions have supported this figure.3 These estimates indicate 
that humans are using a large fraction of the whole. Further, 
because humans convert many natural and agricultural lands 
to urban and suburban housing, highways, dumps, factories, 
and the like, we cancel out an additional 8% of potential pri-
mary production. Thus, we appropriate about 40% of the 
land’s primary production to support human needs. In using 
this much, we have become the dominant biological force 
on Earth, despite representing about 5% of the biomass. As 
ecologist Stuart Pimm put it, “Man eats Planet! Two-fifths 
 already gone!”4
involvement in nutrient Cycling
Nutrients are replenished in ecosystems through the break-
down of organic compounds and the release of the chemi-
cals that make them up—processes we have described as 
biogeochemical cycles. This maintains the sustainability 
of ecosystems indefinitely. However, human intrusion into 
these natural cycles is substantial, and it is bound to increase. 
Our alterations of the nutrient cycles have long-term conse-
Figure 20 Global primary productivity in terrestrial ecosystems. The primary production val-
ues range from 1 ton/hectare/year (yellow) to 15 tons/hectare/year (black) of dry organic matter. The global annual 
total is 120 billion metric tons (1 billion metric tons 5 1 petagram). (Source: Bazilevich global primary  productivity 
map, NOAA Satellite and Information Service.)
2Peter Vitousek, Paul R. Ehrlich, Anne H. Ehrlich, and Pamela Matson, “Human 
Appropriation of the Products of Photosynthesis,” BioScience 36, No. 6. (June 
1986): 368–373.
3N. Ramankutty, A. T. Evan, C. Monfreda, and J. A. Foley, “Farming the Planet: 
1. Geographic Distribution of Global Agricultural Lands in the Year 2000,” Glo-
bal Biogeochemical Cycles 22 (2008): GB1003.
4Pimm, Stuart. 2001. The World According to Pimm: A scientist audits the Earth. 
McGraw-Hill.
129

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
policy decisions involving changes to that stock. However, 
because these ecosystem services are outside the market and 
uncertain, they are too often ignored or undervalued, and the 
net result is human changes to natural systems whose social 
costs far outweigh their benefits. For example, coastal man-
grove forests in Thailand are often converted to shrimp farms, 
yet an analysis showed that the economic value of the forests 
(for timber, charcoal, storm protection, and fisheries support) 
exceeded the value of the shrimp farms by 70%.
A new Look. In 2002, a new team looked at the 1997 
team’s calculation of value and examined the benefit-cost 
consequences of converting ecosystems to more-direct 
human uses (e.g., converting a wetland to a soybean field).6 
In every case, the net balance of value was a loss—that is, 
services lost outweighed services gained. The team examined 
five different biomes and found consistent losses in ecosys-
tem capital, running at –1.2% per year. Based on the calcu-
lated total ecosystem value of $41 trillion, this percentage 
represents an annual loss of $250 billion through habitat 
conversion alone. If this is so, the authors asked, why is this 
conversion still happening? They suggested that the benefits 
of conversion were often exaggerated through various gov-
ernment subsidies, seriously distorting the market analysis. 
Thus, the market does not adequately measure many of the 
benefits from natural ecosystems, nor does it deal well with 
the fact that many major benefits are realized on regional or 
global scales, while the benefits of conversion are narrowly 
local. Other analyses, including a National Research Council 
report published in 20057 that investigated the value of wild 
nature and ecosystem services, support the idea that conser-
vation is more achievable when the real costs of harming ec-
osystems are included in our thinking. Beyond conservation, 
our tremendous dependence on natural systems should lead, 
logically, to proper management of those systems, a topic 
discussed later in this chapter.
Can Ecosystems Be Restored?
The human capacity for destroying ecosystems is well estab-
lished. To some degree, however, we also have the capacity to 
restore them (see Sustainability, “Ecological Restoration: Aldo 
Leopold and the Shack on the Prairie”). In many cases, resto-
ration simply involves stopping the abuse. For example, after 
pollution is curtailed, water quality often improves, and fish 
and shellfish gradually return to previously polluted lakes, riv-
ers, and bays. Similarly, forests may gradually be restored to 
areas that have been cleared. Humans can speed up the proc-
ess by seeding and planting seedling trees and by reintroducing 
populations of fish and animals that have been eliminated.
In some cases, however, specific ecosystems have been 
destroyed or disturbed to such an extent that they require the 
efforts of a new breed of scientist: the restoration  ecologist. 
 perspective: We often assign little thought or value to nat-
ural ecosystems and are unconcerned about (and insulated 
from) human impacts on natural ecosystems. This perspec-
tive can have dangerous consequences.
 We definethe goods and services we derive from natural 
systems as ecosystem capital . In a first-ever attempt of its kind, 
a team of 13 natural scientists and economists collaborated in 
1997 to produce a report  titled “The Value of the World’s Eco-
system Services and Natural Capital.”5 Their reason for mak-
ing such an effort was that the goods and services provided by 
natural ecosystems are not easily seen in the market (meaning 
the market economy that normally allows us to place value on 
things) or may not be in the market at all. Thus, clean air to 
breathe, the formation of soil, the breakdown of pollutants, 
and similar items never pass through and thus are not given a 
value by the market economy. People are often not even aware 
of their importance. Because of this, these things are underval-
ued or not valued at all.
The team identified 17 major ecosystem goods and serv-
ices that provide vital functions we depend on. The team also 
identified the ecosystem functions that actually carry out the 
vital human support and gave examples of each (Table 3). 
They made the point that it is useless to consider human wel-
fare without these ecosystem services; so, in one sense, their 
value as a whole is infinite. However, the incremental value 
of each type of service can be calculated. That is, changes in 
the quantity or quality of various types of services may influ-
ence human welfare, and an economic value can be placed on 
that relationship. For example, removing a forest will affect the 
ability of the forest to provide lumber in the future, as well 
as to perform other services, such as soil formation and pro-
motion of the hydrologic cycle. The economic value of this 
effect can be calculated. By calculating incremental values, 
making many approximations, and collecting data from other 
researchers who have worked on individual processes, the re-
search team tabulated the annual global value of ecosystem 
services performed by all types of ecosystems. According to 
their calculations, the total value to human welfare of a year’s 
services amounts to $41 trillion (in 2004 dollars)—and that is 
considered a conservative estimate. This is close to the $55 tril-
lion calculated for the gross world economic product in 2004.
using Ecosystem Value in Decision Making. The real 
power of the team’s analysis lies in its use for making local 
decisions. For instance, the value of wetlands cannot be repre-
sented solely by the amount of soybeans that could be grown 
on the land if it were drained. Instead, wetlands provide other 
vital ecosystem services, and these should be balanced against 
the value of the soybeans in calculating the costs and benefits 
of a proposed change in land use. The bottom line of their 
analysis is, in their words, “that ecosystem services provide an 
important portion of the total contribution to human welfare 
on this planet.” For this reason, the ecosystem capital stock 
(the ecosystems and the populations in them, including the 
lakes and wetlands) must be given adequate weight in public-
5Robert Costanza et al., “The Value of the World’s Ecosystem Services and 
 Natural Capital,” Nature 387 (1997): 253–260.
6Andrew Balmford et al., “Economic Reasons for Conserving Wild Nature,” 
 Science 297 (August 9, 2002): 950–953.
7National Research Council, Valuing Ecosystem Services: Toward Better Environ-
mental Decision-Making (Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2005).
130

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
tabLe 3 Ecosystem Services and Function
Ecosystem Service
Ecosystem Functions
Examples
Gas regulation
Regulation of atmospheric chemical composition
CO2–O2 balance, O3 for UVB protection, and SOx levels
Climate regulation
Regulation of global temperature, precipitation, and other 
biologically mediated climatic processes at global or local 
levels
Greenhouse gas regulation, dimethylsulfoxide production 
affecting cloud formation
Disturbance regulation
Capacitance, damping, and integrity of ecosystem  
response to environmental fluctuations
Storm protection, flood control, drought recovery, other 
aspects of habitat response to environmental variability 
controlled mainly by vegetation structure
Water regulation
Regulation of hydrological flows
Provisioning of water for agricultural (such as irrigation) 
or industrial (such as milling) processes or transportation
Water supply
Storage and retention of water
Provisioning of water by watersheds, reservoirs, and 
aquifers
Erosion control and 
sediment retention
Retention of soil within an ecosystem
Prevention of loss of soil by wind, runoff, or other removal 
processes; storage of silt in lakes and wetlands
Soil formation
Soil-formation processes
Weathering of rock and the accumulation of organic 
material
Nutrient cycling
Storage, internal cycling, processing, and acquisition  
of nutrients
Nitrogen fixation, N, P, and other elemental or nutrient 
cycles
Waste treatment
Recovery of mobile nutrients and removal or breakdown 
of excess nutrients and compounds
Waste treatment, pollution control, detoxification
Pollination
Movement of floral gametes
Provisioning of pollinators for the reproduction of plant 
populations
Biological control
Trophic-dynamic regulations of populations
Keystone predator to control prey species, reduction of 
herbivory by top predators
Refuges
Habitat for resident and transient populations
Nurseries, habitat for migratory species, regional habitats 
for locally harvested species, or overwintering grounds
Food production
The portion of primary production extractable as food
Production of fish, game, crops, nuts, and fruits by hunting, 
gathering, subsistence farming, or fishing
Raw materials
That portion of primary production extractable as raw 
materials
The production of lumber, fuel, or fodder
Genetic resources
Sources of unique biological materials and products
Medicine, products for science, genes for resistance to plant 
pathogens and crop pests, ornamental species (pets and 
horticultural varieties of plants)
Recreation
Provision of opportunities for recreational activities
Ecotourism, sport fishing, and other outdoor recreational 
activities
Cultural
Provision of opportunities for noncommercial uses
Aesthetic, artistic, educational, spiritual, or scientific values 
of ecosystems
Source: Reprinted, by permission, from Robert Costanza, Ralph d’Arge, Rudolf de Groot, Stephen Farber, Monica Grasso, Bruce Hannon, Karin Limburg, Shahid 
Naeem, Robert V. O’Neill, Jose Paruelo, Robert G. Raskin, Paul Sutton, and Marjan van den Belt, “The Value of the World’s Ecosystem Services and Natural 
Capital,” Nature 387 (1997): 253–260.
131

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
 essential natural and managed ecosystems are for human 
well-being and to bring to bear the wisdom and political 
will necessary to promote their sustainability.
Ecosystems are resilient, living units of the landscape, 
often subject to natural disturbances and capable of chang-
ing over time. They also provide essential goods and serv-
ices that improve the quality of human life and, in many 
areas, allow those in poverty to improve their lot. However, 
we have seen that ecosystem goods and services are rou-
tinely undervalued, with the result that, as the Millennium 
Ecosystem Assessment found, ecosystem capital is being de-
graded and overexploited in many areas of the world. To 
turn human efforts in a sustainable direction, we need to 
protect or manage the natural environment in a way that 
maintains the goods and services vital to the human way of 
life, and we need to manage ourselves. The two aspects are 
interrelated.
Managing Ecosystems
Virtually no ecosystem can escape human impact. We de-
pend on ecosystems for vital goods and services—and by 
using ecosystems, we are in fact managing them. Forests are 
a good example. Management can be a matter of fire sup-
pression (or, more recently, controlled burns), clear-cutting, 
or selective harvesting. The objective of management can be 
to maximize profit from logging or to maintain the forest 
as a sustainable and diverse ecosystem that yields multiple 
products and services. Good ecosystem management is based 
on understanding how ecosystems function, how they re-
spond to disturbances, and what goods and services they can 
best provide to the human societies living in or around them. 
Since 1992, the U.S. Forest Service, the U.S. Bureau of Land 
Management, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the U.S. Na-
tional Park Service, and the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency have all officially adopted ecosystem management as 
their management paradigm. What, then, is ecosystem man-
agement?
Ecosystem management is composed of several main 
principles. First, it looks at ecosystems on both small and 
large scales. For example, the impact of logging on a single 
river and the impact of that logging on the entire watershed 
are both considered in managing the ecosystem. Good man-
agement preserves the range of possible landscapes in an eco-
system instead of allowing one type to take over the area. 
In addition, management is not static—managers are given 
the opportunity to learn from experiments and to employ 
new knowledge from forestry and landscape science in their 
practice. Such “managers” can be volunteer land stewards or 
neighborhood groups, not just government agencies. As part 
of adapting to changing circumstances, management must 
also look at the human element of these ecosystems. The val-
uable goods and services of ecosystems are recognized, and 
through active involvement in monitoring and management, 
all stakeholders (all people with a stake in the ecosystem’s 
health) are included as important elements in stewardship of 
the resources (see Stewardship, “Ecosystem Stakeholders”). 
Unfortunately, sometimes the ecosystem is too greatly dis-
turbed for scientists to repair. In a prairie, for example, 
lack of grazing by native herbivores, overgrazing by cattle 
or sheep, and suppression of regular fires can lead to much 
woody vegetation. Exotic species may abound in the region 
and can continuously disperse seeds on the experimental 
prairie, and there may be no remnants of the original prairie 
grasses and herbs on the site. Such sites may take intensive 
efforts to bring back any native species or may continue in 
an alternative ecosystem.
Why should we restore ecosystems? Restoration ecolo-
gists Steven Apfelbaum and Kim Chapman cite several rea-
sons.8 First, we should do so for aesthetic reasons. Natural 
ecosystems are often beautiful, and the restoration of some-
thing beautiful and pleasing to the eye is a worthy project 
that can be uplifting to many people. Second, we should do 
so for the benefit of human use. The ecosystem services of 
a restored wetland, for example, can be enjoyed by present 
and future generations. The degradation of ecosystems robs 
them of their ecosystem capital, and restoring them returns 
their value. Finally, we should do so for the benefit of the 
species and ecosystems themselves. It can be argued that 
nature has value separate from human use and that people 
should act to preserve and restore ecosystems and species in 
order to preserve that value.
The Future
On a global scale, the future growth of the human popu-
lation and its rising consumption levels will severely chal-
lenge ecosystem sustainability. Over the next 50 years, the 
world’s population is expected to increase by at least 2.5 
billion people. The needs and demands of this expanded 
human population will create unprecedented pressures on 
the ability of Earth’s systems to provide goods and services. 
Estimates based on current trends indicate that impacts on 
the nitrogen and phosphorus cycles will raise the amounts 
of these nutrients being added to the land and water to two 
to three times current levels. Demands on agriculture will 
likely require at least 15% more agricultural land; irrigated 
land area is expected to double, greatly stressing an already 
strained hydrologic cycle. Such growing demands cannot 
be met without facing serious trade-offs between different 
goods and services. More agricultural land means more 
food, but less forest—and, therefore, less of the important 
services forests perform. More water for irrigation means 
more rivers will be diverted, so less water will be available 
for domestic use and for sustaining the riverine ecosystems. 
These dire projections are not necessarily predictions, 
and they don’t have to be inevitable outcomes. By look-
ing ahead, we may choose other alternatives if we clearly 
understand the consequences of simply continuing present 
practices. There is a powerful need to understand how 
8Steven I. Apfelbaum and Kim Alan Chapman, “Ecological Restoration: A Prac-
tical Approach,” in Ecosystem Management: Applications for Sustainable Forest 
and Wildlife Resources, ed. Mark S. Boyce and Alan Haney (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1997).
132

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
STEWARDSHiP
Ecosystem Stakeholders
The pressures on eco-
systems illustrate why 
it is crucially important 
to understand how eco-
systems work and how 
human societies interact with them. Although 
many pressures are large-scale—even global—
the decisions (and decision makers) that will 
most directly determine ecosystem sustainability 
are local or regional. The Millennium Ecosystem 
Assessment identifies a number of “drivers of 
change”: factors that bring about alterations 
in ecosystems, such as changes in land use, 
species introductions, and resource harvesting. 
Decision makers are those who are responsible 
for these “drivers.” To understand how and why 
they make the decisions they do, it is useful to 
employ the concept of stakeholders. People 
who have an interest in or may be affected by a 
given approach to environmental management, 
including government decision makers, are all 
considered to be stakeholders. They have a 
stake in the ecosystem resource and what hap-
pens to it. Primary stakeholders are those most 
dependent on the resource; secondary stake-
holders may be those living near the resource, 
but not greatly dependent on it; government 
officials; scientists studying the resource; and 
conservation organizations.
People living within and adjacent to an 
ecosystem are usually the primary stakeholders. 
In ecosystems of the developing world, these 
are among the world’s poorest people, and 
their dependence on what has been called en-
vironmental income is almost absolute. Primary 
stakeholders may remove vegetation, harvest 
wood, withdraw water, harvest game animals, 
and so on. They may use these products in their 
own households; or where markets exist, they 
may sell them for cash or exchange them for 
services. Their local decisions will have both 
intended and unintended consequences. If they 
harvest firewood from a forest (intended), soil 
erosion may increase (unintended). If many 
local decision makers make similar decisions, 
the impacts may have cumulative undesirable 
regional and, eventually, global consequences. 
Preventing such outcomes requires effective 
management of the ecosystem so as to maintain 
its sustainability and at the same time meet the 
needs of the various stakeholders.
One way to promote good stewardship 
of resources is to involve the stakeholders in 
management. One example of a case where 
poor rural communities were able to pursue 
community-based natural resource management 
and restore and manage crucial environmental 
resources is documented in the World Resources 
Institute report titled The Wealth of the Poor: 
Managing Ecosystems to Fight Poverty.* The 
Shinyanga region of Tanzania was once an 
abundant woodland environment that supported 
the Sukuma people with subsistence agriculture 
and forage for livestock. An indigenous natural 
resource management system of maintaining 
protected vegetation enclosures was removed 
by government decree in the 1970s, and the re-
sult was devastating to the region. Land and soil 
were overused, wood was difficult to find, and 
traditional wild fruit and plants became scarce. 
In 1986, the Tanzanian government reversed 
its approach and promoted the revival of the 
original indigenous scheme of enclosures. As a 
result, people exerted local ownership over the 
natural resources, and gradually, the landscape 
changed from an eroded, dry land to one where 
vegetation and wildlife have been restored on 
more than 350,000 hectares (860,000 acres). 
The outcome greatly improved livelihoods for 
the Sukuma, with dividends in fuelwood, con-
struction timber, fodder for animals, and tradi-
tional foods. In this situation, the involvement 
of the primary stakeholders in decisions affect-
ing local ecosystems was the key to restoration. 
One conclusion of the World Resources Institute 
report was that democratic reform may be the 
most important step toward sustainable use of 
ecosystem goods and services, particularly in 
developing countries.
T
s
it
t
s
*World Resources Institute, World Resources 2005: The 
Wealth of the Poor: Managing Ecosystems to Fight Poverty 
(Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute, 2005).
9Committee of Scientists, Department of Agriculture, Sustaining the People’s 
Lands: Recommendations for Stewardship of the National Forests and Grasslands 
into the Next Century (1999). Available at www.fs.fed.us/news/science.
10Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Living Beyond Our Means: Natural Assets 
and Human Well-Being (Statement of the Millennium Assessment Board, 2005). 
Available at www.millenniumassessment.org/en/Products.BoardStatement.aspx.
Above all, the paradigm incorporates the objective of eco-
logical sustainability.
The U.S. Forest Service is responsible for managing some 
192 million acres (77.7 million hectares) of national forests 
and is a key player in overseeing public natural resources. A 
decade ago, the Forest Service convened an interdisciplinary 
committee of scientists to advise the service on what sound 
science would recommend for managing national lands. 
 According to the committee’s report, “the first priority for 
management is to retain and restore the ecological sustain-
ability of watersheds, forests, and rangelands for present and 
future generations. The Committee believes that the policy of 
sustainability should be the guiding star for stewardship of 
the national forests and grasslands to assure the continuation 
of this array of benefits” (referring to the goods and services 
provided by the national lands).9 These were fine words, but 
have they been followed?
The governing board of the Millennium Ecosystem As-
sessment process examined the findings of the more than 
1,350 experts who produced the many reports of the assess-
ment and issued its own statement of the key messages to be 
derived from the process. The title of this work is significant: 
Living Beyond Our Means: Natural Assets and Human Well-
Being.10 As stated in the first few lines of this document: “At 
the heart of this assessment is a stark warning. Human activ-
ity is putting such strain on the natural functions of Earth 
that the ability of the planet’s ecosystems to sustain future 
generations can no longer be taken for granted.” The follow-
ing are the key messages from the governing board:
 • Everyone in the world depends on nature and ecosystem 
services to provide the conditions for a decent, healthy, 
and secure life.
 • Humans have made unprecedented changes to ecosys-
tems in recent decades, to meet growing demands for 
food, fresh water, fiber, and energy.
133

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
REViSiTinG THE THEMES
sound science
Ecosystems have natural processes that drive their func-
tions. They are not static entities—change is a funda-
mental property of ecosystems. They can stand alone or 
be grouped into large global areas called biomes, which are predicted 
largely by precipitation and temperature. Ecosystems can also include 
sub-ecosystems, caused by variations or microclimates. Ecosystems can 
be characterized by their primary productivity and how that energy and 
the associated nutrients move up through a food chain or food web. 
These structures contain several trophic levels of organisms that gain 
their energy from their prey (or in the case of producers, primarily from 
the Sun). The concepts of energy and matter (and the inefficiency of their 
transfer) play out in forming the biomass pyramid and determining the 
length of food chains. Individual limits on distribution of species  
are the cause of large predictable areas of Earth having similar 
 ecosystems—the biomes. The relationships between species determine 
the trophic levels in ecosystems. A functioning ecosystem and its food 
webs are resilient to disturbance—indeed, some even depend on distur-
bances to reset succession and allow diversity. However, extremely large 
or unusual disturbances might tip an ecosystem into an altered state 
from which it might not recover. In some instances, this leads to much 
lower productivity or diversity, and in others, sound environmental man-
agement can tip a degraded ecosystem back into a restored state. Scien-
tists and others study the processes of restoring degraded ecosystems to 
health, as did Aldo Leopold.
sustainability
The message of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment is 
that human impacts on the resilient natural world are so 
unprecedented and extensive that we crossed the line into 
unsustainable consumption some time ago and are now depleting ecosys-
tem capital stock instead of living off its sustainable goods and services. 
Converting ecosystems into farms and other human uses has frequently 
depleted their ability to provide us with pivotal assets. We are just begin-
ning to calculate the lost economic value of these altered landscapes, not 
to mention their lost aesthetic and natural value. Any attempt at sustain-
ability will need to include monitoring the world’s ecosystems, setting 
international policies to protect them, and involving all stakeholders in 
their management. Basic science will inform much of the policy making 
and other solutions for sustainability .
stewardship
Ecosystem management has shown us that we need to 
monitor the impacts we have on our ecosystems, because, 
while they are resilient, large disturbances can do irrepa-
rable damage. Indeed, stewardship means, first of all, understanding 
how ecosystems, such as the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, do just 
what they do and then stepping back and restraining our activities to 
allow ecosystems to continue to provide us with essential goods and 
services. Human agency has become the dominant force on Earth, 
 affecting living systems all over the planet. In the process, we have the 
ability to drastically reduce biodiversity, or we have the ability to act as 
responsible stewards of our environment. Ecosystem management is, 
above all, a stewardship approach to the natural world. As the U.S. For-
est Service’s Committee of Scientists put it, “the policy of sustainability 
should be the guiding star” for our actions, fittingly linking sustainability 
and stewardship.
s
E
m
w
rable damage I
s
T
t
u
unsustainable c
s
E
t
m
be grouped into
• Measures to conserve natural resources are more likely 
to succeed if local communities are given ownership of 
them, share the benefits, and are involved in decisions.
 • Even today’s technology and knowledge can reduce con-
siderably the human impact on ecosystems. They are 
unlikely to be deployed fully, however, until ecosystem 
services cease to be perceived as free and limitless and 
their full value is taken into account.
 • Better protection of natural assets will require coordi-
nated efforts across all sections of governments, busi-
nesses, and international institutions. The productivity 
of ecosystems depends on policy choices in the areas 
of investment, trade, subsidy, taxation, and regulation, 
among others.
We are living off the future, in other words. Our cur-
rent well-being is apparently dependent on drawing down 
the ecosystem capital that provides the goods and services; 
as a result, agricultural soils erode, fish stocks decline, forests 
shrink, and pollution of land, water, and air increases. This 
situation is unsustainable.
 • These changes have helped to improve the lives of bil-
lions, but at the same time, they have weakened nature’s 
ability to deliver other key services such as the purifica-
tion of air and water, protection from disasters, and the 
provision of medicines.
 • Among the outstanding problems identified by this as-
sessment are the dire state of many of the world’s fish 
stocks; the intense vulnerability of the 2 billion people 
living in dry regions to the loss of ecosystem services, 
including water supply; and the growing threat to eco-
systems from climate change and nutrient pollution.
 • Human activities have taken the planet to the edge of a 
massive wave of species extinctions, further threatening 
our own well-being.
 • The loss of services derived from ecosystems is a signifi-
cant barrier to the achievement of the Millennium De-
velopment Goals to reduce poverty, hunger, and disease.
 • The pressures on ecosystems will increase globally in com-
ing decades unless human attitudes and actions change.
134

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
 1. How did the described volcanoes in Iceland and the 
Philippines change the environment to lesser or greater  
extents?
 2. Name and describe the attributes of the two categories 
into which all organisms can be divided based on how they 
obtain nutrition.
 3. Name and describe the roles of the three main trophic 
categories that make up the biotic structure of every  
ecosystem. Give examples of organisms from each  
category.
 4. Give four categories of consumers in an ecosystem and the 
role that each plays.
 5. Describe different members of the decomposition food 
web.
 6. Differentiate among the concepts of food chain, food web, 
and trophic levels.
 7. Relate the concept of the biomass pyramid to the fact that 
all heterotrophs depend on autotrophic production.
 8. Describe how differences in climate cause Earth to be parti-
tioned into major biomes.
 9. What are three situations that might cause microclimates to 
develop within an ecosystem?
REviEw QuEstions
 10. Identify and describe the biotic and the abiotic components 
of the biome of the region in which you live.
 11. Define the terms ecological succession and climax 
ecosystem. How do disturbances allow for ecological 
succession?
 12. What role may fire play in ecological succession, and 
how may fire be used in the management of certain eco-
systems?
 13. What is meant by ecosystem resilience? What can cause 
it to fail? How does this relate to environmental tipping 
points?
 14. What is meant by the term stakeholder? How does ecosys-
tem management involve stakeholders?
 15. Succinctly describe ecosystem management.
 16. Can ecosystems be restored? What has to happen for that to 
work?
 17. How much of Earth’s primary productivity is used or 
preempted by humans?
 18. Examine the key messages from the Millennium Ecosys-
tem Assessment’s governing board, and evaluate how these 
points affect you now and will affect you and your children 
in the future.
thinking EnviRonmEntally
 1. Write a scenario describing what would happen to an 
ecosystem or to the human system in the event of one  
of the following: (a) all producers are killed through a 
loss of fertility of the soil or through toxic contamina-
tion, or (b) decomposers and detritus feeders are elimi-
nated. Support all of your statements with reasons 
drawn from your understanding of the way ecosystems 
function.
 2. Look at the following description of a broad global re-
gion, and describe what the biome name and main biota 
would be and how you know that: 40 centimeters (16 in.) 
of precipitation a year, seasons, frozen much of the year, 
high winds.
 3. Consider the plants, animals, and other organisms 
present in a natural area near you, and then do the fol-
lowing: (a) Imagine how the area may have undergone 
ecological succession, and (b) analyze the population-
balancing mechanisms that are operating among the vari-
ous organisms. Choose one species, and predict what will 
happen to it if two or three other native species are re-
moved from the area. Then predict what will happen to 
your chosen species if two or three foreign species are 
introduced into the area.
 4. Consult the Web site www.ecotippingpoints.org, and read 
several of the success stories from the site. Compare the tip-
ping points as presented, and explain the common proper-
ties of the tipping points.
 5. Explore how the human system can be modified into a sus-
tainable ecosystem in balance with (i.e., preserving) other 
natural ecosystems without losing the benefits of modern 
civilization.
135

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
making a DiffEREncE
 1. Find out where the nearest wilderness area or national park 
is to where you live. If possible, make a plan to visit it. Find 
out what management issues the park has. Do they have ad-
visories about fire risk, invasive species, or other ecosystem 
management issues?
 2. Using an online map, find out what river drains your water-
shed and where that water goes. Is there a watershed stew-
ardship group for the river? Who might be looking out for 
the protection of the ecosystem? If you are interested, organ-
ize a group volunteer activity.
 3. In your area, is there a citizens’ group for restoring any de-
graded ecosystems? There are many such small groups of 
citizens in the United States and elsewhere. See if you can 
link to a citizens’ group. Volunteer if you can. One such ac-
tivity is the annual CoastSweep, usually held in September, 
in which people all over the world clean up beaches. If you 
are coastal, see if you can help.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
Text Credits
Figure 10: Source: United States Department of Agriculture: Natural Resources 
Conservation Service; Figure 13: Biology: Concepts and Connections, 4th Edition, 
by Neil A. Campbell, Jane B. Reece, Lawrence G. Mitchell and Martha R. Taylor. 
Copyright © 2003 by Pearson Education. Reprinted with permission.; Table 3: 
“Ecosystem Services and Function,” in The Value of the World’s Ecosystem, by 
Robert Costanza, Ralph D. Arge and Rudolf de Groot. Reprinted with permission. 
cREDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): Martin Rietze/Stocktrek Images/Alamy Limited; (bottom left): 
iStockphoto; (center left): Kai Horstmann / vario images GmbH & Co.KG/  
Alamy; (top left): ROBERT T. WELLS/UNEP / Still Pictures / The Image Works 
(top left): Reproduced from Transmission electron micrograph by Breznak & 
Pankratz (1977) with permission of the American Society for Microbiology.; 
Oksana.perkins/Shutterstock; Steve Geer/iStockphoto.com; Dmitry Savinov/
Shutterstock; Galyna Andrushko/Shutterstock; Yuriy Kulyk/Shutterstock;  
© TTphoto/Shutterstock; Mikedabell/iStockphoto; Johnny Lye/iStockphoto; 
Angelo Garibaldi/Shutterstock; Cedric Schmidt/Fotolia; iStockphoto; Mr. Eckhart/
IStockphoto; (top left) Bernard J. Nebel; (bottom right): Bernard J. Nebel; (top 
left): Bernard J. Nebel; (bottom right): Piotr Gatlik/Shutterstock; (bottom left): 
Anna Galejeva/Shutterstock: (top left): szefei/Shutterstock; (top right): Tupungato/
Shutterstock; Everett Collection Inc / Alamy
altitude The vertical distance from sea level.
anaerobic Lacking oxygen.
autotroph Any organism that can synthesize all its organic 
substances from inorganic nutrients, using light or certain 
inorganic chemicals as a source of energy. Green plants are the 
principal autotrophs.
biomass The mass of biological material. Usually the total mass of 
a particular group or category (e.g., biomass of producers).
biomass pyramid The structure that is obtained when the 
respective biomasses of producers, herbivores, and carnivores in 
an ecosystem are compared. Producers have the largest biomass, 
followed by herbivores and then carnivores.
biome A group of ecosystems that are related by having a similar 
type of vegetation governed by similar climatic conditions. 
Examples include prairies, deciduous forests, arctic tundra, 
deserts, and tropical rain forests.
carnivore An animal that feeds more or less exclusively on other 
animals.
cellulose The organic macromolecule that is the prime constituent 
of plant cell walls and hence the major molecule in wood, wood 
products, and cotton. Cellulose is composed of glucose molecules, 
but because it cannot be digested by humans, its dietary value is 
only as fiber, bulk, or roughage.
chemosynthesis The process whereby some microorganisms utilize 
the chemical energy contained in certain reduced inorganic 
chemicals (e.g., hydrogen sulfide) to produce organic matter.
chlorophyll The green pigment in plants responsible for absorbing 
the light energy required for photosynthesis.
climax ecosystem The last stage in ecological succession. An 
ecosystem in which populations of all organisms are in balance 
with each other and with existing abiotic factors.
coniferous forest biome A biome occupying northern regions or 
higher mountainous altitudes dominated by coniferous trees.
consumption In ecological use, the process of feeding on organic 
matter as a source of energy; all heterotrophs are consumers.
decomposers Organisms whose feeding action results in decay or 
rotting of organic material. The primary decomposers are fungi 
and bacteria.
desert biome The pattern of living forms and habitat where 
rainfall is less than 25 centimeters (10 inches) per year.
disturbance A natural or human-induced event or process (e.g., a 
forest fire) that interrupts ecological succession and creates new 
conditions on a site.
ecological succession The gradual or sometimes rapid change in 
the species that occupy a given area, with some species invading 
and becoming more numerous, while others decline in population 
glossaRy
136

Ecosystems: Energy, Patterns, and Disturbance
microclimate The actual conditions experienced by an organism 
in its particular location. Owing to numerous factors—such as 
shading, drainage, and sheltering—the microclimate may be quite 
distinct from the overall climate.
omnivore An animal that feeds on both plant material and other 
animals.
permafrost The ground of arctic regions that remains permanently 
frozen. Defines tundra because only small herbaceous plants can 
be sustained on the thin layer of soil that thaws each summer.
primary consumer An organism, such as a rabbit or deer, that 
feeds more or less exclusively on green plants or their products, 
such as seeds and nuts. (Synonym: herbivore.)
primary producers/primary production Photosynthetic organisms. 
The activities of these organisms in creating new organic matter 
in ecosystems.
productivity See primary producers/primary production.
secondary consumer An organism such as a fox or coyote that 
feeds more or less exclusively on other animals that feed on 
plants.
stakeholders Groups of people who have an interest in the 
management of a given environmental resource, from those 
dependent on the resource to those managing or studying the 
resource.
temperate deciduous forest A biome in the temperate zone 
characterized by deciduous trees, found where annual precipitation 
is 30–80 inches per year.
trophic level A feeding level defined with respect to the primary 
source of energy. Green plants are at the first trophic level, 
primary consumers at the second, secondary consumers at the 
third, and so on.
tropical rain forest Biome in the tropic zone where rainfall 
averages over 95 inches/yr; locations of great biodiversity.
tundra biome In cold latitudes and high altitudes, the pattern 
of plants and animals able to live where permafrost persists; 
dominated by low-growing sedges, shrubs, lichens, mosses, and 
grasses.
and disappear. Succession is caused by a change in one or more 
abiotic or biotic factors that benefit some species at the expense 
of others.
ecosystem capital The sum of goods and services provided by 
natural and managed ecosystems, both free of charge and 
essential to human life and well-being.
ecosystem management The management paradigm, adopted by 
all federal agencies managing public lands, that involves a long-
term stewardship approach to maintaining the lands in their 
natural state.
facilitation A mechanism of succession where earlier species create 
conditions that are more favorable to newer occupants and are 
replaced by them.
feedback loops In ecological or environmental systems, feedback 
loops are processes that can amplify (positive loop) or dampen 
(negative loop) the behavior of the system. See positive feedback.
fermentation A form of respiration carried on by yeast cells and 
many bacteria in the absence of oxygen. Fermentation involves 
a partial breakdown of glucose (sugar) that yields energy for the 
yeast and the release of alcohol as a by-product.
fire climax ecosystems Ecosystems that depend on the recurrence 
of fire to maintain the existing balance.
food chain The transfer of energy and material through a series of 
organisms as each one is fed upon by the next.
food web The combination of all the feeding relationships that 
exist in an ecosystem.
herbivore An organism such as a rabbit or deer that feeds 
primarily on green plants or plant products such as seeds or nuts. 
Such an organism is said to be herbivorous. (Synonym: primary 
consumer.)
heterotroph Any organism that consumes organic matter as a 
source of energy. Such an organism is said to be heterotrophic.
incremental value In the measurement of the value of ecosystem 
services, the incremental value of a service may be calculated 
when changes in that service occur.
latitude In biomes, latitude is the distance from the equator, which 
determines the average temperature for a region.
137

This page intentionally left blank 

Learning Objectives
 1. The Value of Wild Species and 
Biodiversity: Define and give 
examples of both instrumental 
and intrinsic value of wild  
species.
 2. Biodiversity and Its Decline: 
Explain the causes, extent, rela-
tion to human activities, and 
impacts of the tremendous loss 
of species occurring today.
 3. Saving Wild Species: Describe 
how cutting-edge science, 
 policies for protection, and 
changes in the way people 
think can be used to protect 
wild species.
 4. Protecting Biodiversity Interna-
tionally: Explain at least three 
international efforts to protect 
wild species.
Wild Species 
and Biodiversity
N
RBA
R
NDA
N
UNDARBANSS
SU
B
DA
A
BAN
A
DAA
DA
NDARBAN
R
S
S
B
SUNDARBANS
R
S
S
SUNDARBANS
BANGLADESH
INDIA
0
40 km
0
60 miles
A 
brown river winds slowly past mangroves filled with flocking birds,  carrying 
with it plankton, crustaceans, and young fish that will support a vast 
food chain. A fisherman in a boat casts a net to the side. The place is the 
 Sundarbans, the largest mangrove forest in the world. The long nose of a Ganges 
River  dolphin (Platanista gangetica gangetica) breaks the water surface in the early 
morning mist. This endangered cetacean swims past mangrove roots and edges past 
a fishing net, its body narrowly avoiding entanglement.
threatened. This area of the Bay of Bengal is home to populations of two of 
the most endangered cetaceans in the world: the Ganges River dolphin  (Platanista 
gangetica gangetica) and a related subspecies, the Indus River dolphin (Platanista 
gangetica minor ). These rare beasts are nearly blind and swim sideways to get hints of 
sunlight through the water as they find their prey by echolocation. Freshwater dolphins, 
like their saltwater cousins, live on fish. Because they live in rivers instead of oceans, 
they are in some of the most populous areas of the world. These  rivers may be highly 
polluted, in habitats heavily 
divided by dams, and in places 
already crowded with fishermen.
River dolphins are among 
the most threatened large 
vertebrates in the world. In 
fact, another species of river 
dolphin, the Baiji, in China, 
Indus River dolphin
From Chapter 6 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Wild Species and Biodiversity
was declared extinct, to the great sorrow of  conservationists 
worldwide. The Baiji, nicknamed “the goddess of the Yangtze,” 
declined because of loss of habitat, pollution, crowding, and 
injury from contact with fishing vessels, as well as overharvest. 
The species, once spread throughout several large rivers in 
China, became rarer and rarer. In 2006, an extensive 45-day 
search by experts with sonar and other equipment failed to find 
any in the last areas the Baiji was known to inhabit, and it was 
declared extinct.
areas Of impOrtance. Recently, to protect the 
Ganges and Indus river dolphins from the same fate, Bangladesh 
has identified dolphin hot spots, areas of importance, within the 
sprawling Sundarbans mangrove forest. Three of these areas are 
being set aside as breeding and feeding areas for dolphins. Inten-
sive multicountry protections are needed to keep these unique 
animals from further decline. In an area already crowded with 
people, protecting species may seem impossible, but it is impor-
tant. The effort of the Bangladeshi government is a hopeful move 
in the right direction.
The focus in this chapter is wild species. The world is ex-
periencing a dramatic decline in wild organisms. This is such a 
concern that the United Nations has designated 2011–2020 the 
United Nations Decade of Biodiversity. While scientists can study 
individual species such as the Ganges River dolphin, they can 
also work on species decline in the context of biodiversity—the 
variety of life on Earth. In this chapter, we consider the impor-
tance of biodiversity as a whole, as well as that of individual 
species, and look at the public policies that seek to protect wild 
species and biodiversity.
1  The Value of Wild Species 
and Biodiversity
Ecosystem capital is the sum of all the goods and services 
provided to human enterprises by natural systems . This 
capital is enormously valuable to humankind. The 1997 
mean estimate of ecosystem capital by  Robert Constanza 
and his coauthors was $46.7 trillion, adjusted for 2009 dol-
lars. Such a value is so difficult to pull together that there 
is no subsequent estimate of the same set of parameters. 
However, in 2008, economist Pavan  Sukhdev reported that 
capital loss from the worldwide  financial crisis stood at  
$1–$1.5 trillion, and capital loss from ecosystem  degradation 
was estimated to be $2–$4.5 trillion per year.1 The basis of 
much of our natural capital is ecosystems, and the basis of 
ecosystems is the plants, animals, and microbes—the wild spe-
cies—that make them work. To maintain the sustainability of 
these ecosystems, their integrity must be preserved; this means 
maintaining their resilience, natural processes, and biodiversity, 
among other things. Placing a high priority on protecting wild 
species and the ecosystems in which they live is therefore crucial.
Even those who agree on the need to protect wild  species, 
however, may disagree on the kind of protection that should 
be afforded to them. Some want wildlife protected so as to 
provide recreational hunting. Others feel strongly that hunt-
ing for sport should be banned. Many have a deeper concern 
for the ecological survival of wild species, and they view the 
ongoing loss of biodiversity as an impending tragedy. In the 
developing world, however, many collect or kill wild species 
in order to eat or make money, so their personal survival 
is at stake. All of these attitudes stem from the values we 
place on wild species. Can the differing values be reconciled 
in a way that still leads to sustainable management of these 
 important natural resources?
Biological Wealth
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment states that about 
2 million species of plants, animals, and microbes have been 
examined, named, and classified, but that many more species 
have not yet been found or cataloged. Most estimates of the 
total number of species on Earth range from 5 to 30 million. 
The most recent estimate is around 8.7 million (1/2 1.3 mil-
lion). About 15,000 new species are described each year. 
A 2011 survey of habitats on Luzon Island and surround-
ing waters in the Philippines revealed more than 300  new 
 species, including an “inflatable” shark that swells by filling 
its belly with water (Fig. 1).
These natural species of living things, collectively re-
ferred to as biota, are responsible for the structure and main-
tenance of all ecosystems. They, and the ecosystems that they 
form, represent wealth—the biological wealth—that makes 
up most of the ecosystem capital that sustains human life 
1Pavan Sukhdev, The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (Interim Report 
funded by the German Ministry for Environment and the European Commission 
on the Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity). Presented at the UN’s Conven-
tion on Biological Diversity, November 2008.
Figure 1 The “inflatable shark.” New species are being discovered 
regularly. These sharks were among 300 new species discovered in the Philippines 
in 2011.
140

Wild Species and Biodiversity
and economic activity with goods and services. From this 
perspective, the biota found in each country can represent 
a major component of the country’s total wealth. More 
broadly, this richness of living species constitutes Earth’s 
biodiversity.
Humans have always depended on Earth’s wild species 
for food and materials. Approximately 12,000 years ago, 
however, our ancestors began to select certain plant and 
animal species from the natural biota and propagate them, 
and the natural world has never been the same. Forests, 
 savannas, and plains were converted to fields and pastures as 
the human population grew and human culture developed. 
In time, many living species were exploited to extinction, 
and others disappeared as their habitats were destroyed. 
The Center for Biological Diversity has reported that 631 
species and subspecies went extinct in North America be-
tween 1642 and 2001. A 2008 report said that global biodi-
versity loss costs as much as $4.5 trillion a year.2 We have 
been drawing down our biological wealth, with unknown 
consequences.
For many Americans who live in cities and suburbs 
and get all their food from supermarkets, the connection 
between everyday life and nature may seem remote. That 
is an illusion, however. Our interactions with the natural 
world may have changed, but we still depend on biological 
wealth. Moreover, millions of our neighbors in the develop-
ing world are not so insulated from the natural world; they 
draw sustenance and income directly from forests, grass-
lands, and fisheries. For them, “environmental income” is 
often the safety net that sustains them during lean times 
and can enable them in good times to generate wealth to 
improve their well-being. However, these people, too, are 
often engaged in practices that draw down their biological 
wealth. A root source of this problem is the way we regard 
and value wild nature.
Two Kinds of Value
In the 19th century, hunters on horseback could ride out to 
the vast herds of bison roaming the North American  prairies 
and shoot them by the thousands, often taking only the 
tongues for markets back in the east. The passenger pigeons 
that once darkened the skies in huge flocks were killed at 
their roosts to fill a lively demand for their meat, until the 
species was gone. Plume hunters decimated the populations 
of egrets and other shorebirds to satisfy the  demands of fash-
ion in the late 1800s. Appalled at this wanton destruction, 
19th-century naturalists called for an end to the slaughter, 
and the U.S. public became sensitized to the losses. People 
began to see natural species as worthy of preservation, and 
naturalists began to look for ways to justify their calls to 
conserve nature. Thus, there was an emerging sense that 
species should not be hunted to extinction. But why not? 
Their problem then, and ours now, is to establish the thesis 
that wild species have some value that makes it essential to 
preserve them. If we can identify that value, then we will be 
able to assess what our moral duties are in relation to wild 
species.
Instrumental Value. Philosophers who have addressed 
this problem identify two kinds of value that should be 
considered. The first is instrumental value. A species or 
individual organism has instrumental value if its existence 
or use benefits some other entity (by providing food, shel-
ter, or a source of income). This kind of value is usually 
 anthropocentric; that is, the beneficiaries are human be-
ings. Many species of plants and animals have instrumental 
value to humans and will tend to be preserved (conserved, 
that is) so that we can continue to enjoy the benefits derived 
from them.
Intrinsic Value. The second kind of value that must 
be considered is intrinsic value. Something has intrinsic value 
when it has value for its own sake; that is, it does not have 
to be useful to us to possess value. How do we know that 
something has intrinsic value? This is a philosophical ques-
tion and comes down to a matter of moral reasoning. Peo-
ple often disagree about intrinsic value, as illustrated by the 
controversies about the rights of animals. Some people argue 
that animals have certain rights and should be protected, for 
example, from being used for food, fur and hides, or experi-
mentation. On the other side, some people hold that animals 
are simply property and have no rights at all. Others, prob-
ably the majority, hold an intermediate position: They agree 
that cruelty to animals is wrong, but they do not believe that 
animals should be given rights approaching those afforded to 
humans (Fig. 2).
Many people believe that no species on Earth except 
Homo sapiens has any intrinsic value. Accordingly, they 
then find it difficult to justify preserving species that are 
 apparently insignificant. Still, in spite of the problems of 
2Ibid.
Figure 2 Intrinsic value. Do species like this Blandings turtle have value 
separate from their value to humans? The question of intrinsic value is one of 
debate amongst philosophers.
141

Wild Species and Biodiversity
the options for continued improvements in food plants will 
be greatly reduced.
New Food Plants. The potential for developing new ag-
ricultural cultivars would also be lost if wild populations 
were destroyed. From the hundreds of thousands of plant 
species existing in nature, humans have used perhaps 7,000 
in all, and modern agriculture has tended to focus on only 
about 30. Of these, three species—wheat, maize (corn), and 
rice—fulfill about 50% of global food demands. This lim-
ited diversity in agriculture makes modern plants ill suited 
to production under many different environmental condi-
tions. For example, arid regions are generally considered to 
be unproductive without irrigation, but there are wild plants, 
including many wild species of the bean family, that produce 
abundantly under dry conditions.
Scientists estimate that 30,000 plant species with ed-
ible parts could be brought into cultivation. Many of these 
could increase production in environments that are less than 
ideal. For example, every part of the winged bean, a native 
of New Guinea, is edible: pods, flowers, stems, roots, and 
leaves. Recently introduced into many developing countries, 
this legume has already contributed significantly to improv-
ing nutrition. Loss of biological diversity undercuts similar 
future opportunities.
Woods and Other Raw Materials. Because species 
are selected from nature for animal husbandry, forestry, 
and aquaculture, essentially all the same arguments apply 
to those important enterprises, too. For example, nearly 3 
billion people rely on wood for fuel for heating and cook-
ing. Wood products rank behind only oil and natural gas 
as commodities on the world market. Demand for wood is 
increasing so rapidly that scientists are predicting a “timber 
famine” or “fuelwood crisis” in the next decade. Products 
such as rubber, oils, nuts, fruits, spices, and gums also come 
from forests (Fig. 3). All of these products are part of the 
value of wild species for humans, and forests are only one 
example of ecosystems that provide wild and natural living 
resources.
 establishing intrinsic value for species, support is growing in 
favor of preserving species that not only may appear useless 
to humans, but also may never be seen by anyone except a 
few naturalists or taxonomists (biologists who are experts on 
classifying organisms).
The value of natural species can be categorized as 
 follows:
 • Value as sources for food and raw materials,
 • Value as sources for medicines and pharmaceuticals,
 • Recreational, aesthetic, and scientific value, and
 • Value for their own sake (intrinsic value).
Sources for Food and Raw Materials
Most of our food comes from agriculture, rather than being 
collected directly from wild populations, so it is tempt-
ing to falsely believe that food is independent of natural 
biota. In nature, both plants and animals are continuously 
 subjected to the rigors of natural selection. Only the fittest 
survive. Consequently, wild populations have numerous 
traits for competitiveness, resistance to parasites, tolerance 
to adverse conditions, and other aspects of vigor.
In contrast, populations grown for many generations 
under the “pampered” conditions of agriculture tend to 
lose these traits because they are selected for production, 
not resilience. For example, a high-producing plant that 
lacks resistance to drought is irrigated, and the resistance to 
drought is ignored. Also, in the process of breeding plants 
for maximum production, virtually all genetic variation is 
eliminated. Indeed, the cultivated population is commonly 
called a cultivar (for cultivated variety), indicating that it 
is a highly selected strain of the original species, with a 
minimum of genetic variation. When provided with opti-
mal water and fertilizer, cultivars produce outstanding 
yields under the specific climatic conditions to which they 
are adapted. With their minimum genetic variation, how-
ever, they have virtually no capacity to adapt to any other 
conditions. For example,  winter wheat varieties with high 
yields may be less winter hardy or more prone to pests and 
disease.
Wild Genes. To maintain vigor in cultivars and to adapt 
them to different climatic conditions, plant breeders comb 
wild populations of related species for the desired traits. 
When found, these traits are introduced into the cultivar 
through crossbreeding or, more recently, biotechnology. For 
example, in the 1970s, the U.S. corn crop was saved from 
blight by genes from a wild strain of maize. The point is that 
this trait came from a related wild  population—that is, from 
natural biota. Another area in which wild species have in-
strumental value to humans is pest control. There are tre-
mendous and invaluable opportunities to control pests by 
increasing genetic. Genes for increasing this resistance can 
come only from natural biota. If wild populations are lost, 
Figure 3 Forest products. These are all nonwood forest products 
 developed to increase income in African forested areas. (Source: FAO.)
142

Wild Species and Biodiversity
children; today, with vincristine treatment, there is a 99% 
chance of remission.
The story of the rosy periwinkle is just one of hundreds. 
Chinese star anise, a tree in the magnolia family, yields star-
shaped fruits that are harvested and processed to produce 
shikimic acid, the raw material for making Tamiflu®, an ef-
fective treatment against influenza viruses. Paclitaxel (trade 
name Taxol®), an extract from the bark of the Pacific yew, 
has proven valuable for treating ovarian, breast, and small-
cell cancers. For a time, this use threatened to decimate the 
Pacific yew because six trees were required to treat one pa-
tient for a year. Now, the substance is extracted from the 
leaves of the English yew tree, a horticultural plant that is 
easy to maintain. Today, Taxol® is the most prescribed anti-
tumor drug.
Stories like these have created a new appreciation for 
the field of ethnobotany, the study of the relationships be-
tween plants and people. To date, more than 3,000 plants 
have been identified as having anticancer properties. Drug 
companies have been financing field studies of the medici-
nal use of plants by indigenous peoples (called bioprospect-
ing) for years. The search for beneficial drugs in the tropics 
has led to the creation of parks and reserves to promote the 
preservation of natural ecosystems that are home to both the 
indigenous people and the plants they use in traditional heal-
ing. In Surinam, for example, a consortium made up of drug 
companies, the U.S. government, and several conservationist 
and educational groups has created the Central Surinam Re-
serve, a 4-million-acre (1.64-million-hectare) protected area. 
Table 1 lists a number of well-established drugs that were 
discovered as a result of analyzing the chemical properties 
of plants used by traditional healers. Who knows what other 
medicinal cures are out there?
Recreational, Aesthetic, and Scientific Value
The species in natural ecosystems also provide the foun-
dation for numerous recreational and aesthetic interests, 
ranging from sportfishing and hunting to hiking, camping, 
bird-watching, photography, and more (Fig. 5). Periodically, 
the U.S. government conducts a survey on outdoor recrea-
tion; the latest was carried out from 2005 to 2006. Of all 
people age 16 and older who were surveyed, an estimated 
87.5  million were involved in some form of outdoor recrea-
tion. The largest activity was viewing natural scenery, an ac-
tivity reported by 71.1 million people. Very likely, much of the 
public support for preserving wild species and habitats stems 
from the  aesthetic and recreational enjoyment people derive 
from them. While hunting has declined in recent decades, 
other outdoor activities remain popular. A 2006 U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service survey on fishing, hunting, and wildlife found 
that 87.5 million U.S. resident adults (age 16 and older) par-
ticipated in wildlife-centered recreation. This number included 
30 million people who fished, 12.5 million who hunted, and 
71.1 million who did some type of wildlife observation such 
as bird-watching. Hunting, fishing, and wildlife-watching  
result in employment for 2.6 million people—nearly as 
Banking Genes. Living organisms can be thought of as a 
bank in which the gene pools of all the species involved are 
deposited. Thus, biota is frequently referred to as a genetic 
bank. Because of concerns about agriculture, many scientists 
suggest that wild relatives of cultivated crops be conserved. 
In Kew, England, the Royal Botanic Gardens house the Mil-
lennium Seed Bank (MSB). In 2007, the MSB banked the bil-
lionth seed in its vast collection of the genetic diversity of 
world plants—the largest wild seed collection in the world. 
There is also the massive Svalbard Global Seed Vault, built 
into the permafrost deep in a mountain on a remote arctic 
island in Norway. This ultimate seed bank officially opened 
in 2008 and holds seeds that will act as a backup for seed 
banks around the world. Similarly, zoos act as a type of 
genetic bank for animals, and many zoos are active in con-
servation and captive breeding. In the United Kingdom, the 
Frozen Ark Project is collecting cells and DNA from species 
likely to go extinct in the near future. This collaborative ef-
fort with organizations around the world is designed to pre-
serve genetic diversity while we try to stabilize species and 
slow currently high extinction rates.
Sources for Medicine
Earth’s genetic bank is also important for the field of medi-
cine. For thousands of years, the indigenous people of the 
island of Madagascar used an obscure plant, the rosy peri-
winkle, in their folk medicine (Fig. 4). If this plant, which 
grows only on Madagascar, had become extinct before 
1960, hardly anyone outside Madagascar would have cared. 
In the 1960s, however, scientists extracted two chemicals 
with medicinal properties—vincristine and vinblastine—
from the plant. These chemicals have revolutionized the 
treatment of childhood leukemia and Hodgkin’s disease. 
Before their discovery, leukemia was almost always fatal in 
Figure 4 The rosy periwinkle. This plant, native to Madagascar, is a 
source of two anticancer agents that are highly successful in treating childhood 
leukemia and Hodgkin’s disease.
143

Wild Species and Biodiversity
many as employed by the computer industry—and produce 
$108 billion in revenues in the United States.
Recreational and aesthetic values constitute a very im-
portant source of support for maintaining wild species, 
because activities inspired by these values also support com-
mercial interests. Ecotourism—whereby tourists visit a place 
in order to observe wild species or unique ecological sites—
represents the largest foreign-exchange-generating enterprise 
in many developing countries. Because some percentage of 
recreational dollars will be spent on activities related to the 
natural environment, any degradation of that environment 
affects commercial interests. As the national surveys indi-
cated, recreational, aesthetic, and scientific activities involve 
a great number of people and represent a huge economic 
 enterprise.
Scientific value comes from our need to have living 
things available so we can learn basic laws of nature, the 
way ecosystems function, and the way the world works gen-
erally. Societies have long held that such “pure science” is 
valuable. Many scientists are engaged in this endeavor by 
sheer curiosity about the world, including about the func-
tioning of individual types of organisms, and biota pro-
vides the nature that we get to study. Realistically, though, 
most of the science done with these species aims for more-
pragmatic goals—new medicines, protection from gene loss 
in agriculture and forestry, and other outcomes already 
 discussed.
A Cautionary Note. The use of wild species and biodiver-
sity for instrumental value can raise some problems of justice 
as we navigate the needs of people with competing claims. 
For example, while the rosy periwinkle was a success story 
because of its effectiveness in combating cancer, little of the 
money returned to Madagascar, a very poor country. In 
other cases, such as the case of turmeric (a spice commonly 
used in India), ancient herbal remedies have been patented 
by large companies. While the patent on turmeric was even-
tually overturned, the patent on the rosy periwinkle was not, 
and money from the rosy periwinkle came to Madagascar 
only when the patent ran out. The indigenous people in the 
areas where biodiversity is highest may not be the ones to 
benefit from their resources. The Nagoya Protocol on Access 
and Benefit Sharing is a recent International Treaty designed 
to protect the interests of indigenous peoples as products are 
discovered in wild sources.
Similarly, ecotourism may bring money to poor areas 
of the world, but such tourism can also increase pollution, 
 directly harm wildlife, or alter local societies in negative ways. 
For example, whale-watching boats on the St.  Lawrence River 
disrupt the feeding of whales. Tourist boats on Mexican lakes 
frighten flocks of flamingoes and reduce their feeding time. 
In  the Caribbean, coral reefs are damaged by divers, boat 
 anchors, and shopkeepers who remove coral to sell. Ecotour-
ism can marginalize indigenous people as part of the scenery, 
or they can remain poor while tourism operators gain wealth. 
Nonetheless, there is sustainable tourism, and people intend-
ing to travel in the hopes of promoting conservation can find 
tourism that is done well.
The Loss of Instrumental Value. Overall, a loss of biodi-
versity has a tremendous negative effect on the world in real, 
practical ways. The Economics of Ecosystems and  Biodiversity 
(TEEB) report, released in May 2008, was the first interna-
tional report to detail the economic and life- quality effects of 
biodiversity loss. Researchers have estimated that the loss of 
ecosystem services and biodiversity costs $78  billion annu-
ally and, even more importantly, that these costs are higher 
for the world’s poorest people.  Continued loss of biological 
diversity, the report said, could halve the income of the poor-
est billion and a half people. Because the people who ben-
efit most from the rapid use of resources are not the people 
who are most harmed by the loss of those resources, many 
ethicists believe such an outcome to be morally wrong. Thus, 
even the instrumental values of Earth’s resources have an 
 ethical component.
Value for Their Own Sake
The usefulness (instrumental value) of many wild species 
is apparent. But instrumental value alone may not be a 
Figure 5 Recreational, aesthetic, and scientific uses. Natural biota provides numerous values, a 
few of which are depicted here.
144

Wild Species and Biodiversity
humans, but also with all creatures, “every living thing.” Sim-
ilarly, in the Islamic tradition, the Quran (Koran) proclaims 
that the environment is the creation of Allah and should be 
protected because its protection praises the Creator. Many 
Native American religions have a strong environmental ethic 
(a system of moral values or beliefs); for example, the Lakota 
hold that humans and other forms of life should interact like 
members of a large, healthy family. Drawing on Hindu phi-
losophy, the Chipko movement of northern India represents 
a strong grassroots environmentalism. Ethical concern for 
wild species underlies several religious traditions and repre-
sents a potentially powerful force for preserving biodiversity. 
Even if species have no demonstrable use to humans, it can 
still be argued that they have a value and a right to exist and 
that humans thus have a responsibility to protect them from 
harm that results from human actions.
The Land Ethic. Further, there is an ethic about the pres-
ervation not just of species, but also of their ecosystems. 
This view of nature was most famously described by conser-
vationist Aldo Leopold in an essay published in 1949 enti-
tled “The Land Ethic.” Leopold is known for being one of 
the first scientists to understand the importance of both fire 
and predators in maintaining ecosystem health. He advo-
cated for protection of wild places—wilderness—as well as 
for better care of agricultural and other human-dominated 
land. Leopold wrote a number of essays and is well known 
in the literary community as well as among conservation-
ists. A  Sand County Almanac, in which “The Land Ethic” 
appeared, sold more than 2 million copies and is printed in 
nine languages. “The Land Ethic” was instrumental in gen-
erating interest in the protection of wilderness. In it, Leopold 
describes his viewpoint: “A thing is right when it tends to 
preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the biotic com-
munity. It is wrong when it tends otherwise.”4
compelling reason to protect many wild species. What about 
the species that have no obvious value to anyone— including 
many plant and animal species? Another strategy for preserv-
ing all wild species is to emphasize the intrinsic value of spe-
cies rather than their unknown or uncertain ecological and 
economic values. From this viewpoint, the extinction of any 
species is an irretrievable loss of something valuable.
Environmental ethicists argue that the long-established 
existence of species means they have a right to continued ex-
istence. Living things have ends and interests of their own, 
and the freedom to pursue them is often frustrated by human 
actions. Do humans have the right to terminate a species that 
has existed for thousands or millions of years? Environmen-
tal philosopher Holmes Rolston III puts it this way: “De-
stroying species is like tearing pages out of an unread book, 
written in a language humans hardly know how to read, 
about the place where they live.”3 Some support this view 
by arguing that there is value in every living thing and that 
one kind of living thing (e.g., humans) has no greater value 
than any other. This argument, however, can lead to some 
difficulties, such as having to defend the rights of pathogens 
and parasites. A more common viewpoint held by ethicists is 
that, because humans have the ability to make moral judg-
ments, they also have a special responsibility toward the nat-
ural world, and that this responsibility includes concern for 
other species.
Religious Support. Many ethicists find their basis for in-
trinsic value in religious thought. For example, in the  Jewish 
and Christian traditions, Old Testament writings express 
God’s concern for wild species when he created them. Judeo-
Christian scholars maintain that by declaring his creation 
good and giving it his blessing, God was saying that all wild 
things have intrinsic value and, therefore, deserve moral con-
sideration and stewardly care. In the story of Noah, described 
in the Hebrew Bible, God makes a covenant not only with 
3Holmes Rolston III. Environmental Ethics: Duties to and Values in the Natural 
World (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1988), p. 129.
4Aldo Leopold. “The Land Ethic,” in A Sand County Almanac and Sketches Here 
and There (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1949). Available at http://
www.luminary.us/leopold/land_ethic.html.
tabLe 1 Modern Drugs from Traditional Medicines
Drug
Medical Use
Source
Common Name
Aspirin
Reduces pain and inflammation
Filipendula ulmaria
Queen of the meadow
Codeine
Eases pain; suppresses coughing
Papaver somniferum
Opium poppy
Ipecac
Induces vomiting
Psychotria ipecacuanha
Ipecac
Pilocarpine
Reduces pressure in the eye
Pilocarpus jaborandi
Jaborandi plant
Pseudoephedrine
Reduces nasal congestion
Ephedra sinica
Ma-huang shrub
Quinine
Combats malaria
Cinchona pubescens
Cinchona tree
Reserpine
Lowers blood pressure
Rauwolfia serpentina
Rauwolfia
Scopolamine
Eases motion sickness
Datura stramonium
Jimsonweed
Theophylline
Opens bronchial passages
Camellia sinensis
Tea
Tubocurarine
Relaxes muscles during surgery
Chondrodendron tomentosum
Curare vine
Vinblastine
Combats Hodgkin’s disease
Catharanthus roseus
Rosy periwinkle
145

Wild Species and Biodiversity
completely unaware of the great diversity of species that oc-
curs within any given taxonomic category. Groups especially 
rich in species are the flowering plants (270,000 species) and 
the insects (950,000 species), but even less-diverse groups, 
such as birds or ferns, are rich with species that are unknown 
to most people (Table 2). Groups that are conspicuous or 
commercially important—such as birds, mammals, fish, and 
trees—are much more fully explored and described than, say, 
insects and very small invertebrates (such as soil nematodes, 
fungi, and bacteria). Taxonomists are aware that their work 
in finding and describing new species is incomplete. Trained 
researchers who can identify major groups of organisms are 
few, and the task of fully exploring the diversity of life would 
require a major, sustained effort in systematic biology. For 
example, Costa Rica, less than half the size of New York 
State, is estimated to contain at least 5% of all living species. 
Estimates of unknown species keep rising as taxonomists ex-
plore the rain forests more and more. Whatever the number 
of species, the planet’s biodiversity represents an amazing 
and diverse storehouse of biological wealth.
The Decline of Biodiversity
Biodiversity is declining in the United States as well as 
around the world. Because U.S. ecosystems are well studied, 
the trends that show themselves here (including the  decline of 
many plant and animal species) may represent larger  global 
2 Biodiversity and Its Decline
In the introduction to this chapter, biodiversity was defined 
simply as the variety of life on Earth. We can be more spe-
cific than that. The dimensions of biodiversity include the 
genetic diversity within a species and the variety of species 
as well as the range of communities and ecosystems. When 
scientists use the term biodiversity, however, sometimes they 
mean a characteristic that they can calculate and compare 
between habitats. In this definition, scientists use two meas-
ures to calculate biodiversity—the number of species and a 
measure of how “even” the species are. A habitat has low 
biodiversity if it is dominated by only one species, with few 
members of other species, because those few might easily 
leave or die out. Given the same number of species, diversity 
is considered to be higher in habitats where the dominance 
by any single species is low. In this chapter, our main focus 
is the diversity of species. Over long periods of time, natural 
selection leads to speciation (the creation of new species) as 
well as extinction (the disappearance of species) . Now, we 
are interested in how humans interact with wild species and 
impact biodiversity over a relatively short time.
How Many Species?
Almost 2 million species have been discovered and described, 
and certainly many more than that exist. Most people are 
tabLe 2 Known and Estimated Species on Earth
Domain
Eukaryote kingdoms
No. of described 
species
Estimated total
Archaea
175
?
Bacteria
10,000
?
Eukarya
Animalia
1,320,000
Craniata (vertebrates), total
52,500
55,000
Mammals
4,630
Birds
9,750
Reptiles
8,002
Amphibians
4,950
Fishes
25,000
Mandibulata (insects and 
myriapods)
963,000
8,000,000
Chelicerata (arachnids, etc.)
75,000
750,000
Mollusca
70,000
200,000
Crustacea
40,000
150,000
Nematoda
25,000
400,000
Fungi
72,000
1,500,000
Plantae
270,000
320,000
Protoctista
80,000
600,000
Total
1,750,000
14,000,000
Source: Groombridge B. and Jenkins M.D. (2002) World Atlas of Biodiversity. Prepared by the UNEP World 
Conservation Monitoring Centre. University of California Press, Berkeley, USA.
Notes: This table presents estimates of the 
number of species of living organisms in the 
high-level groups recognized and in some selected 
groups within them. Vertebrate classes are 
distinguished because of the general interest in 
these groups. The described species column refers 
to species named by taxonomists. Most groups 
lack a formal list of species. All estimates are 
approximations. They are inevitably inaccurate 
because new species will have been described 
since publication of any checklist; more are 
continually being described, and other names 
turn out to be redundant synonyms. In general, 
the diversity of microorganisms, small-sized 
species, and those from habitats difficult to 
access are likely to be seriously underestimated. 
Among Archaea and Bacteria, the figures of 
175 and 10,000 are very rough estimates of 
“species” defined on features shown in culture; 
there appears to be no sound estimate of the total 
amount of prokaryote diversity. The estimated 
total column includes provisional working 
estimates of the number of described species plus 
the number of unknown species; the total figure is 
highly imprecise. Only a small selection of animal 
phyla is shown, but the figure for Animalia 
applies to all. Figures in the total row are for all 
species in all domains.
146

Wild Species and Biodiversity
world.  Flowering plants are also of great concern, with one-
third of their numbers in decline in North America.
Species populations are a more important element of 
biodiversity than even the species’ existence. Populations of 
species that occupy different habitats and ranges contribute 
to biological wealth, as they provide goods and services im-
portant in ecosystems. Across North America, even popu-
lations of well-studied species are in decline. Commercial 
landings of many species of fish are down, puzzling reduc-
tions in amphibian populations are occurring all over the 
world, and many North American songbird species (such 
as the Cerulean warbler, wood thrush, and scarlet tanager) 
are declining and have disappeared entirely from some local 
regions. These birds are neotropical migrants; that is, they 
winter in the neotropics of Central and South America and 
breed in temperate North America. According to a report 
from the National Audubon Society, more than one-fourth 
of North American birds are already declining or are in dan-
ger of doing so.
Global Outlook. Worldwide, the loss of biodiversity is 
even more disturbing. One of the most recent global analy-
ses of biodiversity is the third Global Biodiversity  Outlook, 
published by the UN (2010). Figure 6, from this assessment, 
shows groups from a comprehensive survey of  more than 
47,000 species, categorized by level of risk of   extinction. 
trends. Endemic species (those found in only one habitat and 
nowhere else) are especially at risk. Some areas of the coun-
try and of the world are particularly vulnerable to species 
loss. These areas are often the focus of special conservation 
efforts.
North America. The biota of the United States is as well 
known as any. Even so, not much is known about most of 
the 200,000-plus species of plants, animals, and microbes 
estimated to live in the nation. At least 500 species native 
to the United States, including at least 100 vertebrates, 
are  known to have gone extinct (or have “gone missing” 
and are believed to have gone extinct) since the early days 
of colonization. An inventory of 20,897 wild plant and an-
imal species in the 50 states, carried out in the late 1990s 
by a team of biologists from the Nature Conservancy and 
the National Heritage Network (and more recently Nature-
Serve), concluded that one-third are vulnerable (threatened), 
imperiled (endangered), or already extinct. In the United 
States, mussels, crayfish, fishes, and amphibians—all  species 
that depend on freshwater habitats—are at greatest risk. 
In part, this potential for loss stems from the high number 
of endemic aquatic species in the American Southeast. For 
 example, there are close to 200 species of freshwater mussels 
and clams in North America, giving these bivalves the great-
est species diversity of any freshwater bivalve group in the 
Birds
Amphibians
Mammals
Reptiles
Dragonflies
Freshwater crabs
Corals
Freshwater fish
Conifers
Cycads
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
Extinct or extinct in the wild
Threatened
Critically endangered
Vulnerable
Not threatened
Endangered
Least concern
Data deficient
EXTINCTION RISK CATEGORIES
Number of species
Figure 6 Who is going extinct? This bar graph shows groups from a comprehensive survey of more than 
47,000 species, categorized by level of risk of extinction.
(Source: Global Biodiversity Outlook 3.)
147

Wild Species and Biodiversity
better way of life, the desperate poverty of rural populations, 
and the global market for timber and other natural resources 
are powerful forces that will continue to draw down biologi-
cal wealth on those continents.
One key to slowing the loss of biodiversity lies in bring-
ing human population growth down . If the human popula-
tion increases to 10 billion, as some demographers believe 
that it will, the consequences for the natural world may be 
frightening. Another key is to pull individual consumption 
down to sustainable levels in parts of the world with high 
consumption of energy and materials. These two concepts 
will be vital to solving several environmental issues be fur-
ther discussed.
Habitat Change. By far the greatest source of biodiversity 
loss is the physical alteration of habitats through the pro-
cesses of conversion, fragmentation, simplification, and in-
trusion. Habitat destruction has already been responsible for 
36% of the known extinctions and is the key factor in the 
currently observed population declines. Natural species are 
adapted to specific habitats, so if the habitat changes or is 
eliminated, the species go with it.
Conversion. Natural areas are commonly converted 
to farms, housing subdivisions, shopping malls, marinas, 
and industrial centers. When a forest is cleared, for exam-
ple, destruction of the trees is not the only result; every other 
plant or animal that occupied the destroyed ecosystem, either 
permanently or temporarily (e.g., migrating birds), also suf-
fers. Global forest cover has been reduced by 40% already, 
and the decline continues. For example, the decline in North 
American songbird populations has been traced to the loss of 
winter forest habitat in Central and South America and the 
increasing fragmentation of summer forest habitat in North 
America. Agriculture already occupies 38% of land on Earth; 
habitats like croplands that replace natural habitats such 
as grasslands are quite inhospitable to all but a few  species 
that tend to be well adapted to the new managed landscapes. 
Haiti provides one extreme example of habitat loss. Figure 7 
shows the border between Haiti and the Dominican Repub-
lic, with Haiti on the left. Land use in Haiti has resulted in a 
tremendous loss of forests, something important not only in 
the context of loss of species, but also as a driver of soil ero-
sion and water quality problems . In the Dominican Repub-
lic, social trends such as greater stability and democratization 
have helped the country avoid unrest and environmental de-
struction.
Fragmentation. Natural landscapes generally have large 
patches of habitat that are well connected to other similar 
patches. Human-dominated landscapes, however, consist of 
a mosaic of different land uses, resulting in small, often geo-
metrically configured patches that frequently contrast highly 
with neighboring patches (Fig. 8). Small fragments of habitat 
can support only small numbers and populations of species, 
making them vulnerable to extermination. Species that re-
quire large areas are the first to go; those that grow slowly or 
have naturally unstable populations are also vulnerable.
Reducing the size of a habitat creates a greater propor-
tion of edges—breaks between habitats that expose species 
Estimates of extinction rates in the past show alarming in-
creases in loss of species. For mammals, the background 
(past) extinction rate was less than one extinction every 
thousand years, although rates were higher during five 
great extinction events. (Scientists estimate the background 
extinction rate from the fossil record of  marine animals 
and from rates of change in DNA.) This rate can be com-
pared with known extinctions of the past several hundred 
years (for mammals and birds, 20 to 25 species per hundred 
years and, for all groups, 850 species over about 500 years), 
indicating that the current rate is 100 to 1,000 times higher 
than past rates.
The International Union for Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN) keeps a running list of threatened species. In 2011, 
approximately 23% (1,138) of mammal species and 12% 
(1,253) of bird species were globally threatened. These two 
groups have been thoroughly studied.5 The status of all other 
groups of organisms is much less well known. The majority 
of threatened species are concentrated in the tropics, where 
biodiversity is so rich as to be almost unimaginable. Biologist 
Edward O. Wilson identified 43 species of ants on a single 
tree in a Peruvian rain forest, a level of diversity equal to the 
entire ant fauna of the British Isles.6 Other scientists found 
300 species of trees in a 1-hectare (2.5-acre) plot and almost 
1,000 species of beetles on 19 specimens of a species of tree 
in Panama.7 Unfortunately, the same tropical forests that 
hold such high biodiversity are also experiencing the high-
est rate of deforestation. Because the inventory of species in 
these ecosystems is so incomplete, it is virtually impossible 
to assess extinction rates in such forests. Regardless of the 
exact rates, numerous species are in decline, and some are 
becoming extinct. No one knows how many, but the loss is 
real, and species loss represents a continuing depletion of the 
biodiversity of our planet.
Reasons for the Decline
Extinctions of the distant past were caused largely by pro-
cesses of climate change, plate tectonics, and even aster-
oid impacts. Current threats to biodiversity are sometimes 
described with the acronym HIPPO, which refers to five 
factors: habitat destruction, invasive species, pollution, pop-
ulation, and overexploitation. Many declining species expe-
rience combinations of several or all of these factors. Indeed, 
global climate change in particular increases the effects of 
some of these factors. We will discuss each factor in more 
detail below. Future losses will be greatest in the developing 
world, where biodiversity is greatest and human population 
growth is highest. Africa and Asia have lost almost two-
thirds of their original natural habitat. People’s desire for a 
5Red List Category summary for all animal classes and orders, IUCN Red List ver-
sion 2011.2: Table 4a. http://www.iucnredlist.org/documents/summarystatistics/ 
2011_2_RL_Stats_Table4a.pdf. March 3, 2012.
6Edward O. Wilson. “The Arboreal Ant Fauna of Peruvian Amazon Forests: A 
First Assessment,” Biotropica 19 (1987): 245–251.
7T. L. Erwin. “The Tropical Forest Canopy: The Heart of Biotic Diversity.” In 
Biodiversity, edited by E. O. Wilson, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 
pp. 123–129.
148

Wild Species and Biodiversity
Figure 7 The border of Haiti and the Dominican Republic. Severe deforestation in Haiti, on the 
left, leads to habitat loss for many species. It also causes a number of problems for humans. The forested area on 
the right is the Dominican Republic.
Figure 8 Fragmentation. Development usually leads to the breaking up of natural areas, resulting in a 
mosaic of habitats that may not support local populations of species.
149

Wild Species and Biodiversity
force the FCC to consider risk to birds when making deci-
sions. Finally, a federal appeals court ruled in 2008 that the 
FCC did in fact have to come up with a plan to protect birds. 
This ruling resulted in a meeting of five agencies with the 
FCC in June of 2008. A draft plan followed in 2011, with a 
time for public comment and hopes of an agreement to make 
more-bird-friendly towers. The clear surfaces of windows are 
one of the greatest dangers for birds. Ornithologist Daniel 
Klem estimated that between 100 million and 1 billion birds 
die every year from crashing into glass windows. Birds are 
just one example of organisms harmed by the intrusion of 
structures into habitats. Any solution to wild species’ decline 
must include creative ways to lower the impact of human 
structures on other organisms.
Invasive Species. An exotic, or alien, species is one that 
is introduced into an area from somewhere else, often a dif-
ferent continent . Because the species is not native to the 
new area, it is frequently unsuccessful in establishing a vi-
able population and quietly disappears. Such is the fate of 
many pet birds, reptiles, and fish that escape or are deliber-
ately released. Some exotic species establish populations that 
remain at low levels without becoming pests. Occasionally, 
however, an alien species finds the new environment to be 
very favorable, and it becomes an invasive species thriving, 
spreading out, and perhaps eliminating native species by pre-
dation or competition for space or food. You will learn that 
most of the insect pests and plant parasites that plague agri-
cultural production were accidentally introduced . Invasive 
species are major agents in driving native species to extinc-
tion and are responsible for an estimated 39% of all animal 
extinctions since 1600.
Accidental 
Introductions. As 
humans 
travelled 
around the globe in the days of sailing ships and explo-
ration, they brought with them more than curiosity and 
dreams of exotic lands. They brought rats and mice to ports 
all over the world. As a result, rats are the most invasive 
mammal worldwide. The two most common invasive rat 
species are the black rat (Rattus rattus, called the ship rat) 
and the brown rat  (Rattus norvegicus, called the Norway 
rat). Fleas infesting black rats carried the bubonic plague 
bacterium to Europe, eventually killing a third of Europe’s 
human population in the Middle Ages. In terms of species 
loss, the arrival of rats is especially deadly to birds. One 
report found that rats have been found preying on nearly 
one-quarter of seabird species. Thirty percent of seabirds 
are threatened with extinction, and rats are the biggest sin-
gle cause. Rats also eat crops,  destroy property, and cause 
other harm directly to  humans, but their  effect on other spe-
cies is profound. Rats are only one example of  accidental 
introduction of non-native species. Figure 9 shows another: 
the red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta), which ar-
rived in Mobile, Alabama, from South America, possibly 
in shipments of wood. The fire ant is a major pest across 
the southern United States, inflicting damage to crops and 
domestic animals. It also contributes to the decline of wild 
species. In Texas, it is estimated that fire ants kill a fifth of 
songbird babies before they leave the nest.
to predators. Increased edge favors some species but may 
be detrimental to others. For example, the Kirtland’s war-
bler is an endangered species that is highly dependent on 
large patches of second-growth jack pines in Michigan. The 
species is endangered because its habitat has been greatly 
fragmented, creating edges that favor the brown-headed 
cowbird, a nest parasite that can invade the forest and lay its 
eggs in the nest of the rare warbler. Edges also favor species 
that prey on nests, such as crows, magpies, and jays. These 
predators are thought to be partly responsible for declines in 
many neotropical bird populations.
Roadways offer particular dangers to wildlife. The 
number of animals killed on roadways now far exceeds the 
number killed by hunters. As rural areas are developed, the in-
creasing numbers of animals found on roadways are a serious 
hazard to motorists. With 5.7 million miles (9.2 million km) 
of paved roadways in the United States, more than a million 
animals a day become roadkill. Overpasses and tunnels are 
increasingly being built to provide wildlife with safe corridors. 
A 2008 study at Purdue University identified amphibians as 
especially affected by road mortality.8 More than 95% of the 
roadkill that researchers identified over 11 months along a 
stretch of road in the Midwest were amphibians.
Simplification. Human use of habitats often simpli-
fies them. Removing fallen logs and dead trees from wood-
lands for firewood, for example, diminishes an important 
microhabitat on which species ranging from woodpeckers 
to germinating forest trees depend. When a forest is man-
aged for the production of one (or a few) species of tree, 
tree diversity declines, and as a result, so does the diversity 
of the plant and animal species that depend on the less fa-
vored trees. Streams are sometimes “channelized”—their 
beds are cleared of fallen trees and stony riffle areas (places 
with more rapidly moving water), and sometimes the stream 
is straightened out by dredging the bottom. Such alterations 
inevitably reduce the diversity of fish and invertebrates that 
live in the stream.
Intrusion. Birds use the air as a highway, especially as 
they migrate north and south in the spring and fall. Recently, 
telecommunications towers have presented a new hazard 
to birds. Although television towers have been around for 
decades, new towers are sprouting up on hilltops and in 
countrysides in profusion. Cell phone signal towers are also 
common. The lights often placed on these towers can attract 
birds, which usually migrate at night, and the birds sim-
ply collide with the towers and supporting wires. In 2000, 
a  study estimated that the towers kill somewhere between 
5 and 50 million birds a year.9 Three organizations peti-
tioned the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to 
incorporate bird mortality in its decisions about new towers 
in 2002, but nothing was done. The scientific research from 
the study gave environmentalists the power to go to court to 
9G. Shire. New Report Documents Hundreds of Thousands of Birds Killed at 
Communications Towers (2000). Available from the American Bird Conservancy 
at www.abcbirds.org/newsandreports/releases/000629.html.
8D. J. Glista, T. L. DeVault, and J. A. DeWoody. “Vertebrate Road Mortality and 
Its Impact on Amphibians,” Herpetological Conservation and Biology 3 (2008): 
77–87.
150

Wild Species and Biodiversity
for example, are now raised along the Pacific Coast, and 
many have escaped from the pens and have been breeding 
in some West Coast rivers, where they compete with native 
species and spread diseases.
Over Time. The transplantation of species by humans 
has occurred throughout history, to the point where most 
people are unable to distinguish between the native and ex-
otic species living in their lands. European colonists brought 
hundreds of weeds and plants to the Americas, and now 
most of the common field, lawn, and roadside plant species 
in eastern North America are exotics. For example, almost 
one-third of the plants in Massachusetts are alien or intro-
duced—about 725 species, of which 66 have been specifi-
cally identified as invasive or likely to become so. In Europe, 
there are about 11,000 alien species, 15% of which harm 
biodiversity. Among the animals introduced to North Amer-
ica, the most notorious have been the house mouse and the 
Norway rat; others include the wild boar, the starling, the 
horse, and the nutria. One of the most destructive exotics is 
the house cat: Studies in the 1990s showed that the millions 
of domestic and feral cats in the United States are highly ef-
ficient at catching small mammals and birds (Fig. 11). They 
kill an estimated 1 billion small mammals (chipmunks, deer 
mice, and ground squirrels, as well as rats) and hundreds  
of  millions of birds annually. One report calculates the 
annual cost of invasive species in the United States to be 
$137-billion.10
Species originating in the Americas can cause havoc in 
other places, too. For example, the North American gray 
squirrel is invasive in Europe, where it outcompetes the na-
tive red squirrels and may be infecting them with a fatal 
virus. The gray squirrel is one of the 100 most invasive spe-
cies worldwide.
May I Introduce . . . Deliberate introductions sanc-
tioned by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(in the interest of “reclaiming” eroded or degraded lands) 
have brought us kudzu and other runaway plants, such as 
the autumn olive and multiflora rose. Salt cedar was intro-
duced in the American Southwest for erosion control and 
has taken over riverbanks there. Many other exotic plants 
are introduced as horticultural desirables (Fig. 10). Fallopia 
japonica, Japanese knotweed, is a good example. Tall, with 
attractive flowers, it originated in Asia and is now found 
in North America and Europe. It forms dense patches and 
outcompetes native plants. Unfortunately, the strong under-
ground stem (rhizome) and root systems cause the plant to 
spread even when it does not produce seeds. Whole plants 
can grow from tiny fragments of root. In the United King-
dom, it is illegal to dispose of Japanese knotweed except by 
burning or placement in a landfill. Japanese knotweed is on 
the World Conservation Union’s list of 100 worst invasive 
species. The site of the 2012 Olympics in London had a large 
infestation, which was removed over a period of years in 
a process estimated to cost 70 million pounds (more than 
$110 million).
There are specific instances of both deliberate and 
accidental introductions in aquaculture—the farming of 
shellfish, seaweed, and fish—which produces one-third of 
all seafood consumed worldwide. More than 100 species 
of aquatic plants and animals are raised in aquaculture 
in the United States, most of which are not native to the 
farming locations. Parasites, seaweeds, invertebrates, and 
pathogens have been introduced together with the desired 
aquaculture species, often escaping from the pens or ponds 
and entering the sea or nearby river system. For example, 
Asian black carp are used in raising catfish because the 
carp eat snails that harbor parasites capable of ruining the 
catfish meat. So far, no carp are known to have escaped in 
the United States, but everywhere else that they have been 
used in farming, they have escaped and spread. Sometimes 
the aquaculture species itself is a problem. Atlantic salmon, 
Figure 9 The red imported fire ant. This ant, Solenopsis invicta, has 
invaded the southern United States, where it kills other animals and sometimes 
starves them by eating their prey.
Figure 10 Japanese knotweed. Japanese knotweed can break  
foundations and walkways, shade other plants, and grow without seeds from a 
tiny bit of root or underground stem.
10D. Pimental, L. Lach, R. Zuniga, and D. Morrison. “Environmental and Eco-
nomic Costs of Nonindigenous Species in the United States,” BioScience 50 
(2000): 53–65.
151

Wild Species and Biodiversity
already having an impact on many species. Climate change is 
likely to accelerate in the next 50 years.
Pollution can spread disease. Human wastes can spread 
pathogenic microorganisms to wild species, a threat called 
pathogen pollution. For example, the manatee (an endan-
gered aquatic mammal) has been infected by human papil-
lomavirus, cryptosporidium, and microsporidium, with fatal 
outcomes. Pollution can also disrupt hormones and other 
body functions. Fish exposed to polluted river water may de-
velop tumors or deformed organs. Sometimes they develop 
both male and female tissues, a condition called “intersex” 
(Fig. 12). The recent and rapid rise in the incidence of these 
deformities has been traced to habitats that have been altered 
by human use, specifically run-off, industry, and sewage in 
populated areas.
Population. Human population growth puts pressure on 
wild species through several mechanisms—through direct 
use of wild species, through conversion of habitat into 
agriculture or other use, through pollution, and through 
having to compete for resources with growing human pop-
ulations. Overconsumption is tied to overpopulation and 
to the concept of overexploitation—the last letter in the 
HIPPO acronym—which will be discussed next. Even if 
each person using a resource used a modest amount, large 
numbers of people might still use too much, leading to a 
total overconsumption. Thus, overpopulation is a problem 
even if people use few resources individually. However, 
a small group of people can also overuse resources. Indi-
rectly, overconsumption can drive pollution, conversion of 
habitat, and other effects that harm wildlife. In a world 
in which some individuals own literally billions of times 
the money and resources that  others own, people with the 
Invasive Species and Trophic Levels. Plants provide 
food for herbivores that in turn provide food for carnivores. 
Non-native plants may be difficult for herbivores to eat and 
thus may keep energy and materials from passing up the 
food chain, even if a species has been in a new ecosystem 
for a long time. For example, the Norway maple was intro-
duced to North America in 1756, but in spite of being in 
the United States for hundreds of years, these maples pro-
vide much less food up the food chain for herbivores (like 
caterpillars) and their predators (like songbirds) than native 
trees do.
Pollution. Another factor that decreases biodiversity is 
pollution, which can directly kill many kinds of plants and 
animals, seriously reducing their populations. For exam-
ple, nutrients (such as phosphorus and nitrogen) that travel 
down the Mississippi River from the agricultural heartland 
of the United States have created a fluctuating “dead zone” 
in the Gulf of Mexico, an area of more than 6,765 square 
miles (in 2011) where oxygen completely disappears from 
depths below 20 meters every summer.11 Shrimp, fish, crabs, 
and other commercially valuable sea life are either killed or 
forced to migrate away from this huge area along the Missis-
sippi and Louisiana coastline.
Pollution destroys or alters habitats, with consequences 
just as severe as those caused by deliberate conversions. 
Every oil spill kills seabirds and often sea mammals, some-
times by the thousands. Some pollutants, such as the pes-
ticide DDT, can travel up food chains and become more 
concentrated in higher consumers. Acid deposition and air 
pollution kill forest trees; sediments and large amounts of 
nutrients kill species in lakes, rivers, and bays; and global 
climate change, brought on by greenhouse gas emissions, is 
Figure 11 The house cat. House cats allowed to roam freely kill more 
than a billion small animals every year.
11Conners, D. (2011). 2011 Gulf of Mexico dead zone smaller than scientists 
predicted. 
EarthSky. 
http://earthsky.org/earth/2011-gulf-of-mexico-dead-zone-
smaller-than-scientists-predicted.
Figure 12 Intersex fish. Up to 80% of male fish in some rivers are found 
to have a condition where they also have female tissues, such as eggs developing 
in their testes. This appears to result from pollution.
152

Wild Species and Biodiversity
valued as a traditional medicine in Asia and used for orna-
mental knife handles in the Middle East.
Rhinos have suffered, as have all large African mam-
mals, from loss of habitat and increasing human popula-
tion. However, the biggest danger to rhinos is direct illegal 
killing (Fig. 13). In November 2011, customs agents in 
Hong Kong seized $2.2 million worth of rhino horns along 
with ivory from elephant tusks. The horns represented the 
deaths of 17 rhinos. The news is not all bad, however. In 
2011, a survey of one-horned rhinos in Nepal found that 
conservation efforts and protection was working and that 
a small population was increasing. That small glimmer of 
hope shows us what conservation can do if poaching can 
be stopped.
Greed. The long-term prospect of extinction does 
not curtail the activities of exploiters because, to them, 
the prospect of a huge immediate profit outweighs it. Even 
when the species is protected, the economic incentive is 
such that poaching and black-market trade continue. Par-
ticularly severe is the growing fad for exotic pets—fish, 
reptiles, birds, and houseplants. In many cases, these plants 
and animals are taken from the wild; often, only a small 
fraction even survives the transition. When animals and 
plants are removed from their natural breeding popula-
tions, these individuals are no better than dead when it 
comes to maintaining the species. At least 40 of the world’s 
330 known species of parrots are threatened because of this 
fad. Many pet stores carry imported species. Not purchas-
ing wild-caught species is one way individuals can help pre-
serve biodiversity.
In 1992, the United States, the largest importer of ex-
otic birds, adopted the Wild Bird Conservation Act, a law 
designed to stop wild capture of declining birds, uphold 
international treaties in wildlife trade, and support sustain-
able breeding programs. In 2004, more than 200 nongovern-
mental organizations (NGOs) signed the European Union 
Wild Bird Declaration, a call for wild bird protection in the 
 European Union (EU). In a huge step forward in bird conser-
vation, in 2007 the EU decided unanimously to prohibit the 
import of wild birds.
most consumptive lifestyles have a disproportionate effect 
on the environment. Differences in level of consumption 
and in sheer numbers of people drive some of the tensions 
among the high-, middle-, and low-income countries.
Overexploitation. The overharvest of a particular species 
is known as overexploitation. Removing whales, fish, or trees 
faster than they can reproduce will lead to their ultimate ex-
tinction. In addition, overuse of individual species harms ec-
osystems. Overexploitation is estimated to have caused 23% 
of recent extinctions (past 500 years) and is often driven by 
a combination of greed, ignorance, and desperation. Poor 
resource management often leads to a loss of biodiversity. 
Forests and woodlands are overcut for firewood, grasslands 
are overgrazed, game species are overhunted, fisheries are 
overexploited, and croplands are overcultivated. These prac-
tices not only deplete the resource in question, but also often 
set into motion a cycle of erosion and desertification, with 
 effects far beyond the exploited area.
Trade in Exotics. One prominent form of overuse 
is the trafficking in wildlife and in products derived from 
wild species. Much of this “trade” is illegal. Worldwide, 
the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) 
estimates that it generates at least $12 billion a year, mak-
ing it the third-largest illicit income source, after drugs and 
guns. This illegal activity flourishes because some consum-
ers are willing to pay exorbitant prices for furniture made 
from tropical hardwoods (like teak), exotic pets, furs from 
wild animals, traditional medicines from animal parts, and 
innumerable other “luxuries,” including polar-bear rugs, 
ivory-handled knives, and reptile-skin handbags. For exam-
ple, some Indonesian and South American parrots sell for up 
to $10,000 in the United States, and a panda-skin rug can 
bring in $25,000.
One example of illegal wildlife trade that still continues 
is that of rhinoceros horn. In 2011, the West African rhino 
was declared extinct. In October 2011, the Javan rhino was 
declared extinct in mainland Asia, only surviving in a small 
population in Indonesia. Rhino species are all very rare be-
cause of the high value placed on their horn. Rhino horn is 
(a)
(b)
Figure 13 Black rhino and rhino horn products. (a) Rhino horn is prized in traditional Asian medi-
cine and as ornamentation. (b) The black rhino is often killed by poachers for its horn.
153

Wild Species and Biodiversity
rica, nature-based tourism represents the largest earner of 
foreign currency.
Can ecosystems lose some species and still retain their 
functional integrity? Research evidence indicates that the 
dominant plants and animals determine major ecosystem 
processes such as energy flow and nutrient cycling. Thus, 
simplifying ecosystems by driving rare species to extinction 
will not necessarily lead to ecosystem decline. This has risks, 
however: It is possible to lose keystone species— species 
whose role is absolutely vital to the survival of many other 
species in an ecosystem. For example, through felling trees 
and building dams, beavers make local habitats that undergo 
succession as beavers move throughout the landscape, in-
creasing ecosystem diversity in a region. Alternatively, the 
keystone species in an ecosystem may be a predator at the 
top of a food chain that keeps herbivore populations under 
control. Sometimes keystone species are the largest animals 
in the ecosystem, and because of their size, they have the 
greatest demands for unspoiled habitat. Thus, wolves, el-
ephants, tigers, moose, and other large animals are consid-
ered “umbrella” species for whole ecosystems.
As we have seen, one thing many declining species have 
in common is that they are often long-lived, large, and older 
at first reproduction and have high parental care of off-
spring (as K-strategists are). Thus, they are vulnerable to 
rapid changes in the environment. Sometimes species go into 
Consequences of Losing Biodiversity
Why is biodiversity loss a concern? The answer goes back to 
the values of wild species. Intrinsic value is self-explanatory: 
the loss of species matters simply because that species is valu-
able, regardless of human benefit. However, much of the dis-
cussion about the consequences of losing species is focused 
on instrumental value—on the fact that we humans need bio-
diversity. We need wild species for all the reasons we value 
them: we use them directly for food, fiber, fuel; we value 
them aesthetically, want medicines from them, want recrea-
tion in natural habitats, or need them to maintain healthy 
ecosystems. It is this last reason that most people understand 
the least. The complexity of ecosystems means that the loss 
of diversity causes them to break down.
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment team agreed: 
biodiversity is essential for the ecosystem services and goods 
that human societies derive from the natural world. For ex-
ample, richly diverse mangrove forests and coral reefs are 
buffers against coastal storms and floods. The well-being 
of millions of rural poor in the developing world is tied to 
the provision of products of natural ecosystems, especially 
during economic hard times. In fact, biodiversity loss threat-
ens the achievement of virtually all of the Millennium De-
velopment Goals. Nature-based tourism would not happen 
without the rich diversity of wildlife and flora that attract 
and delight people; for many countries of sub-Saharan Af-
STEWARDSHIP
Lake Erie’s Island Snake Lady
A three-foot-long 
grayish-tan snake 
basks on a rock at the 
shoreline of an island in 
Lake Erie, Pennsylvania. 
As is warms itself, the sun glints on its scales. 
Slowly it moves, one coil sliding over another, 
and quietly glides into the water. Head still, it 
watches a small round goby fish (Neogobius 
melanostomus). Suddenly, it strikes. The goby 
caught, the snake swallows slowly and slithers 
off to resume basking in the sun. The snake is 
the Lake Erie water snake Nerodia sipedon insu-
larum, and it is endemic to the area. It was once 
endangered and limited to only 1,000 individu-
als and was subject to conservation measures.
Out of the vegetation steps a woman in field 
gear. Kristen Stanford, known as the “Island Snake 
Lady,” is the water snake recovery plan coordina-
tor for this rare reptile, working out of the Ohio 
State University Stone Laboratory. Over the past 
several years, she and her colleagues caught, 
measured, tagged, and protected water snakes; as 
a result, the small snake recovered in numbers.
The hard work of scientists, policy makers, 
and enthusiasts paid off. The snake, returning 
to a population of 12,000 individuals, was taken 
off of the threatened species list in 2011. Spe-
cies are placed on the threatened and endan-
gered species lists when they are already so rare 
that, for many, recovery is a long, drawn-out 
process. The rapid recovery of the snake is great 
news for conservationists.
What makes populations of one species 
increase rapidly and causes populations of an-
other to decline? How do species relate to the 
other species around them? In the case of the 
water snake, intensive human killing and loss of 
habitats were the main causes of decline. Ironi-
cally, the presence of large numbers of invasive 
goby fish helped the snake come back from the 
brink of extinction. This unexpected benefit is 
not the norm for invasive species, however.
Many people find it hard to feel concerned 
about a declining snake. They may feel that 
snakes are threatening or are unattractive. Many 
people need a reason to care for a species in de-
cline and find it much easier to relate to rabbits, 
whales, a beautiful bird like the whooping crane, 
or perhaps the rare and majestic Bengal tiger. 
These species are considered “charismatic” 
because of their wide appeal. But many of the 
world’s creatures that are disappearing are the 
small and seemingly unimportant parts of the 
ecosystem, like a rare water snake or small 
beetles. Why care about them? Conservationists 
suggest several reasons for concern about the 
loss of species. For people like Kristen Stanford, 
protection of species, even the small ones, is 
worth the cold, the bitten hands, and the wet 
feet that come with being “the snake lady.”
Sources: Water Snake, Lake Erie. (2001). Ohio Public Library 
Information Network. http://www.oplin.org/snake/fact%20
pages/water_snake_lake_erie/water_snake_lake_erie.html. 
March 6, 2012.
Michael Scott, The Plain Dealer. “Lake Erie water snakes are 
making a comeback.” Published Sunday, June 08, 2008, http://
blog.cleveland.com/metro/2008/06/snakes.html.
S
A
g
b
s
L
Lake Erie Water Snake
154

Wild Species and Biodiversity
 decline even though they are quite common. Species such as 
the passenger pigeon, once the most common bird in North 
America, can leave a huge ecological gap when they decline 
or disappear. Those species least likely to be harmed by 
human actions include widely distributed species with small 
size, rapid reproduction, short generation time, low parental 
care of offspring, and an ability to migrate (characteristics of 
r-strategists). Such species (roaches, houseflies, and others) 
are most likely to become pest species. Thus, the overarching 
effect of human disturbance of the environment is not only 
to decrease species that we may like, but also to increase a 
number that will become major pests.
Moving Forward
What will happen as rare or unknown species go extinct 
because of human activities? Some people will mourn their 
passing. We do not really know, however, what we are losing 
when species become extinct. One thing is certain: The natu-
ral world is less beautiful and less interesting as a result. We 
might be inclined to feel overwhelmed by these numbers and 
the significant decline in species and in abundances of organ-
isms. But there are glimmers of hope. Sometimes species we 
thought were extinct are found not to be. Two of these are 
the Beck’s petrel, not seen for 80 years before being found 
by an ornithologist in 2008, and the pygmy tarsier, not seen 
since 1921 and thought extinct but found on the Indonesian 
island of Sulawesi in 2008. Sometimes new populations of 
very rare species are discovered, as happened in the case of 
the highly threatened greater bamboo lemur. A new popu-
lation of this rare species was found in 2007, around 400 
kilometers (240 mi) from the only previously known popula-
tion. As we saw in Stewardship, “Lake Erie’s Island Snake 
Lady,” sometimes the hard work of scientists and conserva-
tion volunteers pays off in the recovery of a rare and declin-
ing species such as the modest water snake. While success in 
protecting species begins with the courage and determination 
of individuals, conservation requires the coordinated efforts 
over regional, national, and international scales, involving 
the work of both scientists and policy  makers.
Sometimes new protections emerge from a change in 
policy. Ironically, the conservation of birds was enhanced 
in the EU when concern over avian flu made it possible to 
pass regulations limiting the import of wild birds. Some-
times scientific accomplishments make conservation do-
able. For example, 2008 saw the first live rhinoceros birth 
from frozen semen, and black-footed ferrets, an extremely 
rare weasel-like animal, have been born from sperm stored 
from fathers who had died eight years before (Fig. 14). These 
breakthroughs in captive breeding may save species. Once in 
a while, conservationists catch a break, as they did in 2008, 
when a rare Vietnamese turtle, one of the last four of its 
species in the world, was swept from a lake by a flood and 
caught by a fisherman who was going to sell the reptile to a 
restaurant for soup. Conservationists were able to purchase 
the 68-kilogram (150-lb) turtle and return it to the lake. In 
the next section, we will see more of the efforts scientists and 
others are putting into saving wild species.
 3 Saving Wild Species
If wild species and biodiversity as a whole have so much 
value and if they are in such decline, there must be efforts 
in the works to solve the problem. Indeed, there are. Those 
 efforts involve basic science, individuals, corporations, pub-
lic policy, and decisions at the local, national, and interna-
tional levels (Table 3). Scientists are on the front lines of 
biodiversity protection, as they often have a better knowl-
edge of what is out there in the world and whether or not it 
is declining. However, scientists cannot stop biodiversity loss 
by themselves. That requires laws, and it demands enforce-
ment of those laws. Protection of biodiversity also requires 
stepping back to look at the big picture, seeing how people 
relate to the rest of the natural world, and examining how 
we can do so in more sustainable ways.
The Science of Conservation
The scientific projects that have been used to save the Lake 
Erie water snake, rhinos, and black-footed ferrets are just a 
few of many research activities in conservation biology, the 
branch of science that is most focused on the protection of 
populations and species. Conservation biologists use tech-
niques like captive breeding, telemetry (transmitting data 
through remote communication), and tracking devices in 
order to learn more about the natural history of particular 
species and protect those that are vanishing. Scientists moni-
tor species to see which are threatened with extinction and 
which are invasive and need control. They study the relation-
ships between species and between biodiversity as a whole 
and ecosystem functions.
There is another critical element in the science of pro-
tecting species—taxonomy. Taxonomy is the cataloging of 
species and the naming of new ones. It allows us to under-
stand what species are out there and to identify those in the 
most trouble. Right now, the field of taxonomy is suffering 
from a lack of experts, and this lack is harming biodiversity 
conservation. By 2018, there may be no specialists in fungi 
Figure 14 Captive breeding with new techniques. Captive 
breeders are now able to use frozen semen to produce black-footed ferrets, an 
extremely rare animal.
155

Wild Species and Biodiversity
that 27% expressed concern about the impacts of biodiversity 
loss on their business prospects.
Nonprofit Efforts
One way individuals contribute to conservation of biodiver-
sity is through the funding of nonprofit organizations such 
as the World Wildlife Fund, Audubon Society, and many 
others. With some fundraising campaigns, people are able to 
“sponsor” individual whales, tigers, polar bears, and other 
creatures considered “charismatic”—that is, widely appeal-
ing. The efforts to protect these species, which often require 
in the United Kingdom, despite the fact that fungi provide 
medicines, can be major crop pests, and are important parts 
of soil health.12 Because most people cannot even identify 
the species we are dealing with, it is difficult to promote so-
lutions. The loss of expertise as taxonomists retire and the 
pressure from international treaties to protect species may 
require increased funding to train new taxonomists.
Individuals and Corporations
Individuals can directly support conservation by being care-
ful in their consumption of resources, use of chemicals, 
driving habits, and other personal choices. However, many 
of the actions individuals take are through support of non-
profits, pushing for policy actions, and pushing corporations 
to work in more-biodiversity-friendly ways. For example, 
consumers are insisting on more organic foods and certifica-
tion of wild-caught fish or forest products as sustainable. 
Indi viduals can act as “citizen scientists” and take part in 
massive information-gathering efforts such as the Great 
Sunflower project, which monitors pollinators (Fig. 15), the 
 Firefly Project (which tracks firefly abundance), the  annual 
Audubon Society Christmas Bird count (in which volunteers 
count birds), Project Budburst (a project that tracks when 
plants change seasonally), and others.
Consumers also encourage businesses to care about spe-
cies. Many businesses are beginning to realize that biodiversity 
loss could harm their profits. Biodiversity-friendly investing is 
on the rise as well. A survey in 2009 of global CEOs found 
tabLe 3 Actions Taken to Protect Species by Individuals and Different Groups
Group
Type of action
Example
Individual
Support policy
Vote to support biodiversity
Smart consumerism
Purchase sustainable materials, use fewer resources
Citizen science
Great Sunflower Project
Business
Sustainable practices
Coffee plantations with plants for birds
Smart investment
Go into green technologies and businesses
Nonprofit
Land conservation
Protection of marine reserves/wildlife
Captive breeding
Zoo programs
Education
Environmental education
Sustainable development
Working with local groups for conservation goals
Science
Basic research in natural history, taxonomy,  
captive breeding techniques
Rhino breeding
Develop wildlife forensics
Scottish Wildlife Forensics labs
Monitor species
IUCN Red List
Control invasive species, and better understand  
other causes of species decline
Study effects of house cats or cell phone towers on birds
Government
Make sound policies for local and national needs
Lacy Act, Marine Mammal Act, Endangered Species Act
Develop international treaties
CITES, Convention on Biodiversity
12S. Connor. “Fungi scientists are endangered species: Budget cuts threaten 
research into basics that propagate life on Earth,” The Independent (November 
2008).
Figure 15 Citizen science. The Great Sunflower Project is one of many 
that links a network of amateur scientists to collect data on species. In this case, 
they study pollinators, which are in decline.
156

Wild Species and Biodiversity
in the future it would be protected in states where it is native 
and removed from states where it is invasive.
Hunting and Conservation. Using hunting and trapping 
fees as a source of revenue, state wildlife managers enhance 
the habitats that support important game species. In spite of 
what seems on the surface to be destruction of wildlife, hunt-
ing has many positive aspects. Besides the fees hunters pay, 
many hunters belong to organizations dedicated to the game 
they are interested in hunting. Organizations such as Ducks 
Unlimited raise funds that are used for the restoration and 
maintenance of natural ecosystems vital to the game they are 
interested in hunting.
Defenders of hunting and trapping argue that their 
prey are often animals that lack natural predators and 
would increase to the point of destroying their own habitat, 
something that frequently happens in the United States with 
larger animals such as deer and elk. For example, there are 
so many deer in Pennsylvania that, in 2004, they were es-
timated to be at three times the natural carrying capacity. 
The deer eat crops, damage cars in collisions, and seriously 
harm forest understories through extensive browsing. It 
might seem like hunting is the answer, but sometimes it is 
not that simple.  Despite high deer numbers, some hunters 
have actually lobbied the state to take action to increase the 
deer herd. Why? These hunters are hunting in the northern 
and western part of the state, where deer populations were 
once heavy. Unfortunately, the deer have left these forests 
and have moved to the southern and eastern parts of the 
state, where they eat agricultural crops and browse in sub-
urban developments. They wreak economic damage but 
are very difficult to hunt. Thus, the perception of hunters 
is that deer populations are declining, while the perception 
of many other people (including wildlife managers) is that 
there are too many deer for ecosystems to support.
Bring Back the Predators? Many members of the non-
hunting public object to the killing of wildlife, and some 
groups, such as the Humane Society of the United States and 
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), actively 
campaign to limit or end hunting and trapping. Some prac-
tices that are regarded as especially cruel, such as the use of 
leghold steel traps, have been banned in several states as a 
result of ballot initiatives. Even people who are not opposed 
to hunting may feel that encouraging hunting because of a 
lack of other predators may not be getting at the fundamen-
tal problems with species loss. They argue for the return of 
predators such as grizzly bears, mountain lions, and wolves 
in order to restore more natural checks and balances to eco-
systems. Because humans do not always get along well with 
top predators, such reintroductions are unlikely to occur on 
a large scale (Fig. 16).
Too Many Animals. Because wild animals are in the pub-
lic trust, their numbers are managed by government agencies. 
Now that many populations are increasing, the government 
sometimes has to limit them. Many nuisance animals are 
thriving in highly urbanized areas, creating various health 
large areas of habitat, protect other species as well. Land 
conservation is used to protect multiple species at the same 
time. The oldest regional land conservancy in the United 
States is the Trustees of Reservations in Massachusetts.
Zoos have a special role in biodiversity conservation. 
Not everyone believes it is a good thing for animals to be 
kept in zoos, away from their natural habitat. However, 
in many cases, zoos have a two-fold role in protecting spe-
cies. First, they actively educate the public so people care 
about species protection. Second, many are involved in 
 research and in captive breeding programs. For some spe-
cies, the breeding done at zoos and other captive breeding 
facilities is the difference between survival and extinction. 
Botanical gardens can have the same role for plants. Of 
course, breeding many species solely in captivity is not a 
sustainable long-term solution for species loss, but it may 
bridge the gap while humans figure out how to live more 
sustainably.
Governments: Local, State, 
and National Policies
Public policies, and the agencies that make and support them, 
are necessary for the protection of species. Governments 
from local to international are involved in monitoring, con-
serving, and protecting biodiversity. If we want to save wild 
species, we first need to ask who owns wildlife. In the United 
States, property owners do not own the wildlife living on 
their lands; wildlife resources are public resources, protected 
under the Public Trust Doctrine. The government holds these 
resources in trust for all its people and is obliged to provide 
protection for these resources. In the United States, this pro-
tective role is usually exercised by state fisheries and wildlife 
agencies. Sometimes the law mandates federal jurisdiction, as 
in the case of endangered species. Game animals were some 
of the first animals people recognized as having the potential 
to be overharvested; consequently, they are a group that re-
ceives special oversight, even if they are not currently rare.
Game Animals in the United States. Game animals are 
those animals traditionally hunted for sport, meat, or pelts. 
In the early days of the United States, there were no restric-
tions on hunting, and a number of species were hunted to 
extinction (the great auk, heath hen, and passenger pigeon) 
or near extinction (the bison and wild turkey). As game ani-
mals became scarce in the face of unrestrained hunting, regu-
lations were enacted. State governments, backed up by the 
federal government, enacted laws establishing hunting sea-
sons and bag limits and hired wardens to enforce the laws. 
Some species were given complete protection in order to 
allow their populations to build up to numbers that would 
once again allow hunting. The wild turkey, for example, was 
hunted to the brink of extinction. It made a slow comeback 
by the 1930s as a result of hunting restrictions and returned 
strongly after reintroduction into areas it had once inhab-
ited. The turkey is now found in 49 states. Unfortunately, 
the turkey was also introduced to western states, where it 
was not native, and it is now a pest in those areas. Ideally, 
157

Wild Species and Biodiversity
follow to ensure that endangered populations remain pro-
tected. Since the 1800s, several important laws have been 
passed to protect a wide variety of species.
Lacey Act. Florida and Texas were the first states to pass 
laws protecting plumed birds. Then, in 1900, Congress 
passed the Lacey Act, forbidding interstate commerce in 
 illegally killed wildlife—and therefore making it more dif-
ficult for hunters to sell their kill. Since then, numerous 
wildlife refuges have been established to protect the egrets’ 
breeding and migratory habitats. With millions of people 
visiting these refuges and seeing the birds in their natural 
locales, attitudes have changed significantly. Today, the 
thought of hunting these birds would be abhorrent to most 
of us, even if official protection were removed. Thus pro-
tected, egret populations were able to recover substantially. 
In the meantime, the Lacey Act and its amendments have 
become the most important piece of legislation protecting 
any wildlife from illegal killing or smuggling. Under the 
act, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) can bring 
federal charges against anyone violating a number of wild-
life laws. In 2007, the Combat Illegal Logging Act of 2007 
(S. 1930) was proposed to expand the Lacey Act to cover 
rare timber and timber products. It is still waiting to move 
forward.14
For examples of the work of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service: In 2007, special agents worked on more than 12,177 
violations of the Lacey Act and other wildlife-related laws. 
Their efforts resulted in fines of more than $14 million and a 
total of 31 years of jail time for those convicted. In one case, 
owners of an animal park in South Dakota were caught traf-
ficking bear gall bladders and buying and selling threatened 
grizzly bears; in another, a Utah man was fined for having 
106 illegally caught bobcat skins that he had intended to sell 
hazards. Opossums, skunks, and deer are attracted to urban 
areas by opportunities for food; unsecured garbage cans 
and pet food left outside will ensure visits from raccoons. 
In 2010, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
reported 6,153 cases of rabid animals in the United States, 
60% of which were raccoons and skunks.13
One highly controversial effort to control unwanted ani-
mals is carried out by an agency of the U.S. Department of Ag-
riculture. Wildlife Services responds to requests from livestock 
owners, farmers, homeowners, and others to remove nuisance 
animals and birds. “Removal” virtually always means killing, 
and Wildlife Services routinely uses poisons, traps, and other 
devices to kill around 2.5 million animals yearly. Of these, 
most are native species such as raccoons or skunks, but oth-
ers, such as wild hogs and starlings, are exotic invasive species. 
Wildlife Services plays the important role of keeping both in-
vasive species and native species from overtaking human areas 
and limiting negative human– wildlife interactions.
Protecting Endangered Species
In colonial days, huge flocks of snowy egrets inhabited the 
coastal wetlands and marshes of the southeastern United 
States. In the 1800s, when fashion dictated fancy hats 
adorned with feathers, egrets and other birds were hunted for 
their plumage. By the late 1800s, egrets were almost extinct. 
In 1886, the newly formed National Audubon Society began 
a press campaign to shame “feather wearers” and end the 
practice. The campaign caught on, and gradually attitudes 
changed; new laws followed. Government policies that pro-
tect animals from overharvesting are essential to keep species 
from the brink of extinction. Even when cultural standards 
change due to the efforts of individual groups (such as the 
National Audubon Society), laws and policy measures must 
Figure 16 Wild cougar. As humans 
encroach on wild habitat, animals come into 
human areas. This cougar was on a suburban 
roof in California. It was shot with a tranqui-
lizer. Returning big predators to ecosystems is 
not likely to happen in human-inhabited areas.
13J. D. Blanton, et al. Rabies Surveillance in the United States During 2010. Avail-
able at http://avmajournals.avma.org/doi/pdf/10.2460/javma.239.6.773.
14USFWS Actions. US FWS Office of Law Enforcement. Annual Report FY 2007 
(2008). Available at http://www.fws.gov/le/aboutle/annual.htm.
158

Wild Species and Biodiversity
Endangered Species Act. Congress took another major 
step when it passed a series of acts to protect endangered 
species. The most comprehensive and recent of these acts is 
the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (reauthorized in 1988). 
An endangered species is a species that has been reduced to 
the point where it is in imminent danger of becoming extinct 
if protection is not provided (Fig.  17).  Genetically distinct 
in Europe (where their value was $38,000). In 2009, agents 
helped catch a man bringing endangered fish into the United 
States from Indonesia in a suitcase. In 2011, a Washington 
State couple was prosecuted for sale of bald and golden eagle 
body parts from at least 45 birds. As wildlife smuggling in-
creases and budgets tighten, USFWS agents work harder to 
catch people harming the rarest species.
(a) Male Pine Barrens Tree Frog
(d) Karner Blue Butterfly
(b) Silversword
(e) Swamp Pink
(c) Red-cockaded Woodpecker
(f) Whooping Cranes
(g) Devil’s Hole Pupfish
(h) White Oryx
(i) Manatee
Figure 17 Endangered species. Shown are some examples of endangered species—species whose popu-
lations in nature have dropped so low that they are in imminent danger of becoming extinct unless protection is 
provided. 
159

Wild Species and Biodiversity
Listing must be based on the best available information 
and must not take into consideration any economic im-
pact the listing might have. Current listed species are 
summarized in Table 4.
2. Critical Habitat. When a species is listed, the agency 
must also designate as critical habitat the areas where 
the species is currently found or where it could likely 
spread as it recovers. A 1995 Supreme Court decision 
made it clear that federal authority to conserve critical 
habitats extended to privately held lands.
3. Recovery Plans. The agency is required to develop re-
covery plans that are designed to allow listed species to 
survive and thrive.
As Table 4 indicates, as of November 2011, 1,990 U.S. 
species were currently listed for protection under the act; re-
covery plans are in place for 1,138 of them. In addition, 251 
candidate species are waiting to be listed.
Alternatives and Roadblocks. The Endangered Species 
Act was scheduled for reauthorization in 1992, but because 
of political battles, it has been operating on year-to-year 
populations (subspecies) such as the Florida panther and the 
peninsular bighorn sheep may also be protected. Further, the 
act provides for the protection of threatened species, which 
are judged to be in jeopardy but not on the brink of extinc-
tion. When a species is officially recognized as being either 
endangered or threatened, the law specifies substantial fines 
for killing, trapping, uprooting (in the case of plants), modi-
fying significant habitat of, or engaging in commerce in the 
species or its parts. The legislation forbidding commerce in-
cludes wildlife threatened with extinction anywhere in the 
world.
The Endangered Species Act is administered by the 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service for terrestrial and freshwater 
species (and a few marine mammals) and by the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Fisher-
ies Service for marine and anadromous species (those that 
migrate into freshwater). There are three crucial elements 
in the process of designating a species as endangered or 
threatened:
1. Listing. Species may be listed by the appropriate agency 
or by petition from individuals, groups, or state  agencies. 
tabLe 4 Federal Listings of Threatened and Endangered U.S. Plant and Animal Species, 2011
Summary of Listed Species, Listed Populations,a and Recovery Plansb as of November 19, 2011
United States
Foreign
Total 
Listings 
(U.S. and 
Foreign)
U.S. Listings 
with Active 
Recovery 
Plansc
Endangered
Threatened
Total 
Listings
Endangered
Threatened
Total 
Listings
Mammals
70
14
84
256
20
276
360
60
Birds
76
16
92
204
14
218
310
85
Reptiles
13
24
37
66
16
82
119
37
Amphibians
15
10
25
8
1
9
34
17
Fishes
77
68
145
11
1
12
157
101
Clams
64
8
72
2
0
2
74
70
Snails
25
12
37
1
0
1
38
29
Insects
51
10
61
4
0
4
65
40
Arachnids
12
0
12
0
0
0
12
12
Crustaceans
19
3
22
0
0
0
22
18
Corals
0
2
2
0
0
0
2
0
Animal Subtotal
422
167
589
552
44
604
1,193
469
Flowering Plants
613
147
760
1
0
1
761
638
Conifers and Cycads
2
1
3
0
2
2
5
3
Ferns and Allies
27
2
29
0
0
0
29
26
Lichens
2
0
2
0
0
0
2
2
Plant Subtotal
644
150
794
1
2
3
797
669
Grand Total
1,066
317
1,383
553
54
607
1990
1,138
Source: Department of the Interior, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Division of Endangered Species, November 19, 2011.
aA listing has an E or a T in the “status” column of the tables in 50 C.F.R. §17.11(h) or 50 C.F.R. §17.12(h) (the “List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and 
Plants”).
bSixteen animal species (11 in the United States and 5 in foreign countries) are counted more than once in the above table, primarily because these animals have 
distinct population segments (each with its own individual listing status).
cRecovery plans pertain only to U.S. species.
160

Wild Species and Biodiversity
the protection. If success were measured by the number of 
species that have stabilized or increased their populations, 
then the act might be judged a success, as some 41% of listed 
species have responded this way after being listed.
Other critics of the Endangered Species Act believe that 
it does not go far enough. A major shortcoming is that pro-
tection is not provided until a species is officially listed as 
endangered or threatened and a recovery plan is established. 
For half of the protected vertebrate species, fewer than 1,000 
individuals remained in each population at the time of list-
ing; for half of the listed plant species, fewer than 120 indi-
viduals remained. Currently, the list’s backlog includes some 
253 “candidate species,” all of which are acknowledged to 
be in need of listing. In the first 20 years following the pas-
sage of the Endangered Species Act, 114 U.S. species went 
extinct (or “missing,” which means that, despite at least 10 
years of survey, they haven’t been seen). The majority of 
these never made it to the list and became extinct during a 
delay in listing procedures.
Another contentious issue is the establishment of critical 
habitat. Opponents believe that the critical habitat designa-
tion puts unwanted burdens on property owners and assert 
that the critical habitat findings have little merit in conserving 
species. TESRA, for example, would have completely elimi-
nated critical habitat protections and replaced them with a 
statement that recovery plans must identify areas of “special 
value” to the protection of the species. However, nothing 
in this designation is intended to be mandatory. Critics of 
TESRA answered that critical habitat works; species with 
critical habitat have been twice as likely to be on the road 
to recovery as those without it. In fact, current  efforts are 
budget extensions. It has been a political lightning rod since 
its enactment. Opposition to the act comes from develop-
ment, timber, recreational, and mineral interests as well as 
other lobby groups. Organizations such as the American 
Land Rights Association and the American Forest Resource 
Council continually lobby for weakening or abolishing the 
Endangered Species Act because they believe it limits their 
property rights to log, build buildings, and carry out other 
activities. In 2005, then-congressman Richard Pombo, who 
once chaired the House Resources Committee, sponsored 
H.R. 3824, the Threatened and Endangered Species Recov-
ery Act (TESRA). TESRA had significant limitations from a 
scientific standpoint. The objections of scientists to TESRA 
were so strong that six scientific societies signed a joint state-
ment outlining their concerns in 2006.15 TESRA passed the 
House in the 109th Congress but failed to make it through 
the Senate and was not reintroduced subsequently.
Conflicting Values. Some critics claim that the Endangered 
Species Act has been a failure because only 23 of the 1,900 
listed species have recovered and been taken off the list and 
25 others downlisted from endangered to threatened (2011). 
In response, proponents state that the two main causes of 
extinction—habitat loss and invasive species—are on the in-
crease. Furthermore, species are listed only when they have 
already reached dangerously low populations, which means 
that they almost certainly would have gone extinct without 
15Scientific Societies’ Statement on the Endangered Species Act (February 27, 
2006). Available at http://www.conbio.org/Sections/NAmerica/ScientificSocieties 
OnUSESA.pdf.
SOUND SCIENCE
Using DNA to Catch Wildlife Criminals
Scotland: A group of men 
stand around, holding 
shovels, nets, and the 
leashes of dogs wear-
ing radio collars. A local 
police officer stops them, wondering what they 
are up to. They claim to be hunting rabbits, but 
the police think otherwise. In other years, there 
might not be anything for the police to do, but 
now, it is easier to gather evidence. The police 
swab the mouths of the dogs, and their suspi-
cions are confirmed when the gathered speci-
mens are found to have traces of fox DNA.
Sound like an odd episode of CSI: Wildlife? 
You are right! But in this real-life drama, Scot-
land’s own Wildlife DNA Forensic Unit came 
to the rescue to give the police the data they 
needed to apprehend criminals. The illegal fox 
hunters pleaded guilty, and the work of the first 
dedicated wildlife DNA forensic testing facility in 
Europe was showcased.
New technologies can often help in crimes 
against wildlife, much as it is widely used to 
solve crimes against humans. In Italy, scientists 
were able to show that the blood on a knife 
owned by a suspected poacher had come from 
a specific poached wild boar. Scientists at the 
Center for Conservation Biology at the University 
of Washington have worked to find the origin of 
contraband ivory shipped from Africa to Singa-
pore. Were the elephants slaughtered for their 
tusks all from one place or scattered throughout 
Africa? They compared DNA from the ivory with 
DNA patterns found in elephant dung collected 
all over the African continent. By doing so, they 
were better able to identify where the poaching 
had occurred. In this instance, they found that 
the origin of the tusks was a small area centered 
in Zambia. The group’s efforts could be increased 
to stop poaching. They were able to do the same 
with a second shipment of contraband ivory, de-
tected in a shipping container in Malaysia. In this 
case, the elephants came from another region. 
Knowing how wildlife traffickers are attacking 
rare species is important to their protection.
Wildlife forensics is increasing as wildlife 
trafficking increases. Some people believe that 
the solution is not to ban traffic in rare species 
outright, but to “farm” them so that limited 
legal amounts could be harvested. This is a 
controversial approach, however. Regardless of 
how we try to protect them, crimes against wild 
species populations occur, and when they do, it 
is helpful to have cutting-edge science and tech-
nology to unravel the secrets.
Source: http://conservationbiology.net/research-programs/
tracking-poached-ivory-2/
S
s
s
le
i
161

Wild Species and Biodiversity
to protect the critical habitat of multiple species at once, an 
ecosystem approach.
Improving Legislation. In March 2006, a letter signed by 
almost 6,000 scientists from around the country was deliv-
ered to the U.S. Senate, urging them to pass legislation that 
maintains and strengthens the provisions and funding of the 
Endangered Species Act and to reject proposals that would 
weaken the act.
In the final analysis, the Endangered Species Act is a for-
mal recognition of the importance of preserving wild species, 
regardless of whether they are economically important. Spe-
cies listed as endangered or threatened have legal rights to pro-
tection under the law. The act is something of a last resort for 
wild species, but it embodies an encouraging attitude toward 
nature that has now become public policy. Some changes may 
make the act function better. These might include tax breaks 
as incentives to landowners caring for endangered species or 
other measures to lift the burden of critical habitat designa-
tions. In 2007, a bipartisan group of 17 senators introduced 
another bill—the Endangered Species Recovery Act (ESRA) of 
2007 (S.700)—to suggest just that. The reauthorization of a 
strong Endangered Species Act, possibly with changes to bet-
ter protect whole ecosystems, will be a major signal of our 
continuing commitment to consider the value of wild species 
on grounds other than economic or political.
Seeing Success
Efforts to protect species—such as the Lacey Act, the Marine 
Mammals Protection Act, the Endangered Species Act, and 
many other laws designed to keep our biotic heritage from 
going extinct—have resulted in some successes. The Lake 
Erie water snake is one such example. Another example of a 
species restored to many former areas of its range because of 
these protection and recovery efforts is the gray wolf. Other 
species have also benefited significantly from these laws.
Birds of Prey. One of the species recently removed from the 
Endangered Species List because its numbers have recovered 
significantly is the American bald eagle, the U.S. national 
symbol (Fig. 18). The peregrine falcon, another previously 
endangered species, has also been removed for the same rea-
son. Both are large raptors—predatory birds at the top of the 
food chain. Both the bald eagle and the peregrine falcon were 
driven to extremely low numbers because of the use of DDT 
as a pesticide from the 1940s through the 1960s. Carried 
up to these predators through the food chain, DDT caused 
a serious thinning of the birds’ eggshells that led to nesting 
failures in the two species and in numerous other predatory 
birds . DDT use was banned in both the United States and 
Canada in the early 1970s, and the stage was set for the birds 
to recover. On August 20, 1999, the peregrine falcon was 
delisted, and on June 28, 2007, the Interior Department took 
the American bald eagle off the Endangered Species List. 
Both raptors will still be protected by the Migratory Bird 
Treaty Act, and the eagle will be protected by the Bald and 
Golden Eagle Protection Act.
Figure 18 The American bald eagle. The Endangered Species Act 
worked well in bringing this magnificent national symbol to the point where it 
was dropped from the list.
Fly Away Home. A few species have gained exceptional 
public attention, and heroic efforts have been mounted to 
save them. Efforts to save the whooping crane, for exam-
ple, include virtually full-time monitoring and protection of 
the single remaining flock, which for years numbered only 
in the teens. The historic migratory wild flock is increas-
ing steadily and reached a population of 279 individuals in 
the spring of 2011 from a low of 14 cranes in 1939. This 
flock migrates from their wintering grounds on the Texas 
Gulf Coast to Wood Buffalo National Park in Canada. Non- 
migratory flocks have been reintroduced in central Florida 
and  Louisiana. Some 30 birds now make up these flocks. 
A spectacular effort has established a new migratory flock 
of 105 cranes that summer in Wisconsin and migrate to 
 Florida. This flock was first “taught” its migratory path by 
following researchers in ultralight aircraft (Fig. 19). Although 
each of these flocks is extremely vulnerable to environmental 
changes, whooping cranes have suffered setbacks before, and 
conservationists remain hopeful.
Whooping cranes are one of the examples of successful 
conservation, and, although they still need help, their num-
bers are clearly increasing. Conservationists treasure these 
examples in a time when so many species are in decline. 
It is important to know that the work you do can make 
a difference. Another source of encouragement for people 
interested in saving wild species are the so-called “Lazarus 
species”—species that were thought extinct and later found 
to still have some members alive. The Bermuda petrel is one 
such species. Not seen since 1620, it was thought extinct 
for 330 years until 1951, when 18 nesting pairs were found 
on a remote island. The Takahe, a flightless bird of New 
Zealand, is another example. The last four known speci-
mens were taken in 1898. In 1948, it was rediscovered. 
Both birds are endangered today, but not extinct. These 
stories of hope help motivate people in the hard work of 
protecting species.
162

Wild Species and Biodiversity
Figure 19 Whooping cranes and pilot. A pilot in an ultralight aircraft 
leads a flock of whooping cranes in their migration from Wisconsin to Florida.
4  Protecting Biodiversity 
Internationally
Serious efforts are being made to preserve biodiversity 
around the world, especially in the tropics, where so much 
of the world’s biodiversity exists. These protective efforts 
require an immense amount of coordination among local, 
state, and federal authorities. The National Biological In-
formation Infrastructure is a collaborative program that 
makes protecting species easier for agencies in the United 
States, but the United States also has to coordinate with the 
rest of the world. These partnerships not only create trea-
ties, but also monitor species, share scientific advances, and 
find solutions to the needs of people who are clashing with 
wild species.
International Developments
There are numerous international developments for the 
 protection of species. Some, like the International Union for 
Conservation of Nature (IUCN, formerly called the World 
Conservation Union), are organizations that monitor the 
successes and failures of our conservation efforts. Others are 
organizations that help coordinate scientists or policy makers 
around the globe. For example, the Invasive Species Special-
ist Group (ISSG) is a part of the Species Survival Commis-
sion of IUCN. The ISSG is made up of invited world experts 
who act as advisors and maintain a global invasive species 
database. The policy and treaty makers have to hammer 
out documents like the Convention on Biological Diversity. 
 Finally, there has to be funding for species protection, some 
of which is provided by the Critical Ecosystem Partnership 
Fund and other foundations.
The Red List. The IUCN maintains a “Red List” of threat-
ened species.16 Similar to the U.S. Endangered Species List, 
the Red List uses a set of criteria to evaluate the risk of 
 extinction for thousands of species throughout the world. 
The list is updated frequently, and there were 18,678 species 
of plants and animals on it in 2011. Once published in book 
form, the Red List is now available in searchable electronic 
format on the Internet. Each species on the list is given its 
proper classification, and its distribution, documentation, 
habitat, ecology, conservation measures, and data sources 
are described.
The IUCN is not actively engaged in preserving en-
dangered species in the field, but its findings are often the 
basis of conservation activities throughout the world, and 
it provides crucial leadership to the world community on 
issues involving biodiversity. One of its efforts was to help 
establish the Trade Records Analysis for Flora and Fauna 
in International Commerce (TRAFFIC) network, which 
monitors wildlife trade and helps to implement the deci-
sions and provisions of the Convention on International 
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 
(CITES).
CITES. Endangered species outside the United States are 
only tangentially addressed by the Endangered Species Act. 
However, under the leadership of the United States, CITES 
was established in the early 1970s. CITES is not specifically 
a device to protect rare species—instead, it is an interna-
tional agreement (signed by 169 nation-states) that focuses 
on trade in wildlife and wildlife parts. The treaty recognizes 
three levels of vulnerability of species—the highest being spe-
cies threatened with extinction—and covers 5,000 animals 
and 28,000 plants, fungi, and other species. Restrictive trade 
permits and agreements between exporting and importing 
countries are applied to those species, sometimes resulting in 
a complete ban on trade if the nations agree. Every two or 
three years, the signatory countries meet at a Conference of 
the Parties. The latest such conference was held in 2011 in 
Bergen, Norway.
Perhaps the best-known act of CITES was to ban the 
international trade in ivory in 1989 in order to stop the 
rapid decline of the African elephant (from 2.5  million 
 animals in 1950 to about 609,000 in 1989 and only 
around 470,000 in 2008). Recently, several countries have 
applied to CITES to resume ivory sales and conduct a lim-
ited harvest of elephants; permission was given for sales 
of stocks of ivory at several conferences, and each time 
poaching of elephants resumed. Unfortunately, legal sales 
of ivory from the few stable populations may make poach-
ing in other populations worse. In 2006, 3.9 tons of ivory 
shipped from Cameroon and seized in Hong Kong were 
shown (via DNA testing) to have come from elephants in 
Gabon (see Sound Science, “Using DNA to Catch Wild-
life Criminals”). Any plan to protect African elephants 
needs to enable people in Africa to manage wildlife with-
out overexploitation, persuade others to stop using ivory, 
and use science to stop ivory crime. These changes require 
a world outcry against ivory  collection and an expanded 
 effort to stop ivory crime to save the African elephant 
from extinction.
16http://www.iucnredlist.org/
163

Wild Species and Biodiversity
Convention on Biological Diversity. Although CITES 
provides some protection for species that might be involved 
in international trade, it is inadequate to address broader is-
sues pertaining to the loss of biodiversity. With the support 
of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 
an ad hoc (formed for this purpose) working group pro-
posed an international treaty that would move to conserve 
biological diversity worldwide. After several years of nego-
tiation, the Convention on Biological Diversity was drafted 
and became one of the pillars of the 1992 Earth Summit in 
Rio de  Janeiro. The Biodiversity Treaty, as the convention is 
called, was ratified in December 1993 and is now in force. 
One hundred ninety-two states and the European Union 
are treaty members. As originally organized, the treaty ad-
dresses three complementary objectives: (1) the conserva-
tion of biodiversity, (2) the sustainable use of biodiversity 
services, and (3) the equitable sharing of the use of genetic 
resources found in a country. The treaty establishes a secre-
tariat and designates the Conference of the Parties (the treaty 
members) as the governing body. Ten conferences have been 
held, the latest in Nagoya, Aichi Prefecture, Japan, in Octo-
ber 2010. At that meeting, delegates adopted a Revised and 
Updated Strategic Plan, including Aichi Biodiversity Targets 
for the  period 2011–2020, designated as the UN Decade of 
Biodiversity. After the joint international meeting, individual 
countries agreed to form national biodiversity strategies and 
action plans within two years. National reports on those 
strategies and plans are due by 2014.
Some examples of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets are:
 • At least halve and, where feasible, bring close to zero the 
rate of loss of natural habitats, including forests
 • Establish a conservation target of 17% of terrestrial 
and inland water areas and 10% of marine and coastal 
areas
 • Restore at least 15% of degraded areas through conser-
vation and restoration activities
 • Make special efforts to reduce the pressures faced by 
coral reefs
The secretariat of the Convention on Biological Di-
versity and the UNEP jointly published the report Global 
Biodiversity Outlook 1, 2, and 3 in 2001, 2006, and 2010, 
respectively. Outlook 3 lays out issues for biodiversity in 
the 21st century and analyzes why some of the goals for 
2010 were not met. The bottom line: Although the targets 
laid out in the Strategic Plan are achievable and the tools for 
achieving them are largely in place, it will take an unprec-
edented and costly effort to reach success, and more people 
need to become convinced of the immediacy of the problems 
associated with biodiversity loss. The loss of biodiversity is 
continuing at all levels. Deforestation continues; popula-
tion trends of key land, freshwater, and marine species all 
show declines; and more species are threatened with extinc-
tion. One positive note is that the area of protected spaces 
is  increasing.
Even though President Clinton signed the Convention 
on Biological Diversity in 1993, lobbying by a number of 
key organizations—especially those concerned about prop-
erty rights—prevented ratification of the treaty by the U.S. 
Senate, leaving U.S. involvement in a state of limbo. How-
ever, many of the provisions of the treaty are being car-
ried out by different U.S. agencies. The National Biological 
Service, for example, is working on several of the treaty’s 
provisions. The United States continues to send delegations 
to the Conference of the Parties and participates in other 
related meetings, such as those dealing with genetically 
modified organisms.
Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund. The Critical Eco-
system Partnership Fund emerged in August 2000. Jointly 
sponsored by the World Bank, Conservation International, 
the government of Japan, the MacArthur Foundation, and 
the Global Environment Facility, the fund provides grants to 
NGOs and community-based groups for conservation activi-
ties in biodiversity “hot spots”—34 regions, making up just 
2.3% of Earth’s land surface (Fig. 20), in which 75% of the 
most threatened mammals, birds, and amphibians are lo-
cated. By 2011, the fund had already provided $137 million 
in grants to some 1,627 partners to work on preserving biodi-
versity in the hot spots.
Stewardship Concerns
What we do about wild species and biodiversity reflects on 
our wisdom and our values. Wisdom dictates that we take 
steps to protect the biological wealth that sustains so many 
of our needs and economic activities. Our values come from 
our view of species and their instrumental and intrinsic 
worth. Our values also reflect what we think about the im-
portance of justice—whether we believe, for example, that 
the people who most benefit economically from the use of an 
ecosystem should be the same people who bear the risks of 
its decline, or whether we value maintaining choices and op-
tions for future generations.
Wisdom. The scientific team that put together the UN Glo-
bal Biodiversity Assessment focused on four themes in its 
recommendations:
1. Reforming policies that often lead to declines in bio-
diversity. Many governments (including that of the 
United States) subsidize the exploitation of natural re-
sources and agricultural activities that consume natural 
habitats.
2. Addressing the needs of people who live adjacent to or 
in high-biodiversity areas or whose livelihood is derived 
from exploiting wild species. Although protecting biodi-
versity benefits entire societies, the people who are clos-
est to the protected areas are key to the success of efforts 
to maintain sustainability of natural resources. These 
people must be given ownership rights or at least com-
munal-use rights to natural resources, and they must be 
involved in the protection and management of wildlife 
resources.
164

Wild Species and Biodiversity
3. Practicing conservation at the landscape level. Too 
often, we tend to believe that a given refuge or park will 
protect the biodiversity of a region, when, in reality, 
many wild species require larger contiguous habitats or 
a variety of habitats. For example, to address the needs 
of migratory birds, summer and winter ranges and fly-
ways between them must be considered.
4. Promoting more research on biodiversity. Far too lit-
tle is known about how to manage diverse ecosystems 
and landscapes, and much remains to be learned about 
the species within the boundaries of different countries. 
Toward that end, a new field called biodiversity infor-
matics has been established. Its goal is to put taxonomic 
data and other information on species online.17 Species 
2000, a program with the “objective of enumerating all 
known species of organisms on Earth,” is one such ef-
fort.18 Another is the Global Biodiversity Information 
Facility, whose express purpose “is to make the world’s 
biodiversity data freely and universally available.”19
Values. Our values also are demonstrated by our ap-
proach to wild species. Is the natural world simply grist for 
our  increasing consumption, or is nature something to be 
managed sustainably and in a stewardly fashion and then 
passed on to our children and their children? Because we 
live together in society, we must be prepared to persuade 
others in our belief that wild species should be conserved. 
Our own consumption patterns—and our actions as 
 citizens—can help, but coordination with nonprofit, scien-
tific,  business, and government agencies is necessary to slow 
 species loss.
At the start of the chapter, we learned about breed-
ing reserves for river dolphins in Bangladesh, developed 
through the efforts of conservation biologists. The suc-
cess of other conservation efforts shows us that we can 
indeed stem the tide of species declines with hard work. 
Further strategies to address the loss of biodiversity must 
focus on preserving the natural ecosystems that sustain 
wild species. 
Thomas Jefferson once said, “For if one link in na-
ture’s chain might be lost, another might be lost, until 
the whole of things will vanish by piecemeal.”20 As this 
quote  suggests, loss of wild species and their associated 
genetic and  ecosystem diversity could lead to a break-
Mountains of
Central Asia
Caucasus
Japan
Indo-Burma
Indonesia
New
Caledonia
and
Melanesian
Islands
Philippines
South West
Australia
New Zealand
Cape Floristic Region
Madagascar
East
Africa
Western
Ghats
India
Mediterranean
Basin
Atlantic
Forest
Brazil
Tropical
Andes
Central
America
Caribbean
Islands
California
Floristic
Province
Polynesia &
Micronesia
Figure 20 Biodiversity “hot spots.” These regions are considered the “emergency rooms” of planetary 
biodiversity and represent most of the hot spots being funded by the Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund. 
(Source: Redrawn from various sources.)
17F. A. Bisby. “The Quiet Revolution: Biodiversity Informatics and the Internet,” 
Science, 89, 5488 (2000): pp. 2309–2312.
18Goddard Space Flight Center, An Online Catalogue of the World’s Known Spe-
cies. http://gcmd.nasa.gov/records/Species2000–99.html.
19Global Biodiversity Information Facility. http://www.gbif.org/informatics/ 
infrastructure/.
20 Jefferson, Thomas. Memoir on the Discovery of Certain Bones of a Quadruped 
of the Clawed King in the Western Parts of Virginia. Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society. 1799. Vol. A, pp. 246–260.
165

Wild Species and Biodiversity
down in the natural functioning of ecosystems. Indeed, 
as we look at the world around us, we see that Jefferson 
was correct.  Currently, many animal and plant popula-
REVISITING THE THEMES
sound science
Sometimes we do not know enough science to manage 
species well. Fortunately, many universities provide excel-
lent programs in wildlife management. The Millennium 
Ecosystem Assessment and the Heinz State of the Nation’s 
Ecosystems, as well as annual reports by the IUCN, pull together the 
solid work of thousands of scientists. Conservation biology, like resto-
ration ecology, is a science that is focused on the protection of living 
things. The work of conservation biologists helps us to understand why 
some species are going extinct, where they travel, when they are recu-
perating, and sometimes when wildlife-related crimes have occurred. 
Sometimes scientists work together with “citizen scientists,” networks 
of observers, to get more information. Other times they use cutting-edge 
technology such as DNA analysis to catch criminals. Furthermore, the 
science of taxonomy is foundational to the protection of species, and 
making sure we have scientists ready to study has to be part of the  
solution to biodiversity decline.
sustainability
Because ecosystem capital is of such high value to human 
enterprises, the pathway to a sustainable future depends 
on protecting the wild species that make ecosystems 
work. Such protection is afforded by local and federal policies and in-
ternational treaties. Sustainability is enhanced when we take steps to 
encourage healthy populations of organisms; if they thrive, so do their 
natural ecosystems. Sometimes, however, it is necessary to hunt or 
otherwise remove animals (such as deer) from populations when their 
numbers increase too much. Long-term plans for sustainability have to 
address the root issues that cause biodiversity declines, including those 
caused by overpopulation and overconsumption.
stewardship
The reestablishment of the Lake Erie water snake is good 
stewardship at work. Stewardship places a high value on 
wild species. Although instrumental value is sufficient 
reason for preserving many species, perceiving intrinsic value might be 
the nearest to a pure stewardship ethic because it works out primarily 
for the sake of the species. Although some people dislike snakes, their 
protection is important for ecosystems. Other species, such as river dol-
phins, are easy to like, and people rally behind them for their protection, 
although they live in heavily populated areas.
The protection of biodiversity is tied to the ways people value wild 
species. These values can include instrumental or utilitarian values as 
well as intrinsic values. Wild species and their genes represent biologi-
cal wealth, providing the basis for the goods and services coming from 
natural ecosystems and sustaining human life and economies. Species 
can also be thought of as a genetic bank, capable of being drawn on 
when new traits are needed. Losing biodiversity eventually leads to a 
biologically impoverished future.
s
T
s
w
reason for prese
s
B
e
o
k S
h
t
s
S
s
le
E
Review Questions
1. Define biological wealth and apply the concept to the human 
use of that wealth.
 2. Compare instrumental value and intrinsic value as they re-
late to determining the worth of natural species. Where does 
Leopold’s idea of the land ethic fit into these two categories?
 3. What are the four categories into which the human value of 
natural species can be divided? Give examples of each one.
 4. What means are used to protect game species, and what 
are some problems emerging from the adaptations of many 
game species to the humanized environment?
 5. What is the Lacey Act, why was it needed, and how is it 
used to protect wild species?
 6. How does the Endangered Species Act preserve threatened 
and endangered species in the United States? Give some ex-
amples of how the act has been implemented.
 7. What is one example of an endangered species that has ben-
efited from protection under the Endangered Species Act?
 8. What is biodiversity? What do scientists need to know to 
calculate it for a habitat?
 9. What do the letters in the acronym HIPPO stand for? What 
is an example of each?
 10. Give several examples of ways habitat change can either 
harm species or aid them.
 11. What are IUCN, CITES, and the Convention on Biological 
Diversity? How do their roles differ?
 12. What are the Aichi Biodiversity Targets?
tions are in decline. However, efforts made in science 
and policy and the political will of all of us can result in 
successes such as the comeback of the puffin.
166

wild species and Biodiversity
thinking enviRonmentally
 1. Some people argue that each individual animal has an in-
trinsic right to survival. Should this right extend to plants 
and microorganisms? What about the Anopheles mosquito, 
which transmits malaria, or tigers that sometimes kill people 
in India? What about the bacteria that cause typhoid fever? 
Defend your position.
 2. Choose an endangered or threatened animal or plant species, 
and use the Internet to research what is currently being done 
to preserve it. What dangers is your chosen species subject to?
 3. The Endangered Species Act is the most important legisla-
tion in the United States for the protection of species. How-
ever, there are critics who think it is too strict and those who 
think it is not strict enough. Investigate one example of the 
application of the law—for example, to gray wolves—and 
decide what you think ought to be done.
 4. Log onto Conservation International’s biodiversity hot spots 
Web page and research one of the 34 hot spots. What is 
being done to protect biodiversity in this location?
making a DiffeRence
 1. Instead of devoting your whole yard to grass, convert some 
of your yard to native plants. The National Wildlife Federa-
tion has a great deal of information on turning your back-
yard into wildlife habitat and even a certification program. 
They can be found on the Web.
 2. Support groups that conserve and protect wildlife through 
the political process. Groups like the Center for Biological 
Diversity and others will alert members when there are po-
litical actions that they can support.
 3. Consider volunteering or interning for a program that con-
serves wildlife. The Audubon Society has volunteer opportu-
nities, as do many other wildlife conservation groups. These 
opportunities are found on the Internet.
 4. Be careful about purchasing products that might come from 
a wild population. For example, it is better to buy pets bred 
in captivity rather than wild-caught pets.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cReDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(bottom left): Varin-Visage/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (top left): Jacana/Photo 
Researchers, Inc.; (bottom right): STEPHANIE STONE/AFP/Getty Images/
Newscom; (bottom right): Ryan M. Bolton/Shutterstock; (bottom right): AP Photo/
George Osodi; (bottom left): WILDLIFE GmbH / Alamy; (center left): iStockphoto; 
(center): Jeremy Woodhouse/Blend Images/Getty Images; (center right): blick-
winkel/Rose/Alamy; (top): James P. Blair/NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC IMAGE 
COLLECTION/Getty Images; (bottom left): Nagy Melinda/Shutterstock; (top left): 
James H Robinson/Photo Researchers/Getty Images; (top right): mkimages/Alamy; 
(top left): blickwinkel / Alamy; (bottom right): AP Photo/The Daily News-Record, 
Pete Marovich; (bottom left): Piotr Gatlik/Shutterstock; (bottom left): Premaphotos/
Alamy; (center right): AP Photo/John Kuntz/The Plain Dealer; (top right): 
Roberta Olenick/All Canada Photos/SuperStock; (bottom right): AndreyKlepikov/
Shutterstock; (top): AP Photo/The El Paso Times, Rudy Gutierrez; (top left): 
Marvin Dembinsky Photo Associates/Alamy; (top center): kuma/Shutterstock; 
(top right): David Norris/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (center left): A.H. Rider/Photo 
Researchers, Inc.; (center): Jeff Lepore/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (center right): 
Canon Bob/iStockphoto.com; (bottom left): Tom McHugh/Steinhart Aquarium/
Photo Researchers, Inc.; (bottom center): Gorshkov25/Shutterstock; (bottom right): 
Nicolas Larento/Fotolia (top right): Richard Langs/Shutterstock (top left): Tom 
Lynn/MCT/Newscom
Text Credits
Table 2: “Preventing Childhood Obesity and Type II Diabetes,” by Sharron Dalton 
from Our Overweight Children: What Parents, Schools, and Communities Can Do 
to Control the Fatness Epidemic, University of California Press. Copyright © 2004 
by the Regents of the University of California. Reprinted with permission.; Table 4: 
Source: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
167

Wild Species and Biodiversity
aquaculture A propagation or rearing of any aquatic (water) 
organism in a more or less artificial system.
biodiversity The diversity of living things found in the natural 
world. The concept usually refers to the different species but 
also includes ecosystems and the genetic diversity within a given 
species.
biological wealth The life-sustaining combination of commercial, 
scientific, and aesthetic values imparted to a region by its biota.
biota The sum total of all living organisms. The term usually is 
applied to the setting of natural ecosystems.
ecotourism The enterprises involved in promoting tourism of 
unusual or interesting ecological sites.
edges Breaks between habitats that may expose sensitive species 
to predators.
Endangered Species Act The federal legislation that mandates the 
protection of species and their habitats that are determined to be 
in danger of extinction.
genetic bank The concept that natural ecosystems with all their 
species serve as a repository of genes that may be drawn upon 
to improve domestic plants and animals and to develop new 
medicines, among other uses.
HIPPO An acronym for the major threats to biodiversity: 
Habitat destruction, Invasive species, Pollution, Population, and 
Overexploitation.
instrumental value The value that living organisms or species have 
by virtue of their benefit to people; the degree to which they 
benefit humans. (Contrast intrinsic value.)
intrinsic value The value that living organisms or species have in 
their own right; in other words, organisms and species do not 
have to be useful to have value. (Contrast instrumental value.)
invasive species An introduced species that spreads out and 
often  has harmful ecological effects on other species or  
ecosystems.
Lacey Act Passed in 1900, the first national act that gave 
protection to wildlife by forbidding interstate commerce in 
illegally killed animals.
taxonomy The science of identifying and classifying organisms 
according to their presumed natural relationships.
Wildlife Services An agency within the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture that removes “nuisance” animals for landowners; 
the  agency dispatches more than 2 million animals and birds 
yearly.
glossaRy
168

The Value, 
Use, and 
Restoration of 
Ecosystems
From Chapter 7 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Caribbean Reef. Diver in the Caribbean passes a large Nassau grouper. Such fish are in decline.
Learning Objectives
 1. Ecosystem Capital and Services: 
List several ways natural ecosys-
tems have great economic value 
(as they provide goods and serv-
ices vital to human well-being).
 2. Types of Uses: Describe the dif-
ferences between the consump-
tive and productive uses to which 
ecosystems may be put.
 3. Biomes and Ecosystems Under 
Pressure: Describe how forests 
and oceans are examples of 
ecosystems under pressure, and 
describe sustainable ways to fill 
demands for their products.
 4. Protection and Restoration: 
Explain how the public and private 
management of lands is key to 
keeping habitats both protected 
and productive, and describe an 
example of an ecosystem that 
needed to be restored to a more 
healthy state.
B
right sun filters through shallow water to reveal the colors of a tropical 
reef. Fish flit by branching arms of a coral. A parrotfish grazes a piece of sea-
weed, and a lobster hides at the base of a craggy rock. As the sun warms the 
clear water, divers swim by. An endangered Nassau grouper floats in an eddy, eyeing 
a smaller fish. A non-native lionfish snaps out, catching prey. It’s another day in a 
tropical paradise. Suddenly, a SCUBA diver snatches the venomous lionfish and heads 
for the surface with the catch.
Today is the Lionfish Derby, held in the Florida Keys and run by the Reef  
Environmental Education Foundation (REEF). In the Derby, teams compete for cash 
and prizes to capture these invasive fish and remove them from this critical habitat. 
Lionfish lack predators in the Caribbean and eat the young of other fish. Researchers 
will use data from the captured fish to better understand their biology and ecology, 
and the capture removes some of the invaders from a habitat that is important to 
many other species. In 2011, the Florida Keys Lionfish Derby teams netted more than 
1,500 fish.
citizen scientists. On a 
similar day elsewhere in the Carib-
bean, SCUBA divers move methodi-
cally through the water, recording 
the fish they see. They note the 
condition of coral reefs and record 
the presence of fish species, both 
herbivorous and carnivorous. This is 
also a REEF initiative: the Volunteer 
Survey Project. The SCUBA divers, 
trained volunteers in a network of 
“citizen scientists,” will submit the 
The Value, 
Use, and 
Restoration of 
Ecosystems
170

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
information they collect, to be used by scientists who track what 
is happening with coral reef fish. Using these data, scientists have 
already been able to figure out a few things: Fish are declining, 
which affects the health of the coral reef. As herbivorous fish 
decline, algae and water plants can grow over the corals. Some 
of these produce toxic chemicals and kill the coral. As carnivo-
rous fish decline, coral-eating sea stars are free to take over. 
The invasive lionfish can oust other native reef fish. Researcher 
Christopher Stallings of the Florida State University Coastal and 
Marine Lab is one of the scientists working with REEF. His work 
with the large database on fish in the Caribbean showed that some 
large-bodied fish like the Nassau grouper have completely disap-
peared in some highly populated areas.1
criticaL ecOsystems. Around the world, coral reefs 
are critical ecosystems. They act as nurseries for marine fish and 
as an early warning system for habitat degradation. Because they 
need clean, clear water and grow relatively slowly, corals show us 
when marine systems are in decline. Physical breakage, pollution, 
heat, and invasive species combine to kill off these colonial ani-
mals and their algal symbionts. A coral reef is a good example of 
an ecosystem that provides humans with goods and services and 
that needs monitoring, protection, and sometimes restoration. 
The dive teams competing in the Lionfish Derby and the SCUBA 
divers recording species while they dive are ways that ordinary 
people can be involved in the care of an ecosystem.
One key to saving wild species is to preserve their habitats—
the ecosystems in which they are found. Populations of wild 
species continue to decline, however, because ecosystems are in 
decline throughout the world. In addition to the loss of species, 
the natural goods and services that ecosystems provide are also 
being degraded or lost. It is not only the natural world, but also 
human well-being that is threatened in the face of this 
unsustainable decline of ecosystems.
The focus in this chapter is particularly on the natural eco-
systems that directly sustain human life and economy. We will 
pay special attention to those ecosystems that are in the deepest 
trouble. These ecosystems, the species in them, and the goods 
and services they generate are identified as ecosystem capital, 
a major component of the natural capital wealth of nations.
1C. Stallings. “Fishery-Independent Data Reveal Negative Effect of Human Pop-
ulation Density on Caribbean Predatory Fish Communities,” PLoS ONE 4(5) 
(2009): [e5333].
1 Ecosystem Capital
Earth consists of ecosystems that vary greatly in their species 
makeup but that exhibit common functions, such as energy 
flow and the cycling of matter. The major types of terrestrial 
and aquatic ecosystems—the biomes—reflect the response 
of plants, animals, and microbes to different climatic condi-
tions. Earth’s land area can be divided into five broad cat-
egories for the purposes of this chapter (Table 1): forests and 
woodlands, grasslands and savannas, croplands, wetlands, 
tabLe 1 Ecosystems on Earth’s Surface
Area
Percentage of Total  
Land Area
Ecosystem
(million km2)
(million mi2)
Forests and woodlands
47.3
18.2
31.7
Grasslands and savannas
30.2
11.6
20.2
Croplands
16.1
 6.2
10.7
Wetlands
5.2
2.0
3.5
Desert lands and tundra
51.0
19.6
34.0
Total land area
149.8
57.6
100.0
Coastal ocean and bays
21.8
8.4
Coral reefs
0.52
0.2
Open ocean
426.4
164.0
Total ocean area
448.7
172.6
171

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
flood control or climate moderation. Cultural services com-
prise nonmaterial benefits people gain from ecosystems, 
including spiritual enrichment, knowledge, and aesthetic 
enjoyment. Some of the services are general and pertain to 
essentially all ecosystems, whereas others are more specific. 
Finally, ecosystems provide services that maintain them-
selves: photosynthesis, for example. These are called sup-
porting services.
Table 2 shows combinations of services provided to so-
cieties by a spectrum of ecosystems. In their normal func-
tioning, all natural and altered ecosystems perform some 
or all of these natural services, year after year. A team of 
natural scientists and economists calculated the total value 
of a year’s global ecosystem goods and services to be $41 
trillion, and we receive them free of charge.
and deserts and tundra. The oceanic ecosystems can be cat-
egorized as coastal ocean and bays, coral reefs, and open 
ocean. These eight terrestrial and aquatic systems provide all 
of our food; much of our fuel; wood for lumber and paper; 
fibers—leather, furs, and raw materials for fabrics; oils and 
alcohols; and much more. The world economy and human 
well-being directly depend on the exploitation of the natural 
goods (referred to by the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
team as provisioning services) that can be extracted from 
ecosystems.
Ecosystems also perform a number of other valuable 
natural services, including regulating and cultural services, 
as they process energy and circulate matter in the normal 
course of their functioning. Regulating services are benefits 
derived from regulation of ecosystem processes, such as 
tabLe 2 Services from Various Types of Ecosystems
Mountain 
and Polar
Forest and 
Woodlands
Inland 
Rivers 
and Other 
Wetlands
Drylands
Cultivated
Urban 
Parks 
and 
Gardens
Coastal
Island
Marine
Air quality regulation
√
Biofuels
√
Carbon sequestration
√
Climate regulation (local 
and wide spread)
√
√
√
√
√
√
Cultural heritage
√
√
√
Disease regulation and 
medicines
√
√
√
Dyes
√
Education
√
Erosion control
Fiber
√
√
√
√
Flood regulation
√
√
√
Food
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
Fresh and drinking water
√
√
√
√
√
Fuelwood and timber
√
√
√
√
Nutrient cycling
√
√
√
√
Pest regulation
√
Pollution regulation
√
Recreation, ecotourism, 
and aesthetic values
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
Sediment retention and 
transport
√
Waste processing
√
Water regulation
√
Source: Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. “Living Beyond Our Means: Natural Assets and Human Well-Being” (Statement of the Millennium 
Ecosystem Assessment Board, 2005).
172

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
To illustrate the value of an ecosystem, consider a man-
grove wetland in South Asia that is converted to a shrimp 
farm (Fig. 1), a common conversion. Studies of shrimp 
aquaculture (cultivating aquatic organisms like fish and 
shellfish under controlled conditions) in Thailand show 
that the economic value of the shrimp was $3,375 per acre 
over five years, following which the site is abandoned as 
yields decline sharply. Left intact, the mangroves provide 
services not fully captured in the marketplace: storm pro-
tection for coastline communities, forest products from 
mangrove harvest, and spawning ground for local fisheries. 
These services have a sustained estimated value of $14,450 
per acre. In addition, there are net social costs of the 
shrimp farm in the form of pollution and land degradation 
that require expensive restoration, calculated at $2,200 per 
acre. Thus, the net income from the shrimp farming, when 
social costs are subtracted, is lowered to $1,175, which 
is only 8% of the value of services provided by the intact 
mangrove wetland.2
The benefit is local, short term, and specific to the 
shrimp farmer, who is likely to be from outside the commu-
nity, while the loss of services is more regional, long term, 
and diffuse to all those living near the coast. Fortunately, 
shrimp farming in mangrove areas has been largely stopped 
because the farms do not do well long term and construc-
tion costs are high. But mangrove loss from conversion to 
rice agriculture, fuel, wood pulp, and other uses has contin-
ued. Many areas of Southeast Asia hit by the 2004 tsunami 
had been deprived of their protective mangrove forests and 
were more heavily damaged than those with intact man-
groves. Mangroves are also efficient at taking up carbon di-
oxide and are home to globally threatened species. Removal 
of mangroves for aquaculture often ignores other benefits 
and costs.
Ecosystems as Natural Resources
If the natural services performed by ecosystems are so valua-
ble, why are we still draining wetlands and removing forests? 
The answer is clear: a natural area will receive protection 
only if the value a society assigns to services provided in its 
natural state is higher than the value the society assigns to 
converting it to a more direct human use.
Natural ecosystems and the biota in them are commonly 
referred to as natural resources. As resources, they are ex-
pected to produce something of value, and the most commonly 
understood value is economic value. By referring to natural 
systems as resources, we are deliberately placing them in an 
economic setting, and it becomes easy to lose sight of their eco-
logical value. Instead of natural resources, we use the concept 
of ecosystem capital in order to avoid making this mistake.
Valuing. Markets provide the mechanism for assessing eco-
nomic value, but do poorly at placing monetary values on 
ecosystem services. People and institutions may express their 
preferences for different ecosystem services via the market, 
an instrumental value. Instrumental valuation works fairly 
well for the provisioning services provided by ecosystems 
(goods such as timber, fish, and crops). However, many of 
the regulating and cultural services (and supporting services) 
provided by natural ecosystems—the more ecological val-
ues—are far more difficult to put prices on. These services 
are public goods (something that is not used up as people use 
it, and which can’t be effectively limited, in order to charge 
money; for example, breathing air) not usually provided by 
markets, but contributing greatly to people’s well-being. In 
fact, they are absolutely essential.
Regulating and cultural services provide benefits that are 
experienced over a large area, and their losses are also experi-
enced regionally, rather than just locally. Large forested areas 
can modify the climate in a region and absorb and hold water 
in the hydrologic cycle. A small forest can be cut and the tim-
ber sold, with no noticeable impact on the weather, but with 
a definite economic value in a market setting, providing in-
come to the owners. If the larger area is also cut, it will have 
both an immediate economic benefit and a long-term loss in 
regulating and supporting services. Thus, it will have an im-
pact on people’s well-being in the formerly forested area and 
well beyond, as short-term profits are made at the long-term 
environmental expense of many. When the benefits and losses 
in such conversions are reasonably evaluated economically, 
losses generally outweigh benefits.
Private Versus Public Lands. Some natural ecosystems 
are maintained in a natural or seminatural state because that 
is how they provide the greatest economic (direct-use) value 
for their owners. For example, most of the state of Maine is 
owned by private corporations that exploit the forests for 
lumber and paper manufacturing. However, if Maine expe-
rienced a population explosion and corporations could sell 
their land to developers for more money than could be gained 
from harvesting timber, forested lands would quickly be-
come house lots. Similar conversions can be pictured:  tropical 
2Elizabeth McLeod and Rodney V. Salm. Managing Mangroves for Resilience to 
Climate Change. IUCN Science Group Working Paper Series No. 2. 2006.
Figure 1 Shrimp aquaculture farms in Thailand. Carved out of 
mangrove forest, these shrimp farms provide only a fraction of the value of the 
services performed by the intact mangroves.
173

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
spite  certain quantities of organisms being taken from it, 
and this  renewal can go on indefinitely—it is sustainable. 
Recall that every species has the biotic potential to increase 
its numbers and that, in a balanced population, the excess 
numbers fall prey to parasites, predators, and other factors 
of environmental resistance. It is difficult to find fault with 
activities that effectively put some of this excess population  
to human use. The trouble occurs when users ( hunters,  fishers, 
loggers, whalers) take more than the excess and deplete  
the breeding population.
Conservation Versus Preservation
Conservation of natural biotas and ecosystems does not 
imply no use by humans whatsoever, although this may 
sometimes be temporarily expedient in a management pro-
gram to allow a certain species to recover its numbers. 
Rather, the aim of conservation is to manage or regulate use 
so that it does not exceed the capacity of the species or sys-
tem to renew itself. Conservation is capable of being carried 
out sustainably, and when sustainability is adopted as a prin-
ciple, conservation has a well-defined goal.
Preservation is often confused with conservation. The 
objective of the preservation of species and ecosystems is to 
ensure their continuity, regardless of their potential utility. 
Effective preservation often precludes making use of the spe-
cies or ecosystems in question. For example, it is impossible 
to maintain old-growth (virgin) forests and at the same time 
harvest the trees. Thus, a second-growth forest can be con-
served (trees can be cut, but at a rate that allows the forest to 
recover), but an old-growth forest must be preserved (it must 
not be cut down at all).
There are times when conservation and preservation 
come into conflict. The Muriqui monkey of Brazil was once 
thought to require virgin forests, leading to a concern for 
protecting such forests for the sake of the species (Fig.  2). 
Recent research has shown, however, that the monkeys 
 actually do better in second-growth forests, which support 
 forests to grasslands for grazing, agricultural fields to sub-
urbs, and wetlands to vacation developments.
Some natural ecosystems either are publicly owned (state 
and federal lands) or cannot be owned at all (ocean ecosys-
tems). These ecosystems are still considered natural resources 
and may be subject to economically motivated exploitation. 
Sustainable exploitation of such systems will maintain the 
natural services they perform. Fortunately, ecosystems can 
not only sustain continued exploitation, but can also be re-
stored from destructive uses that have degraded them and 
removed their natural biota.
Domesticated Nature. Whether private or public, human 
domination of the landscape is pervasive, and ecosystems 
have been converted or domesticated in vast areas of the 
planet. What we call natural may be only an illusion, because 
humankind has so converted and domesticated natural sys-
tems that it is difficult to find areas of the world unaffected 
by human impact. Even where systems appear natural, it is 
likely that humans have killed larger animals, suppressed 
wildfires, controlled rivers, introduced exotic species, and 
harvested wood. Elsewhere, we have converted grasslands 
and forests to grazing lands and crop cultivation, so that al-
most 50% of the land surface is now used in the production 
of crops and animal products and over half of the forests 
have been lost in the process. To be sure, domesticated eco-
systems still provide provisioning and regulating and cultural 
services, and may do so sustainably, but they do so at our 
consent and largely for our benefit.
Future Pressures. As the human population continues to rise, 
pressures on ecosystems to provide resources will increase: 
more food, more wood, more water, and more fisheries prod-
ucts will be needed. Maintaining sustainable exploitation of 
ecosystem capital will become more difficult, in view of the 
already intense pressure being put on those ecosystems. The 
main objective of the thorough work of the Millennium Eco-
system Assessment was to evaluate the health of the services 
that people derive from the natural world. The assessment 
team found that 15 of the 24 services they evaluated were 
in decline worldwide, five were in a stable state, and four 
were increasing at the expense of other services. The govern-
ing board of the assessment was so concerned about these 
findings that it published a separate document for a “nonspe-
cialist” readership—Living Beyond Our Means: Natural As-
sets and Human Well-Being. This brief report begins: “At the 
heart of this assessment is a stark warning. Human activity 
is putting such strain on the natural functions of Earth that 
the ability of the planet’s ecosystems to sustain future genera-
tions can no longer be taken for granted. . . . This assessment 
shows that healthy ecosystems are central to the aspirations 
of humankind.”
2 Consumption and Production
An ecosystem’s remarkable natural capacity to regener-
ate makes it (and its biota) a renewable resource. In other 
words, an ecosystem has the capacity to replenish itself de-
Figure 2 Muriqui monkey. Protection of this species of monkey in Brazil in-
volves allowing some cutting of the forest in order to provide second-growth forests.
174

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
these resources, people’s living standard would decline and 
their very existence could be threatened. Unfortunately, this 
is a largely unregulated practice and often involves poaching 
in wildlife parks. According to the Convention on Interna-
tional Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), this practice has 
contributed to the decline of 30 endangered species. Mak-
ing matters worse, commercial hunters have recently turned 
what was once a matter of local people using local wildlife 
for food into an unsustainable industry that supplies cities 
with tons of “fashionable” meat. For example, primate meat 
(e.g., chimpanzee) has been found in markets in New York, 
London, Paris, Brussels, and others.
Dependence on consumptive use is most commonly as-
sociated with the developing world but also exists in the 
more rural areas of the developed world, where people de-
pend on wood for fuel or wild game for food. Their well- 
being would be diminished if they were denied access to 
these “free” resources.
Productive Use. In contrast to consumptive use, pro-
ductive use is the exploitation of ecosystem resources for 
economic gain, as when products like timber and fish are 
harvested and sold for national or international markets  
(Fig. 4). Productive use is an enormously important source of 
revenue and employment for people in every country. More  
than 1.2 billion hectares of forests are managed for wood 
production. Nearly half of the wood removed, however, is 
used for fuel, so a great deal of the value of forests oc-
curs on the consumptive, noneconomic side. Planted for-
ests are on the increase, shifting timber harvest from 
natural to planted forests and making conservation of 
some natural forests easier. The global fisheries catch in 
2008, which reached 90 million metric tons (83 million 
tons), was valued at $93.9 billion. Another productive  
a greater range of vegetation on which the monkeys feed. 
Thus, conservation of the forests is essential for preserva-
tion of this New World monkey, a seriously  endangered 
species.
Patterns of Human Use of Natural 
Ecosystems
Before examining the specific biomes and ecosystems that are 
under the highest pressure from human use, we need to study 
a few general patterns of such use to understand what is hap-
pening in these natural systems and why it is happening.
Consumptive Use. People in more-rural areas make use 
of natural lands or aquatic systems that are in close prox-
imity to them. When people harvest natural resources in 
order to provide for their needs for food, shelter, tools, 
fuel, and clothing, they are engaged in consumptive use. 
This kind of exploitation usually does not appear in the 
calculations of the market economy of a country. People 
may barter or sell such goods in exchange for other goods 
or services in local markets, but most consumptive use 
involves family members engaged in hunting and gather-
ing to meet their own needs. Thus, people hunt for game 
(Fig. 3) and fish and gather fruits and nuts in order to meet 
their food needs; or they collect natural products like fire-
wood, as well as wood or palm leaves to construct shelters 
or to use as traditional medicines. This “wild income,” as 
it has been called, is highly important to the poor; some 
90% of the 1.2 billion poorest people depend on forests 
for some of their income.
Wild game, or “bush meat,” is harvested in many parts 
of Africa and provides a large proportion of the protein 
needs of people. In Congo, for example, bush meat may 
account for as much as 75% of a person’s protein intake. 
The estimated take in the Congo basin alone is somewhere 
around 1 million metric tons annually. Without access to 
Figure 3 Consumptive use. Hunters in Papua, New Guinea bring home 
a captured wild pig. Wild game is an important food source for millions in many 
parts of the world.
Figure 4 Productive use. Loggers load poplar logs to be transported to a 
lumber mill, where they will be made into waferboard for the building industry.
175

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
communal, state, and open access—there is the potential 
either for sustainable use of the resources or for unsustain-
able use leading to the loss of the resources and the services 
provided by the natural ecosystem being exploited. As a re-
sult, the perspective of stewardship is vital. Do the resource 
managers and harvesters see themselves as caretakers, as 
well as exploiters, of the natural resource? Are public poli-
cies that encourage stewardship and sustainability in place? 
Is the local or national government presence weak or cor-
rupt? Are sound scientific principles employed in manage-
ment strategies? Keep these questions in mind as we next 
examine two patterns that are commonly seen when people 
exploit natural resources.
Maximum Sustainable Yield. The central question in 
managing a renewable natural resource is this: How much 
continual use can be sustained without undercutting the ca-
pacity of the species or system to renew itself? A scientific  
model employed to describe this amount of use is the 
use is the collection of wild species of plants and ani-
mals for cultivation or domestication. The wild species 
may provide the initial breeding stock for commercial  
plantations or ranches, or they may be used as sources of 
genes to be introduced into existing crop plants or animals 
to improve their resistance or to add other desirable genetic 
traits. Finally, wild species continue to provide sources of 
new medicines.
Tenure. Consumptive and productive uses of natural 
ecosystem resources are the consequence of the rights of 
tenure, or property rights, over the land and water hold-
ing those resources. Four kinds of tenure are recognized: 
(1) private ownership, which restricts access to natural 
resources; (2) communal ownership, which permits use of 
natural resources by members of the community; (3) state 
ownership of natural resources, which implies regulated 
use; and (4) open access, where natural resources can be 
used by anyone. In all of these arrangements—private, 
SUSTAINAbILITY
How Much for That Irrigation Water?
The dry bed of the Santa 
Cruz River in Arizona lies 
20 feet below the bank 
sides, filled with water 
only in large floods, but 
it wasn’t always so. In the late 1880s, a local 
farmer dug deep ditches and tapped into the 
underground water, moving below the shallow 
river bed. Fierce storms sent raging torrents 
through the channels, eroding the river bed, 
stranding farm fields above the precious water. 
The dry deep river of today and the increased 
cost of irrigation result from human actions of 
the past.
For years, humans have used the natural 
world as a place to obtain goods and services, 
often without paying for them. Humans are 
checking out at the global grocery store, with 
a basket of things that come from ecosystems: 
wood products, fish, fibers, chemicals, metals, 
water. How much is that flood control or clean 
air worth? How much is the irrigation from a 
river worth? To estimate the “value” of goods 
and services—things like photosynthesis, water 
cycling, and absorption of carbon dioxide—we 
need to know how ecosystems work and how 
our activities affect the rest of the system. That 
is part of what scientists do. We also have to 
determine how much the price of our activities 
and things we produce reflects the effect of our 
actions on ecosystems. This is done primarily 
by economists. Policy makers help figure out 
how we can act together to change the way 
things are done,in order to incorporate the 
real-world cost of ecosystem 
capital into our human deci-
sions.
How do natural and 
social scientists determine 
the value of ecosystems? 
Some valuation is dependent 
on what stakeholders think. 
Researchers doing a study on 
the Santa Cruz River asked 
participants, “Why do people 
think rivers are important? 
What do they value about 
rivers?” Respondents valued 
water quality, presence (in a 
river where stretches some-
times dried up altogether), 
lush vegetation, and habitat 
for birds and fish. They also 
valued human connections 
to the river, use by others 
downstream, and recharge 
of underground water and 
other ecosystem services. 
The people around the Santa 
Cruz River want the river 
to have a role in their daily lives and desire its 
health. Of course, putting economic value only 
on the ecosystem services people recognize, 
value, and are willing to pay for is a faulty 
approach, as we often do not know all the im-
portant features of ecosystems. However, it is a 
beginning and often provides useful information 
to policy makers.
Sources: B. Fisher et al. “Ecosystem Services and Economic 
Theory: Integration for Policy-Relevant Research.” Ecological 
Applications, 18(8) (2008): 2050–2067.
P. L. Ringold, J. Boyd, D. Landers, and M. Weber. Report from 
the Workshop on Indicators of Final Ecosystem Services for 
Streams. 56p. EPA/600/R-09/137. July 2009.
M. Weber et al. Why are rivers Important? Ecosystem Service 
Definition via Qualitative Research: A Southwestern Pilot 
Study. Oral Presentation. December 9, 2010. http:// 
conference.ifas.ufl.edu/aces10/Presentations/Thursday/ 
C/AM/Yes/0845%20MattWeber.pdf.
T
C
2
s
o
How Much is the Flood Control Worth? This picture of the Santa 
Cruz River shows the pressures rivers face—drying, erosion and 
invasive species.
176

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
year to year as the weather fluctuates. Replacement of har-
vested individuals may also vary from year to year, because 
some years are particularly favorable to reproduction and 
recruitment, while others are not. Human impacts, such as 
pollution and other alterations of habitats, adversely affect 
reproductive rates, recruitment, carrying capacity, and, con-
sequently, sustainable yields. For these reasons alone, manag-
ing natural populations to achieve the MSY is fraught with 
difficulties. Furthermore, accurate estimates of the size of the 
population and the recruitment rate must be made continu-
ally, and these data are hard to come by for many species.
Precautionary Principle. The conventional approach 
has been to use the estimated MSY to set a fixed quota—
in fishery management, the total allowable catch (TAC). If 
the data on population and recruitment are inaccurate, it is 
easy to overestimate the TAC, especially when there are pres-
sures from fishers (and the politicians who represent them) 
to maintain a high harvest quota. In the face of such uncer-
tainties, and also in response to repeated cases of overuse 
and depletion of resources, resource managers have been 
turning to the precautionary principle. That is, where there 
is uncertainty, resource managers must favor the protection 
of the living resource. Thus, the exploitation limits must be 
set well enough below the MSY to allow for uncertainties. 
Those using the resource ordinarily want to push the limits 
higher, however, so the result is frequent conflicts between 
users and managers. These conflicts are addressed in greater 
detail when the problems of fisheries are discussed later in 
this section.
Using the Commons. Where a resource is owned by many 
people in common or by no one (open access), it is known 
as a common-pool resource, or commons. Strictly speaking, 
a commons refers to a system with open access where use 
by one does not subtract from use by others; for example, 
maximum sustainable yield (MSY): the highest possible 
rate of use that the system can match with its own rate 
of replacement or maintenance. Besides pertaining to the 
harvesting of natural biota, the concept of MSY can apply 
to the maintenance of parks, air quality, water quality and 
quantity, and soils—indeed, the entire biosphere. Use can 
refer to the cutting of timber, hunting, fishing, park visi-
tations, the discharge of pollutants into air or water, and 
so on. Natural systems can withstand a certain amount of 
use (or abuse, in terms of pollution) and still remain viable. 
However, a point exists at which increasing use begins to 
destroy the system’s regenerative capacity. Just short of that 
point is the MSY.
Optimal Population. An important consideration in 
understanding how the MSY works is the carrying capacity 
of the ecosystem—the maximum population the ecosystem 
can support on a sustainable basis. If a population is well 
below the carrying capacity of the ecosystem (Fig. 5a), then 
allowing that population to grow will increase the number 
of reproductive individuals and thus the yield that can be 
harvested. However, as the population approaches the car-
rying capacity of the ecosystem, new individuals must com-
pete with older individuals for food and living space. As a 
result, recruitment (survival of new individuals in the popu-
lation) may fall drastically (Fig. 5b). When a population is 
at or near the ecosystem’s carrying capacity, production—
and hence sustainable yield—can be increased by thinning 
the population so that competition is reduced and optimal 
growth and reproductive rates are achieved. Thus, the MSY 
cannot be obtained with a population that is at the carrying 
capacity. Theoretically, the optimal population for harvest-
ing the MSY is just halfway to the carrying capacity.
The practical use of this model is complicated by the 
fact that the carrying capacity—and, therefore, the optimal 
population—is variable. Carrying capacity may vary from 
High
Time
Low
(a)
(b)
Rate of recruitment
to population
Optimal
population size
for harvesting
Yield
reduced
by
competition
Carrying capacity
Relative
population
size
Maximum rate 
of increase in
population size
Yield reduced
by decreased
population
Relative
population
size
High
Low
Figure 5 Maximum sustainable 
yield. The maximum sustainable yield 
occurs when the population is at the opti-
mal level (meaning the rate of increase in 
population is at a maximum). (a) The logistic 
curve of population size in relation to carry-
ing capacity. (b) Recruitment plotted against 
population size, showing the effects of com-
petition and decreased population levels.
177

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
lation should allow for (1) protection, so that the benefits 
derived from the commons can be sustained; (2) fairness in 
access rights; and (3) mutual consent of the regulated. Such 
regulation can be the responsibility of the state, but it does 
not have to be. In fact, the most sustainable approach to 
maintaining the commons may be local community control, 
wherein the power to manage the commons resides with 
those who directly benefit most from its use and there are 
strong social ties and customs that can function well over 
time to protect the commons. By contrast, in many situa-
tions, state control of a commons has accelerated its ruin 
and has led to an associated social breakdown and the im-
poverishment of people.
Maine Lobsters. The lobster is a tasty crustacean found 
in the colder marine waters of the Northern Hemisphere, 
especially where there are shallow-water rocky subtidal sea-
scapes interspersed with sandy patches. The state of Maine is 
famous for its lobsters, and management of the lobster fish-
ery—a common-pool resource—has evolved into a workable 
combination of state and local regulation. The state has es-
tablished conservation laws that protect juvenile and breeding 
female lobsters and limit the number of lobster traps (Fig. 6). 
The lobster fishers, however, have developed a second set of 
local rules that determine who can fish a given harbor and 
coastline area. It is an informal system, but it works because 
the fishers are part of a functioning community where they 
know each other and are monitoring each other’s harvesting. 
The result is a successful outcome where the state’s lobster 
fishery is thriving even though the number of fishers has more 
than doubled since 1973.
Public Policies. In sum, to achieve the objectives of con-
servation when harvesting living resources, it is important to 
consider both the concept and limitations of the MSY and 
the social and economic factors causing overuse and degra-
dation that diminish the sustainable yield. After reviewing 
these factors, public policies can be established and enforced 
that protect natural resources effectively. Some principles 
that should be embodied in these policies are presented in 
Table 3. When policies based on principles like these are in 
place, it is possible for people to continue to put natural re-
sources to sustainable consumptive and productive uses. The 
vast harvest taken from the natural world each year is proof 
that sustainable use not only is possible, but also actually oc-
curs with many resources and in many locations around the 
world.
In some situations, however, exploitation and degra-
dation have gone too far, and the resilience of an ecosys-
tem has been overcome. In those cases, natural services 
and uses can be restored only if the habitats are delib-
erately restored as well. In recent years, the need for the 
restoration of damaged ecosystems has become clear, and 
a new subdiscipline with that objective—called restora-
tion ecology—has been developed. This is discussed in 
Section 4.
The next section discusses a number of still-functioning 
biomes and ecosystems that are in trouble because of their 
great economic importance.
knowledge is a commons. Examples of natural common-pool 
resources include federal grasslands, on which private ranch-
ers graze their livestock; coastal and open-ocean fisheries 
used by commercial fishers; groundwater drawn for private 
estates and farms; nationally owned woodlands and forests 
harvested for fuel in the developing countries; and the atmos-
phere, which is polluted by private industry and everyone 
who drives motor vehicles.
The exploitation of such common-pool resources 
presents some serious problems and can lead to the eventual 
ruin of the resource—a phenomenon called the “tragedy of 
the commons,” taken from the title of a 1968 essay by the 
late biologist Garrett Hardin.3 Sustainability implies that 
common-pool resources will be maintained so as to continue 
to yield benefits not just for the present, but also for future 
users.
Tragedy of the Commons. As described by Hardin, 
the original “commons” were pastures around villages in 
England. These pastures were provided free by the king to 
anyone who wished to graze cattle. Herders were quick to 
realize that whoever grazed the most cattle stood to ben-
efit the most. Even if they realized that a particular com-
mons was being overgrazed, those who withdrew their 
cattle simply sacrificed personal profits, while others went 
on using that commons. One herder’s loss became another’s 
gain, and the commons was overgrazed in any case. Con-
sequently, herders would add to their herds until the com-
mons was totally destroyed. The lesson of this story is that 
where there is no management of the commons, the pursuit 
of individuals’ own interests will lead to a tragedy for all.
Hardin’s essay applies to a limited, but significant, set of 
problems that arise where there is open access to a common-
pool resource, but where there is no regulating authority (or 
there is one, but it is ineffective) and no functioning commu-
nity. Exploitation of the resource then becomes a free-for-all 
in which profit is the only motive. Coastal and offshore fish-
eries have consistently demonstrated the reality of the trag-
edy of the commons, with stocks of desirable fish declining 
all over the world. The tragedy can be avoided only by limit-
ing freedom of access.
Limiting Freedom. One arrangement that can miti-
gate the tragedy is private ownership. When a renewable 
natural resource is privately owned, access to it is restricted 
and, in theory, it will be exploited in a manner that guaran-
tees a continuing harvest for its owner(s). This theory does 
not hold, however, when an owner maximizes immediate 
profit and then moves on. Modern corporations lend them-
selves to this strategy: For example, corporate raiders can 
take over a natural resource—say, a timber company and 
its holdings—and clear-cut the forest in order to pay off 
debts incurred in the process of the takeover. Many own-
ers, though, will be in for the long run and manage the re-
sources more responsibly because it is in their best interests 
to do so.
Where private ownership is unworkable or lacking, 
the alternative is to regulate access to the commons. Regu-
3Garrett Hardin. “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science 162 (1968): 1243–1247.
178

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
Forest Ecosystems
Forests are the normal ecosystems in regions with year-round 
rainfall that is adequate to sustain tree growth. Forests are 
also the most productive systems the land can support, and 
they are self-sustaining. Forests and woodlands (ecosystems 
with mixed trees and grasses) perform a number of vital nat-
ural services. Among other things, they conserve biodiversity,  
3  biomes and Ecosystems Under 
Pressure
Although human activities affect virtually all biomes and 
ecosystems, some are under more pressure than others. This 
section begins with a look at the forest biomes, the most im-
portant of all biomes in terms of their economic significance 
and potential for active human management.
Figure 6 Exploiting a commons. Lobster boat unloading a lobster pot in Maine waters.
tabLe 3 Principles That Should be Incorporated into Public Policies to Protect Natural Resources
1.  Natural resources cannot be treated as open-access commons. Habitats and species should be held by private, communal, or state entities that 
are responsible for their exploitation and sustainability.
2. Scientific research should be employed to assess the health of the resource and to set sustainable limits on its use.
3. To accommodate uncertainty, the precautionary principle should be used in setting limits for exploitation.
4. Regulations should be enforced; the resource must be protected from poaching.
5. Economic incentives that encourage the violation of regulations should be eliminated.
6. Subsidies that encourage exploitation of the resource should be removed.
7. All stakeholders should be involved in resource-related decisions; those living close to the resource should share in profits from its use.
8. Security of tenure is crucial for poor people who depend on the resource for their well-being.
179

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
moderate regional climates, prevent erosion, store carbon 
and nutrients, and provide recreational opportunities. They 
provide a number of vital goods, too, such as lumber (the 
raw material for making paper), fodder for domestic animals, 
fibers, gums, latex, fruit, berries, nuts, and fuel for cooking 
and heating. In fact, forests provide fuel, food, medicine, and 
income for more than 1.6 billion people, mostly in the de-
veloping countries. In spite of this value, the major threat to 
the world’s forests is not simply their exploitation, but rather 
their total destruction.
Forest Resources Assessments. The UN’s Food and 
Agricultural Organization (FAO) conducts periodic assess-
ments of forest resources and compares the data with previ-
ous information in order to evaluate trends in forested areas. 
 Figure 7 shows the locations of the four major world for-
est biomes. The FAO produced the Global Forest Resources 
Assessment 2010. The most recent FAO forestry report was 
titled State of the World Forests 2011. Forest ecosystems are 
tracked by other groups as well, such as NASA’s earth ob-
servatory. Major findings by those assessing forests are as 
follows:
1. In 2005, the world’s forest cover was 3.95 billion hec-
tares (9.8 billion acres), or 30% of total land area. The 
FAO defines “forests” as lands where trees are the domi-
nant life form and produce a canopy greater than 10% 
cover. An additional 1.4 billion hectares (3.5 billion 
acres) are classified as “other wooded land,” sometimes 
referred to as “woodlands,” where the tree cover is less 
than 10% or the trees and/or shrubs are species that do 
not grow to a height above 5 meters. Forests account for 
50% of plant productivity.
Boreal
Temperate
Subtropical
Tropical
Figure 7 World forest biomes. The FAO Global Forest Resources Assessment 2000 produced this map 
showing the locations of the major world forests.
2. Deforestation continues to occur, primarily in the 
developing countries. Forest cover in the developed 
countries has remained stable. The FAO defines defor-
estation as the removal of forest and replacement by 
another land use. Thus, logging per se does not count 
as deforestation if the forests are allowed to regener-
ate. The current global rate of net deforestation is es-
timated at 7.3 million hectares (18 million acres) per 
year, some 18% better than in the 1990s. The annual 
net changes in forest area in major world regions are 
shown in Figure 8.
3. Throughout the world, the most important forest prod-
uct is wood for industrial use; half of forest lands are 
designated for “production,” where the wood is har-
vested for pulp (paper source), lumber, and fuelwood. 
Close to 1.2 billion hectares (2.9 billion acres), about 
30% of the world’s forests, are managed for production 
of forest products, including wood.
4. Worldwide, 13.5% of forests are in legally established 
protected areas. This proportion represents an increase, 
a recognition by many countries of the important non-
timber services of forests. China in particular has in-
creased forests in order to slow the spread of deserts and 
soil loss.
5. The role of forests in climate change was formally ac-
knowledged in November 2001 at a meeting of the sign-
ers of the Kyoto Protocol in Marrakech, Morocco. The 
outcome of this accord is a much more thorough inven-
tory of the role of forests as carbon stores, sources of 
carbon emissions, and carbon sinks. Some estimates are 
that 45% of the carbon stored on land is in forests—
180

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
obstacle to conventional animal husbandry and agriculture. 
Indeed, the first task the early European colonists faced when 
they came to the Western Hemisphere was to clear the forests 
so they could raise crops. Once the forests were cleared, con-
tinual grazing or plowing effectively prevented the trees from 
regrowing.
Consequences. Clearing a forest has the following imme-
diate consequences for the land and its people:
 • Overall productivity of the area is reduced.
 • Standing stock of nutrients and biomass, once stored in 
the trees and leaf litter, is enormously reduced.
 • Biodiversity is greatly diminished.
 • Soil is more prone to erosion and drying.
 • The hydrologic cycle is changed as water drains off the 
land instead of being released by transpiration through 
the leaves of trees or percolating into groundwater.
 • A major carbon dioxide sink (removal of CO2 from the 
air) is lost.
 • Land no longer yields forest products.
 • People who depend on harvesting forest products lose 
their livelihood.
The trade-off, of course, if you cut down a forest, is that 
now the land will yield crops or support livestock, more 
people may be fed, and (usually) more profit will accrue to 
the owners, but sometimes those effects do not last. If for-
ests are not cleared and converted to other uses, they could 
be managed to yield a harvest of wood for fuel, paper, and 
building materials indefinitely. Approximately 3 billion 
cubic meters (3.7 billion yd3) of wood are harvested an-
nually from the world’s forests for fuel, wood, and paper 
(Fig.  9). It is unreasonable to expect the countries of the 
world—especially the developing countries—to forgo mak-
ing use of their forests. However, forest-management prac-
tices vary greatly in their impact on the forest itself and on 
surrounding ecosystems.
as much as 289 gigatonnes (GT). However, reduction in 
forest area caused this number to drop about 0.5 GT per 
year between 2005 and 2010.
6. Insect pests, disease, invasive species, and fires affect 
global forests significantly. In the United States and 
Canada, the mountain pine beetle has killed more than 
11 million acres of forest since the 1990s.
7. Government spending on forestry is not replaced. On 
average, governments spend about $7.50 (managing 
timber and building and maintaining logging roads) 
and collect about $4.50 per hectare. Those that spend 
less also receive less. Overall, governments “generally 
spend more on forestry than they collect in revenue.”4 
About 80% of the world’s forests are publically owned, 
some managed locally and others by central national 
governments.
Forests as Obstacles. Even though the current rate of de-
forestation is lower than in the 1990s, it is still a major cause 
for concern. Why are forests being cleared when they could 
be managed for wood production on a sustainable basis? 
Even though forests are highly productive systems, it has 
always been difficult for humans to exploit them for food. 
Most deforestation is used to convert forests into pastures 
and agricultural land. Unlike forests, grasslands have short 
food chains in which herbaceous growth supports large her-
bivores that can yield meat and other animal products. Al-
ternatively, forests can be replaced by cultivated plants that 
are used directly for food. Thus, forests have always been an 
South America
Europe
China
Australia
Africa
North America
CHANGE IN FOREST AREA BY REGION, 1990–2010
Net loss 2000-2010
Net loss 1990-2000
Net gain 2000-2010
Net gain 1990-2000
Millions of hectares
0
1
-1
2
-2
3
-3
-4
Figure 8 Net changes in forest area. The annual net change of forests 
from 2000 to 2010 in the different regions of the world. Virtually all of the losses 
occurred in tropical forests of South America and Africa.
(Source: Food and Agriculture Organization [FAO] of the United Nations, Global Forest Re-
sources Assessment 2010, p. xvi.)
4FAO. Global Forest Resources Assessments, Key Findings 2010, p. 9. http://www
.pefc.org/images/stories/documents/external/KeyFindings-en.pdf.
Figure 9 Logging operations. A forest in New Guinea is logged for its 
tropical wood.
181

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
generations. This sentiment has been expanded into a list of 
principles for sustainable forestry.
Tropical Forests. Because of their continued deforesta-
tion, tropical forests are of great concern. They are the 
habitat for millions of plant and animal species and a store-
house of biodiversity. These forests are also crucial in main-
taining Earth’s climate, serving as a major sink for carbon 
and restraining the buildup of global carbon dioxide. Nev-
ertheless, tropical forests continue to be removed at a rapid 
rate. Between 1960 and 1990, 20% of the tropical forests 
(over 445 million hectares, or 1.1 billion acres)—equivalent 
to two-fifths of the land area of the United States—were 
converted to other uses. According to the FAO, in 2010 the 
annual global deforestation rate was about 13 million hec-
tares (32 million acres), down from about 16 million hec-
tares per year in the 1990s. Most of this loss occurred in 
the tropical forests (Fig. 10).
Reasons for Removal. Deforestation is caused by a 
number of factors, all of which come down to the fact that 
the countries involved are in need of greater economic de-
velopment and have rapid population growth. The FAO 
concluded that the current major cause of deforestation is 
conversion to pastures and agriculture. Many governments 
in the developing world are promoting deforestation by en-
couraging the colonization of forested lands. Indonesia, for 
example, has embarked on a program of resettlement and 
intends to convert 20% of its remaining forests to agricul-
tural production. The clearing of forests for subsistence ag-
riculture is especially intense in Africa, where population 
growth is unrelenting. In Brazil’s Amazon basin, commercial 
ranches, home to some 74 million cattle, are replacing rain 
forests, enabling Brazil to dominate the beef export market. 
The Brazilian government has introduced antideforestation 
measures, which had some success in reducing the Ama-
zon deforestation for several years (2004–2007), but recent  
satellite-based reports indicate that the rate is rising again.
New Trends. Left to grow, the forests of the devel-
oping world are an important resource that can generate 
much-needed revenue. Developing countries account for 
26% of the international trade in forest products. Often, 
Types of Forest Management. The practice of forest man-
agement, usually with the objective of producing a specific  
crop (hardwood, pulp, softwood, wood chips, etc.), is called 
silviculture. Several practices are employed, with quite differ-
ent impacts on the total forest ecosystem involved. Because 
trees take from 25 to 100 years to mature to harvestable size, 
the normal process of management is a rotation, which is a 
cycle of decisions about a particular stand of trees from its 
early growth to the point of harvest. Two options are open to 
the forester: even-aged management and uneven-aged man-
agement. With even-aged management, trees of a fairly uni-
form age are managed until the point of harvest, cut down, 
and then replanted, with the objective of continuing the cycle 
in a dependable sequence.
Clear-Cutting. Typically, fast-growing, but economi-
cally valuable, trees are favored for even-aged management. 
(Others are culled from the stand.) In the Pacific Northwest, 
Douglas fir is frequently managed this way. Harvesting is 
often accomplished by clear-cutting—removing an entire 
stand at one time. This management strategy has been se-
verely criticized because it creates a fragmented landscape 
with serious impacts on biodiversity and adjacent ecosys-
tems; also, a clear-cut leaves an ugly, unnatural-looking site 
for many years. Large timber companies often employ the 
practice because it is efficient at the time of harvest and it 
does not involve much active management and planning.
Other Methods. Uneven-aged management of a stand 
of trees can result in a more diverse forest and lends itself 
to different harvesting strategies. For example, in selective 
cutting, some mature trees are removed in small groups 
or singly, leaving behind a forest that continues to main-
tain a diversity of biota and normal ecosystem functions. 
Replanting is usually unnecessary, as the remaining trees 
provide seeds. Another strategy is shelter-wood cutting, 
which involves cutting the mature trees in groups over a 
period of, say, 10 or 20 years, such that at any time there 
are enough trees both to provide seeds and to give shel-
ter to growing seedlings. Like selective cutting, this method 
takes more active management and skill, but unlike clear-
cutting, it leaves a functional ecosystem standing. In effect, 
it should lead to a sustainable forest, an objective that the 
entire wood and paper industry is currently focusing on—
at least in principle.
Sustainable Forestry. In forestry, sustainability must be 
carefully defined. A common objective of forestry manage-
ment is sustained yield, which means that the production of 
wood is the primary goal and the forest is managed to har-
vest wood continuously without being destroyed. It is similar 
in concept to MSY in that its objective is to maximize harvest 
rates, but it ignores the ecosystem properties of forests. Sus-
tainable forest management, by contrast, was defined at the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Develop-
ment (UNCED) of 1992: Forests are to be managed as eco-
systems, with the objectives of maintaining the biodiversity 
and integrity of the ecosystem, but also to meet the social, 
economic, cultural and spiritual needs of present and future 
Production
30%
Multiple use
24%
Social services
4%
Conservation and biodiversity
12%
Unknown
16%
Protection of soil and water
8%
DESIGNATED FUNCTIONS OF FORESTS, 2010
Other
7%
Figure 10 Designated uses of forests. Worldwide, forests have differ-
ent ecosystem services for which they are managed.
(Source: Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, Global Forest Re-
sources Assessment 2010, pg. xxvi.)
182

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
concessions are sold to multinational logging companies, 
which reap high profits by exploiting the economic des-
peration of the developing countries and harvest the tim-
ber with little regard for regenerating the forest. Chinese 
and other Asian companies are logging millions of acres of 
tropical forest in smaller countries like Belize, Suriname, 
and Papua New Guinea, where regulation is weak and cor-
ruption is strong. More important is the consumptive use 
of forests by millions of people living in the forests or on 
their edges. Owning few private possessions and often little 
land, they absolutely depend on foraging in and extracting 
goods from the forests.
There are encouraging trends in forest management 
in the developing world—trends that indicate that those 
in power are paying more attention to the needs of indig-
enous people and the importance of forest goods and services 
(other than just wood). These actions include practicing sus-
tainable forest management, designating forest areas for con-
servation, establishing more-sustainable plantations of trees 
for wood or other products (cacao, rubber, etc.) (Fig. 11), and 
setting aside extractive reserves (areas for nonwood prod-
ucts) that yield nontimber goods. Some 3.6 million hectares 
(9 million acres) of the Brazilian Amazon have been set aside 
as extractive reserves.
Another trend is the preservation of forests as part of 
a national heritage and putting them to use as tourist at-
tractions. This practice can often generate much more in-
come than logging can. Putting forests under the control 
of indigenous villagers is an important part of forest pro-
tection in many parts of the world. The villagers can then 
Figure 11 Plantation forest. A rubber tree plantation in Vietnam.
collectively use the forest products in traditional ways. 
Given tenure over the land, the villagers tend to exercise 
stewardship over their forests in a way that is sustainable. 
Where this practice has been implemented, the forests have 
fared better than where they have been placed under state 
control.
Certification. The Forest Stewardship Council was 
the result of a recent initiative directed toward the certifica-
tion of wood products. This alliance of nongovernmental 
organizations (including the World Wide Fund for Nature 
and National Wildlife Federation, industry representa-
tives, and forest scientists) has developed into a major in-
ternational organization with the mission of promoting 
sustainable—or, as they call it, “responsible”—forestry 
by certifying forest products for the consumer market. By 
2009, more than 110 million hectares (242 million acres) 
in 81 countries had been certified. Certification makes it 
possible for consumers to choose wood products that have 
been harvested sustainably.
Ocean Ecosystems
Covering 75% of Earth’s surface, the oceans and coastal 
ecosystems provide priceless goods and services that enable 
commerce and enhance human well-being. As vast as the 
oceans are, human activities have impacted them, often se-
verely. A team of British, Canadian, and American scientists 
recently constructed a global map that pictures the severity 
of the effects of such human impacts as commercial ship-
ping, resource extraction, nutrient runoff from land, fish-
ing, species invasion, and greenhouse gas emissions (Fig. 
12). The team’s work provides a first attempt at document-
ing the human impacts throughout the oceans and is ex-
pected to stimulate strategies for minimizing the ecological 
impact of human activities in locations where that impact 
is especially severe. One of those activities is commercial 
fishing.
Marine Fisheries. Fisheries provide employment for at 
least 200 million people and account for more than 15% of 
the total human consumption of protein. The term fishery 
refers either to a limited aquatic area or to a group of fish 
or shellfish species being exploited. For years, the oceans 
beyond a 12-mile limit were considered international com-
mons. By the end of the 1960s, however, numerous regions  
of the sea were being seriously depleted of many species 
by overfishing on the part of international fleets equipped 
with factory ships and modern fish-finding technology. In 
the mid-1970s, as a result of agreements forged at a series 
of UN Conferences on the Law of the Sea, nations extended 
their limits of jurisdiction to 200 miles offshore. The United 
States accomplished this with the Magnuson Act of 1976. 
Since many prime fishing grounds are located between 12 
and 200 miles from shore, this action effectively removed 
most fisheries from the international commons and placed 
them under the authority of particular nations. As a result, 
183

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
some fishing areas recovered, while nationally based fishing 
fleets expanded to exploit the fisheries.
The Catch. The total recorded harvest from marine 
fisheries and fish farming is reported annually by the FAO. 
The harvest has increased remarkably since 1950, when it 
was just 20 million metric tons (Fig. 13). By 2009, it had 
reached almost 145 million metric tons. Aquaculture ac-
counted for 55.1 million metric tons, or 38% of world fish 
supplies that year. The trends in the figure show that the 
“capture” fisheries leveled off in the 1990s and the con-
tinued rise in fish production is due to aquaculture. Of the 
total of 145 million metric tons, 90 million metric tons 
were the freshwater and marine fisheries catch, to which 
should be added approximately 7 million tons of bycatch 
(fish caught and discarded).
One of the effects of this increase in fishing effort is 
the removal of large fish. Because large and slow-growing 
fish take longer to replace, ocean fish are changing—to 
smaller individuals and those that reproduce more rapidly. 
As fishers capture too many of one species, they move on 
to the next. First, they overfish the top predators—such as 
tuna, marlin, and swordfish—then those smaller and lower 
on the food chain. This process of moving from species to 
species as each type is depleted is known as “fishing down 
the food chain.” It means that commercial fishing has made 
long-lasting changes to basic ecological processes in ma-
rine ecosystems.
Aquaculture. Modern aquaculture, the farming of 
aquatic organisms, includes species ranging from seaweed 
to bivalve mollusks to freshwater and marine fish and has 
increased dramatically in the past 20 years (see Fig. 13). 
This production is offsetting the plateau in the wild cap-
ture fisheries, but coastal aquaculture is not without its 
problems and critics. For example, shrimp farming in many 
tropical areas has been criticized for destroying mangrove 
habitats, accelerating the decline of fisheries for some spe-
cies that depend on the mangroves for a part of their life 
cycle. Another concern is that farming carnivorous species 
such as shrimp and salmon requires food—often in the form 
of fishmeal from marine organisms caught in the wild. More 
than 37% of the capture fisheries are species like whiting, 
herring, and anchovy that are reduced to fish products to 
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Very low impact (<1.4)
Low impact (1.4–4.95)
Medium impact (4.95–8.47)
Medium high impact (8.47–12)
High impact (12–15.52)
Very high impact (>15.52)
Figure 12 Human impact on ocean ecosystems. 
This map indicates the highest-impact areas in the eastern Caribbean 
(b), the North Sea (c), and Japanese waters (d) and a least-impact area 
in the vicinity of northern Australia (e).
(Source: Halpern, Benjamin S. et al.(2008). A global map of human impact on 
marine ecosystems. Science, vol. 319, no. 5865, pp. 948–952)
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
World total
World capture
All aquaculture
Million metric tons
Year
Figure 13 The global fish harvest. The global fish catch plus aquacul-
ture equals the world total. Note how aquaculture is providing all of the increase 
since 1995. Shown are data for 1950–2008.
(Source: Data from FAO. 2010. The State of the World’s Fisheries and Aquaculture.)
184

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
feed farm-raised fish and animals. Salmon and shrimp aqua-
culture farms consume several times as much fish protein as 
they actually produce.
Spread of diseases from farmed to wild populations and 
pollution of waters by fish farms’ nutrients are other con-
cerns that accompany aquaculture. The result in many cases 
is conflict among the various users, and the long-term out-
look for coastal aquaculture is that nearshore waters are be-
coming less and less available for farming.
One approach is open-ocean aquaculture, which is the 
farming of coastal species in ocean waters several kilom-
eters from the shoreline. This is a new practice in North 
America, and even in Europe and other areas where it has 
been long practiced, total production levels are far lower 
than they could be. Open-ocean waters are relatively clean. 
High water quality is important for aquaculture, but it 
is especially critical for species such as bivalve mollusks, 
which concentrate pathogens and other pollutants that 
can be passed on to human consumers. Also, new satellite-
based remote-sensing efforts are revealing previously un-
known nutrient-rich upwelling zones. In some areas in the 
Gulf of Maine, for example, phytoplankton concentrations 
can exceed the levels thought to occur only in enriched es-
tuarine waters. This means that open-ocean waters may be 
able to support a high productivity of farmed species such 
as the blue mussel. Mussels and other bivalve mollusks are 
herbivorous animals, feeding lower on the food web. A 
long-term sustainable approach to aquaculture would see 
more use of herbivorous species, reducing the impact on 
the wild fish stocks.
The Limits. The world fish catch may appear stable, 
but many species and areas are overfished. The FAO has con-
cluded that 52% of fish stocks are fully exploited (at their 
maximum sustainable yield), 16% are overexploited and will 
likely decline further, and 8% are depleted and are much less 
productive than they once were. Much of the catch (one-
third) is of such low commercial value that it is used only for 
fishmeal and oil production. Aquaculture is growing in de-
veloping countries, helping to alleviate poverty and improve 
the well-being of rural people.
The FAO has also concluded that the capture fisheries 
are at their upper limit, as indicated by the long-term catch 
data. Fisheries scientists reason that if overexploited and de-
pleted fisheries were restored, the catch could increase by at 
least 10 million metric tons. That could happen, however, 
only if fishing for many species was temporarily eliminated 
or greatly reduced and the fisheries were managed on a more 
sustainable basis. At the 2002 Johannesburg World Summit, 
SOUND SCIENCE
Restoration Science: 
Learning How to Restore
A group of people walk 
across the flat landscape, 
bent over, moving slowly 
from side to side. From 
a distance their motion 
looks odd. Up close, you can see they are throw-
ing something on the ground from containers 
in their hands. They look like ancient farmers, 
in a planting ritual going back millennia, but 
they are not. They are ecologists and volunteers 
restoring an abandoned farm to a native prairie. 
The seeds they cast are from native grasses like 
big blue stem and plants like wild lupine, purple 
coneflower, and Black-eyed Susan.
Volunteers have painstakingly picked the 
seeds over a period of months, and now, the soil 
plowed and ready, the seeds are being planted. 
Later, when both native plants and non-native 
agricultural weeds have grown, the team will 
reconvene to burn the field, giving the native, 
fire-adapted plants an edge and clearing out 
the weeds. Right now it is planting time. For 
this moment to happen, a lot of other things 
had to be done first. Seeds were collected some 
months ago. Some species needed to be chilled 
for weeks to stimulate growth. Some were 
scratched (or “scarified”), others soaked and 
exposed to fungi that would help them grow. 
Humans are doing the work 
that a healthy soil would do in a 
natural setting.
In order to find the most 
effective ways to restore an eco-
system such as an abandoned 
farm, old mining area, or former 
construction site, scientists first 
must do extensive research. 
Much of this research owes a 
debt of gratitude to the resto-
ration pioneers at the Curtis 
 prairie (Madison, Wisconsin), the 
oldest ecologically restored prai-
rie in the world. Scientists at the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison 
have been experimenting with 
restorations for 75 years, coming 
up with many of the techniques 
and scientific advances that are 
used in other places.
Even so, scientists will agree 
that restoration will not bring 
back the system that was de-
graded. Usually, what is restored differs signifi-
cantly from the original. Prevention is a better 
approach, and restoration should be used when 
other approaches have failed.
Sources: R. H. Hilderbrand, A. C. Watts, and A. M. Randle. “The 
Myths of Restoration Ecology.” Ecology and Society, 10(1) 
(2005): 19. http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol10/iss1/
art19/.
M. P. Zedler, B. Herrick, and J. Zedler, 2008. Curtis Prairie: 
75-Year-Old Restoration Research Site. http://botany.wisc.edu/
zedler/images/Leaflet_16.pdf.
A
a
b
f
a
Restoration Ecology. Prairie seeds collected for restoring prairie 
habitat.
185

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
with openings of a size that allowed smaller fish to escape. 
In less than 10 years, the number of boats fishing Georges 
Bank doubled, with disastrous results, as indicated by the 
cod-landing data (Fig. 14).
The NEFMC discarded the mesh-size approach and in-
itiated a number of regulations designed to take some pres-
sure off the Georges Bank cod. Vessels were restricted in the 
days they could spend at sea, areas of the bank were closed 
to fishing, and target TACs were set at levels designed to 
reduce the harvest. In addition, the NMFS has been buying 
back fishing permits and paying fishers to scrap their boats. 
In spite of these measures, cod landing consistently ex-
ceeded the TAC for years, by 150–200%, until 2004–2005, 
when the stock had plummeted to its lowest level ever and 
restrictions finally led to a much-reduced harvest. Recently, 
the New England ground fishery (with the blessing of the 
NEFMC) began to operate a community-based quota sys-
tem; this has been so successful that 17 additional groups 
of eastern fishers have petitioned to start similar systems.
Other Cod Fisheries. The Grand Banks off the coast of 
Newfoundland were once the richest fishing grounds in the 
world. The cod, however, were decimated by Canadian fish-
ers, who were encouraged by their government to exploit the 
fishery and were given little warning of its imminent collapse. 
By 1991, the cod population had dropped to one-hundredth 
of its former size. In 1992, the fishery was closed, costing 
the jobs of 35,000 fishers. So far, the cod population has 
not rebounded, and cod are at their lowest levels in a cen-
tury. Across the water, Europe’s cod fishery is experiencing 
the same decline: The North Sea’s cod stocks are now only 
15% of what they were in the 1970s. Proposals to reduce 
harvests have met with fierce resistance from the European 
Union fishing nations, who argue that the reductions would 
destroy them.
delegates agreed (one of the few agreements to come out of 
the meeting) to restore depleted global fisheries to achieve an 
MSY “on an urgent basis” by 2015 and to establish a net-
work of protected marine areas by 2012. Recent studies have 
shown that marine reserves provide sheltered nurseries for 
surrounding areas and can supply world-record-size fish to 
adjacent fisheries.
Georges Bank. Events on Georges Bank, New Eng-
land’s richest fishing ground, illustrate well the fisheries’ 
problems. Cod, haddock, and flounder (called groundfish 
because they feed on or near the bottom and are caught by 
bottom trawling) were the mainstay of the fishing industry 
for centuries. In the early 1960s, these species accounted for 
two-thirds of the fish population on the bank. After 1976, 
fishing on Georges Bank doubled in intensity, resulting in 
a decline in the desirable species and a rise in the so-called 
rough species—dogfish (sharks) and skates. As the rough 
species increased their numbers, fishers focused their atten-
tion on them, even though they were less valuable. Predict-
ably, dogfish and skate populations have also been overfished 
and are now subject to regulation.
Management Councils. The prized species declined 
on Georges Bank because the fishery was poorly managed. 
The Magnuson Act established eight regional management 
councils made up of government officials and industry rep-
resentatives. The councils are responsible for creating man-
agement plans for their regions, while the National Marine 
Fisheries Service (NMFS) provides advice and scientifically 
based information on assessing stocks. The NMFS also has 
the authority to reject elements of the plans submitted to 
it by the councils. The New England Fishery Management 
Council (NEFMC) began its task by setting TAC quotas, but 
fishers claimed that the TACs were set too low and success-
fully argued for an indirect approach that employed mesh 
60,000
20,000
0
40,000
57,157
Part of Georges
Bank closed
December 12, 1994
1982
'98
'97
'99
'00
'96
'02
'01
'03
'04
'05
'06
'07
'08
'09
‘10
'95
'94
'93
'92
'91
'90
'89
'88
'87
'86
'85
'84
'83
Cod landings from Georges Bank (metric tons)
Year
Figure 14 Fishery in distress. Data showing cod landings from Georges Bank, 1982–2010.
(Source: NOAA, 2011.)
186

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
and their scientists follow the mandates of the new law. Some 
fisheries scientists were disappointed that the new law does 
not require an ecosystem-based approach to fisheries man-
agement, instead maintaining the existing species-by-species 
approach. It does, however, strengthen the role of the SSCs, 
which improves the science-based approach to fisheries 
 management.
Marine Reserves. Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are 
areas of the coasts and sometimes open oceans that have been 
closed to all commercial fishing and mineral mining. They 
often allow less-harmful use like small-scale fishing, tourism, 
and recreational boating, although some MPAs prohibit all 
such activities. The number of MPAs is growing, now num-
bering more than 4,000 of varying sizes. More than 18% of 
coral reefs are covered by MPAs, but not all of these are rig-
orously managed. The benefits of MPAs are well known and 
include basic protection of these vital ecosystems, increased 
tourism, and the spillover of fish and larvae from the MPA to 
surrounding fisheries. The most direct path to the restoration 
of a fishery or a damaged habitat is likely to be the crea-
tion of a marine reserve. In 2009, President George W. Bush 
established three huge MPAs in waters surrounding several 
South Pacific islands, totaling 505,000 square kilometers 
(195,000 mi2) in size.
International Whaling. Another fishery of great concern 
to the international community is the great whale. Whales, 
found in the open ocean and in coastal waters, were heav-
ily depleted by overexploitation until the late 1980s. Whales 
once were harvested for their oil but are now prized for 
their meat, considered a delicacy in Japan and a few other 
countries. In 1974, the International Whaling Commission 
(IWC), an organization of nations with whaling interests, 
decided to regulate whaling according to the principle of  
maximum sustainable yield. Whenever a species of whale 
dropped below the optimal population for such a yield, the 
The basic problem of the fisheries is that there are too 
many boats—rigged with high technology that gives the fish 
little chance to escape—chasing too few fish. Equipped with 
sophisticated electronic equipment that can find fish in the 
depths and with trawlers with 200-foot-wide openings that 
scoop up everything on and close to the bottom, the fishing 
industry has become too efficient (Fig. 15). A better system of 
management is needed and the size of the fishing fleet must 
be reduced, so that the remaining fishers are better able to 
make a living without overfishing. One system, called catch 
shares, effectively gives fishers the equivalent of property 
rights in the fishery. The rights are transferable and allow the 
fishers to determine how and when they will harvest their 
catch. Coupled with accurate population assessments by 
fishery scientists, the catch shares system has produced an 
economically stable and environmentally sustainable Pacific 
halibut fishery, and there is no reason that it should not be 
applied to fisheries everywhere.
Fisheries Law Reauthorized. In December 2006, Con-
gress passed the second reauthorization of the Magnuson 
Act, with strong bipartisan support: the Magnuson-Stevens 
Fishery Conservation and Management Reauthorization Act. 
In the new legislation, the structure of the regional councils 
is retained, but they are required to set catch limits based on 
sound scientific advice from the council’s Scientific and Sta-
tistical Committee (SSC). The annual catch limits are to be 
set below the maximum sustainable yield, and the councils 
are to employ precautionary principles in setting those limits. 
The law also requires councils to end overfishing within two 
years after a species is judged to be overfished (it used to be 
10 years!). As with the previous version of the act, depleted 
fish stocks must be rebuilt and maintained at biologically sus-
tainable levels. The law also requires steps to be taken to as-
sess and minimize bycatch. Limited access programs may be 
developed along the lines of the catch shares system. Clear ac-
countability measures are required to ensure that the councils  
Trawl
door
Floats
Sweep
chain
Cod
end
Figure 15 Bottom trawling. Because 
of the way the ocean bottom is degraded, this 
method, used to harvest groundfish, has been 
compared to clear-cutting forests. The steel trawl 
doors weigh up to 5 tons, and the distance be-
tween the doors is as much as 200 feet.
187

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
ships. Although reliable data are still hard to acquire, many 
of the whale species appear to be recovering. The bowhead, 
gray, and southern right whales, for example, recently were 
upgraded from “vulnerable” to “lower risk” by the Inter-
national Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). In the 
time between the IWC moratorium and the present, how-
ever, the basis of the ethical controversy over whaling has 
shifted from conservation to animal rights. Many people 
worldwide simply believe that it is wrong to kill and eat 
such large and unique mammals. People from whaling 
nations counter with the argument that their culture eats 
whales, just as other cultures eat cows or turkeys.
Whale Stakes. There has been heavy pressure from 
three members of the IWC—Japan, Iceland, and Norway—
to reopen whaling. The interests of these countries focus 
on the small minke whale, although the Japanese have 
begun taking the much larger fin whales. In 1993, Norway 
resumed whaling for minkes, citing the country’s right to 
refuse to accept specific IWC rulings. Norway based its 
decision on information submitted by the Scientific Com-
mittee of the IWC, which judged the minke population to 
be numerous enough to absorb a sustainable exploitation. 
Currently, Norway takes up to 650 and Japan more than 
1,000 minke whales per year, the Norwegians for human 
consumption and the Japanese for “scientific purposes.” It 
is no secret that the Japanese “scientific” harvest ends up in 
commercial markets; the Japanese people, however, are los-
ing their taste for whale meat, and much of it ends up as pet 
food or in school dinners.
The IWC is right in the middle of this controversy. At its 
annual meetings, prowhaling members push for a resump-
tion of whaling with quotas, and antiwhaling countries op-
pose any such resumption. The 2007 meeting of the IWC 
reaffirmed the moratorium on commercial whaling, and sub-
sequent meetings have not changed that.
One contentious issue, however, is the claim that Japan 
and Iceland kill whales under permits given for scientific pur-
poses but really use the law as a loophole to get around the 
moratorium on commercial whaling.
IWC instituted a ban on hunting that species in order to 
allow the population to recover. At that time, three species 
(the right whale, bowhead whale, and blue whale) were at 
very low levels and were immediately protected. Because of 
difficulties in obtaining reliable data on and enforcing catch 
limits, the IWC took more-drastic action and placed a mora-
torium on the harvesting of all whales beginning in 1986. 
The moratorium has never been lifted; however, some limited 
whaling by Japan, Iceland, and Norway continues, as does 
harvesting by indigenous people in Alaska, the Russian Fed-
eration, and Greenland (Fig. 16).
Table 4 lists the status of 13 whale species or popu-
lations that are of commercial interest. Estimates of the 
numbers remaining range from 100 Northwest Pacific gray 
whales to up to 2 million sperm whales. Their main threat 
today is entanglement with fishing gear and collisions with 
Figure 16 Current whaling operation. Butchers slice into a Baird’s 
beaked whale at a pier-side slaughterhouse in Wada, Japan.
tabLe 4 Remaining Numbers of Large Whales
Endangered
Vulnerable
Lower Risk or Insufficient Data
Blue whale (3,000–5,000)
Sperm whale (1 million–2 million)
Minke whale (935,000)
North Atlantic right whale (300–350)
Bryde’s whale (40,000–80,000)
North Pacific right whale (under 1,000)
Bowhead whale (11,750)
Fin whale (50,000–90,000)
Southern right whale (7,500)
Sei whale (50,000)
Humpback whale (63,600)
Northwest Pacific gray whale (100)
Gray whale (26,300)
Sources: WWF, IUCN Red Data List (2008), and International Whaling Commission.
188

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
then, the percentage of destroyed reefs has increased to 
20%. The threats are both global and local.
Extensive coral bleaching (wherein the coral animals 
expel their symbiotic algae and become white in appearance) 
severely damaged an estimated 16% of the world’s reefs  
(Fig. 18) during the record-high sea surface temperatures ac-
companying the 1997–1998 El Niño. Some coral bleaching 
is an annual phenomenon related to the normal high tem-
peratures and light intensities of summer, but the events 
of 1998 were unprecedented in scope. Studies have shown 
that increased sea surface temperatures can bring on 100% 
bleaching; indeed, 2010 brought the highest global water 
temperatures on record, and the second worst coral bleach-
ing event since we have kept records. Corals are resilient, re-
covering from bleaching if sea surface temperatures decline 
in a short time, and some species are more tolerant of bleach-
ing than others. Repeated bleaching, however, weakens the 
corals and eventually kills them. Many had been recovering 
from 1998 temperatures more than a decade later, when new 
record temperatures set them back.
The other global threat—one that is more long-term—is 
ocean acidification. As the surface oceans take up increas-
ing amounts of the CO2 pumped into the atmosphere by hu-
mans, seawater becomes more acid and the carbonate ion 
concentration is reduced. This in turn makes it more difficult 
for coral animals to build their calcium carbonate skeletons. 
Scientists point out that persistent high summer tempera-
tures and the gradual acidification of the oceans could per-
manently wipe out coral reefs over vast areas of the shallow 
tropical oceans—an enormous loss of biodiversity and eco-
nomic value.
Islanders and coastal people in the tropics often scour 
the reefs for fish, shellfish, and other edible sea life. Some 
exploitation of the reefs, however, is driven by the lucrative 
trade in tropical fish for food and the pet trade. Local resi-
dents sometimes use dynamite and cyanide to flush the fish 
out of hiding in the coral, a practice that is not only destruc-
tive to the coral, but also dangerous to the perpetrators. 
Whale Watching. Whale watching has become an im-
portant tourist enterprise in coastal areas (Fig. 17). For ex-
ample, Stellwagen Bank, within easy reach of boats from 
Boston, Cape Ann, and Cape Cod, Massachusetts, has be-
come the center of a whale-watching industry estimated to 
be worth more than $30 million annually in New England 
alone. Whale watching now flourishes in 87 countries and 
generates more than $1 billion in business annually.
Besides having aesthetic and entertainment value, 
whale watching is of scientific value. Whale-watching tour 
boats usually carry along a biologist who identifies the 
whale species and interprets the experience for the visitors. 
Unfortunately, whales can be spooked by boats following 
too closely. In 2011, a U.S. researcher was charged with 
bringing boats too close and feeding whales, an activity 
that could teach whales to come too close to boats and lead 
to their injury.
Coral Reefs. In a band from 30° north to 30° south of 
the equator, coral reefs (such as the Caribbean reefs dis-
cussed at the chapter’s start) occupy shallow coastal areas 
and form atolls, or islands, in the ocean. Coral reefs are 
among the most diverse and biologically productive ecosys-
tems in the world. The reef-building coral animals live in 
a symbiotic relationship with photosynthetic algae called 
zooxanthellae and, therefore, are found only in water shal-
lower than 75 meters (245 ft). The corals build and protect 
the land shoreward of the reefs and attract tourists, who 
enjoy the warm, shallow waters. In addition, because the 
reefs attract a great variety of fish and shellfish, they are 
important sources of food and trade for local people, gen-
erating an estimated $30 billion per year in tourism and 
fishing revenues. In recent years, coral reefs have been the 
subject of concern because they have shown signs of dete-
rioration in areas close to human population centers. The 
year 1998 was a watershed: Before then, an estimated 11% 
of coral reefs had been destroyed by human activities. Since 
Figure 18 Bleached coral. This coral in the Red Sea shows the effects of 
excessively warm temperature.
Figure 17 Whale watching. A group of humpback whales entertains 
boatloads of whale watchers on Stellwagen Bank just north of Provincetown, 
Cape Cod. Whale watching has replaced whaling in New England waters that 
were once famous as whaling centers.
189

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
sites whose management is aimed at “achieving specific con-
servation objectives,” according to the Convention on Biolog-
ical Diversity. These sites, representing 13% of Earth’s land 
area, cover a spectrum of protection from strict nature pre-
serves to managed resource use. However, establishment of 
a protected area is not always followed by effective manage-
ment and control over misuse.
Public and Private Lands  
in the United States
In March 2009, the Omnibus Public Lands Management 
Act was signed into law by President Obama. This sweep-
ing legislation protected an additional 2.1 million acres of 
wilderness, increased the wild and scenic river system by 
50%, established new national parks and monuments, and 
provided for a new federal land system, the National Land-
scape Conservation System. The United States is unique 
among the countries of the world in having set aside a 
major proportion of its landmass for public ownership. 
Nearly 40% of the country’s land is publicly owned and 
is managed by state and federal agencies for a variety of 
purposes, excluding development. The distribution of fed-
eral lands, shown in Figure 19, is greatly skewed toward 
the western states, a consequence of historical settlement 
and land distribution policies. Nonetheless, although most 
of the East and Midwest are in private hands, forests and 
other natural ecosystems still function all across these 
 regions.
Wilderness. Land given the greatest protection (preser-
vation) is designated as wilderness. Authorized by the Wil-
derness Act of 1964, this classification includes 109 million 
acres in more than 700 locations—more than 4% of the land 
area of the United States. The act provides for the permanent 
protection of these undeveloped and unexploited areas so 
that natural ecological processes can operate freely. Perma-
nent structures, roads, motor vehicles and other mechanized 
transport are prohibited. Timber harvesting is excluded. 
Some livestock grazing and mineral development are al-
lowed where such use existed previously; hiking and other 
similar activities are also allowed. Areas in any of the feder-
ally owned lands can be designated as wilderness; the Bureau 
of Land Management, National Park Service, Forest Service, 
and Fish and Wildlife Service all manage wilderness lands.
National Parks and National Wildlife Refuges. The 
national parks, administered by the National Park Serv-
ice, and the national wildlife refuges, administered by the 
Fish and Wildlife Service, provide the next level of protec-
tion to 84 million and 96 million acres, respectively. Here 
the intent is to protect areas of great scenic or unique eco-
logical significance, protect important wildlife species, and 
provide public access for recreation and other uses. The 
dual goals of protecting and providing public access often 
conflict with each other, because the parks and refuges are 
extremely popular, drawing so many visitors (more than 
310 million visits a year) that protection can be threatened 
“Fishing” with cyanide is a growing (illegal) practice that 
has been encouraged by exporters in the Indo-Pacific region.
One solution to this destructive trade is to foster effec-
tive, sustainable management of the coral reef resources. 
Ideally, such management would be community based so 
that local people benefit from the exploitation. Another 
solution is to incorporate coral reefs in Marine Protected 
Areas (MPAs). A recent study found that 980 MPAs are  
already providing 19% of the world’s coral reefs with 
some level of protection. Again, effective management 
and enforcement are essential, and even this is not always  
effective.
Mangroves. Often, just inland of coral reefs is a fringe of 
mangrove trees. These trees have the unique ability to take 
root and grow in shallow marine sediments. There they pro-
tect the coasts from damage due to storms and erosion and 
form a rich refuge and nursery for many marine fish. Despite 
these benefits, mangroves are under assault from coastal 
development, logging, and shrimp aquaculture. Between 
1983 and the present, half of the world’s 45 million acres  
(18 million ha) of mangroves were cut down, with percent-
ages ranging from 40% (in Cameroon and Indonesia, for ex-
ample) to nearly 80% (in Bangladesh and the Philippines, for 
instance). The massive removal of mangroves has brought on 
the destabilization of entire coastal areas, causing erosion, 
the siltation of sea grasses and coral reefs, and the ruin of 
local fisheries. Developing nations that once considered the 
mangroves to be useless swampland are now beginning to 
recognize the natural services they perform. Local and in-
ternational pressure to stop the destruction of mangroves is 
growing. (Mangroves are highlighted in the section in this 
chapter on forests as well.)
We have investigated how the management (or lack 
thereof) of natural resources has affected several ecosystems 
around the world, focusing on forests and ocean systems. We 
could, however, have looked at freshwater ecosystems such 
as lakes and rivers, grasslands, or mountain areas. In each 
case, we could have looked at the use of natural capital from 
those ecosystems and whether humans are using the ecosys-
tem goods and services in a sustainable way. In the next sec-
tion, we will focus on the connection between public policy 
and natural resource management as it is reflected in public 
and private lands in the United States and at ways to restore 
degraded ecosystems.
4  Protection and Restoration
The time has passed when the loss of ecosystems could be 
excused on the grounds that there are suitable substitute 
habitats just over the hill. With the rising human population,  
industrial expansion, and pressure to convert natural re-
sources to economic gain, there will always be reasons to ex-
ploit natural ecosystems. The last resort for many species and 
ecosystems is protection by law in the form of national parks, 
wildlife refuges, and reserves. The World Database on Pro-
tected Areas (WDPA) recognizes 106,900 “protected areas,” 
190

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
the senseless shooting of bison that wander off the national 
parklands in search of winter grazing.
This cooperative approach is important for the con-
tinued maintenance of biodiversity because so much of the 
nation’s natural lands remain outside of protected areas. 
Cooperation may also help restrict development up to the 
borders of the parks and refuges, keeping them from be-
coming fairly small natural islands in a sea of developed 
landscape.
National Forests. Forests in the United States represent 
an enormously important natural resource, providing habi-
tat for countless wild species as well as supplying natural 
services and products. These forests range over 740 million 
acres, of which about two-thirds are managed for commer-
cial timber harvest. Almost three-fourths of the managed 
commercial forestland is in the East and privately owned; 
the remainder is mainly in the West and is administered by a 
number of government agencies, primarily the Forest Service 
and the Bureau of Land Management.
In the United States, although we have cut all but 5% 
of the forests that were here when the colonists first arrived, 
second-growth forests have regenerated wherever forestlands 
have been protected from conversion to croplands or house 
by those who want to see and experience the natural sites. 
At a number of the most popular parks, auto traffic has 
been replaced by shuttle vehicles because of the problems 
of parking and habitat destruction accompanying the use 
of motor vehicles within the parks. All of the federal agen-
cies involved are trying to cope with the rising tide of rec-
reational vehicles like snowmobiles and off-road vehicles 
used on most federal lands. The Blue Ribbon Coalition, a 
lobbying group representing owners and manufacturers of 
off-road vehicles, fiercely defends keeping federal lands ac-
cessible to these vehicles.
Increasingly, agencies, environmental groups, and pri-
vate individuals are working together to manage natural 
sites as part of larger ecosystems. For example, the Greater 
Yellowstone Coalition has been formed to conserve the 
larger ecosystem that surrounds Yellowstone National Park  
(Fig. 20). Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks form 
the core of the ecosystem, to which seven national forests,  
three wildlife refuges, and private lands are added to form 
the greater ecosystem of 18 million acres. The coalition acts 
to restrain forces threatening the ecosystem. Thus, it has 
challenged the Forest Service’s logging activities, addressed 
residential sprawl and road building on the private lands, 
acted to protect crucial grizzly bear habitat, and curtailed 
Bureau of land management
Indian lands
Wildlife refuges
Military properties
National forests
National parks
Marine sanctuaries
Other federal lands
Figure 19 Distribution of federal lands in the United States. Because the East and Midwest 
were settled first, federally owned lands are concentrated in the West and Alaska.
(Source: Council on Environmental Quality, Environmental Trends, 1989.)
191

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
lots. There are more trees in the United States today than 
there were in 1920. In the East, some second-growth forests 
have aged to the point where they look almost as they did be-
fore their first cutting, except for the absence of the American  
chestnut and elm. Now scientists are trying to breed disease-
resistant American chestnuts and elms.
Bozeman
River
River
River
Snake
River
Bear
Salt  River
Livingston
Cooke
City
NATIONAL
ELK REFUGE
Jackson
Dubois
Lander
Pinedale
IDAHO
WYOMING
Big Piney
Afton
GRAYS LAKE
N.W.R
Pocatello
Idaho Falls
Rexburg
St. Anthony
Ashton
YELLOWSTONE
NATIONAL
PARK
RED ROCK
LAKES N.W.R.
West
Yellowstone
Driggs
John D.
Rockefeller Jr.
Memorial Parkway
Blackfoot
Reservoir
Palisades
Reservoir
Red
Lodge
MONTANA
WYOMING
MONTANA
IDAHO
Yellowstone
Lake
Hebgen
Lake
Jackson
Lake
Cody
Gardiner
Ennis
GRAND
TETON
N.P.
Ecosystem Core
Transition Zone
State Boundary
N
kilometers
miles
50
0
50
0
R
u
b
y
 
R
i
v
e
r
M
a
d
i
s
o
n
Ye
llo
ws
to
ne
 R
iv
er
Yellow
stone 
       
      
  R
iv
er
Gal
lat
in
 R
iv
e
r
Bou
lde
r R
iv
e
r
S
ti
ll
w
a
t
e
r 
  
  
 
R
i
v
e
r
W
e
s
t
 
Ro
s
e
b
u
d
E
a
s
t
 
R
o
s
e
b
u
d
Y
el
lo
w
st
on
e 
   
   
   
    
   
Riv
er
Cl
a
r
k
s
 F
or
k
No
rth 
 For
k
S
o
u
t
h
 
F
or
k
S
h
o
s
h
o
ne
Gr
ey
bu
ll 
Ri
ve
r
W
oo
d 
Ri
v
e
r
G
r
o
s
 
V
e
n
t
r
e
 
R
i
v
e
r
Gr
ee
n 
Ri
v
er
Wi
n
d
 
 
 
R
i
v
er
H
o
b
a
c
k
 
R
i
v
e
r
S
n
a
k
e
 
R
i
v
e
r
S
n
a
k
e
 
R
i
v
e
r
H
e
n
r
y
s
 
F
o
r
k
Jef
fe
rs
o
n
 
 
 
R
i
v
e
r
Figure 20 Greater Yellowstone ecosystem. Yellowstone National 
Park is the center of a much larger ecosystem, which has received attention 
from the Greater Yellowstone Coalition.
The Forest Service is responsible for managing 193 mil-
lion acres of national forests. The Bureau of Land Manage-
ment oversees 258 million acres that are a great mixture of 
prairies, deserts, forests, mountains, wetlands, and tundra. 
Most federal timber production comes from the national for-
est lands.
Multiple Use. The Forest Service’s management princi-
ple in the 1950s and 1960s was multiple use, which allowed 
for a combination of extracting resources (grazing, logging, 
and mining), using the forest for recreation, and protecting 
watersheds and wildlife. Although the intent was to achieve a 
balance among these uses, multiple use actually emphasized 
the extractive uses; that is, it was output oriented and served 
to justify the ongoing exploitation of public lands by private 
interest groups (ranchers, miners, and especially the timber 
industry).
New Forestry. A forest-management strategy called 
new forestry was introduced in the late 1980s. This prac-
tice is directed more toward protecting the ecological health 
and diversity of forests than toward producing a maximum 
harvest of logs. New forestry involves cutting trees less fre-
quently (at 350-year intervals instead of every 60 to 80 
years), leaving wider buffer zones along streams to reduce 
erosion and protect fish habitats, leaving dead logs and de-
bris in the forests to replenish the soil, and protecting broad 
landscapes—up to 1 million acres—across private and public 
boundaries, while involving private landowners in manage-
ment decisions. The Forest Service began adopting some of 
these management principles in the early 1990s, and they 
formed the core of what is now the official management par-
adigm of the Forest Service: ecosystem management.
To harvest timber, government foresters select tracts 
of forest they judge ready for harvesting and then lease the 
tracts to private companies, which log and sell the timber. 
The timber harvest from national forests has been a contro-
versial issue. Historic data on timber sales (Fig. 21) reflect 
major shifts in logging. Note the rapid rise following World 
War II to satisfy the housing boom that was under way at the 
time, the drop reflecting rising environmental concern in the 
1970s, increased logging during the Reagan-Bush years, and 
a steep drop with the Clinton administration as a result of re-
newed environmental concern. According to a recent Forest 
Service analysis, growth of forests has exceeded harvests for 
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1905
1915
1925
1935
1945
1955
1965
1975
1985
2000
1995
2005
2010
Billions of board feet sold
HISTORIC NATIONAL FOREST TIMBER SALE LEVELS
Timber sales
(based on harvest volume)
Year
Figure 21 National forest timber sales. Timber sales 
over the years reflect changes in resource needs and political 
philosophy. 
(Source: US Forest Service FY 1905–2011 National Summary Cut and Sold 
Data and Graph. Available from http://www.fs.fed.us/forestmanagement/
documents/sold-harvest/documents/1905-2011_Natl_Summary_Graph.pdf. 
May 1, 2012.)
192

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
several decades in both national and private forests, indicat-
ing that the forests are being managed sustainably.
The Roadless Controversy. The Clinton administra-
tion’s Forest Service chief, Mike Dombeck, embraced the 
ecosystem management paradigm, and one of his first acts 
was to initiate a moratorium on building new logging roads, 
which became the Roadless Area Conservation Rule. The 
Forest Service had been criticized for its road building be-
cause the existing roads had contributed to the destruction 
of forests and streams. The timber industry and many mem-
bers of Congress from states with national forests objected 
to the moratorium. They believed that it would halt timber 
harvests and prevent access by off-road vehicles in roadless 
areas (they were right!). Some 58 million acres of forestland 
were affected by the moratorium. The Bush administration, 
unhappy with the roadless rule, replaced the road ban with a 
ruling in 2005 that allows governors to ask the secretary of 
agriculture to open lands to roads and development. In 2006, 
this ruling was canceled by a federal district court order to 
reinstate the roadless rule. Another district court tossed out 
the roadless rule in 2008, creating conflicting court deci-
sions and initiating a lengthy appeal process. Under President 
Barack Obama, a 2011 decision made the roadless rule the 
law of the land, although there have already been court chal-
lenges. Currently, this rule continues to protect 58 million 
acres of forests.
Fires. The years 2006 and 2007 set new records for 
forest fires, with 9.9 million acres burning the former year 
(a record) and 9.3 million acres the latter. With a decade of 
drought in the western states (2011 was one of the worst on 
record for Texas) and serious drought in the South, it is no 
surprise that forest fires have become more extensive. Many 
scientists believe that this drought pattern is a consequence 
of the buildup of greenhouse gases and their impacts on cli-
mate. A hot debate has focused on why so much forest land 
bears what is called “fuel loads”—meaning dead trees and 
dense understories of trees and other vegetation—and what 
to do about it. Most observers believe that a combination of 
fire suppression and common logging practices are responsi-
ble for the high fuel loads. Ecologists remind us that wildfires 
can also be seen as natural disturbances, rather than ecologi-
cal disasters—a confirmation of the dynamic nonequilibrium 
nature of ecosystems.
Salvage logging, one response to fires, involves harvest-
ing timber from recent burns (fires often consume only the 
outer branches of trees). The Forest Service authorizes sales 
of timber on recently burned national forest lands but is 
required to follow conservation safeguards mandated by 
the National Environmental Policy Act and the Endangered 
Species Act. This takes time, but in recent years, this kind of 
logging has been profitable to private operators in national 
forests. A 2006 study of postwildfire logging in an  Oregon 
forest showed, however, that salvage logging not only 
added to the continued fire risk (loggers left branches and 
brush behind), but also actually killed up to three-fourths 
of the seedlings that had regenerated on the burned land.5 
Many scientists believe that the best approach to regenerat-
ing a forest is to do nothing; removing the dead trees kills 
seedlings, disturbs the soil, removes nesting sites for wild-
life, and reduces nutrients and shade needed for new trees 
to grow.
Protecting Nonfederal Lands. In 2008, voters across the 
nation approved $7.3 billion in spending for the preserva-
tion of open space and for parks. California and Florida, in 
particular, spent $700 million together. Pennsylvania com-
missioned a report on public lands and parks in 2008 and 
discovered that in Philadelphia alone the parks provided mil-
lions of dollars in revenue, cost savings, and taxes—a total 
(estimated $1.1 billion) about ten times the amount the city 
spends on parks each year.
Land Trusts. Often, landowners and townspeople want 
to protect natural areas from development but are wary of 
turning the land over to a government authority. One crea-
tive option is the private land trust, a nonprofit organization 
that will accept either outright gifts of land or easements—
arrangements in which the landowner gives up development 
rights into the future but retains ownership of the parcel. The 
land trust may also purchase land to protect it from devel-
opment. The land trust movement is growing considerably: 
There were 429 land trusts in the United States in 1980 and 
more than 1,723 in 2010, as reported by the Land Trust Al-
liance, an umbrella organization in Washington, DC, serv-
ing local and regional trusts. These trusts protect almost  
47 million acres of land. The Nature Conservancy, a national 
and international land trust, also protects 102 million acres 
in other countries.
Land trusts are proving to be a vital link in the preserva-
tion of ecosystems. In 1999, alarmed about signs of develop-
ment in their region, 30 residents of Grand Lake Stream in 
northeastern Maine (pop. 150) met to share their concerns. 
Out of that meeting grew the Downeast Lakes Land Trust, 
which, over time, has carried out a $30 million conserva-
tion effort that has protected 342,000 acres of woodlands, 
60 lakes, and 1,500 miles of riverfront. Members are cur-
rently in a campaign to raise funds for another 21,000 acres. 
These lands connected several other conservation holdings 
in eastern Maine and New Brunswick, and the result (to 
the surprise of the original 30 residents) is that more than 1 
million contiguous acres are protected against development. 
The Downeast Land Trust is busy now constructing hiking 
trails and canoe-access campsites so that the public will be 
able to enjoy hiking, canoeing, and fishing in the conserved  
landscape.
Ecosystem Restoration
A great increase in restoration activity has occurred dur-
ing the past 30 years, spurred on by federal and state pro-
grams and the growing science of restoration ecology. The 
intent of ecosystem restoration is to repair the damage to 
specific lands and waters so that normal ecosystem integrity, 
5D. C. Donato, J. B. Fontaine, J. L. Campbell, W. D. Robinson, J. B. Kauffman, and 
B. E. Law. “Post-Wildfire Logging Hinders Regeneration and Increases Fire Risk,” 
Science 311 (January 20, 2006): 352.
193

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
least to a healthy system that promotes the second goal of 
the task force. If CERP does its job, close to 2 billion gallons 
of water that flow out of the Everglades each day will be 
redirected to flow southward. The plan calls for 80% of this 
water to feed the Everglades and 20% to feed the thirst of 
South Florida’s cities and farms.
Funding. One of the most difficult parts of any restora-
tion is funding. A major step in the restoration of the Florida 
Everglades project was announced in 2008, when U.S. Sugar 
agreed to sell its land and facilities to the state of Florida 
for $1.7 billion. This sale involved 187,000 acres of land 
to the south and east of Lake Okeechobee and could recre-
ate wetlands to store up to 1.2 cubic kilometers (0.28 cubic 
miles) of water that otherwise would need to be pumped into 
reservoirs and underground wells during the summer. Cur-
rently, the excess water is pumped eastward and westward 
out to sea, disturbing the salinity and nutrient regimes in the 
receiving estuaries. The water stored in the new wetlands 
would then be free to flow south into the Everglades during 
the dry season, once the path to the Everglades is made clear 
by other planned projects. Unfortunately, this planned sale 
has been scaled way back because of Florida’s financial un-
certainties, a result of the recent national recession. The new 
proposal would invest $530 million for 72,500 acres of land 
south of Lake Okeechobee and leave open future options for 
the state to buy more land.
There is no blueprint for a project like the Everglades 
restoration. The long time frame, the need for a continued 
infusion of federal and state money, and the great difficulties 
that will arise in carrying out the restoration guarantee that 
the project will attract skepticism as well as effusive praise. It 
will be in the news for a long time.
Pending Restorations. As the values of natural ecosys-
tems become more recognized, efforts to restore damaged 
or lost ones will become increasingly important. Many other 
large systems, such as the California Bay Delta, Chesapeake 
Bay, Platte River basin, and Upper Mississippi River system, 
have suffered from human abuse and ignorance and are now 
the focus of restoration projects. The Mississippi delta, bat-
tered by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005, is in need of 
a huge effort to restore the damaged wetlands and barrier 
islands. Restoration is under way at many sites that are eco-
logical gems, including the Galápagos Islands, under siege 
from many exotic species; the Illinois River, confined by 
levees; the Brazilian Atlantic forest, severely deforested; and 
Tampa Bay, affected by its urban surroundings.
Final Thoughts
Ecosystems everywhere are being exploited for human needs 
and profit. In addition to all the examples discussed in this 
chapter, other areas that are in trouble include overgrazed 
rangelands, and rivers that are overdrawn for irrigation 
water. The purpose of this chapter has been to highlight some 
of the most critical problems and to indicate steps being 
taken to correct them. It is certain that greater pressures 
will be put on natural ecosystems as the human population 
 resilience, and productivity return. It has become a world-
wide, $70 billion industry. Because of the complexity of nat-
ural ecosystems, however, the practical task of restoration is 
often difficult. Frequently, soils have been disturbed, pollut-
ants have accumulated, important species have disappeared, 
and other—often exotic—species have achieved dominance.
For these reasons, a thorough knowledge of ecosystem 
and species ecology is essential to the success of restoration 
efforts. The ecological problems that can be mended by resto-
ration include those resulting from soil erosion, surface strip 
mining, draining of wetlands, hurricane damage, agricul-
tural use, deforestation, overgrazing, desertification, and the 
eutrophication of lakes. Every case is different. Some cases 
involve working with several different ecological problems 
at the same time, such as the huge restoration project under 
way in the (formerly) vast Everglades of southern Florida.
Everglades Restoration. A much-publicized plan to re-
store the Everglades received congressional approval in 
2000. The plan, the Comprehensive Everglades Restora-
tion Plan (CERP), is expected to take 36 years and almost 
$11 billion to complete (Fig. 22). The federal government 
promised to provide half of the funds, and state, tribal, and 
local agencies the other half. CERP is managed by the U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers, the federal agency that was ac-
tually responsible for creating much of the system of water 
control that made the restoration necessary.
The Everglades is a network of wetland landscapes that 
once occupied the southern half of Florida. Now reduced to 
half its original size through development and wetlands drain-
ing, it is still an amazing and unique ecosystem, harboring a 
great diversity of species and many endangered and threat-
ened species. It is home to 16 wildlife refuges and four na-
tional parks, the crown jewel being Everglades National Park.
Because Florida is so flat, the general topography pro-
moted a slow movement of water south from Lake Okee-
chobee by way of a 40-mile-wide, 100-mile-long shallow 
“river of grass” ending in Florida Bay. Floridians brought the 
water flow under human control with a system of 1,000 miles 
of canals, 720 miles of levees, and hundreds of water con-
trol structures (locks, dams, and spillways), bounded on 
the east by a string of cities and their suburbs. In its center, 
550,000 acres of croplands were created, which form a 
lucrative  sugarcane industry. Now, water shortages in the 
winter leave too little for the natural systems, and in the 
summer rainy season, too much water is diverted to the Ev-
erglades. The water quality, once pristine, is now degraded 
because of nutrients (especially phosphorus) from agricul-
tural runoff.
Water Release. A broader restoration program was 
originally begun in 1996, coordinated by the South Flor-
ida Ecosystem Restoration Task Force. The total task force 
project is expected to cost close to $15 billion. The plan calls 
for removing 240 miles of levees and canals and creating a 
system of reservoirs and underground wells to capture water 
for release during the dry season. The new flowage is de-
signed to restore the river of grass, thereby restoring the 2.4 
million acres of Everglades—not to the original state, but at 
194

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
tion, a situation requiring both wise leadership and effective 
international aid.
In April 2000, when he was UN Secretary-General, 
Kofi Annan included in his millennium report to the Gen-
eral  Assembly a stern warning that far too little concern 
was being given to the sustainability of our planet: “If 
I could sum it up in one sentence, I should say that we are 
plundering our children’s heritage to pay for our present 
 continues to rise. These pressures must be met with increas-
ingly effective protective measures if we want to continue to 
enjoy the goods and services provided by ecosystems. The 
problems are most difficult in the developing world, where 
poverty forces people to take from nature in order to survive. 
If natural areas are to be preserved, the needs of people must 
be met in ways that do not involve destroying ecosystems. 
People must be provided with alternatives to overexploita-
.LVVLPPHH
&KDLQRI/DNHV
,QGLDQ5LYHU
/DJRRQ
6W/XFLH
5LYHU
%LVFD\QH
%D\
)ORULGD.H\V
)ORULGD%D\
(YHUJODGHV
1DWLRQDO3DUN
%LJ&\SUHVV
1DWLRQDO3UHVHUYH
&DORRVDKDWFKHH
5LYHU
.LVVLPPHH
5LYHU
/DNH
2NHHFKREHH
:DWHU
&RQVHUYDWLRQ
$UHDV
6XUIDFH:DWHU6WRUDJH5HVHUYRLUV
DFUHVRIDERYHDQGLQJURXQGUHVHUYRLUV
DUHSODQQHGWRVWRUHPLOOLRQVRIJDOORQVRIZDWHU
$TXLIHU6WRUDJHDQG5HFRYHU\
0RUHWKDQXQGHUJURXQGZDWHUVWRUDJHZHOOV
DUHSURSRVHGWRVWRUHXSWRELOOLRQJDOORQVRI
WUHDWHGZDWHUDGD\LQFRQILQHGDTXLIHUV
6WRUPZDWHU 7UHDWPHQW$UHDV
DFUHVRIPDQPDGHZHWODQGVZLOOEH
FRQVWUXFWHGWRUHPRYHSROOXWDQWVDQGRWKHU
KDUPIXOFRQWDPLQDQWVIURPZDWHUEHIRUHLW
LVGLVFKDUJHGWRWKH(YHUJODGHV
:DVWHZDWHU5HXVH
7ZRDGYDQFHGWUHDWPHQWSODQWVDUHSURSRVHG
WRUHF\FOHPRUHWKDQPLOOLRQJDOORQVRI
ZDVWHZDWHUDGD\DGGLQJDQHZVRXUFHRIKLJK
TXDOLW\ZDWHUIRUWKHVRXWKHUQ(YHUJODGHV
6HHSDJH0DQDJHPHQW
%DUULHUVDUHSURSRVHGWREHEXLOWWRVWRSWKH
UDSLGXQGHUJURXQGVHHSDJHRIZDWHURXWRIWKH
(YHUJODGHVZKLFKWRGD\UHVXOWVLQWKHORVV
RIPLOOLRQVRIJDOORQVRIZDWHUHDFK\HDU
5HPRYLQJ%DUULHUVWR6KHHWIORZ
0RUHWKDQPLOHVRIFDQDOVDQGOHYHHV
PD\EHUHPRYHGWRUHVWRUHWKHKLVWRULF
RYHUODQGVKHHWIORZ WKURXJKWKH(YHUJODGHV
ZHWODQGV6HFWLRQVRI7DPLDPL 7UDLOZLOOEH
HOHYDWHGWRKDQGOHLQFUHDVHGZDWHUIORZV
FRQWULEXWHGE\&(53SURMHFWIHDWXUHV
2SHUDWLRQDO&KDQJHV
&KDQJHVZLOOEHPDGHLQWKHUHJLRQDOZDWHU
PDQDJHPHQWV\VWHPWREHQHILW/DNH
2NHHFKREHHWKH(YHUJODGHVDQGWKH
FRDVWDOHVWXDULHV
Figure 22 The Everglades restoration plan. The goal of this 
plan is to restore historical water flow patterns so that ecological resto-
ration can occur. The seven major features of the plan are described at 
the left of the map. The lower three maps illustrate the historical, current, 
and future water flow through southern Florida. 
(Source: Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan, www.evergladesplan.org.)
195

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
the Billion Tree Campaign, begun in 2006, overran its goal 
in 18 months and has now become the Seven Billion Tree 
Campaign. From individuals to heads of states, people in 
155 countries are planting trees, acting in stewardship con-
cern for the climate and for peoples’ needs.
 unsustainable practices. . . . We must preserve our forests, 
fisheries, and the diversity of living species, all of which are 
close to collapsing under the pressure of human consump-
tion and destruction. . . . in short,” Annan stated, “we need 
a new ethic of stewardship.” Indeed, under UN sponsorship, 
REVISITING THE THEMES
sound science
Calculating a total allowable catch (TAC) requires solid 
scientific data on fish populations and an understanding 
of the MSY model. These limits are difficult, if not impossi-
ble, to accomplish for mobile creatures such as fish and whales. Fisheries 
scientists are constantly challenged to assess fish stocks accurately, and 
their recommendations can often be trumped by political and economic 
decisions, as is well illustrated in the plight of the New England fisher-
ies. Ensuring sustainable harvests in forests requires thorough scientific 
assessments of tree growth and a balancing of the needs of ecosystems 
with those of the harvesters. The restoration of ecosystems requires a 
great deal of sound science in the form of species and ecosystem ecol-
ogy. It also requires the ability to make midcourse corrections, which 
projects like the Everglades restoration will require in the future. Scien-
tists at the Curtic prairie set the stage for the discipline of restoration 
ecology. Scientists today use not only experiments, but also data col-
lected by citizen scientists to test hypotheses, as the example of the REEF 
data collection showed.
sustainability
The protection of forests, reefs, and other ecosystems 
requires intelligent policies and practices. Often this re-
quires coordination, as an unregulated commons almost 
always tends to overuse. This is why we have the International Whal-
ing Commission, for example. Unfortunately, there are many cases of 
unsustainable use: the taking of “bush meat” by commercial hunters, 
the cyanide poisoning of coral reefs, the exploitation of a commons 
where there is open access to all, and the deforestation in tropical rain 
forests, to name a few. The principle of sustainability is built into the 
model of the maximum sustainable yield, but for fisheries it turns out 
to be harder to accomplish in practice than in theory. For this reason, 
it is wise to use the precautionary principle in attempting to set such 
a threshold for a resource. Sustainable forestry, however, is not so dif-
ficult, as long as it is focused on managing the forests as functioning 
ecosystems and as long as biodiversity is respected. Where resources 
are being exploited in much of the developing world, sustainability is 
unworkable without taking into account the needs of local people and 
involving them in management decisions. Incorporating ecosystem 
services into our calculations will make protection of ecosystems more 
economically viable. Such an approach requires a knowledge of the 
value of ecosystem capital.
stewardship
Stewardship care of ecosystems means consciously man-
aging them so as to benefit both present and future gen-
erations. Sustainable consumptive and productive use of 
ecosystem resources involves tenurial rights over them; exercising these 
rights should be a matter of stewardship embodied in rules and policies. 
Table 3 presents a set of principles that promote such stewardship. When 
forests and fisheries are under the control of the people who most di-
rectly depend on their use, stewardship can flourish. Management of the 
fisheries exhibits both good and poor stewardship in different regions: 
Compare the Pacific Northwest and Georges Bank fisheries. Individuals 
can show stewardship by acting as citizen scientists or informed con-
sumers or helping nonprofits such as land trusts.
Finally, it is heartening to see the former UN secretary-general 
endorsing a stewardship ethic as an important step in preserving the 
natural resources that are under tremendous pressure from present gen-
erations. The Seven Billion Tree Campaign is a tangible demonstration of 
that ethic.
s
S
a
e
ecosystem reso
s
T
r
q
always tends to
s
C
s
o
ble to accompl
6. What does maximum sustainable yield mean? What factors 
complicate its application?
 7. What is the tragedy of the commons? Give an example of 
a common-pool resource, and describe ways of protecting 
such resources.
 8. When are restoration efforts needed? Describe efforts under 
way to restore the Everglades.
 9. Describe some of the findings of the most recent FAO Global 
Forest Resources Assessments. What are the key elements of 
sustainable forest management?
 1. How did individuals act to help scientists in the Caribbean 
Sea?
 2. What are some goods and services provided by natural 
ecosystems?
 3. Compare the concept of ecosystem capital with that of natu-
ral resources. What do the two reveal about values?
 4. Compare and contrast the terms conservation and 
preservation.
 5. Differentiate between consumptive use and productive use. 
Give examples of each.
REViEw QUEsTions
196

The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
 3. Consider the benefits and problems associated with coastal 
and open-ocean aquaculture. Is aquaculture a useful practice 
overall? Justify your answer.
 4. Kofi Annan stated that we are in need of a “new ethic of stew-
ardship.” What principles should this new ethic be built on?
 1. It is an accepted fact that both consumptive use and produc-
tive use of natural ecosystems are necessary for high-level 
human development. To what degree should consumptive 
use hold priority over productive use? Think about more 
than one resource (lumber, bush meat, etc.).
 2. Consider the problem presented by Hardin of open access to 
the commons without regulation. To what degree should the 
freedom of the use of these areas be limited by the authori-
ties? Make use of Table 3 when you defend your position.
Thinking EnViRonmEnTally
 10. What is deforestation, and what factors are primarily re-
sponsible for deforestation of the tropics?
 11. What is the global pattern of exploitation of fisheries? 
Compare the yield of the capture fisheries with that of  
aquaculture.
 12. Compare the objectives of the original Magnuson Act with 
those of the 2006 Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation 
and Management Reauthorization Act.
 13. What is the current status of the large whales? Discuss the 
controversy over continued whaling by some countries.
 14. How are coral reefs and mangroves being threatened, 
and how is this destruction linked to other environmental 
problems?
 15. Compare the different levels of protection versus use for the 
different categories of federal lands in the United States.
 16. Describe the progression of the management of our national 
forests during the past half century. What are current issues, 
and how are they being resolved?
 17. How do land trusts work, and what roles do they play in 
preserving natural lands?
avoid this by using firewood harvested locally or, if you need 
to carry firewood a distance, by finding wood marked with a 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) tag confirming that 
the logs are safe to move.
 4. Organize a volunteer tree-planting group. You can purchase 
young trees at a nursery, college agricultural department, or 
city government. To raise money for a large project, try to 
find individual or corporate sponsors.
 5. When you visit parks and other natural areas, stay on the 
designated trails. Avoid making new trails that might lead 
to erosion, and never disturb nesting birds and wild animals 
raising their young.
 1. To determine the impact you have on the ecosystems around 
you, calculate your ecological footprint (several sites on the 
Internet can help with this). What can you do to lower your 
ecological footprint?
 2. Consider Michael Pollan’s work The Omnivore’s Dilemma. 
The book deals with America’s eating habits, government 
regulations regarding food production, farming techniques, 
and similar topics. Decide which eating habits are ecologi-
cally sustainable and which are not. Go to the Internet and 
search for sites that offer ecosystem-friendly recipes.
 3. By transporting firewood from its native area, you may run 
the risk of spreading diseases and alien insect species that 
can damage trees and overrun whole areas of forest. You can 
making a DiffEREncE
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cREDiTs
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top): Rich Carey / Shutterstock; (bottom): Reinhard Dirscherl/Robert Harding 
World Imagery; (top left): think4photop/Shutterstock; Andre Seale/Alamy; (top left): 
Daniel Heuclin/NHPA/Photoshot; (bottom right): Jim West / Alamy; Norma Jean 
Gargasz/Alamy; Image Quest Marine; (bottom right): jeremy sutton-hibbert/Alamy; 
(bottom left): Tim Hall/Robert Harding World Imagery; (top right): Robert Brook/
Photo Researchers, Inc.; (top left): AP Photo; (top left): Kurt Lackovic / Alamy; (bot-
tom right): Georgette Douwma / Photo Researchers, Inc.
Text Credits
Table 2: Source: Data from “Living Beyond Our Means: Natural Assets and Human 
Well-Being,” from Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (Statement of the Millennium 
Ecosystem Assessment Board, 2005); Figure 8: Source: based on “Global Forest 
Resources Assessment 2010” from Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations; Figure 10: Source: based on “Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010” 
from Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; “A Global Map 
of Human Impacts to Marine Ecosystems,” from National Center for Ecological 
Analysis and Synthesis website, 2010. Copyright © 2010 by The Regents of the 
University of California. Reprinted with permission. All Rights Reserved.; Figure 19: 
Source: National Atlas website. 
197

carrying capacity The maximum population of a given species that 
an ecosystem can support without being degraded or destroyed in 
the long run. Represented symbolically by K.
catch shares See individual quota system.
clear-cutting In harvesting timber, the practice of removing an 
entire stand of trees, leaving an ugly site that takes years to recover.
Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan (CERP) Multi-billion-
dollar plan to restore the Florida Everglades by addressing water 
flow and storage.
conservation The management of a resource in such a way as 
to ensure that it will continue to provide maximum benefit to 
humans over the long run. Energy: Saving energy by cutting back 
on the use of heating, air conditioning, lighting, transportation, 
and so on and also by increasing the efficiency of energy use.
consumptive use The harvesting of natural resources in order to 
provide for people’s immediate needs for food, shelter, fuel, and 
clothing.
coral bleaching A condition, usually brought on by excessively 
high temperatures, in hard corals where the coral animals expel 
their symbiotic algae and become white in appearance.
deforestation The process of removing trees and other vegetation 
covering the soil and converting the forest to another land use, 
often leading to erosion and loss of soil fertility.
easement In reference to land protection, an arrangement whereby 
a landowner gives up development rights into the future but 
retains ownership of the land.
ecosystem capital The sum of goods and services provided by 
natural and managed ecosystems, both free of charge and 
essential to human life and well-being.
fishery Fish species being exploited, or a limited marine area 
containing commercially valuable fish.
Forest Stewardship Council An alliance of organizations directed 
toward the certification of sustainable wood products.
maximum sustainable yield (MSY) The maximum amount of a 
renewable resource that can be taken year after year without 
depleting the resource. The maximum sustainable yield is the 
maximum rate of use or harvest that will be balanced by the 
regenerative capacity of the system.
national parks Lands and coastal areas of great scenic, ecological, 
or historical importance administered by the National Park Service, 
with the dual goals of protecting them and providing public access.
national wildlife refuges Administered by the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, these lands are maintained for the protection and 
enhancement of wildlife and for the provision of public access.
natural goods The food, fuel, wood, fibers, oils, alcohols, and the 
like derived from the natural world, on which the world economy 
and human well-being depend.
natural resources Features of natural ecosystems and species that are of 
economic value and that may be exploited. Also, features of particular 
segments of ecosystems, such as air, water, soil, and minerals.
new forestry Now part of the U.S. Forest Service’s management 
practice, a forestry management strategy that places priority on 
protecting the ecological health and diversity of forests rather 
than maximizing the harvest of logs.
ocean acidification An outcome of the rise in atmospheric 
carbon dioxide; as the oceans take up more and more of the 
CO2, the carbonate ion concentration is reduced, making 
it more difficult for coral animals to build their calcium 
carbonate skeletons.
optimal population The population of a harvested biological 
resource that yields the greatest harvest for exploitation; according 
to maximum-sustained-yield equations, the optimal population is 
half the carrying capacity.
precautionary principle The principle that says that where there 
are threats of serious or irreversible damage, the absence of 
scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing 
cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.
preservation In protecting natural areas, the objective of 
preservation is to ensure the continuity of species and ecosystems, 
regardless of their potential utility.
private land trust See land trust.
productive use The exploitation of ecosystem resources for 
economic gain.
public good A category of ecosystem services that is not used 
up when people use it and cannot be marketed, like the air we 
breathe.
renewable resources Biological resources, such as trees, that 
may be renewed by reproduction and regrowth. Conservation 
to prevent overcutting and to protect the environment is still 
required, however. (Contrast nonrenewable resources.)
restoration ecology The branch of ecology devoted to restoring 
degraded and altered ecosystems to their natural state.
selective cutting In forestry, the practice of cutting some mature 
trees from a stand but leaving enough to maintain normal 
ecosystem functions and a diverse biota.
shelter-wood cutting In forestry practice, the strategy of cutting 
the mature trees in groups over a period of years, leaving enough 
trees to provide seeds and give shelter to growing seedlings.
silviculture A term used to denote the practice of forest 
management.
sustainable forest management The management of forests as 
ecosystems wherein the primary objective is to maintain the 
biodiversity and function of the ecosystem.
sustained yield In forestry, the objective of managing a forest to 
harvest wood continuously over time without destroying the 
forest.
tenure Property rights over land and water resources that involve 
different patterns of use of those resources.
total allowable catch (TAC) In fisheries management, a yearly 
quota set for the harvest of a species by managers of fisheries.
wetlands Areas that are constantly wet and are flooded at more or 
less regular intervals—especially marshy areas along coasts that 
are regularly flooded by tides.
wilderness Land that is undeveloped and wild; in the U.S., land 
that is protected by the Wilderness Act. 
zooxanthellae Photosynthetic algae that live within the tissues of 
coral species and enable them to grow productively in warm, 
shallow coastal areas.
glossaRy
The Value, Use, and Restoration of Ecosystems
198

Sweden. The cold winter wind cuts through the streets of Stockholm, Sweden, as 
Anje, a 19-year-old university student, hurries home to the warmth of her apartment, 
where she will settle in for an evening at her computer and books, studying for a 
degree in banking. She will stop for a fast-food meal on the way. Like many Swedes, 
Anje plans to travel extensively when her studies are over and then work for an inter-
national firm. While she is dating, Anje has no plans to marry in the near  future. She 
is likely to marry late, if she does, and have children later than many people in the 
world. Like many in the European Union (EU), Anje gets a free university education. 
She works hard because jobs will be scarce and she wants, someday, to be estab-
lished. When she is ready to have children, Anje is likely to have good benefits, with 
medical care and maternity 
leave. She is likely to care for 
her elderly parents in a society 
in which the number of elderly 
people is increasing, but good 
social and medical services 
will keep them active long 
into their seventies, maybe 
their eighties.
IndoneSIa. A world 
away, in the heat of bustling 
Jakarta, Indonesia, 19-year-old  
LearnIng objectIveS
 1. Humans and Population Ecology: 
Explain how humans, like other 
organisms, are subject to natural 
laws and ecological processes. 
Describe some significant dif-
ferences between humans and 
other creatures in their ability to 
change their own world.
 2. Population and Consumption—
Different Worlds: Explain the 
relationship between income and 
fertility in countries around the 
world.
 3. Consequences of Population 
Growth and Affluence: Describe 
the likely outcome of unlimited 
population growth or unlimited 
use of natural resources. Explain 
ways in which both population 
growth and consumption pat-
terns must be addressed for 
stewardship of resources to 
occur.
 4. Projecting Future Populations: 
Explain how age structure, 
population momentum, and the 
demographic transition help 
social scientists understand 
populations and predict future 
population trends in developing 
and  developed countries.
The Human 
Population
From Chapter 8 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

The Human Population
Atin rides a motorcycle home with her brother. They will stop at 
a market for chicken and noodles and come home to the small 
house they share with their parents and three siblings. Atin and 
her family have a small television and a few other luxuries. A 
medical emergency could set them back, though, and Atin is wor-
ried about her father’s coughing. Like millions of Indonesian men, 
he smokes local clove and tobacco cigarettes. Their family, like 
many others, was hurt by the Asian financial crisis in the 1990s. 
Atin’s father lost a stable job and took a series of temporary jobs, 
and their mother began to work part-time. Atin dropped out of 
high school to help her family. Now Atin and her brother are 
working to help support the family. Atin hopes to marry a young 
man her family knows, if they can get enough money together. 
Like many Indonesians, she will most likely have a smaller family 
than her parents did.
burkIna FaSo. In the dry season, Burkina Faso (in West 
Africa) is a place of dust and sun. Awa, 19-year-old married 
mother of two, walks with her children along a dusty road to-
ward her home. She is carrying a large container of water on her 
head. Awa’s husband works in agriculture in neighboring Côte 
d’Ivoire (Ivory Coast), where he makes a small amount of money 
and sends it home. Neither Awa nor her husband can read, and 
there is no nearby medical facility. She is worried because she is 
pregnant and has been feeling very ill. Awa and her husband had 
another child who died shortly after birth, and Awa is afraid that 
this coming baby will not survive either because she is sick and 
still nursing another child. Her feet ache and she is very tired, but 
there is little to be done about it. She sometimes cares for her 
mother and for the children of her sister, who died of AIDS. Her 
four surviving siblings have similar lives and live nearby. They all 
farm during the rainy season—growing cassava, yams, peanuts, 
and maize—and a few members of the extended family work on 
a  cotton farm or have other relatives working in the Ivory Coast.
Anje, Atin, and Awa are three of millions of young people 
living around the world. Their life circumstances give them differ-
ent health concerns, access to education, and medical care. They 
are also likely to have different family sizes and to use natural re-
sources differently. In the 20th century, the global human popula-
tion experienced an unprecedented explosion, more than tripling 
its numbers. Now, the rate of growth is slowing down, but the 
increase in absolute numbers continues to be substantial—and in 
some parts of the world, there isn’t much slowing.
Remarkable changes in technology and substantial improve-
ments in human well-being have accompanied this growth. In 
just the past 50 years (1960–2010), average income per capita 
has more than tripled, global economic output has risen more 
than sevenfold (from $10 trillion to $76 trillion), life expectancy 
has risen from 53 to 69 years, and infant mortality has been cut 
to one-tenth (from 40 to 4 deaths per thousand live births). Even 
so, Anje, Atin, and Awa do not live in a world where people 
experience average conditions. The remarkable improvements in 
living conditions are not experienced equally. Extreme poverty 
is still widespread. An estimated 1.2 billion people live on less 
than $1 per day, and the income gap between the richest and the 
poorest countries is enormous.
Humans are animals, and population ecologists can study 
human populations and ask many of the same questions they 
would if they were studying wolves or elk. But humans are also 
exceptional. They can think about and make decisions about their 
own fertility, they have ethical systems that inform their deci-
sions, and they can use technology to prolong life and increase 
food production. Even more unusual, humans have cultural 
constructs, such as money. Money and its economic institutions 
mean that survival is driven not only by evolutionary fitness, but 
also by the economic circumstances into which people are born.
In this chapter, we will put the stories of people like Anje, 
Atin, and Awa into the context of the dynamics of population 
growth and the related context of consumption and its social and 
environmental consequences. A continually growing population 
is unsustainable, as is a continually increasing consumption of 
natural resources, so the focus in this chapter is population and 
consumption stability—and what is required to get there.
1  Humans and Population Ecology
Humans are part of the natural world, and human popula-
tions are subject to processes such as birth and death. Fig-
ure 1 shows human population growth over the past 2,000 
years. The long, slow incline is followed by a rapid rise, 
giving what looks like a J-shaped curve. However, on closer 
inspection, the past few decades have shown decreasing 
population growth rates, and projections (possible future 
scenarios determined by assumptions about changes we will 
see) suggest that the global human population may level off, 
so that the pattern in 2100 will be more like the S-shaped 
curve that characterizes logistic growth.
The field of collecting, compiling, and presenting infor-
mation about human populations like that presented in Fig-
ure 1 is called demography; the people engaged in this work 
are demographers. Demographers may study population 
processes such as migration or changes in fertility and mor-
tality. In environmental science, biological science quickly 
becomes intertwined with other fields, so some  social demog-
raphers include economic, cultural, social, and biological 
factors in their analyses of populations. Consequently, we 
cannot discuss human population ecology without quickly 
discussing differences in wealth or health care.
Demographers use a set of specialized terms, described 
in Table 1, which we will use throughout the chapter.
200

The Human Population
reproductive potential. They are contrasted with “K-selected 
species,” or “K-strategists,” which remain close to K (carry-
ing capacity) and are characterized by long life spans, older 
age at first reproduction, high parental care of offspring, and 
fewer offspring. These characteristics form a continuum, 
with some organisms not easily placed in either group.
When we ask “Are humans r- or K-strategists?” it be-
comes clear that humans are like other organisms, but 
also significantly different. Just looking at the population 
growth curve of the past thousand years (Fig. 1), we might 
be tempted to conclude that we are looking at a J-shaped 
curve representing exponential growth typical of weedy spe-
cies that move from place to place quickly and cannot out-
compete other organisms over the long term (r-strategists). 
However, humans have characteristics such as high parental 
care and late reproduction that we would expect of the more 
stable K-strategists.
How can humans have the rapid population growth 
curve of a weedy, explosive species but also the life history of 
a slower-growing equilibrial species (those with population 
numbers remaining near the carrying capacity)? The answer 
lies in the fact that in some ways humans are critically dif-
ferent from other organisms. Even though the Millennium 
Ecosystem Assessment recognizes that “humans are an inte-
gral part of ecosystems,” there are some differences between 
 humans and other organisms that make our role in ecosys-
tems different from that of others.
Remember that a population is an interbreeding group 
of a particular species in the same area. We do not typically 
r- or K-Strategists
We can contrastorganisms like cockroaches, which breed 
rapidly and have boom-and-bust populations, with  others 
like elephants, which maintain smaller, but more stable 
population sizes. Cockroaches are described as “r-selected 
species,” or “r-strategists,” because they have a high r, or 
2000
A.D.
2500
A.D.
1500
A.D.
1000
A.D.
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2084
2044
2025
2011
1999
1987
1975
1960
1930
1830
Billions of people
Year
6 billion
Black Death
Plague
10 billion
9 billion
8 billion
7 billion
Figure 1 World population over the centuries. Population grew 
slowly for most of human history, but in modern times it has expanded greatly. 
(Sources: Basic plot from Joseph A. McFalls, Jr. “Population: A Lively Introduction,” Population 
Bulletin 46, no. 2 (1991): 4; updated from UN Population Division, medium projection, 2010.)
tabLe 1 Demographic Terms
Term
Definition
Growth rate (annual rate of 
increase or decrease)
The rate of growth of a population, as a percentage. Multiplied by the existing population, this rate gives the net 
yearly increase (or decrease, if negative) for the population.
Total fertility rate
The average number of children each woman has over her lifetime, expressed as a rate based on fertility occurring 
during a particular year.
Replacement-level fertility
A fertility rate that will only replace a woman and her partner, theoretically 2.0, but adjusted slightly higher because 
of mortality and failure to reproduce.
Infant mortality
The number of infant deaths per thousand live births.
Population profile  
(age structure)
A bar graph plotting numbers of males and females for successive ages in the population, starting with the youngest 
at the bottom.
Population momentum
The effect of current age structure on future population growth. Young populations will continue growing even after 
replacement-level fertility has been reached, due to reproduction by already-existing age groups.
Crude birthrate
The number of live births per thousand in a population in a given year.
Crude death rate
The number of deaths per thousand in a population in a given year.
Epidemiologic transition
The shift from high death rates to low death rates in a population as a result of modern medical and sanitary 
developments.
Fertility transition
The decline of birthrates from high levels to low levels in a population.
Demographic transition
The tendency of a population to shift from high birth and death rates to low birth and death rates as a result of the 
epidemiologic and fertility transitions. The result is a population that grows very slowly, if at all.
201

The Human Population
About 12,000 years ago, a highly significant change 
in human culture occurred when humans in the Middle 
East began to develop animal husbandry and agriculture. 
The development of agriculture provided a more abundant 
and reliable food supply, but it was a turning point in 
human history for other reasons as well. Because of its 
profound effect, it is referred to as the Neolithic Revolution. 
Agriculture allows permanent (or at least long-term) 
settlements and the specialization of labor. Some members of 
these settlements specialize in tending crops and producing 
food, freeing others to specialize in other endeavors. With 
this specialization of labor, there is more incentive and 
potential for technological development, such as better tools 
and better means of transporting water and other materials. 
Trade with other settlements begins, and commerce is born. 
In addition, living in settlements allows a greater storage of 
food and the development of preservation techniques, and 
food storage means that food stored from one year might 
be able to help people in years with less food production, 
talk about a widespread species as having a “global popula-
tion,” because local populations rise and decline according 
to local conditions. Drought in one area might be offset by 
good conditions in another. In contrast, we do talk about 
“human population” and mean the whole global popula-
tion. Prior to the modern era, human populations acted more 
separately—disease, plenty, and scarcity were local effects, 
and populations rose and fell with surrounding conditions. 
Several changes, due to society and culture, have altered the 
way human populations interact and have also changed the 
way human population ecology works. In the modern age, 
what happens in one part of the world affects humans in 
other parts of the world. Humans act both as local popula-
tions, with population characteristics such as family size and 
life expectancy, and as part of a larger global whole. Hu-
mans are unique in the biosphere in our ability to regulate 
our reproduction, use fire, store food for longer times, and 
adapt our environment with technology so we can live in 
more places. Consequently, population ecology can be ap-
plied to humans, but not in exactly the same way it is applied 
to other organisms.
Revolutions
The changes that have allowed humans to become such a 
dominant part of the landscape are so extreme that they can 
be considered revolutionary. Here we will look at a number 
of the revolutions that have brought humans from a number 
of isolated populations—ruled (like other species) primarily 
by local conditions—to the global human population today. 
In the past, there have been several large-scale upheavals in 
the way humans do things. These include the development of 
agriculture (which allowed settling into cities), the Industrial 
Revolution, modern medicine, the green agricultural revolu-
tion of the 1970s, and the current environmental revolution. 
In each case, we will see how new ways of doing things al-
tered the effect of high populations.
Neolithic Revolution. Natural ecosystems have existed 
and perpetuated themselves on Earth for hundreds of mil-
lions of years, while humans are relative newcomers to the 
scene. Anatomically modern humans most likely arose in 
Africa around 200,000 years ago. The earliest fully mod-
ern humans in Europe appeared some 40,000 years ago, 
during the end of a period known as the Upper Paleolithic 
(around 50,000 to 10,000 years ago). Archeological evidence 
suggests that Paleolithic humans survived in small tribes as 
hunter-gatherers, catching wildlife and collecting seeds, nuts, 
roots, berries, and other plant foods (Fig. 2). Settlements were 
never large and were of relatively short duration because, 
as one area was picked over, the tribe was forced to move 
on. As hunter-gatherers, these people were much like other 
omnivorous consumers in natural ecosystems. Populations 
could not expand beyond the sizes that natural food sources 
supported, and deaths from predators, disease, and famine 
were common.
Figure 2 The Neolithic Revolution. Before the advent of agriculture, all 
human societies had to forage for their food; agriculture allowed people to  settle 
in cities and to divide labor.
202

The Human Population
came with some unexpected costs. Pollution and exploita-
tion took on new dimensions as the industrial powers turned 
to the extraction of raw materials from all over the world. 
In time, every part of Earth was affected by this revolution 
and continues to be affected today. As a result, we now live 
in a time of population growth and economic expansion, 
but unfortunately with all of the environmental problems.
Medical Revolution. One of the main reasons for the 
slow and fluctuating population growth prior to the early 
1800s was the prevalence of diseases that were often fatal, 
such as smallpox, diphtheria, measles, and scarlet fever. 
These diseases hit infants and children particularly hard, 
and it was not uncommon for a woman who had seven or 
eight live births to have only two or three children reach 
adulthood. In addition, epidemics of diseases such as the 
black plague of the 14th century, typhus, and cholera elim-
inated large numbers of adults. Prior to the 1800s, there-
fore, the human population was essentially in a dynamic 
balance with natural enemies—mainly diseases—and other 
aspects of environmental resistance. High reproductive 
rates were largely balanced by high mortality, especially 
among infants and children. With high birth and death 
rates, the population growth rate was low in preindustrial 
societies.
In the late 1800s, Louis Pasteur and others demon-
strated that many diseases were caused by infectious agents 
(now identified as various bacteria, viruses, and parasites) 
and that often these organisms were transmitted via water, 
food, insects, and rodents. Soon, vaccinations against dif-
ferent diseases were developed, and whole populations were 
 immunized against such scourges as smallpox, diphtheria, 
and typhoid fever (Fig. 4). At the same time, cities and towns 
began treating their sewage and drinking water. Later, in the 
1930s, the discovery of penicillin (the first in a long line of 
antibiotics) resulted in cures for often-fatal diseases such as 
pneumonia and blood poisoning. Improvements in nutrition 
began to be significant as well. In short, better  sanitation, 
medicine, and nutrition brought about  spectacular  reductions 
in mortality—especially among infants and children—while 
birthrates remained high. From a biological point of view, 
the human population began growing almost exponentially, 
as does any natural population once it is freed from natural 
enemies and other environmental restraints.
The Green Revolution. After the Industrial and Medi-
cal Revolutions, human populations increased dramati-
cally. Concerns about whether we would be able to feed 
the rapidly burgeoning global population led to intense ef-
forts to find new ways to increase agricultural efficiency. 
The development of chemical pesticides in World War II, 
along with an increase in irrigation and fertilizer use, dra-
matically increased crop yields. These trends were enhanced 
by the  development of high-yield crops such as specialized 
rice, which yielded more per acre than other crops. These 
advances in agriculture did increase crop yields dramatically 
and allowed many countries to provide food for their rapidly 
Figure 3 Industrial Revolution. The Industrial Revolution began in 
England in the 1700s. Coal was the energy source, and economic growth and 
 pollution were the consequences.
evening out the risk from year to year. A consequent reduced 
mortality rate, coupled with more reliable food production, 
supports population growth, which in turn supports (and 
is supported by) expanding agriculture. In short, modern 
civilization and population growth had their origins in the 
invention of agriculture about 12,000 years ago.
Industrial Revolution. For about another 11,000 years, 
the human population increased and spread out over the 
planet, but these increases were not as dramatic as those 
seen today. Agriculture and natural ecosystems supported 
the growth of civilizations and cultures, which increased 
their knowledge and mastery over the natural world. With 
the birth of modern science and technology in the 17th and 
18th  centuries, the human population—by 1800 almost a 
billion strong—was on the threshold of another revolution: 
the Industrial Revolution (Fig. 3). The Industrial Revolu-
tion and its technological marvels were energized by fossil 
fuels—first coal, then oil and gas. In the past, people had 
used other fuels, particularly peat (compacted plant mate-
rial in wetlands) and wood. These fuels do the same thing 
that fossil fuels do: they allow people to use energy that was 
trapped by plants from the sun a long time ago. The use 
of coal, in particular, opened up vast resources of trapped 
 energy from other eras. This energy was used by humans to 
do work that we would never have been able to do if we had 
relied on human power—or even on the power of domesti-
cated animals. The burning of fossilized plants and animals, 
or of wood, is similar to the process of cellular respiration . It 
breaks chemical bonds to release stored energy and releases 
water and carbon dioxide as waste products. Fossil fuels 
contain other chemicals as well—such as sulfur and nitrogen 
compounds, mercury, lead, and arsenic— all of which can 
contribute to the pollution of land, air, and water.
The harnessing of this extra energy allowed people to 
produce more food. However, the Industrial Revolution 
203

The Human Population
growing populations (Fig. 5). However, the industrialized ag-
riculture that allowed for such high yields came at significant 
costs, much as the Industrial Revolution did. Increased ero-
sion, soil and water pollution, and the loss of native (often 
hardier) plant varieties were some of the costs of industrial 
agriculture.
Figure 4 This cartoon is from a British Ministry of Health pub-
lic health  campaign
(Source: The National Archives/SSPL/Getty Images)
Figure 5 Green Revolution. Indian 
farmers harvest high-yield wheat. Different varie-
ties of crops, fertilizer, irrigation, and pesticides 
are all part of industrialized agriculture, which 
helped feed growing populations but led to the 
pollution of soil and water.
Fossil fuels allowed people to use energy over short time 
frames that had been trapped over millions of years; in the 
same way, industrialized agriculture allowed people to use 
resources, particularly soil and underground water, more 
rapidly than they were replaced. In addition, the use of pes-
ticides initially saved many human lives and protected crops. 
In the long term, however, the overuse of pesticides resulted 
in pesticide resistance, the ineffectiveness of a pesticide when 
the target organisms are no longer affected by it. A current 
worldwide interest in  sustainable agriculture is an attempt 
to rectify some of these problems. However, as we will see 
in Section 3, population growth is pressuring us to increase, 
rather than decrease, high-yield agriculture.
The Newest Revolution. In the past, humans experienced 
revolutions with new technological breakthroughs. Now, we 
have the Internet, computers, nanotechnology, robotics, and 
solar and other technologies. Many of these can be put to use 
in what some hope will be a real “green” revolution—an En-
vironmental Revolution. More-efficient technologies, better 
urban and regional planning, policy and industrial changes, 
and the personal decisions of billions of people will be re-
quired to drive this revolution.
Humans are part of natural ecosystems, but they are dif-
ferent enough from other organisms to make their population 
ecology global and to allow them to change their world more ex-
tensively. They have characteristics of both r- and K-strategists. 
We see the J-shaped curve for human population growth 
 because, at different times in history, we have increased the 
number of people the world can support by changing the way 
we do things. Our past growth might seem to suggest that natu-
ral laws do not apply to humans. In the next section, we will 
204

The Human Population
and water for human activities. The argument that Simon 
makes also includes no value for nonhuman parts of nature 
except as resources for humans. That is, the rest of nature 
has no intrinsic value.
Because humans seem able to increase their carrying ca-
pacity in the short term—while potentially making trade-offs 
that will be paid for in the long term—determining a car-
rying capacity for the global human population is difficult. 
Demographer Joel Cohen explained the reason in his book 
How Many People Can the Earth Support?2 Cohen said that 
there isn’t a clear-cut answer to the question of carrying ca-
pacity because, with humans, some of the answer depends 
on what living standard we are willing to accept. For exam-
ple, if we never ate meat, we did not rely on wild organisms, 
and we were willing to never travel, heat our homes, or use 
paper, Earth could support more people. On the other hand, 
if everyone on Earth wanted a 21st-century American way 
of life, we would need multiple Earths to support the global 
population we already have. Because so much of the answer 
depends on standard of living expectations, Cohen argued, 
it is very difficult to determine an actual carrying capacity. 
Some people have used Cohen’s argument to say that there is 
no carrying capacity at all. That was not Cohen’s meaning, 
as he has made clear in other writings. Cohen simply meant 
that we can’t figure out a carrying capacity for humans in 
the same way we do for fish, ducks, or flies, because we have 
(and want) more choices.
While it may be difficult to find a single number for 
human carrying capacity because we may not all agree on 
what living standard we are willing to accept, the world’s 
scientific societies disagree with Simon and believe that there 
is some type of limit to human population growth. In 1993, 
representatives of the National Academies of Sciences from 
58 countries met in New Delhi, India, to agree on and sign a 
statement about world population. They said, among other 
things, that “the earth is finite and that natural systems are 
being pushed ever closer to their limits.”3
Scientists believe that, even if a concrete number may 
be hard to agree on, it is important to try to estimate 
what carrying capacity limits might be from an ecosystem 
 perspective. In 2004, two professors in the Department of 
Spatial Economics at the Free University in Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands, reported on their meta-analysis (an analysis 
of multiple other analyses) of 69 papers on world popu-
lation and carrying capacity, looking to see if there were 
any central trends. They identified a number of factors that 
could limit human populations, such as “water availability, 
energy, carbon, forest products, nonrenewable resources, 
heat removal, photosynthetic capacity, and the availabil-
ity of land for food production.”4 They concluded that 
the best estimates for global human carrying capacity cen-
look at carrying capacity and limits and ask whether they apply 
to human populations.
Do Humans Have a Carrying Capacity?
It is challenging to determine a carrying capacity for hu-
mans, a fact that makes predicting human impacts on the 
environment or likely future human poverty outcomes diffi-
cult. If people were close to starving many years ago and yet 
today there are many more people, people live longer, and 
proportionately fewer are extremely poor, how can we talk 
about humans reaching a carrying capacity? In fact, some 
people claim that the whole idea of a carrying capacity does 
not apply to humans. Economist Julian Simon, the author 
of The Ultimate Resource,1 claimed that human ingenuity 
is the ultimate resource and that there is no such thing as a 
limit for humans. He believed we would colonize space and 
that human populations really have no upper limit. There 
are plenty of people who would agree with him, in part 
because every time in the past that it was thought humans 
had hit a carrying capacity, a problem has been solved to 
 overcome it.
Most ecologists and demographers, however, would 
disagree. In their view, an escape into space is unlikely to 
solve the world’s problems for the vast majority of hu-
mans, and humans are subject to limits and natural laws of 
population growth. How then do we reconcile natural laws 
with the pattern of human population growth in the past 
2,000  years? Throughout history, humans have improved 
their survival rate, increased their populations, and increased 
their life span by doing some things other organisms can-
not do (or cannot do on the scale we can). These improve-
ments have essentially increased the carrying capacity for 
our  species. For example, we were once limited by what we 
could capture or hunt in one season, but the development of 
agriculture and trade removed that limit. We were limited 
by our energy requirements, but the use of fossil fuels gave 
us a new resource; we were limited by child mortality, but 
 medical breakthroughs lowered child mortality and popula-
tions exploded.
This pattern of population growth is actually exactly 
what you would expect to see under the law of limiting 
 factors—each time a limit is removed, population increases 
until there is another limiting factor. Simon represents a 
group that believes that we will always be able to elimi-
nate limiting factors. However, in the past, increases have 
come at the expense of using up nonrenewable resources 
(like fossil fuels). Increases in population have also come 
at the expense of creating another set of limits—this time, 
pollutants. The limiting factors that humans face in the 
21st century include pollution from our own activities, a 
limit on agricultural land, a limit on ocean fish, and trade-
offs between ecosystems we need for their services (such 
as photosynthesis, flood control, and habitat) versus land 
1Julian Simon. The Ultimate Resource (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1983).
2Joel Cohen. How Many People Can the Earth Support? (New York: Norton, 
1995).
3Population Summit of the World’s Scientific Academies, 1993. National Academy 
of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine (SEM), p. 7. 
Available at http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=9148&page=7.
205

The Human Population
the modern world, people in wealthy, middle-income, and 
poor countries live in radically different economic and de-
mographic conditions. In fact, even within a single country 
there can be tremendous disparities in wealth and in quality 
of life.
Rich Nations, Middle-Income Nations, 
Poor Nations
The World Bank, an arm of the United Nations, divides the 
countries of the world into three main economic catego-
ries, according to average per capita gross national income  
(Fig. 6):
1. High-income, highly developed, industrialized countries. 
This group (population 1.13 billion in 2010) includes the 
United States, Canada, Japan, Republic of Korea, Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, the countries of Western Europe 
and Scandinavia, Singapore, Taiwan, Israel, and sev-
eral Arab states (2010 gross national income per capita 
$12,276 and above; average of $38,658). Sometimes the 
high-income nations are further divided into those be-
longing to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD), an economic collaboration 
between primarily European countries, and non-OECD 
countries. Anje in Sweden is in a high-income country in 
the OECD.
2. Middle-income, moderately developed countries. This 
group (4.92 billion) includes mainly the countries of 
Latin America (Mexico, Central America, and South 
America), northern and southern Africa, China, Indo-
nesia and other southeastern Asian countries, many 
Arab states, Eastern Europe, and countries of the 
former U.S.S.R. The average income for this group in 
2010 was $3,764. The category is further divided by 
the World Bank into lower middle-income and upper 
middle-income countries (2010 gross national income 
per capita: $1,005–$3,975 for the former category, 
$3,975–$12,276 for the latter). In 2010, China, Ec-
uador, Jordan, Thailand, Maldives, and Tunisia were 
reclassified from the lower-middle income to the upper- 
middle income group, indicating that their economies 
had improved, while Latvia was moved down from 
high to upper-middle income and Fiji fell from upper-
middle to lower-middle income. Indonesia, home to 
Atin and her family, is in the lower-middle-income 
group.
3. Low-income, developing countries. This group (popu-
lation 0.8 billion in 2010) is composed of the countries 
of eastern, western, and central Africa, India and other 
countries of southern Asia, and a few former Soviet 
republics (2010 gross national income per capita: less 
than $1005,  average of $510). In 2010, Zambia, Solo-
mon Islands,  Mauritania, Ghana, and Lao PDR (Laos) 
moved out of this low category, to lower middle, 
 showing that their economies are improving. Awa and 
her family in Burkina Faso are members of the low-
income group.
tered on 7.7 billion people. One important result the anal-
ysis showed is that the best predictions of how large our 
human populations will get by 2050 are greater than the 
best estimates of our carrying capacity. Such analyses are 
difficult to do. While regional carrying capacities have been 
calculated, a similar global calculation has not been made 
recently. However, other types of analyses have reached 
similar conclusions.
Planetary Boundaries. In 2009, a team of 28 leading 
academics headed by Johan Rockström, executive director 
of the Stockholm Environment Institute, proposed a way of 
thinking about what parameters would need to be in place 
for humans to survive what they called “planetary bounda-
ries” for a “safe operating space for humanity.” The scien-
tists claimed that there are a series of limits, which act as 
“tipping points” that, if passed, would keep humans from 
surviving. Within them is a “safe space.”5 Both popula-
tion growth and overconsumption could push us past our 
boundaries. Estimates suggest that of the nine parameters 
they outlined, three of the boundaries (climate change, bio-
diversity loss, and flow of nutrient cycles) may have already 
been crossed. To survive, we will have to find ways to meet 
human needs without pushing those parameters. (For more 
discussion, see Stewardship, “Lessening Your Ecological 
Footprint”).
Picking Up the Population Pace. From the dawn of 
human history until the beginning of the 1800s, the popula-
tion increased slowly and variably, with periodic setbacks. 
It was roughly 1830 before world population reached the 
1 billion mark. By 1930, however, the population had dou-
bled to 2 billion. In 1960 it reached 3 billion, and by 1975 
it had climbed to 4 billion. Thus, the population doubled in 
just 45 years, from 1930 to 1975. Then, just 12 years later, 
in 1987, it crossed the 5 billion mark. In 1999 world popu-
lation passed 6 billion and hit 7 billion in late 2011.
On the basis of current trends (which assume a contin-
ued decline in fertility rates), the UN Population Division 
(UNPD) medium projection predicts that world population 
will pass the 8 billion mark in 2025, the 9 billion mark in 
2045, about 9.3 billion around 2050, and 10 billion around 
2085 (Fig. 1). Future growth and projections will be de-
scribed in Section 4.
2  Population and Consumption: 
Different Worlds
To understand what is likely to happen in the next decades, 
we need to understand the lives of people like Anje, Atin, 
and Awa. In spite of the fact that globalization is part of 
4J. Van Den Bergh and P. Rietveld. “Reconsidering the Limits to World Popula-
tion: Meta-Analysis and Meta-Prediction,” BioScience 54, no. 3 (2004): 195.
5J. Rockström et al. “Planetary Boundaries: Exploring the Safe Operating Space 
for Humanity.” Ecology and Society 14, no. 2 (2009): 32. http://www.ecologyand-
society.org/vol14/iss2/art32/.
206

Figure 6 Major economic divisions of the world. Nations of the world are grouped according to gross national income per capita. The population of various regions 
(in millions) is also shown by magenta lines and numbers. (Sources: World Development Report, 2005 (New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.), Copyright © 2005 by the Interna-
tional Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank. Populations from World Population Data Sheet (Washington, DC, Population Reference Bureau, 2010).)
Rep. of
Korea
Canada
United States
Mexico
Belize
Bermuda
(UK)
Greenland
(Den)
Cuba
The
Bahamas
Haiti
Jamaica
Guatemala
El Salvador
Honduras
Nicaragua
Costa Rica
Panama
Columbia
Venezuela
Guyana
Suriname
French Guiana (Fr)
Brazil
Ecuador
Peru
Bolivia
Paraguay
Uruguay
Argentina
Chile
Faeroe Islands
(Den)
Iceland
Norway
Denmark
Austria
Spain
Portugal
Andorra
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Ireland
Netherlands
Isle of Man (UK)
Channel Islands (UK)
United
Kingdom
Switzerland
 France Italy Cro
B&H
Mont
Kosovo
Albania
Mac
Serb
Slov
Gibralter (UK)
Former
Spanish 
Sahara  
Morocco
Algeria
Tunisia
Libya
Egypt
Malta
Monaco
Finland
Sweden
Poland
Czech Rep.
Slovakia
Hungary
Estonia
Latvia
Lithuania
Belarus
Russian
Fed.
Ukraine
Moldova
Romania
Bulgaria
Greece
Turkey
Cyprus
Lebanon
Saudi Arabia
Yemen
Oman
United Arab
Emirates
Qatar
Bahrain
Kuwait
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Syria
Armenia Azerbaijan
Turkmenistan
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz
Rep.
Afghanistan
Pakistan
Russia
Australia
China
Mongolia
India
Nepal
Bhutan
Dem. People's
Rep. of Korea
Japan
Laos
Viet
Nam
Taiwan
Thailand
Bangladesh
Myanmar
Sri
Lanka
Djibouti
Philippines
Maldives
Cambodia
Brunei
Malaysia
Singapore
Indonesia
Papua
New Guinea
Solomon
Islands
Nauru
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Federated States
of Micronesia
New
Caledonia
(Fr)
Fiji
Vanuatu
Guam (US)
N. Mariana Islands (US)
New
Zealand
The Gambia
Guinea-Bassau
Cape Verde
Senegal
Mauritania
Mali
Niger
Burkina
Faso
Benin
Nigeria
Chad
Sudan
South
Sudan
Ethiopia
Somalia
Kenya
Uganda
Central
African
Republic
Guinea
Sierra Leone
Liberia
Togo
Cameroon
GabonCongo
Equatorial Guinea
Angola
Zaire
Rwanda
Burundi
Tanzania
Namibla
Botswana
Swaziland
Lesotho
South Africa
Madagascar
Malawi
Zimbabwe
Zambia
Mauritius
Mayotte
(Fr)
Comoros
Seychelles
Low-income economies $765 or less
Middle-income economies $766–$9385
High-income economies $9386 or more
Ghana
Israel
Belgium
Germany
Georgia
Tajikistan
Tuvalu
Cote
d' Ivoire
Mozambique
Reunion (Fr)
Sao Tome and Principe
Eritrea
Uzbekistan
602
37
58
131
313
155
213
396
42
158
100
336
1795
1581
295
190
346
238
9
207

The Human Population
Population Growth in Rich  
and Poor Nations
One of the reasons we spend so much time looking at wealth 
distributions in a study of environmental science is because 
population growth is related to poverty, environmental deg-
radation, and other development measures. If you look at 
population growth in developed versus developing countries, 
you find a discrepancy that parallels the great difference in 
wealth between these groups of countries. According to the 
UNPD, the high-income countries such as Anje’s Sweden, 
with a combined population of 1.24 billion in 2010, are 
growing at a rate of 0.1% annually. These countries will add 
less than 1 million to the world’s population in a year. The 
middle-income countries, such as Atin’s Indonesia, and the 
low-income countries, such as Awa’s Burkina Faso, together 
had a 2010 total population of 5.73 billion. The populations 
of these countries are increasing at a rate of 1.5% annually, 
adding 75 million in a year. Consequently, more than 98% 
of world population growth is occurring in the developing 
(middle- and low-income) countries. In fact, population 
growth is highest in the least developed countries (Figs. 8, 9). 
What lies behind this discrepancy?
Population growth occurs when births outnumber 
deaths. In the absence of high mortality, the major determin-
ing factor for population growth is births, conventionally 
measured using the total fertility rate—the average number 
The high-income nations are commonly referred to as 
developed countries, whereas the middle- and low-income 
countries (a much larger number) are often grouped together 
and referred to as developing countries. Of course, all coun-
tries are in the process of developing in some sense, but here 
the term refers to economic changes. The terms more devel-
oped countries (MDCs), less developed countries (LDCs), 
and third-world countries are being phased out, although 
you may still hear them used.
Moving Up: Good News
Some of the news about population is good. Worldwide, 
the low-income percent of the world’s population has de-
clined dramatically since 1998, falling from about 60% to 
less than 12%. This is a reduction of about 80% in only a 
few years. It used to be that living in a low-income country 
was the norm for humans, and now it is not. It is part of 
the reason people talk about the “environmentalist’s para-
dox”. This paradox refers to the fact that some measures 
of human development are increasing at the same time that 
serious problems are arising in the environment. One of 
the improved measures is the movement of many countries 
from the lowest income status even as populations are rap-
idly rising.
The World Bank explains that, “Developing countries 
have increased their share of the global economy by grow-
ing faster than rich countries, on average 6.8% per year 
compared to only 1.8% for high income economies over the 
2000 to 2010 period.”6 While this is good news, in spite of 
the movement of millions of people from the extremely low-
income to the middle-income categories, the disparity in dis-
tribution of wealth among the countries of the world is still 
mind-boggling (Fig. 7).
The disparity of wealth is difficult to understand just 
by looking at general income figures (Fig. 7). The UN De-
velopment Program (UNDP) uses the Human Development 
Index as a measure of general well-being, based on life ex-
pectancy, education, and per capita income. The UNDP 
also uses the Human Poverty Index, based on additional 
information about literacy and living standards, to make a 
more direct measurement of poverty in both low- and high-
income countries. Between 10% and 15% of the people in 
developed countries are unable to afford adequate food, 
shelter, or clothing, compared with about 45% of those in 
developing countries. Anje, in Sweden, lives in a country 
with one of the lowest human poverty indexes, while Awa, 
in Burkina Faso, lives in a country with one of the highest. 
These data, available yearly in the UNDP Human Develop-
ment Report, have been used to focus attention on the most 
deprived people in a country, to help countries develop ap-
propriate policies, and to mark progress toward sustainable 
development.
6“Changes in Country Classifications.” 2011. http://data.worldbank.org/news/2010-
GNI-income-classifications.
Figure 7 Between-country inequality. Low- and middle-income coun-
tries are gaining some in the share of world gross national income, while their 
populations are increasing more rapidly than those of high-income countries. 
Inequality between countries remains stark. 
(Source: World Bank. 2011. http://data.worldbank.org/news/2010-GNI-income-classifications.)
SHARE OF WORLD GROSS NATIONAL INCOME, 2000—2010
20
High income economies
Low & middle income economies
Percentage
40
60
80
100
2000
2004
2003
2002
2001
2005
2009
2010
2008
2007
2006
0
208

The Human Population
Land area
Technical notes
Data are from the United Nations Development
  Programme’s 2004 Human Development Report.
The United Nations Development Programme
  uses one Human Poverty Index for poorer
  territories and another for richer territories. The
  scores of the latter can be divided by 10 so the
  indices are comparable.
•
•
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Human Poverty Index on a scale of 0–1000;
scoring 1000 would show 100% poverty
Central Africa
Southeastern Africa
Northern Africa
Southern Asia
Asia Paciﬁc
Middle East
Eastern Asia
South America
Eastern Europe
North America
Western Europe
Japan
HUMAN POVERTY
Figure 8 Another way to picture poverty. The territory size shows the number of poor people in the 
country. On the human poverty index, Burkina Faso ranks highest and Sweden ranks lowest.
(Source: SASI Group (University of Sheffield) and Mark Newman (University of Michigan).)
Figure 9 Population growth in 
different world regions. Because of larger 
populations and higher birthrates, developing 
countries represent an ever-growing share of 
the world’s population. This trend is expected to 
continue.
(Source: UN Population Division, World Population 
Prospects: The 2010 Revision (New York: United Nations, 
2010).)
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1950 '55
'60
'65
'70
'75
'80
'85
'90
'95 2000 '05
'10
'15
'20
'25
'30
'35
'40
'45
'50
Year
Billions
Developed Countries
Developing Countries
209

The Human Population
tinue growing, while the populations of developed coun-
tries will stabilize or decline. (An exception to the rule, 
because of immigration and births to immigrants, is the 
U.S. population.) As a consequence, the percentage of the 
world’s population living in developing countries—already 
82%—is expected to climb steadily to more than 90% by 
2075 (Fig. 9). Nevertheless, it is not just the developing 
countries that have problems.
Different Populations, Different Problems
Just as we saw in the discussion of carrying capacity, both 
the number of people and their standards of living play a role 
in whether we achieve sustainability or experience environ-
mental degradation. Some time ago, ecologist Paul Ehrlich 
and physicist John Holdren proposed a formula to account 
for the human factors that contribute to environmental de-
terioration and the depletion of resources. They reasoned 
that human pressure on the environment was the outcome 
of three factors: population, affluence, and technology. They 
offered the following formula:
I 5 P ? A ? T
According to this equation, called the IPAT formula, en-
vironmental impact (I) equals population (P), multiplied by 
affluence and consumption patterns (A), multiplied by the 
level of technology of the society (T). The IPAT formula fits 
well with the concept of carrying capacity. Given the high 
level of technology in the industrialized countries and the 
of children each woman in a population has over her lifetime 
(Fig. 10). Theoretically, a total fertility rate of 2.0 will give a 
stable population, because two children per woman, on aver-
age, will replace two parents when they eventually die. A total 
fertility rate greater than 2.0 will result in a growing popu-
lation, because each generation is replaced by a larger one; 
and, barring immigration, a total fertility rate less than 2.0 
will lead to a declining population, because each generation 
will eventually be replaced by a smaller one. Given that infant 
and childhood mortality is not, in fact, zero and that some 
women do not reproduce, replacement-level fertility—the fer-
tility rate that will just replace the population of parents—is 
2.1 for developed countries and slightly higher for developing 
countries, which have higher infant and childhood mortality.
Total fertility rates have dropped all over the world, but 
most dramatically in the high-income countries. Total fertil-
ity rates in developed countries have declined over the past 
two centuries to the point where they now average 1.7, with 
some as low as 1.1 (Table 2, Fig. 10). The one major excep-
tion is the United States, with a total fertility rate of 2.06 in 
2012. When countries industrialize and have modern medi-
cine, they typically undergo these changes, described as the 
demographic transition. This will be described in Section 4 
when we discuss how demographers project future popula-
tion trends.
In developing countries, fertility rates have come 
down considerably in recent years, but they still aver-
age 2.7. Some have rates as high as 7 or more, however  
(Table 2). Thus, the populations of developing countries, 
half of which are poor (low-income) countries, will con-
Figure 10 Total fertility rates around the world. Fertility rates vary around the world.
(Source: UN Population Division, World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision (New York: United Nations, 2008).)
0.8
BHM Projections of Total Fertility.
Based on WPP 2010 fertility estimates
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9.25
Estimates and Projections of Total Fertility
2005 – 2010 Estimate
210

The Human Population
the United States and western Europe with the passage of 
many environmental laws and that some wealth is required 
to build technologies to deal with the needs of large groups 
of people with minimal environmental degradation. But the 
relationship between economic wealth and environmental 
health is not clear-cut for two reasons. First, while issues like 
infectious disease in water might improve, other problems 
like municipal waste increase with wealth. The second rea-
son is that wealth allows people to care for the environment 
in their area, but doing so often pushes environmental prob-
lems to other, poorer places. For example, the high-income 
countries may be able to clean up their own sewage because 
they have the money for treatment plants. However, the ex-
traction of resources and the manufacture of goods in other 
countries for use in these high-income countries have impacts 
in many other parts of the world.
Ecological Footprint. Some people argue that because 
the highest-density places—like the Netherlands, Singapore, 
Hong Kong, and Japan—are places with healthy, long-lived, 
wealthy human populations, overpopulation is not real. If 
they can be so crowded, why can’t we have a whole world 
like that? But high-density, wealthy areas such as Singapore 
use resources and affect ecosystems over a much wider area. 
 affluent  lifestyle that accompanies it, a fairly small  population 
can have a very large impact on the environment. More re-
cently, there have been attempts to improve the equation. The 
technology part of the equation has always been difficult to 
quantify. Some technologies improve environmental condi-
tions and some harm it. Some economists have rewritten the 
IPAT formula to separate the effects of technology (T) into 
two components: consumption per unit of GDP (How much 
do you use as your economy increases?) and impact per unit 
of consumption (How inefficient, or how negative, is what 
you are doing?). They call this formula ImPACT.7
Effect of Wealth. Sometimes people think that wealth will 
solve environmental problems—that is, the rich can afford 
the luxury of caring for the environment. Wealthy countries, 
the thinking goes, can more easily afford the technologies to 
lower air pollution, clean water, and take care of sewage, 
for example. Give the poor quick ways to improve their 
economies, and eventually they will also take care of the en-
vironment. It is true that the environment has improved in 
tabLe 2 Population Data for Selected Countries
Country
Total Fertility  
Rate
Population 2011 
(millions)
Population 2050—
Projected (millions)
World
2.5
6,987
9,587
Least Developed
4.5
861
1,826
Egypt
2.9
82.6
123.5
China
1.5
1,345.90
1,312.60
Afghanistan
6.3
32.4
76.3
India
2.6
1,241.30
1691.7
Iraq
4.7
32.7
83.4
Burkina Faso
5.8
17
46.7
Haiti
3.4
10.1
14.2
Indonesia
2.3
238.2
309.4
More Developed:
Average
1.7
United States
2.0
311.7
422.6
Canada
1.7
34.5
47.5
Japan
1.4
128.1
95.2
Sweden
2.0
9.4
10.7
Italy
1.4
60.8
62
Spain
1.4
46.2
49.1
Source: Data from 2011 World Population Data Sheet (Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau, 2011).
7Richard York, Eugene A. Rosa, and Thomas Dietz. “STIRPAT, IPAT, and Im-
PACT: Analytic Tools for Unpacking the Driving Forces of Environmental Impacts.” 
Ecological Economics 46 (2003): 351–365.
211

The Human Population
more live in extreme poverty. In China, there are more than 
300 million people in this rising middle- and upper-class 
group. Even in low-income countries, the top leaders may 
be extremely wealthy, while the rest of the citizens are poor. 
The United States (GINI index 45), an extremely wealthy 
country, also has large disparities between groups in terms 
of health care and access to services. Because of these dis-
parities, it ranks lowest among the developed countries in life 
expectancy, in spite of spending more per person on health 
care than any other country. It has more children in poverty 
and more people in prison than any other high-income coun-
try. Income inequality can cause social unrest. In the United 
States, the percent of wealth owned by the top 1% went 
from 28% to 47% between 1968 and 2007. This change 
contributed to the 2011 protests across the country called 
the “Occupy Wall Street” movement.
We have seen that simple statements about the life ex-
periences of high-, middle-, and low-income countries may 
not apply to every person. The disparities between rich and 
poor within a country also matter. Differences between 
countries are not the only differences that justice requires us 
to  address.
Enter Stewardship. Despite having a fairly stable popula-
tion, the developed countries have their own problems with 
consumption, affluence, damaging technologies, and bur-
geoning wastes. These issues must be addressed to achieve 
sustainability, and this, too, requires wise leaders and 
 effective public policies. It also requires willpower, both indi-
vidually and as a society, and an ethical basis for caring for 
others and for the rest of the natural world.
Fortunately, the environmental impacts of affluent 
lifestyles may be moderated somewhat by practicing envi-
ronmental stewardship. For example, suitable attention to 
People living in high-density areas have impacts in the far 
reaches of the seas and land. This is why we talk about an  
ecological (or environmental) footprint, or an effect of some-
thing we might be doing. An environmental footprint is an 
estimate of the amount of land and ocean required to provide 
the resources you need or absorb the wastes you produce. 
The environmental footprint of Hong Kong, for example, is 
many times greater than the size of the metropolitan region 
(see Stewardship, “Lessening your Ecological Footprint”).
Inequalities Within Countries. The developing coun-
tries, especially the low-income group of countries, do have a 
population problem, and it is making their progress toward 
sustainable development that much more difficult. Their 
needs are great: economic growth, more employment, wise 
leaders, effective public policies, fair treatment by other na-
tions, and, especially, technological and financial help from 
the wealthy nations. Meeting these needs is a matter of jus-
tice, one of the key components of stewardship. Even this 
description is too simplistic because within each group of 
nations and within individual nations there is a tremendous 
difference in wealth and poverty levels and individual experi-
ences. There is a rising middle class in some middle-income 
countries, with consumption patterns similar to those in the 
United States, Japan, and Europe. This group is called “the 
consumer class.” The World Bank measures inequality in 
each country with the GINI index, a way of quantifying dif-
ferences in wealth within countries. Sweden has one of the 
lowest values (23) and South Africa one of the highest (65). 
In fact, Burkina Faso (39) and Indonesia (37) each have a 
GINI index in the middle; they have few ultra-rich citizens.
India has hundreds of millions of extremely wealthy 
people and an emerging middle class (as wealthy as Euro-
peans, Japanese, or Americans), while hundreds of millions 
STEWaRDSHIP
Lessening Your Ecological Footprint
Some estimates 
conclude that the 
average American 
places at least 20 
times the demand 
on Earth’s resources—including its ability 
to absorb pollutants—as does the average 
person in Bangladesh, a poor Asian country. 
Major world pollution problems—such 
as the depletion of the ozone layer, the 
impacts of global climate change, and 
the accumulation of toxic wastes in the 
environment—are largely the consequence 
of the high consumption associated with 
affluent lifestyles in the developed countries. 
How might Atin, Awa, and Anje affect the 
environment? Anje in Sweden probably uses 
fewer resources and has a smaller footprint 
than her cousin in the United States, because 
the EU has more regulations on products 
and because Europe is so tightly packed and 
distances between cities are much smaller. 
Public transportation, biking, smaller vehicles, 
and other lower-impact services are the 
norm. However, Europeans still have very 
high impacts on the world in comparison 
to citizens of low-income countries. Awa 
in Burkina Faso likely has a lower footprint 
from consumer impacts, but is likely to have 
more children and might cause more water 
pollution if sanitary facilities are not available. 
Overall, her use of resources will be much 
lower than the other two. Atin in Indonesia is 
likely to have greater consumption levels than 
Awa and lower than Anje.
If you search the Internet for “ecological 
footprint,” you can calculate your own, one of 
the first steps to figuring out how to be more 
sustainable. A footprint calculator is likely to ask 
you to answer questions about your housing, 
use of energy, purchasing habits, recycling, eat-
ing habits, and other questions. Then it will use 
this information to calculate how many Earths 
we would need if everyone lived at the standard 
of living you have. The calculator will suggest 
steps to reduce your footprint based on your 
habits. You can also calculate specific types of 
footprints such as nitrogen, carbon, and water. 
If we calculated a footprint for Anje, for exam-
ple, it might be less than a college student in the 
United States, because she would be less likely 
to have a car and more likely to recycle and to 
take public transportation. Awa would require 
fewer resources because she uses much less en-
ergy, does not travel much, and grows her own 
food. Figuring out our contribution to the over-
use of resources is the first step to change!
S
c
a
p
t
212

The Human Population
up new land to farm. They may also engage in illicit activi-
ties for income, emigrate to other countries (either legally or 
 illegally), or move to the cities and seek employment.
As we will see, each of these options has consequences.
Land Ownership Reform. Rising population growth in 
rural developing countries has increased the need to reform 
the system of land ownership. Collectivization (the gathering 
of farmers into group farms) and ownership by the wealthy 
few are two patterns of agricultural land ownership that 
have historically kept rural peoples in poverty. Collectivi-
zation originated within 20th-century communism and was 
one of the great failures of the former Soviet Union. Today, 
state-owned land is being privatized, with the result that 
 agricultural production is on the rise. When China aban-
doned collective agriculture in 1978 and assigned most agri-
cultural land to small-scale farmers, farm output grew more 
than 6% a year for the next 15 years.
Ownership by the wealthy few was a common result 
of colonialism in the 19th and 20th centuries. For example, 
under the apartheid system in South Africa, 87% of South 
 Africa’s land was available only to whites or was owned by 
the government, leaving a much smaller amount of poor-
quality land for use by people of color. Since apartheid 
ended, the South African government has been slowly trying 
to solve the problems brought about by such land inequal-
ity. However, resolving these kinds of inequities can disrupt 
the social order, as events in Zimbabwe have shown. In that 
country, a chaotic land reform program, which was supposed 
to return land to landless people, has virtually  destroyed the 
country’s agriculture and helped to plunge the country into 
economic decline.
Intensifying Cultivation. The introduction of more 
highly productive varieties of basic food grains in the Green 
Revolution has had a dramatic beneficial effect in support-
ing the growing population, but is not without some con-
cerns. For example, intensifying cultivation means working 
the land harder. Traditional subsistence farming in Africa 
involved rotating cultivation among three plots and allow-
ing some of the land to lie fallow. With pressures to increase 
wildlife conservation, pollution control, energy conservation 
and efficiency, and recycling may lower (to some extent) the 
negative impact of a consumer lifestyle. These changes would 
alter the technology part of the ImPACT equation, lessening 
the effect of our use of resources.
Some people argue that population growth is the main 
problem, others claim that our highly consumption-oriented 
lifestyle is chiefly to blame, and still others maintain that it 
is our inattention to stewardship that is the prime shortcom-
ing. In order to make the transition to a sustainable future, 
however, all three areas (and more) must be addressed. That 
is, the population must stabilize (a demographic transition), 
consumption must decrease (a resource and technology tran-
sition), and stewardship action must increase (a political/ 
sociological transition).
3  Consequences of Population 
Growth and affluence
Expanding populations and increasing affluence—it sounds 
like trouble for the environment, and it is. It also means trou-
ble for people in high-, middle-, and low-income countries. 
In countries experiencing rapid population growth, people 
overuse land, and many flee to cities in the hopes that there 
will be new opportunities there. These hopes are not neces-
sarily fulfilled. In high-income countries,  increases in indus-
trialization have resulted in huge amounts of wealth, but have 
caused problems as well, including the transfer of environ-
mental degradation to places where those most  responsible 
for generating it do not have to experience its price.
Countries with Rapid Growth
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, many humans survived 
through subsistence agriculture. Families lived on the land, 
raised livestock, and produced enough crops for their own 
consumption and perhaps some extra to barter for other es-
sentials. Forests provided firewood and structural materials 
for housing. With small, isolated, and relatively stable popu-
lations, this system was basically sustainable. As the older 
generation passed away, the land and natural systems could 
still support the next generation. Indeed, many cultures sus-
tained themselves in this way over thousands of years.
After World War II, modern medicines—chiefly vaccines 
and antibiotics—were introduced into developing nations, 
whereupon death rates plummeted and populations grew 
rapidly. Today 75% of the world’s poor in developing coun-
tries live in rural areas, and most are engaged in small-scale 
agriculture (Fig. 11), but only 3.8% of official development 
assistance goes to agriculture. Rapid growth has negative 
consequences on a population that is largely engaged in 
farming a few acres or less of land. When farms become too 
small to support the next generation, only a few basic op-
tions are possible, all of which are being played out to vari-
ous degrees by people in these societies. They can reform the 
system of land ownership, intensify the cultivation of exist-
ing land to increase the production per unit area, and open 
Figure 11 Small-scale agriculture. Seventy percent of the world’s poor 
live in rural areas and are heavily dependent on small-scale agriculture.
213

The Human Population
undeniable that the shortage of adequate employment exac-
erbates the problem. In many developing countries, income 
is obtained from illegal activities such as raising drug-related 
crops and poaching wildlife. In Indonesia, Atin’s home, there 
is a great deal of poaching of wildlife, including sea turtles, 
parrots, and many other species. The temptation is high for 
people who are poor in an area with rare and exotic species.
Migration Between Countries. The gap between high- 
and low-income countries is reflected in the perception of 
many in poorer countries who believe they can improve 
their well-being by migrating to a wealthier country. In fact, 
3.4  million people move to more-developed regions annu-
ally, including about 1.4 million to North America. The fact 
that populations in the wealthy countries are aging suggests 
a strategy that, on the surface, looks appealing. That is, the 
wealthy countries need more and younger workers, so they 
should welcome the migrants from the low-income countries 
who are looking desperately for work. Such migration does 
happen. Each year many millions migrate to the United States 
and Europe to find a better life or to escape civil wars and eth-
nic persecution (Fig. 13). Immigration, however, has its prob-
lems, too. Prejudice against foreigners is common, especially 
in countries with strong ethnic and cultural  homogeneity. In 
some countries with declining birthrates, such as Taiwan and 
Japan, the government is trying to encourage higher birth-
rates in order to have enough workers to support aging popu-
lations, rather than increase immigration.
Current U.S. immigration laws officially admit around 
1.2 million new immigrants per year, a number larger than 
any time since the 1920s and larger than the number  accepted 
by all other countries combined. At present, immigration ac-
counts for about 35% of U.S. population growth. A report 
by the National Research Council examined the economic 
impacts of our immigration policies and concluded that legal 
immigration basically benefits the U.S. economy and has 
 little negative impact on native-born Americans, with the 
 exception of a few areas of the country where  immigrants 
productivity, plots have been put into continuous production 
with no time off. The results have been a deterioration of the 
soil, decreased productivity (ironically), and erosion. Given 
the countertrends of rapidly increasing population and the 
deterioration of land from overcultivation, food production 
per capita in Africa is currently decreasing and may decrease 
in China in the near future. Burkina Faso, Awa’s country, is 
characterized by agriculture but is limited by drought and 
poor soil. Intensifying agriculture is done to increase cash 
crops such as cotton and sugar cane—changes that may or 
may not help local farmers.
Opening Up New Lands. Opening up new lands for ag-
riculture may sound like a good idea, but there is really no 
such thing as “new land.” Most good agricultural land is  
already in production. Opening up new land means convert-
ing natural ecosystems to agricultural production, which 
means losing the goods and services those ecosystems con-
tribute. Even then, converted land is often not well suited for 
agriculture. Figure 12 depicts an areal view of small agricul-
tural plots around the world. These landscape views enable 
us to see how intensive agriculture already is and how much 
land has been converted to its use. Unfortunately, much of 
the land that is useful to agriculture is already used. The use 
of steep hillsides, marginal lands, or cut forests for planting 
is not a long-term solution.
Illicit activities. Anyone who doesn’t have a way to grow 
sufficient food must gain enough income to buy it—and 
sometimes desperate people break the law to do this. Al-
though it is difficult to draw the line between the need and 
the greed that also draws people into illicit activities, it is 
Figure 12 Conversion of land for agriculture. This is a set of six 
satellite and computer generated images of fields in Minnesota (upper left), 
Kansas (upper middle)—where center pivot irrigation is responsible for the round 
field patterns—and northwest Germany (upper right). Near Santa Cruz, Bolivia 
(lower left), the fields radiate from small communities. Outside of Bangkok, 
 Thailand (lower middle), rice paddies are skinny rectangular fields. In the Cerrado 
in southern Brazil (lower right), inexpensive flat land has resulted in large field 
sizes. Scale: covers an area of 10.5 3 12 km. 
(Source: NASA.)
Figure 13 Migration. Many people migrate from one country to another to 
better their lives.
214

The Human Population
are especially numerous. However, the 
United States has a high number of illegal 
 immigrants, something that is extremely sen-
sitive politically.
Refugees. Much migration is not from 
a poor country to a wealthy one, but from 
one low- or middle-income country to an-
other, especially in areas with civil strife. 
Refugee immigration leads to temporary 
refugee camps, where diseases and hunger 
often take a terrible toll on human life. Some 
“migrants” are easy targets for exploitation. 
In some cases, recruiters from plantations in 
the Ivory Coast pay parents in neighboring 
Burkina Faso (families like Awa’s) to send 
their children to work on the plantations, 
where they are used virtually as slaves.
Migration to Cities. Faced with the pov-
erty and hardship of the countryside, many 
hundreds of millions of people in develop-
ing nations continue to migrate to cities in 
search of employment and a better life. This 
urbanization is one of the biggest trends in 
population today. In 2008, the world passed 
a landmark—more than half of the popula-
tion lived in cities. This trend is expected to 
continue, so that by 2050 urban dwellers 
will account for 70% of the global popula-
tion. In 2010, there were 21 metroregions 
that qualified as “megacities” of 10 million 
or more—the top ten of which are shown in 
Figure 14a—but most urbanites live in cities 
of less than half a million. Most of the net 
growth of the next 50 years in the develop-
ing countries will be absorbed in urban areas. 
About one-third of that urban growth is 
 expected to occur in China and India.
Challenges to Governments. Population 
growth and migration to urban areas are out-
pacing economic growth and the provision of 
basic services in many developing countries. 
The most rapidly expanding cities, especially in 
sub-Saharan Africa, have fallen so far behind 
in providing basic services that they are getting 
worse, not better. Streets are potholed, sanita-
tion and drinking water are poor, electricity 
and telephone service are erratic, and crime is 
rampant. Many are forced to live in sprawl-
ing, wretched shantytowns and slums that do 
not even provide adequate water and sewers, 
much less other services (Fig. 14b). Diseases 
like malaria and malnutrition are rampant, 
and the incidence of HIV/AIDS is much higher 
in the cities than in the countryside, a conse-
quence of much higher numbers of single men.
10
15
5
20
25
30
35
40
0
(b)
(a)
1970 
2009
2025 (expected)
Population (in millions)
Tokyo, Japan
Mexico City, Mexico
Mumbai, India
São Paulo, Brazil
Delhi, India
New York-Newark, USA
Karachi, Pakistan
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Calcutta, India
Shanghai, China
18.73%
20.11%
20.94%
14.65%
13.12%
3.12%
1.47%
15.55%
6.93%
20.02%
16.58%
6.04%
20.64%
19.43%
16.19%
20.71%
19.46%
8.77%
25.81%
20.04%
5.81%
21.65%
20.26%
7.62%
28.57%
22.16%
3.53%
37.09%
36.67%
23.30%
Figure 14 Growing cities. (a) The top 10 world metropolitan areas in 2011. Since 1970, cities 
in the developing world have grown phenomenally, and a number of them are now among the world’s 
largest. (b) Slums on the outskirts of São Paulo, Brazil. Thirty-two percent of the city’s population lives in 
these blighted areas.
(Source: Data for part (a) from UN Population Division, World Urbanization Prospects: The 2010 Revision (New York: 
United Nations, 2011).)
215

The Human Population
People need basic services like education, housing, 
health care, and transportation, and many developing coun-
tries are simply unable to provide these fast enough to keep 
up with population growth and migration to urban areas. 
Pakistan’s population increased almost fivefold between 
1960 and 2010, as a result of decades of 3.2% annual 
growth. According to Pervez Musharraf, former president of 
Pakistan, that country’s population growth was “the main 
factor retarding economic growth, poverty alleviation, and 
action on joblessness.”8
Although there are connections between rapid popu-
lation growth in the developing world and environmental 
decline, the most pressing issue is the massive poverty that 
afflicts the low-income countries where population growth is 
still very high. The 2011 Human Development Report makes 
the argument that equitability and social progress are con-
nected to environmental sustainability. A different set of is-
sues connects population and environmental decline in the 
affluent countries.
Countries with affluence
The United States has the dubious distinction of leading the 
world in the consumption of many resources. We consume 
the largest share of 11 of 20 major commodities: aluminum, 
coffee, copper, corn, lead, oil, oilseeds, natural gas, rubber, 
tin, and zinc. We lead in per capita consumption of many 
other items, such as meat. The average American eats about 
twice the global average of meat. We lead the world in paper 
consumption, at 725 pounds (330 kg) per person per year. 
All of these factors (and many more like them) contribute to 
the unusually high environmental impact each of us makes 
on the world. Unlike many other developed countries, how-
ever, the United States continues to have high population 
increase, much of which is from immigration. During the 
20th century, the United States tripled its population and in-
creased per capita use of raw materials 17 times.9
Despite the adverse effects of affluence, increasing the 
average wealth of a population can affect the environment 
positively. An affluent country such as ours provides ameni-
ties like safe drinking water, sanitary sewage systems and 
sewage treatment, and the collection and disposal of refuse. 
Thus, many forms of pollution are held in check, and the 
environment improves with increasing affluence. In addition, 
if we can afford gas and electricity, we are not destroying 
our parks and woodlands to obtain firewood. In short, we 
can afford conservation and management, better agricul-
tural practices, and pollution control, thereby improving our 
 environment.
Still, because the United States consumes so many re-
sources, we also lead the world in the production of many 
8“The President of Pakistan on the Need to Slow Population Growth in the 
 Muslim World,” Population and Development Review 31, no. 2 (2005): 399.
9U.S. Census Bureau. (April 2004). “Statistical Abstract of the United States.” 
And L. A. Wagner. (2002). Materials in the Economy: Material Flows, Scarcity 
and the Environment. U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1221. http://pubs.usgs.gov/
circ/2002/c1221/c1221-508.pdf.
10International Energy Agency (IEA). (2011). CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion: 
Highlights (2011 edition). Paris, France: IEA.
pollutants. For example, by using such large quantities of 
fossil fuel (coal, oil, and natural gas) to drive our cars, heat 
and cool our homes, and generate electricity, the United 
States is responsible for a large share of the carbon dioxide 
produced. As mentioned, with about 4.5% of the world’s 
population, the United States generates 18% of the carbon 
dioxide emissions that may be changing global climate.10 
Similarly, emissions of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) that have 
degraded the ozone layer, emissions of chemicals that cause 
acid rain, emissions of hazardous chemicals, and the produc-
tion of nuclear wastes are all largely the by-products of afflu-
ent societies.
High individual consumption places enormous demands 
on the environment. The world’s wealthiest 20% of people 
(some located in low- and middle-income countries) are re-
sponsible for 76% of all private consumption (the poorest 
fifth, only 1.5%). As a consequence, by 2005, 75% of major 
world fisheries were either fully exploited or overexploited, 
and old-growth forests in southern South America were being 
clear-cut and turned into chips to make paper. Oil spills are 
a “by-product” of our appetite for energy. Tropical forests 
are harvested to satisfy the desires of the affluent for exotic 
wood furnishings. Metals are mined, timber harvested, com-
modities grown, and oil extracted, all far from the industrial-
ized countries where these goods are used. Every one of these 
activities has a significant environmental impact. As increas-
ing numbers of people strive for and achieve greater afflu-
ence, it seems more than likely that such pressures, and other 
ones like them, will mount.
One way of generalizing the effect of affluence is to 
say that it enables the wealthy to clean up their immediate 
 environment by transferring their wastes to more distant 
 locations. It also allows them to obtain resources from more 
distant locations, so they neither see nor feel the impacts 
of getting those resources. However, affluence also pro-
vides people with opportunities to exercise lifestyle choices 
that are consistent with the concerns for stewardship and 
 sustainability.
With this picture of population growth and its impacts 
in view, the next section discusses future population trends, 
how demographers identify them, and the biggest population 
trend—the demographic transition.
4 Projecting Future Populations
During the 1960s, the world population growth rate peaked 
at 2.1% per year, after having risen steadily for decades. Fol-
lowing this peak, it began a steady decline (Fig. 15). Twenty 
years later, the number of persons added per year peaked at 
87 million. The reason for the difference is that even though 
the population growth rate was in decline, there were in-
creasing numbers of people who could reproduce. The total 
216

The Human Population
same time when women reproduce young. Thus, total fertil-
ity rate is the most important, but not the only, factor deter-
mining population growth.
Extrapolating the trend of lower fertility rates leads 
to the UN Population Division’s projection that the global 
human population will reach 9.3 billion by 2050; it will not 
have leveled off at that time, but is likely to level off some-
time in the 22nd century. This projection is the UN’s me-
dium scenario; other scenarios are based on different fertility 
assumptions. Figure 16 depicts the UN Population Division’s 
projections until 2050 under four different sets of assump-
tions. The assumption of declining fertility rates is crucial; if 
current fertility rates remain unchanged (constant in the fig-
ure), the 2050 population will be 10.9 billion.11 To achieve 
the medium scenario, people will need to continue to pur-
posefully lower their fertility in the high fertility areas of the 
world, at a rate we are not seeing yet. The UN doesn’t usu-
ally project past 50 years out. The projected leveling off over 
10 billion raises serious concerns about whether Earth can 
sustain such numbers.
Population Profiles
In studying population growth, we must consider more than 
just the increase in numbers, which is simply births minus 
deaths. We must also consider how the number of births ulti-
mately affects the entire population over the longevity, or life-
times, of the individuals (see Sound Science, “Are We  Living 
Longer?”). A population profile is a bar graph showing the 
number or proportion of people (males and females sepa-
rately) at each age for a given population. Figure 17 shows 
examples of such graphs. The data are collected through 
a census of the entire population using a combination of 
 household questionnaires and estimates for groups such as 
number of persons added every year did not go down until 
the growth rate fell low enough to offset the increase in re-
producing people.
The declines in both the population growth rate and 
the number of persons added per year are primarily a con-
sequence of the decline in the total fertility rate—that is, the 
average number of babies born to a woman over her life-
time. In the 1960s, the total fertility rate was an average of 
5.0 children per woman; it has since steadily declined to its 
present value of 2.6 children per woman. In addition to the 
total fertility rate, the age at which a woman first reproduces 
also controls how rapidly a population grows. A popula-
tion in which women have children at a young age will grow 
more quickly than one in which women are slightly older 
when they reproduce, even if women have the same number 
of children. That is, there are more generations alive at the 
100
80
60
40
20
0
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
Number of persons added per year
(millions)
Population growth rate
(percent)
1950–55
1955–60
1960–65
1965–70
1970–75
1975–80
1980–85
1985–90
1990–95
2000–05
2005–10
1995–00
0
Growth rate
Year
Figure 15 World population growth rate and absolute 
growth. Declining fertility rates in the past three decades have resulted in a 
decreasing rate of population growth. Absolute numbers, however, are still add-
ing 78 million persons per year.
(Source: Data from Shiro Horiuchi, “World Population Growth Rate,” Population Today (June 
1993): 7 and (June/July 1996): 1; updated from UN Population Division, World Population 
Prospects: The 2010 Revision (New York: United Nations, 2010).)
1950
'60
'70
'80
'90
2000
'10
'20
'30
'40
'60
'70
'80
'90
2100
'50
Population (billions)
Year
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Constant fertility
High
Low
Medium
Figure 16 United Nations population 
projections. The most recent population projections 
demonstrate the vital role played by different fertility as-
sumptions. The Constant projection assumes that fertility 
rates remain at their present level (2.6 children per woman). 
The Medium projection assumes a gradual decline in fertil-
ity in the developing countries, where 85% drop below 
replacement-level fertility by 2050 and the world total fertility 
rate is 2.02 children per woman. This projection is given the 
highest probability by the UN Population Division. The High 
projection assumes fertility rates a 1/2 child greater than the 
Medium projection, and the Low projection assumes fertility 
rates a 1/2 child lower than the Medium projection. All of 
these projections include the impact of the AIDS epidemic on 
increasing mortality.
(Source: UN Population Division, World Population Prospects: The 2010 
Revision (New York: United Nations, 2010).)
11United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Divi-
sion. (2011). World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision, Volume I: Compre-
hensive Tables. ST/ESA/SER.A/313.
217

The Human Population
the homeless. In the United States and most other countries, 
a detailed census is taken every 10 years. Between censuses, 
the population profile may be adjusted using data regarding 
births, deaths, immigration, and the aging of the population.
A population profile shows the age structure of the 
 population—that is, the number of people in each age group 
at a given date. It is a snapshot of the population at a given 
time. For example, population profiles of the United States 
for 1950 and 2000 and projected future profiles for 2050 
and 2100 are shown in Figure 17. Leaving out the compli-
cation of migration for the moment, each bar in the profile 
represents one cohort (group of the same age) of the popula-
tion. As you look from one graph to the next, you can see a 
particular group as it ages. In high-income countries such as 
the United States, the proportion of people who die before 
age 60 is relatively small. Therefore, the population profile 
below age 60 is an “echo” of past events that affected birth-
rates. Figure 17a shows, for example, that smaller numbers 
of people were born between 1931 and 1935 (ages 15–18 in 
1950). This drop was a reflection of lower birthrates during 
the Great Depression. The dramatic increase in people born 
in 1946 and for 14 years thereafter (ages 50–64 in 2010, Fig. 
17b) is a reflection of returning veterans and others start-
ing families and choosing to have relatively large numbers 
of children following World War II—the “baby boom.” A 
number of industries expanded and then contracted as the 
baby-boom generation moved through a particular age 
range, and this phenomenon is not yet past. In sequence, 
schools, then colleges and universities, and then the job mar-
ket were affected by the large influx of baby boomers. As the 
large baby-boom generation, now in middle age and retire-
ment (and projected to be extremely elderly in 2050), moves 
up the population profile (Fig. 17a–c), any business or pro-
fession that provides goods or services to seniors is looking 
forward to a period of growth. Planners also use population 
profiles to understand the probable needs for social security 
programs in the future.
The baby boom is not the only phenomenon we see in 
U.S. population profiles. The general drop in numbers of 
people born from 1961 to 1976 (ages 34–49 in 2010) re-
sulted from declining fertility rates—the “baby bust.” The 
rise in numbers of people born in more recent years (ages 
20–29 in 2010) is termed the “baby boom echo” and is due 
to the large baby-boom generation producing children, even 
though the actual total fertility rate remained near 2.0. These 
changes in fertility are shown in Figure 18.
Predicting Populations
Current population growth in a country is calculated from 
three vital statistics: births, deaths, and migration. The 
population of the United States grew by more than 2.8 mil-
lion people during the 15-month period from April 1, 2010, 
to July 1, 2011. This growth rate (0.92%) was the lowest 
since the mid-1940s. Only three years prior, the population 
growth of 2007–2008 had been much higher—there were 
4.32 million births (15,000 more than the highest previ-
ous record in 1957). In the United Sates in January 2012, 
Males
Females
POPULATION BY AGE GROUPS AND SEX (absolute numbers)
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
Age group
(a) United States of America: 2010
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
Age group
(b) United States of America: 2050
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
Age group
Population (in millions)
(c) United States of America: 2100
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
Males
Females
Males
Females
Figure 17 Population profiles of the United States.The age struc-
ture of the U.S. population (a) in 1985, (b) in 2005, and (c) projected to 2050. 
www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com.
(Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base.)
218

The Human Population
 (orange) shows what will happen if the fertility rates around 
the world do not change. Note how each fertility assumption 
generates profoundly different world populations. Notice also 
that none of these projections, even the one based on a drop 
in total fertility to 1.5 children per woman, will lead to a 2050 
population smaller than today’s population.
Population Projections for Developed Countries. The 
population profiles of Sweden, a developed country in south-
ern Europe, shown in Figure 19, reflect the fact that  Swedish 
women have had a stable fertility rate for some time. Sweden 
has a boom group that will be getting older by 2050, but 
also has a stable production of new youth. In some coun-
tries, such as Italy (with a fertility rate of 1.3) or Japan, the 
number of workers for each dependent (child,  elderly, disa-
bled, or otherwise unable to work) will decline. In the case 
of these countries, it is because an aging population is not 
replaced by new babies.
Graying of the Population. For the next 20 years, 
 Italy’s and Japan’s populations will be graying, a term 
used to indicate that the proportion of elderly people is in-
creasing. In 2005, one-fourth of Italians were aged 60 and 
above; by 2050, 41% are expected to be 60 or older. Over-
all, a net population decrease is expected to occur. What 
opportunities and risks does the changing population pro-
file imply for Italy? If you were an advisor to the Italian or 
Japanese governments, what would your advice be for the 
short term? For the longer term? Unless a smaller popula-
tion is the goal, it might be wise to encourage, and to pro-
vide incentives for, Italian couples to bear more children. In 
fact, many European governments have policies to encour-
age women to have more children, with mixed results so 
far. France, with one of the highest fertility rates in Europe 
(TFR 5 1.9) provides child allowances, tax credits for in-
home child care, and discounts on many goods and services 
for larger families.
The very low fertility rate and the expected declining 
population seen in Italy and Japan are typical of an increas-
ing number of highly developed nations. Europe as a whole is 
12U.S. Census Bureau. “Census Bureau Projects U.S. Population of 312.8 Mil-
lion on New Year’s Day.” http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/ 
population/cb11-219.html. June3, 2012.
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1911 '15
'19
'23
'27
'31
'35
'39
'43
'47
'51
'55
'59
'63
'67
'71
'75
'79
'83
'87
'91
'95
'99 2003 '07
'10
Year
Number of Children Per Woman
U.S. TOTAL FERTILITY RATE, 1911—2010
Figure 18 Total fertility rate, United States, 1911–2010. The changes in fertility led to the baby boom and the baby bust in the United 
States. The rate now hovers about the replacement level.
(Sources: 2010 World Population Data Sheet (Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau, 2010).)
 immigration was projected to add one person every 46 sec-
onds to the population, with one birth every 8 seconds and 
one death every 12. Thus, the total population was increas-
ing by one person approximately every 17 seconds (U.S. 
Census Bureau News),12 although these numbers are impre-
cise because of illegal immigration.
Demographers used to make population forecasts. Most 
often, they took current birth and death rates, factored in 
 expected immigration, and then extrapolated the data into 
the future. They were virtually always wrong. For example, 
in 1964, the total fertility rate (TFR) in the United States was 
around 3.0. The U.S. Census Bureau forecast that the TFR 
would range between 2.5 and 3.5 up to 2000 and projected 
a 2000 population of 362 million under the higher fertility 
 assumption—81 million more than the actual number. The 
agency totally missed the baby bust of the late sixties and 
 seventies, although the trend in 1964 was  definitely downward.
Nowadays, demographers only make projections, and 
they cover their bases by making their assumptions about fer-
tility, mortality, and migration very clear. As noted earlier, the 
projection that the world population will reach 9.3 billion in 
2050 is based on the assumption that fertility rates will con-
tinue their decline. The United Nations gives three different 
projections of future world population (Fig.  16). All three 
projections assume fertility rates will fall. In fact, if we main-
tained a current rate of fertility, the human population would 
hit 27 billion by 2100. Instead, fertility rates in high-fertility 
countries are likely to fall, and those in extremely low-fertility 
countries are likely to rise slightly. The medium scenario as-
sumes that world fertility will drop from 2.55  children per 
woman to slightly above 2 children per woman well before 
2050, the high-fertility scenario assumes a total fertility rate 
half a child above, and the low-fertility scenario assumes a 
total fertility rate half a child below that of the medium 
variant. Recall that the constant fertility line in Figure 8–16 
219

The Human Population
200
300
100
0
100
200
300
Males
Females
POPULATION BY AGE GROUPS AND SEX (absolute numbers)
Age group
(a) 1950
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
(b) 2010
200
300
100
0
100
200
300
Males
Females
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
200
300
100
0
100
200
300
Males
Females
Age group
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
200
300
100
0
100
200
300
Males
Females
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
Population (in thousands)
Population (in thousands)
(c) 2050
(d) 2100
Figure 19 Projecting future populations: A developed country. A population profile of Swe-
den, representative of a highly developed country, in four times. Note how stable the population becomes.
(Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base.)
on a trajectory of population decline if only natural increase 
(rather than immigration) is considered. Who will produce 
the goods and services needed by the European countries’ 
aging populations? Will their economies remain competitive 
on the world markets? The surge of older people retiring may 
overwhelm government pension systems; life  expectancies 
near 80 and retirement around 60 mean decades of retire-
ment income. A number of countries in the Eurozone experi-
enced financial difficulties in 2011 when it became clear that 
the burden of their social programs, including pensions, was 
unsupportable. Japan is also struggling to figure out how to 
care for the elderly.
One obvious solution is to allow more immigration. 
However, allowing the declining numbers of Italian or  
Japanese people to be replaced by immigrant populations 
has implications for art, culture, and religion. Such changes 
are sometimes difficult for the host society. In fact, Europe 
is in the midst of a migration wave. More than 20 million 
immigrants now live and work in the countries of west-
ern Europe, many of whom do not have resident status. 
In some of these countries, fear and mistrust of these 
“guest workers” have led to violent attacks on them. Many 
 Europeans do not want more immigration, even to off-
set declines in the labor force and population. Yet just to 
maintain their current populations, most of these  countries 
will have to triple their current immigration levels in the 
near future.
Less Graying Here. In contrast to other developed 
countries, the fertility rate in the United States reversed di-
rections in the late 1980s and started back up. On the basis 
of the lower fertility rate, the U.S. population had been pro-
jected to stabilize at between 290 million and  300 million 
220

The Human Population
toward the middle of the next century. With the higher fer-
tility rate of 2.1 and with an influx of immigrants, the U.S. 
population is now projected to be 439 million by 2050 
(Fig. 17c) and to continue growing indefinitely (Fig. 20). For 
this projection, immigration is assumed to remain constant 
at current levels.
These projections for the United States show how dif-
ferences in the total fertility rate and high immigration 
profoundly affect population estimates when they are ex-
trapolated forward. In light of the concerns for sustainable 
development, the population policy of the United States (and 
scenarios that could lead to lower future growth) is under 
heavy debate.
Population Projections for Developing Countries. 
Developing countries are in a situation vastly different from 
that of developed countries. Fertility rates in  developing 
countries are generally declining, but they are still well 
above replacement level. The average TFR (excluding China, 
where it is 1.6) is currently 3.2, which is similar to that of 
the United States at the peak of the baby boom. Because 
of  decades of high fertility rates, the population profiles of 
 developing countries have a pyramidal shape.
Burkina Faso and Indonesia. A series of population pro-
files for Awa’s home country of Burkina Faso, which has a 
total fertility rate of 6.3, are shown in Figure 21a–d. Burkina 
Faso is a good example of the lowest-income countries and 
has demographics that are typical of that group. Even as-
suming that this high fertility rate will gradually decline by 
2025, the population is likely to increase from 15.3 million 
(2010) to 25.4 million, yielding the profiles shown in Fig-
ure 21c and d. Even the high infant mortality rate (currently 
91 per thousand) comes nowhere close to offsetting the high 
fertility rate. The impact of AIDS is also included in the UN 
projections. AIDS has increased child and young adult mor-
tality and lowered average life spans in a number of coun-
tries. The pyramidal form of the profile remains the same in 
both 2010 and 2025, because, for many years, the rising gen-
eration of young adults produces an even larger generation 
Projections
as of 2008
Projections
as of 1989
1990
2010
2030
2050
Year
450
375
425
325
275
225
Population in millions
Figure 20 Population projections for the United States. 
Projections shift drastically with changes in fertility. Contrast the 1989 projection, 
based on a fertility rate of 1.8, with the 2008 projection, based on an increased 
fertility rate of 2.1 and current immigration.
(Source: U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Population Projections.)
SOUND SCIENCE
are We Living Longer?
With the advent of 
modern medicine and 
disease control, a 
long life has become 
possible for more and 
more people. Average life expectancy (the 
number of years a newborn can expect to 
live under current mortality rates) has been 
increasing dramatically. Over the past two 
centuries, world life expectancy increased 
from about 25 years to 65 for men and 69 for 
women. Life expectancy and mortality rates 
are linked, and as infant mortality in particular 
has declined in the developing countries, their 
average life expectancy has climbed sharply. 
Life expectancies in those countries are now 
within 10 years of life expectancies in the 
developed countries (73 for men and 80 for 
women). What is not well known is that life 
expectancy has also continued to climb about 
2 1/2 years every decade for the low-mortality 
developed countries. Mortality rates have 
declined for every age.
Can we hope that this trend will continue 
until, perhaps a century from now, human life 
expectancies will be approaching or going 
beyond 100? There is intense debate over this 
question. First, however, we must differenti-
ate between life expectancy and longevity. 
Longevity refers to the maximum life span for 
a species. The verifiable record for humans is 
held by Jeanne Calumet of France, who lived for 
122 years. The record for the United States is 
that of a woman who died at 119 years of age 
in 1999. While these individuals were very old, 
many workers in the field of gerontology (the 
study of aging) are convinced that, in humans 
(as in all species), there is an aging process that 
cannot be prevented—that built into our cells 
are the biochemical seeds of destruction. Cells, 
tissues, and organs wear out at variable rates 
in different people. Thus, we will not likely find 
life expectancies rising beyond about 85 years 
anywhere or anytime in the future.
Others argue that even though absolute 
longevity seems to be a limiting process, we 
can expect life expectancies to continue the 
increase they have shown in recent years. They 
ask, “Why should life expectancies stop at 85?” 
The trend of a 2 1/2-year increase per decade 
is based on reducing many of the factors that 
cause mortality at different ages. This trend 
should continue, given the medical prowess of 
our 21st-century science.
W
m
d
l
p
221

The Human Population
2
4
3
1
0
2
1
3
4
Males
Females
Age group
(a) Burkina Faso: 1950
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
2
4
3
1
0
2
1
3
4
Males
Females
Age group
(c) Burkina Faso: 2050
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
2
4
3
1
0
2
1
3
4
Males
Females
(b) Burkina Faso: 2010
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
2
4
3
1
0
2
1
3
4
Males
Females
(d) Burkina Faso: 2100
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
(e) Indonesia: 1950
5
10
0
5
10
Males
Females
Age group
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
5
10
0
5
10
Males
Females
Age group
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
(g) Indonesia: 2050
Population (in millions)
(f) Indonesia: 2010
5
10
0
5
10
Males
Females
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
(h) Indonesia: 2100
5
10
0
5
10
Males
Females
105
50
60
40
30
90
100
80
70
20
10
0
Population (in millions)
Figure 21 Projecting future populations: Indonesia and Burkina Faso. (a–d) Projections for Burkina 
Faso. (e–h) Projections for Indonesia.
(Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base.)
222

The Human Population
of children. Thus, the pyramid gets wider and wider until 
the projected declining fertility rate begins to take effect. Fig-
ure 21e–h depicts the population profiles of Indonesia, Atin’s 
home. While Indonesia is not well off, its population growth 
rate is lower than Burkina Faso’s. Its large population may 
stabilize earlier, but it is so large that it has a lot of popula-
tion momentum.
While highly developed countries are facing the prob-
lems of a graying population, the high fertility rates in 
developing countries maintain an exceedingly young popula-
tion. An “ideal” population structure, with equal numbers 
of persons in each age group and a life expectancy of 75 
years, would have one-fifth (20%) of the population in each 
15-year age group. By comparison, 40% to 50% of the pop-
ulation is below 15 years of age in many developing coun-
tries, whereas less than 20% of the population is below the 
age of 15 in most developed countries (Table 3).
Growth Impacts. What do these differing population 
structures mean in terms of the need for new schools, hous-
ing units, hospitals, roads, sewage facilities, telephones, and 
so forth? One of the things they mean is that if a country 
such as Burkina Faso is simply to maintain its current stand-
ard of living, the amount of housing and all other facilities 
(not to mention food production) must be almost doubled in 
as little as 25 years. In particular, jobs must be available for 
a large number of young people. Unfortunately, the popula-
tion growth of a developing country can easily cancel out its 
efforts to get ahead economically.
Enormous growth is in store for the developing world, 
even assuming that fertility rates in the developing world 
continue their current downward trend. Even bringing the 
fertility rates of developing countries down to 2.0 right 
now will not immediately stop population growth in those 
 countries, because of a phenomenon known as population 
momentum.
Population Momentum
Population momentum refers to the effect of current age 
structures on future populations. In a young population, 
such as Burkina Faso’s,  momentum is positive because such 
a small portion of the population is in the upper age groups 
(where most deaths occur) and many young people are en-
tering their reproductive years. Even if the rising genera-
tions have only two children per woman (replacement-level 
fertility), the number of births will far exceed the number 
of deaths. This imbalance will continue until the current 
 children reach the Burkina Faso limits of life expectancy—50 
to 60 years. In other words, only a population that has been 
at or below replacement-level fertility for decades will stop 
growing (achieve a stable population).
Despite population momentum, efforts to stabilize pop-
ulation are not fruitless. It just means that population growth 
cannot be halted quickly. Like a speeding train, there is a 
long time between applying the brakes and stopping com-
pletely. The earlier the fertility rates are reduced, the greater 
the likelihood is of ending population growth and achieving 
a sustainable society in the near future.
Europe’s population, on the other hand, will soon begin 
to experience negative population momentum as a conse-
quence of the low fertility of the past three decades. It has 
been calculated that if the current TFR of 1.5 births contin-
ues for 15 more years, negative momentum will shrink the 
EU population by some 88 million by 2100 (of course, im-
migration would offset this number).
tabLe 3 Populations by age Group
Percent of Population in Specific age Groups
Region or Country
<15
15 to 65
>65
Dependency Ratio*
Sub-Saharan Africa
43
54
 3
85
Latin America
28
65
 7
56
Asia
26
67
 7
54
Indonesia
28
66
 6
54
Europe
16
68
16
47
Sweden
17
65
18
54
China
17
74
 9
37
United States
20
67
13
49
Source: Data from 2011 World Population Data Sheet (Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau, 2011).
*Number of individuals below 15 and above 65, divided by the number between 15 and 65 and expressed as a percentage.
223

The Human Population
The Demographic Transition
The concept of a stable, nongrowing global human popula-
tion based on people freely choosing to have smaller fami-
lies can become a reality, because it is already happening in 
developed countries. Early demographers observed that the 
modernization of a nation brings about more than just a 
lower death rate resulting from better health care. A decline 
in the fertility rate also occurs as people choose to limit the 
size of their families. Thus, as economic development occurs, 
human societies move from a primitive population stability, 
in which high birthrates are offset by high infant and child-
hood mortality, to a modern population stability, in which 
low infant and childhood mortality are balanced by low 
birthrates. A gradual shift in birth and death rates from the 
primitive to the modern condition in the industrialized soci-
eties is called the demographic transition (Figs. 22, 23). The 
basic premise of the demographic transition is that there is a 
causal link between modernization and a decline in birth and 
death rates.
Birth and Death Rates. To understand the demographic 
transition, you need to understand the crude birthrate (CBR) 
and the crude death rate (CDR). The CBR and the CDR are 
the number of births and deaths, respectively, per thousand 
of the population per year. By giving the data per thousand 
of the population, populations of different countries can be 
compared, regardless of their total size. The term crude is 
used because no consideration is given to what proportion of 
the population is old or young, male or female. Subtracting 
the CDR from the CBR gives the increase (or decrease) per 
thousand per year. Dividing this result by 10 then yields the 
percent increase (or decrease) of the population.
Number of
Number of
Natural increase
Percent increase
births per
deaths per
(or decrease)
(or decrease)
1,000
2
1,000
5 in population 410 5
in population
per year
per year
per 1,000
per year
(CBR)
(CDR)
per year
A zero-growth population is achieved if, and only if, the 
CBR and CDR are equal and there is no net migration.
Epidemiologic Transition. Throughout most of 
human history, crude death rates were high—40 or more 
per thousand for most societies. By the middle of the 
19th century, however, the epidemics and other social con-
ditions responsible for high death rates began to recede and 
death rates in Europe and North America declined. The de-
cline was gradual in the now-developed countries, lasting 
for many decades and finally stabilizing at a CDR of about 
10 per thousand (Fig. 21). At present, cancer, cardiovascu-
lar disease, and other degenerative diseases account for most 
mortality, and many people survive to old age. This pattern 
1775
1825
1875
1900
1925
1955
1985
2000
1775
1825
1875
1900
1925
1955
1985
2000
40
30
20
0
10
Natural Increase
Death rate
Birth rate
Births and deaths (per thousand per year)
(b) Developing countries
Natural Increase
Death rate
Birth rate
Year
(a) Developed countries
Year
Figure 22 Demographic transition in developed and developing countries. (a) In developed countries, 
the decrease in birthrates proceeded soon after, and along with, the decrease in death rates, so very rapid population growth never 
occurred. (b) In developing countries, both birth and death rates remained high until the mid-1900s. Then the sudden  introduction 
of modern medicine caused a precipitous decline in death rates. Birthrates remained high, however, resulting in very rapid 
 population growth. 
(Source: Redrawn with permission of Population Reference Bureau.)
224

The Human Population
Rate of
population
growth
Phase I
High Birth Rate,
Fluctuating Death Rate
Phase II
Declining Birth
and Death Rates
Phase III
Birth Rate Approaching
Replacement (2.1)
Phase IV
Low to Very
Low Birth Rate,
Very Low Death Rate
Birthrate
Death rate
Primitive
stability
Afghanistan
Uganda
Zambia
Ghana
Guatemala
Iraq
India
Gabon
Malaysia
Brazil
Germany
Japan
Modern
stability
Development
Time
THE CLASSIC PHASES OF THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION
Fertility t
ra
n
s
it
i
on
Ep
idem
iolo
gi
c
 tr
an
si
ti
o
n
of change in mortality factors has been called the epidemi-
ologic transition and represents one element of the demo-
graphic transition. (Epidemiology is the study of diseases in 
human societies.)
Fertility Transition. Another pattern of change over 
time can be seen in crude birthrates. In the now-developed 
countries, birthrates have declined from a high of 40 to 
50 per thousand to 9 to 12 per thousand—a fertility transi-
tion. As Figure 22 shows, this fertility transition did not 
happen at the same time as the epidemiologic transition; 
instead, it was delayed by decades or more. Because net 
growth is the difference between the CBR and the CDR, 
the time during which these two patterns are out of phase 
is a time of rapid population growth. The developed coun-
tries underwent such growth during the 19th and early 
20th centuries and during the baby-boom years of the  
mid-20th century.
Phases of the Demographic Transition. The demo-
graphic transition is typically presented as occurring in the 
four phases shown in Figure 23. Phase I is the primitive sta-
bility resulting from a high CBR being offset by an equally 
high CDR. Phase II is marked by a declining CDR—the epi-
demiologic transition. Because fertility and, hence, the CBR 
remain high, population growth accelerates during Phase II. 
The CBR declines during Phase III due to a declining fertil-
ity rate, but population growth is still significant. Finally, 
Phase IV is reached, in which modern stability is achieved by 
a continuing low CDR and an equally low CBR. Figure 23 
also shows countries that typify each of the stages of the 
 demographic transition.
Developed countries have generally completed the demo-
graphic transition, so they are in Phase IV. Developing coun-
tries, by contrast, are still in Phases II and III. In most of these 
countries, death rates declined markedly as modern medicine 
and sanitation were introduced in the mid-20th  century. 
 Fertility and birthrates are declining but remain considerably 
above replacement levels (Fig. 21). Therefore, populations in 
developing countries are still growing rapidly.
In light of these circumstances, the key question is: 
What must happen in the developing countries so that they 
complete their demographic transition and reach Phase IV? 
Is economic development essential to undergoing the tran-
sition, or may other factors, such as family planning pro-
grams, come into play?
In this chapter, we looked at three young people—Anje 
in Sweden, Atin in Indonesia, and Awa in Burkina Faso. 
We saw that their life experiences were dramatically differ-
ent from each other—in part because of broad differences 
between countries in wealth, health care, and other goods 
and services. Even within countries, great variability exists. 
Those differences in life experiences drive differences in con-
sumption patterns and fertility—two parameters that need to 
be brought into line to have a sustainable world.
Figure 23 The demographic transition. The epi-
demiologic transition and the fertility transition  combined 
to produce the demographic transition in the  developed 
countries over many decades.
(Source: Population Bulletin, Population Reference Bureau, 
http://www.prb.org/Publications/Datasheets/2011/world-population-
data-sheet/population-bulletin.aspx, 2011.)
225

The Human Population
REvISITING THE THEMES
Sound Science
Demography, the science of human population phenom-
ena, reflects the diligent work of many scientists whose 
concern is to document data and interpret it. Their work 
forms much of the data and information presented in this chapter. 
Demography can be viewed in the context of population ecology as a 
whole. Human populations can be studied like other populations and are 
subject to natural laws such as the law of limiting factors and carrying 
capacity. Despite some opinions, there is consensus in the scientific  
community that population growth and increased demand for resources 
cannot continue indefinitely. However, humans are also quite different 
from other organisms. It is difficult to classify them as either r- or 
K-strategists, because their life history of slow growth and high parental 
care does not easily match their current rapid global population growth 
and opportunistic use of new habitats. In the past, the carrying capacity 
of humans has been increased by using technology to trap energy from 
other eras and open up new habitats. However, many of the things we 
did to achieve modern life have prices.
Demographers have clarified the nature of the demographic transi-
tion, and their population projections enable us to see what the future 
will look like if current trends continue.
Sustainability
A sustainable world is a world whose population is gener-
ally stable—it cannot increase indefinitely, as the world’s 
population currently is doing. World population may level 
off at 10 billion or even 9 billion, but we may be exceeding Earth’s car-
rying capacity. Two or 3 billion more people will need to be fed, clothed, 
housed, and employed, all in an environment that continues to provide 
essential goods and services. Many agree that sustainability will be pos-
sible only if the additional people maintain a modest, low-consumption 
lifestyle, at level lower than that currently experienced in the developed 
countries. People already in developed countries will need to make 
changes to lower their own consumption so that others may have access 
to resources. These changes involve not only myriad personal decisions, 
but also coordinated action and the development of more efficient 
technologies.
In a sense, the United States is playing a small role in the process by 
accepting so many immigrants from developing countries—about 1% 
of the annual population growth in these countries (hardly a significant 
percentage). More significant is the impact of immigration on the United 
States itself, which is currently on a trajectory of indefinite population 
growth because of immigration. Sustainability requires that we some-
how stabilize population both nationally and globally.
Stewardship
In order to achieve the goal of sustainability, humans need 
to steward resources by stabilizing both population growth 
and resource consumption. Such stewardship requires us 
to promote justice and may require difficult decisions about what is right. 
Calling on the developing countries to keep down their future demands 
on the environment could be considered unjust, as so many people live in 
abject poverty while others consume resources at high rates. Still, there is 
no way for these countries to meet their future needs by mimicking what 
the developed world is currently doing with resources and the environ-
ment. Justice demands (and sustainability requires) that both the rich and 
the poor countries reduce their environmental impact.
Stewardship requires both individual efforts and corporate action 
through policy. If enough people in the high- and middle-income coun-
tries practice environmental stewardship, the pathway to such a future 
will be easier. Stewardship can do much to alleviate the negative im-
pacts of affluence and technology, prominent items in the IPAT formula. 
Population growth has to slow as well. Achieving that end without tram-
pling on the rights of others is part of the job ahead of us. Immigration 
also offers ethical dilemmas as immigrants move to places that may or 
may not be prepared to receive them.
S
I
t
a
to promote just
S
A
a
p
off at 10 billion
S
D
e
c
forms much of t
 7. What information is given by a population profile?
 8. How do the population profiles and fertility rates of devel-
oped countries differ from those of developing countries?
 9. Compare future population projections, and their possible 
consequences, for developed and developing countries.
 10. Discuss the immigration issues pertaining to developed and 
developing countries. Which countries are sending the most 
immigrants and which are receiving the most?
 11. What is meant by population momentum, and what is its 
cause?
 12. Define the crude birthrate (CBR) and the crude death 
rate (CDR). Describe how these rates are used to calcu-
late the percent rate of growth and the doubling time of a 
 population.
 1. In what ways is human population ecology similar to and 
different from that of other organisms? Why is it difficult to 
determine a carrying capacity for humans?
 2. How has the global human population changed from pre-
historic times to 1800? From 1800 to the present? What is 
projected over the next 50 years?
 3. How does the World Bank classify countries in terms of eco-
nomic categories?
 4. What three factors are multiplied to give total environmental 
impact? Are developed nations exempt from environmental 
impact? Why or why not?
 5. What are the environmental and social consequences of 
rapid population growth in rural developing countries? In 
urban areas?
 6. Describe the negative and positive impacts of affluence (high 
individual consumption) on the environment.
Review QuesTions
226

The Human Population
 3. Consider the population situation in Italy or Japan: very 
low birthrates, an aging population, and eventual decline in 
overall numbers. What policies would you recommend to 
these countries, assuming their desire to achieve a sustain-
able society?
 4. Consider the populations of Sweden, Indonesia, and Burkina 
Faso. How could people in each of these countries help those 
in the other countries to steward their resources better or to 
promote a sustainable future?
 1. Consider how humans are different from and similar to 
other species. In what ways does it seem obvious that popu-
lation ecology principles apply to humans? Why do some 
people see humans as not subject to the law of limiting 
 factors?
 2. List the parameters you think you would need to keep track 
of to make accurate predictions about future human popula-
tion growth. For example, what conditions might drive mor-
tality and fertility trends?
THinking enviRonmenTally
 3. Educate yourself on immigration policy. Decide whether you 
support immigration reform and what policies you would 
like to see in place. Then write to an elected official about it.
 1. Calculate your ecological (environmental) footprint using a 
site such as http://www.myfootprint.org.
 2. Come up with two things you can do to lower your resource 
consumption. They might include buying less of something 
you don’t need or buying a product with less packaging. 
Agree to do it for one month, and decide whether you could 
continue longer.
making a DiffeRence
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
 13. What is meant by the demographic transition? Relate the 
epidemiologic transition and the fertility transition (two 
 elements of the demographic transition) to its four phases.
 14. What are examples of countries in different stages of the 
 demographic transition?
cReDiTs
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top right): David Grossman / Alamy; (bottom left) TED ALJIBE/AFP/Getty Images/
Newscom; (left): L Ancheles/Getty Images; Ron Giling/Lineair/Still Pictures/Specialist 
Stock; (right): James Baigrie/FoodPix/Getty Images; (bottom right): Peter Johnson/
CORBIS/Glow Images, Inc.; (bottom left): Library of Congress Prints and Photographs 
Division [LC-DIG-nclc-01537]; (top left): The National Archives/SSPL/Getty Images;  
(bottom right): NARINDER NANU/AFP/Getty Images; (top right): Evelyn 
Hockstein/MCT/Newscom; (bottom left): ASTER Science Team/Nasa Images; (bot-
tom right): J.m._Vidal European Press Agency/Newscom; (bottom right): imagebro-
ker.net / SuperStock 
Text Credits
Figure 7: “Changes in Country Classification” from the World Bank Website, 
July 1, 2011. Copyright © 2011 by The World Bank Group, All Rights Reserved. 
Reprinted with permission; Figure 8: Total Population poster from Worldmapper 
website. Copyright © 2006 by SASI Group (University of Sheffield) and 
Mark Newman (University of Michigan). Reprinted with permission; Figure  9: 
“Population Growth in Different World Regions,” from World Population 
Prospects: 2010 Revision. Copyright © 2010 by United Nations. Reprinted 
with permission. All rights reserved; Figure 10: “Total Fertility Rates Around the 
World,” from World Population Prospects: 2010 Revision. Copyright © 2010 by 
United Nations Publications. Reprinted with permission; Table 2: Source: based on 
data from 2011 World Population Data Sheet from Population Reference Bureau; 
Figure 1: “Growing Cities,” from World Organization Prospects: 2009 Revision. 
Copyright © 2009 by United Nations. Reprinted with permission. All rights 
reserved; Figure 15: Source: Data from: “The World Population Growth Rate: Why 
Declines Stalled in the 1980s” by Shiro Horiuchi, from Population Today, Volume 
21(6) and “World Population Expected to Reach 6 Billion in Early 1999” by Carl 
Haub, Population Today, June/July 1996, Volume 24(6/7). Population Reference 
Bureau; and World Population Prospects the 2008 Revision. United Nations; 
Figure 16: “Population of the world, 1950-2100, according to different projec-
tions and variants,” from World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision. Volume 
1: Comprehensive Tables. Copyright © 2010 by United Nations. Reprinted with 
permission. All rights reserved; Figure 17: Source: The 2010 Revision, Volume II: 
Demographic Profiles from United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs/Population Division; Figure 19: Figures from World Population Prospects: 
the 2010 Revision, Volume II: Demographic Profiles. Reprinted with permission. 
All rights reserved. Figure 20: Source: U.S. Population Projections. United States 
Census Bureau; Figure 21a-d: Figures from World Population Prospects: The 
2010 Revision, Volume II: Demographic Profiles. Copyright © 2010 by United 
Nations. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved; Figure 21e-h: Figures from 
World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision, Volume II: Demographic Profiles. 
Copyright © by United Nations. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved; 
Figure 22: Adapted from “Demographic transition in developed and developing 
countries,” from Population Reference Bureau; Figure 23: “World Population 
Growing at Record Speed,” by Carl Haub and James Gribble, from Population 
Bulletin: The World at 7 Billion, July 2011, Volume 66(2). Copyright © 2011 by 
Population Reference Bureau. Reprinted with permission. 
227

The Human Population
age structure Within a population, the different proportions of 
people who are old, middle aged, young adults, and children.
crude birthrate (CBR) The number of births per 1,000 individuals 
per year.
crude death rate (CDR) The number of deaths per 1,000 individuals 
per year.
demographic transition The transition of a human population 
from a condition of a high birthrate and a high death rate to a 
condition of a low birthrate and a low death rate. A demographic 
transition may result from economic or social development.
demography/demographer The study of population trends 
(growth, movement, development, and so on). People who 
perform such studies and make projections from them.
developed countries The high-income industrialized countries—
the United States, Canada, western European nations, Japan, 
Korea, Australia, and New Zealand, as well as many middle-
income countries such as those in Latin America, China, eastern 
Europe, and many Arab states.
developing countries Countries in which the gross domestic 
product is less than $936 per capita. The category includes 
nations of Africa, India, other countries of southern Asia, and 
some former Soviet republics.
Environmental Revolution In the view of some, a coming change 
in the adaptation of humans to the rising deterioration of the 
environment. The Environmental Revolution should bring about 
sustainable interactions with the environment.
equilibrial species See K-strategists
graying The increasing average age in populations in developed 
countries and in many developing countries that is occurring 
because of decreasing birthrates and increasing longevity.
ImPACT A refinement of the IPAT formula that separates the 
effects of Technology (T in the equation) into two components 
that incorporate the different effects of consumption of resources.
Industrial Revolution During the 19th century, the development 
of manufacturing processes using fossil fuels and based on 
applications of scientific knowledge.
IPAT formula A conceptual formula relating environmental 
impact (I) to population (P), affluence (A), and technology (T).
life expectancy The number of years a newborn can expect to live 
under mortality rates current for its country of residence.
longevity The maximum life span of individuals of a given species. 
The known record for humans is 122 years.
natural increase The number of births minus the number of deaths 
in a given population. The natural increase does not take into 
account immigration and emigration and is the percent of growth 
(or decline) of a given population during a year. It is found by 
subtracting the crude death rate from the crude birthrate and 
changing the result to a percent.
Neolithic Revolution The development of agriculture begun by 
human societies around 12,000 years ago, leading to more 
permanent settlement and population increases.
population momentum A property whereby a rapidly growing 
human population may be expected to grow for 50–60 years 
after replacement fertility (2.1 live births per female) is reached. 
Momentum is sustained because of increasing numbers entering 
reproductive age.
population profile A bar graph that shows the number of 
individuals at each age or in each five-year age group, starting 
with the youngest ages at the bottom of the profile.
replacement fertility rate/level The fertility rate (level) that 
will just sustain a stable population. It is 2.1 for developed 
countries.
total fertility rate The average number of children that will be born 
alive to each woman during her total reproductive years if her 
fertility is average at each age.
glossaRy
228

Population and 
Development
From Chapter 9 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

LEARNING ObjEctIvEs
 1. Predicting the Demographic Tran-
sition: Explain the main schools 
of thought about what causes 
the demographic transition.
 2. Promoting Development: Explain 
how development, fertility, and 
environmental health relate to 
each other. Understand the Mil-
lennium Development Goals. 
Describe how development can 
pull down fertility but can also 
increase environmental stressors. 
Explain the need for sustain-
able actions even as we develop 
economies.
 3. A New Direction: Social Moderni-
zation: Explain the five features 
other than general economic 
improvement countries focus on 
to achieve lower fertility rates.
T
he sun shines on the surface of the chao Phraya river in thailand. The water 
glistens as it runs past the rich fields in the central Thai region. In the villages 
by the river, extended families live in wooden structures on stilts, water buf-
falos and chickens safely housed beneath. Anong and her husband, Somchai, are 
part of such a family. They live with Anong’s parents, now elderly, and their own two 
children, a boy and a girl. While Somchai is the head of the family in most matters, 
Anong is in charge of finances and the household. Both work outside the home and 
earn a modest income. Both are literate. Although they live in only one room, the 
family has access to clean drinking water and sanitation. Both parents were raised in 
large families; Anong had seven siblings and Somchai five. Today, their family of two 
children is more typical.
FERtILIty DROp. Their experience is typical of many in Thailand. In a single 
generation, the country experienced one of the largest drops in fertility in world 
history. Between 1960 and 2005, the total fertility rate dropped from 6.4 children 
per woman to 1.8. 
At the same time, 
GNP per capita 
and life expectancy 
rose dramatically 
($1,059 to $7,274; 
53 years to 69.9 
years). Anong 
and Somchai are 
composites of 
the experience of 
modern Thais. Like 
the rest of their 
generation, they 
Population and 
Development
Thailand
Myanmar
(Burma)
Vietnam
Vietnam
Cambodia
Malaysia
Gulf of Thailand
Andaman
Sea
South China Sea
Laos
Floodplain life. Central Thailand has many houses 
near rivers. Here, a Thai house on stilts with aquac-
ulture pens.
230

Population and Development
have experienced rapid change in their home country. Probably 
the biggest change is family size. This remarkable drop in popu-
lation growth rate astonished the world.
In 1960, when the Texas-sized country held 28 million 
people, demographers predicted the country would fall into a 
poverty trap: any increase in the economy would be eaten up 
by the needs of the growing population. Today, with population 
growth slowed and a population of about 70 million, the coun-
try has 25 million fewer people than demographers predicted in 
the 1970s.
sOcIAL chANGEs. How did Thailand accomplish this? 
Much was done through direct efforts to lower fertility: Voluntary 
contraception was increased, public health and awareness cam-
paigns were undertaken, and health care clinics were opened, 
even in rural areas. For example, the public health campaign of 
one non-profit group made contraception a familiar and humor-
ous topic of everyday life.
But there were other factors as well. Modern Thai women 
now have higher freedom, equality, and literacy rates than Thai 
women of the past. In Thai culture, sons are not favored over 
daughters, so women are not under pressure to abort female 
fetuses or to have more children than they can support in order 
to produce sons. A nutrition program implemented by the govern-
ment dramatically slashed child malnutrition. Contrary to some 
prevailing thought, the fertility transition Thailand experienced 
occurred even though the country was relatively poor, and even 
though most people remained rural. While the drop in population 
growth prevented disaster, some of the economic growth and 
the support for millions more Thai citizens came at the expense 
of ecosystems. Thailand now has to contend with water and air 
pollution and loss of biodiversity brought on by its activities. On 
the plus side, the country’s ability to solve ecological problems 
is more likely with lower population growth. This chapter begins 
with a reassessment of the demographic transition.
1  Predicting the Demographic 
Transition
The demographic transition describes the shift from high 
birth and death rates to low birth and death rates over time 
in industrialized countries. Using the concept of the demo-
graphic transition, current birth and death rates of the major 
regions of the world can be plotted to visualize where they 
currently fall in the transition (Fig. 1). The vertical dividing 
line on this plot separates the regions (to the right of the line) 
that are on a fast track to completing the demographic transi-
tion (or have already done so) from the regions (to the left of 
the line) that are in the middle of the demographic transition. 
These regions (half of the world) are mostly in their fifth dec-
ade of rapid population increase. It is as if they are trapped 
there, with serious consequences. One of the key questions 
scientists who study population ask is, “What causes some 
countries to move quickly through the demographic transi-
tion and others to remain in the process indefinitely?”
Different Ways Forward
Countries trapped in long-term rapid growth would all like 
to experience the economic development that has brought 
Thailand, South Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Brazil, and 
other low-income nations into the middle- and even high-
income nation groups. If they did so, it is likely that they 
would then move through the demographic transition. There 
50
40
30
20
10
0
Crude birth or death rate
Progress in demographic transition
Regions completing
or having completed the
transition
Regions in the
middle of the
transition
CBR
38
24
18
12
13
13
11
11
8
5
7
6
Latin
America
N. America
E. Asia
Europe
Western
Asia
Sub-Saharan
Africa
CDR
Figure 1 World regions in the process of demo-
graphic transition. Crude birthrates (CBRs, orange) and 
crude death rates (CDRs, green) are shown for major regions of 
the world. A dividing line separates countries at or well along 
in the demographic transition from those still in the middle of 
the transition. (Source: Data from 2011 World Population Data 
Sheet (Washington, D.C.: Population Reference Bureau, 2011).)
231

Population and Development
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Per capita
income growth
Technology
growth
Europe &
Central Asia
Latin America
& Caribbean
Sub-Saharan
Africa
Middle-East &
North Africa
East Asia
& Pacific
South
Asia
Technological progress, income growth and poverty reduction
Average annual per capita income and technology growth, 1990–2005
Figure 2 Technological progress, income 
growth, and poverty reduction. Average annual per 
capita income and technology growth, 1990–2005, in selected 
regions. (Source: Technology & Development (Findings from a 
World Bank Report). Global Economic Prospects 2008: Technol-
ogy Diffusion in the Developing World (Washington, D.C.: World 
Bank, 2008).)
Figure 3 Fertility transition times. Countries experience very different 
rates of change in fertility. (Source: www.gapminder.org.)
United
States
India
Colombia
Zimbabwe
Morocco
Bangladesh
Iran,
Islamic Rep.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Number of years for the total fertility
rate to fall from more than 6 children
to less than 3
How fast can fertility decline?
are great disparities in economic progress among developing 
countries, however. A World Bank study of developing econ-
omies found that growth in per capita income was strongly 
correlated with technological progress; both of these meas-
ures were at their lowest in three regions with continued 
high population growth and poverty: sub-Saharan Africa, the 
Middle East, and Latin America.1
How did the now-developed nations come through 
the demographic transition without getting caught in the 
 poverty-population trap? In these countries, the improve-
ments in disease control that lowered death rates (the epi-
demiological transition) occurred gradually through the 
1800s and early 1900s. Industrialization, which introduced 
factors that lowered fertility, occurred over the same period. 
Therefore, there was never a huge discrepancy between birth 
and death rates. In contrast, modern medicine was intro-
duced into the developing world relatively suddenly, bringing 
about a precipitous decline in death rates, while the fertility-
lowering effects of development have been slow in coming. 
Figure 3 shows how extreme the differences in speed of the 
demographic transition can be.
Looking at the Data
Demographers and economists try to determine which fac-
tors most predict changes in populations and why. Why is 
it that educated women have fewer children? If the GNP of 
a whole nation goes up, but inequality is high, will popula-
tion growth rates still fall? Should governments simply try to 
increase the family economy for the poorest and assume fer-
tility rates will fall, or do people need specific programs for 
family planning? Demographers seek answers to these ques-
tions, which may vary by country.
Competing Ideas
What do the developing countries need to do to fast-forward 
their way through the demographic transition? From early on, 
two basic conflicting theories offered answers to this question:
1. Speed up economic development in the high-growth 
countries and population growth will slow down “auto-
matically,” as it did in the developed countries.
2. Concentrate on population policies and family-planning 
technologies to bring down birthrates.
Population 
Conferences. These 
two 
schools 
of 
thought were reflected at two UN population confer-
ences—one in Bucharest, Romania, in 1974 and a second 
in Mexico City in 1984. At the Bucharest conference, the 
United States was a strong advocate of population control 
through family planning, while the developing nations 
argued that “development was the best contraceptive.” 
1Kavita Watsa, Technology & Development: Findings from a World Bank Report: 
Global Economic Prospects 2008: Technology Diffusion in the Developing World 
(Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2008).
232

Population and Development
Most Recent Thinking. The most recent population confer-
ence, the International Conference on Population and Develop-
ment (ICPD), was held in Cairo in 1994. Poverty, population 
growth, and development were clearly linked, and resources and 
environmental degradation were an important focus. The ideo-
logical split between developed and developing countries was 
a thing of the past—all agreed that population growth must be 
dealt with in order to make progress in reducing poverty and 
promoting economic development. The responsibility for bring-
ing fertility rates down was placed firmly on the developing 
countries themselves, although the developed countries pledged 
to help with technology and other forms of aid.
There was also broad agreement on several main ideas. One 
of these was that women’s rights to health care, education, and 
employment were foundational to achieving slower population 
growth. Development must be linked to a reduction in poverty, 
Their resistance to family planning was also bolstered by 
feelings that the developed world’s promotion of popula-
tion control was another form of economic imperialism 
or even genocide.
At the conference in Mexico City, the sides were some-
what reversed. Developing countries facing real problems of 
excessive population growth were asking for more assistance 
with family planning, whereas the United States, under pres-
sure from anti-abortion advocates, took the position that 
development was the answer and terminated all contribu-
tions to international family-planning efforts, a policy that 
remained in effect until 1993. The other developed countries, 
however, remained convinced that family planning was es-
sential and continued to support international efforts to 
help the developing countries implement policies designed to 
bring fertility rates down.
SuSTaInabILITy
Looking at Change in India
If you were to call any 
one of several compa-
nies for a credit card 
application, chances 
are that you might 
be talking to a young Indian person, one of 
13,000 working for Genpact, in a call center 
in Gurgaon, a small city on the outskirts of 
Delhi, India. Genpact recruits some 1,100 
new employees a month from a pool of well-
educated young people who aspire to live in 
apartments like those of Heritage City. Out-
side this high-tech enclave, however, is the 
old India, with families living in shantytowns, 
sacred cows roaming the streets, garbage 
and trash everywhere, and shoeless children 
begging for rupees. This is the stark contrast 
found in many countries with a history of 
rapid population growth.
In the nearly 65 years since India gained 
its independence, its population has more 
than tripled. With 1.22 billion people already 
(2012), India is now growing at a rate of 18 
million per year and is expected to surpass 
China’s population by 2030. In spite of many 
decades of family-planning programs, India’s 
population has continued to grow, cance-
ling out much of the country’s gains in food 
production, health care, and literacy. Almost 
half of India’s children under the age of five 
are malnourished, and 75% of its popula-
tion lives on less than $2 a day. India has 
the largest illiterate population in the world. 
With a per capita gross national income of 
$1,370 per year, India has a very long way to 
go to achieve the kind of development that 
characterizes the industrialized countries. It 
might be tempting to consider this a hopeless 
situation were it not for Kerala, one region of 
India where things are quite different.
Kerala, a state in the south of India, has 
a population of 33.4 million and an area 
of 39,900 square miles (about the size of 
Kentucky). This makes Kerala the second 
most densely populated state in India and 
close to the most densely populated region 
in the world. Situated only 10° north of the 
equator, Kerala is tropical, with lush planta-
tions of coffee, tea, rubber, and spices in the 
highlands and rice, coconut, sugarcane, tapi-
oca, and bananas in the lowlands. With the 
Arabian Sea lapping at Kerala’s shore, fishing 
is an important industry. Kerala is very much 
like the rest of India in that it is crowded, 
I
o
n
a
a
  
  
K
A
R
N
A
T
A
K
A 
 
T
A
M
I
L
 
N
A
D
U
 
SRI LANKA
Cochin
Arabian
Sea
Bay of
Bengal
Bay of
Bengal
Arabian
Sea
SRI LANKA
0
100 km
0
100 miles
Bangladesh
INDIA
CHINA
PAKISTAN
Nepal Bhutam
New Delhi
I N D I A
KERALA
New and old India. Heritage City, an apart-
ment complex in Gurgaon, on the southwest 
fringe of Delhi, India. Gurgaon has become a 
corporate and industrial center. 
per capita income is small, and food intake is 
low. Here, however, the similarities end.
The people of Kerala have a life expect-
ancy of 73 years, compared with 65 for all of 
India. Infant mortality in the state is 12 per 
thousand versus 57 per thousand for India. 
The fertility rate is 1.8 (below replacement 
level) compared with 2.8 for India. Literacy 
is near 90%, almost all villages in the state 
have access to schools and modern health 
services, and women have achieved high 
political offices and are as well educated as 
men. Even though Kerala must be considered 
a poor region by every economic measure, 
its people are well on the way to achieving a 
stable population.
233

Population and Development
full advantage of the demographic window? To do so, they must 
directly help the poorest people in their societies.
Large and Small Families
The fertility transition is the most vital element in the demo-
graphic transition. Many studies have shown that high fertility 
and poverty are linked, including the correlation between fertility 
rate and gross national income per capita (Fig. 5).  Countries on 
the far left side of this plot are all in the early or middle stages 
of the demographic transition; most are low-income economies. 
Those in the middle and to the right are all middle-income econo-
mies and are moving through the transition.
To the observer in a developed country, it may seem strange 
that so many poor women in developing countries have large 
families. It is obvious from our perspective that more children 
could spread a family’s income more thinly and handicap efforts 
to get ahead economically. In the United States, an extremely large 
family is so rare that it may even lead to endorsements of a reality 
show like 19 Kids and Counting. In other countries, large fami-
lies are more common, though in countries with poor health out-
comes, members may not live to adulthood. The decision-making 
process that leads parents to produce large families is different in 
low-income countries than in the United States, however, because 
they live under very different sociocultural conditions.
Let’s look at some examples. In western Uganda, most 
families are large and polygamous and make their living in ag-
riculture. Children are an asset in the work force, and most do 
not receive education (Fig. 6). Because girl children bring a bride 
price to their parents, both boys and girls are valued. An aver-
age bride is 16 years old and will have more than six children. 
In fact, about a third of women will have 10 or more children. 
Some women have access to family planning but do not use it, 
and many people see the immediate need for help in the fields as 
more important than their children’s long-term options.
Afghanistan is another good example. In 1950, the pop-
ulation was 8 million; in 2009, 28 million; and estimates for 
2030 range between 43 million and 50 million. Half of all Af-
ghani adults are between the ages of 15 and 29. In comparison, 
that age group makes up 26% of the population in the United 
States. Just as American college students enter the work force 
the participants said. Existing poverty in the developing coun-
tries is an affront to human dignity that should not be tolerated. 
Everyone realized that continued population growth, poverty, 
and development were a threat to the health of the environment 
and that only sustainable development would prevent a future of 
unprecedented biological and human impoverishment.
Five-year anniversary reviews affirmed the universal 
commitment to the agreements forged at the 1994 conference. 
Because the Cairo conference produced a 20-year plan, the 
next such conference is anticipated sometime around 2014.
Demographic Dividend. An interesting thing happens as a 
country goes through the demographic transition. As birthrates 
decline, the working-age population increases relative to the 
younger and older members of the population. This relationship 
is known as the dependency ratio and is defined as the ratio of 
the nonworking population (under 15 and over 65) to the work-
ing-age population. For a time, therefore, the society can spend 
less on new schools and old-age medical expenses and more 
on factors that will alleviate poverty and generate economic 
growth—a demographic dividend. This demographic window is 
open only once, however, as the numbers of younger children de-
crease, and stays open only for a few decades, until the numbers 
of older people increase. Graying populations then increase the 
dependency ratio again, though if countries have succeeded in 
increasing their economy, they will then be in a better position 
to care for dependents. For countries well below replacement 
level, such as some in Europe and Japan, the fertility level may 
rebound slightly or immigration may increase to level the popu-
lation out in the long term.
Figure 4 shows how dependency ratios have changed over 
time—and will likely change in the future—for several world re-
gions. A number of East Asian and Latin American countries, 
such as South Korea, Brazil, and Mexico, have taken advantage 
of this window. They have put in place population and economic 
policies that are consistent with poverty reduction and economic 
expansion, and as a result, they have experienced rapid eco-
nomic development. The countries of South Asia (for example, 
Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh) are currently approaching this 
window of opportunity. Will they make the necessary invest-
ments in health, education, and economic opportunities to take 
1960
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2050
Dependency ratio
Year
Figure 4 The demographic 
 window. As countries experience gradu-
ally decreasing fertility, the dependency ratio 
declines and opportunities for development 
increase. The plot compares several developing 
regions with some developed countries.  
(Source: World Data Sheet 2011 and the World 
Economic Outlook Database, September 2011.)
234

Population and Development
doesn’t accept it. Because of harsh conditions, both mothers and 
infants die in the birth process at higher rates than in much of 
the world. One in eight Afghan women is likely to die of preg-
nancy-related diseases. In spite of all of these difficulties, fertility 
in Afghanistan is currently declining and contraceptive use rose 
from 5% to 22% in some rural areas between 2003 and 2011.
These stories of Uganda and Afghanistan put a human 
face on high fertility. Numerous studies and surveys reveal 
the following as primary reasons that the poor in developing 
countries have large families.
uncertain if there will be jobs open to them, young Afghans feel 
that pressure many times over. A number of authors have de-
scribed the dilemmas faced by Afghan families: War, poverty, 
lack of human rights, uncertainty about the future, and a lack 
of education combine to make life difficult. A typical Afghan 
woman (Fig. 7) might marry a man a dozen years older than 
herself and bear children as soon as she is able to get preg-
nant. She will have few rights to her own decision making, little 
schooling, and heavy social pressure to bear sons. She may not 
even know about contraception or may live in a culture that 
Figure 5 Fertility rate and income in selected developing countries. There is a correlation 
between income (gross national income in purchasing power parity per capita) and lower total fertility. Factors that 
affect fertility more directly are health care, education for women, and the availability of information and services re-
lated to contraception. (Source: World Data Sheet 2011 and the World Economic Outlook Database, September 2011)
0
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Uganda
Nigeria
Mozambique
Madagascar
18000
Republic of Congo
Pakistan
Philippines
Egypt
Bangladesh
Total Fertility Rate (2011)
Per Capita Income (2011)
India
Indonesia
Sri Lanka
Morocco
Honduras
Sudan
Kenya
Ghana
El Salvador
Peru
Algeria
Kazakhstan
Costa
Rica
Brazil
Argentina
Malaysia
Panama
World
Turkey
Mexico
Chile
Democratic Republic
of Congo
TFR vs GNI 2007–2011
Figure 6 Children as an economic asset. Children working fields in 
Myanmar. In many developing countries, children perform adult work and thus 
contribute significantly to the income of the family.
Figure 7 Young parenthood. Marriage by young girls (often to older 
husbands) is common in war-torn Afghanistan, where this mother and child live. A 
young age at first reproduction and lack of medical care cause high maternal and 
infant mortality. They also contribute to high growth rates.
235

Population and Development
Conclusions. The five factors supporting large families 
are common to preindustrialized, agrarian societies. With 
industrialization, urbanization, and development, however, 
come conditions conducive to having small families. These 
include: the relatively high cost of raising children, the exist-
ence of pensions and a Social Security system, opportunities 
for women to make money, access to affordable contracep-
tives, adequate health care, educational opportunities, and an 
older age at marriage.
Fertility rates in developing countries remain high not be-
cause people in those countries are behaving irrationally or ir-
responsibly, but because the sociocultural climate in which they 
live has favored high fertility for years and because contracep-
tives are often unavailable. Sometimes the rise in population 
triggers a vicious cycle: poverty, environmental degradation, and 
high fertility drive one another forward (Fig. 9). Increasing popu-
lation density leads to a greater depletion of rural community re-
sources like firewood, water, and land, which encourages couples 
to have more children to help gather resources, and so on. They 
are in a poverty trap. In addition, rapid population growth can 
increase inequality in a society because the abundance of labor 
lowers the price of labor. This feeds the same cycle, as inequality 
also promotes poverty.
Thus, it is not just economic development that leads to 
declining fertility rates. Rather, fertility rates decline insofar as 
development provides (1) security in one’s old age apart from 
the help of children, (2) lower infant and childhood mortality,  
(3)  universal education for children, (4) opportunities for 
higher education and careers for women, and (5) unrestricted 
1. Old age security. A primary reason given by poor women 
in developing nations for having many children is to en-
sure that they will be cared for in old age.
2. Infant and childhood mortality. The common experience 
of children dying leads people to try to make sure that 
some of their children will survive to adulthood.
3. Helping hands. In subsistence-agriculture societies like 
rural Uganda, women do most of the work relating to 
the direct care and support of the family. Very young 
children help with chores and fieldwork. In short, chil-
dren are seen as a productive asset.
4. 
Status of women. The traditional social structure in 
many developing countries still discourages women from  
obtaining higher education, owning businesses or land, and 
pursuing many careers. As is often the case in Afghanistan, 
respect for a woman increases as she bears more children.
5. Availability of contraceptives. Poor women often lack 
access to reproductive health information, services, 
and facilities. Providing contraceptives to women is a 
major facet of family planning. Studies show a strong 
correlation between lower fertility rates and the per-
centage of couples using contraception (Fig. 8). In 
Thailand, for example, the availability of contracep-
tion was a large part of the fertility transition. World-
wide about 215 million women would like to delay 
or prevent pregnancy but are unable to do so. This is 
an unmet need for contraception.
0
20
40
60
80
100
10
30
50
70
90
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Uganda
Yemen
Tanzania
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
Mali
Pakistan
Haiti
Libya
Philippines
Total fertility rate
Percent using modern contraceptives
India
Tunisia
Japan
Kenya
Jordan
Honduras
Ecuador S. Africa
Indonesia
Guatemala
Ghana
Ethiopia
Thailand
Cuba
Canada
U.K.
USA Brazil
China
S. Korea
Mexico
Contraceptive prevalence and fertility rates, selected countries, 2011
Developing
countries
(–China)
Figure 8 Prevalence of contraception and fertility rates. More than any other single factor, 
lower fertility rates are correlated with the percentage of the population using contraceptives. (Source: Data from 
2011 World Population Data Sheets (Washington, D.C.: Population Reference Bureau, 2011).)
236

Population and Development
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) have also played 
a large role. Literacy rates, the percentage of the popu-
lation with access to clean drinking water and sanitary 
sewers, and other social indicators of development have 
generally improved. Furthermore, the fertility rates of 
most developing countries have declined, although they 
are still far from the replacement level (Table 1).
The successes just described, however, are dulled by some 
sobering facts. A sixth of the world’s population (1.2 billion 
people) still lives on less than $1.25 a day, nearly 1 billion lack 
access to clean water, more than 1.2 billion are living in urban 
slums under deplorable conditions, and more than 1 billion are 
malnourished. These are the world’s poorest people. As Nelson 
Mandela, former leader of South Africa, put it, “Massive poverty 
and obscene inequality are such terrible scourges of our times—
times in which the world boasts breathtaking advances in sci-
ence, technology, industry and wealth accumulation—that they 
have to rank alongside slavery and apartheid as social evils.”2
Is the solution to these problems simply to facilitate 
economic growth and the alleviation of poverty will follow? 
The United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) 
puts it the following way in State of World Population 2002: 
“Development has often bypassed the poorest people, and 
has even increased their disadvantages. The poor need direct  
Poverty
Context
Food insecurity
Employment lack
High disease burden
Overusing
resources
for survival
Dwindling
resources
divided
among more
people
Environmental
degradation
High
fertility
Lack of
contraceptives
More "little hands"
needed to help
the family in a
depleted environment.
Illiteracy
Figure 9 The poverty cycle. Poverty, environmental degradation, and 
high fertility rates become locked in a self-perpetuating vicious cycle.
access to contraceptives and reproductive health services. These 
are all outcomes of public policies, and countries and regions 
(like Kerala and Thailand) that have made them a high priority 
have moved into and through the demographic transition.
2 Promoting Development
The good news is that many developing countries have 
made remarkable economic progress. The gross national 
products of some countries have increased as much as 
fivefold, bringing them from low- to medium-income 
status, and some medium-income nations have achieved 
high-income status. India, for example, has dramatically 
lowered its poverty rate—from 52% to almost 22%—de-
spite having huge numbers of people in poverty. Although 
the world economy is still strongly dominated by the de-
veloped countries, the developing countries have become 
more and more involved in what is now an integrated glo-
bal economy. At the heart of this economy is technology, 
and as Figure 2 indicates, those developing regions show-
ing the highest growth in income also show the greatest 
technological progress. There is still a great gap between 
rich and poor countries in income, as well as technology, 
but the percentage of impoverished people in the world—
those living on less than $1.25 per day (the new extreme 
poverty criterion)—has dropped from 42% to 21.3% of 
the developing world’s population in the two decades 
since 1990. This is further expected to drop to 14.4 % by 
2015 (Fig. 10).
Tremendous social progress has been made in many 
developing countries, too. Efforts from many branches of 
the United Nations have aided the work of various gov-
ernment programs. Private charitable organizations and 
Figure 10 Extreme poverty. Extreme poverty rates around the world are 
falling, though numbers are still high. (Source: Millennium Development Goals 
Report 2011 (New York: United Nations, 2011).
0
20
40
1990
2005
2015 target
80
Southern Asia
Sub-Saharan
Africa
58
51
60
Proportion of people living on less than $1.25 a day,
1990 and 2005 (Percentage)
Southern Asia
(excluding India)
49
39
Caribbean
Caucasus &
Central Asia
South-Eastern
Asia
Eastern Asia
Latin America
45
31
29
26
6
19
39
19
60
16
11
7
2
6
5
3
45
27
Western Asia
Northern Africa
Developing
regions
2Speech in London’s Trafalgar Square for the Campaign to End Poverty in the 
Developing World. BBC News, February 3, 2005.
237

Population and Development
their impacts will certainly improve economic development 
in the different countries.
The 
Millennium 
Project 
and 
MDG 
Support 
Team. An unprecedented amount of global attention has 
been focused on the MDGs. Virtually every UN agency, 
scores of NGOs, and government agencies of many coun-
tries have produced strategies and directives that dem-
onstrate how they are mobilizing to achieve the MDGs. 
In the midst of this activity, the Millennium Project was 
given the mandate to develop a coordinated action plan 
that other agencies and organizations can consult as 
they address the MDGs. The Millennium Project, com-
missioned by the UN Secretary-General in 2002, was an 
independent advisory body headed by economist Jeffrey 
Sachs, a world expert on poverty, and involved some 
250 development experts from around the world. Several 
years later, it appears that some of the MDGs will be met 
by 2015, but others will not. The Millennium Project was 
succeeded by the MDG Support Team, operating under 
the mandate of the United Nations Development Program 
(UNDP). The MDG Support Team works with countries 
by invitation, helping them to prepare and implement 
national strategies for achieving the MDGs, developing 
tools and methods specific for that country, coordinating 
technical expertise across the UN family of agencies, and 
obtaining the financing needed for support of MDG work 
in the recipient countries.
Progress Toward the MDGs. A recent summary of glo-
bal and regional progress toward the MDGs is found in The 
 Millennium Development Goals Report 2011, produced by 
statisticians from a host of UN agencies. Now that we are 
close to the target date of 2015, how is it going?
Extreme Poverty.  The first goal (eradicate extreme 
poverty and hunger) aims to reduce by half the propor-
tion of people whose income is less than $1 (now $1.25) 
a day. This goal has almost been met at the global level, 
and by 2015, the number in this poorest group should 
fall to below 900  million. Unfortunately, the worldwide 
recession that began in 2008 slowed economic growth. 
Furthermore, there are major regions—in particular, sub-
Saharan Africa and Southern Asia—that are far behind on 
this goal.
tAbLE 1 Decline in Total Fertility Rates
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2008
2011
Africa
6.3
6.2
5.8
5.3
5.1
4.9
4.7
Latin America and the 
Caribbean
4.2
3.5
3.1
2.8
2.6
2.5
2.2
Asia (excluding China)
4.6
4.1
3.5
3.3
3
2.8
2.6
China
2.1
2.3
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.5
Developed countries
2
2
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.7
Source: Data from various World Population Data Sheets (Washington, D.C.: Population Reference Bureau).
action to bring them into the development process and create 
the conditions for them to escape from poverty.”3 In fact, as 
we have already seen, a country can have increases in wealth, 
but many people remain in poverty if inequality is high. To 
alleviate poverty is the explicit objective of the Millennium 
Development Goals.
Millennium Development Goals
In 1997, representatives from the United Nations, the 
World Bank, and the Organisation for Economic Co-
Operation and Development (OECD) met to formulate a set 
of goals for international development that would reduce 
the extreme poverty in many countries and its various im-
pacts on human well-being. The goals were sharpened and 
then adopted as a global compact by all UN members at 
the UN Millennium Summit in 2000. Table 2 lists the eight 
 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and 17 targets. As 
well as targets, each goal has definite indicators for moni-
toring progress. The indicators are measurable and provide 
feedback to all who are concerned about whether progress 
is being made.
The goals reinforce each other and should all be worked 
on together. For example, the indicators of progress for Goal 4 
(reduce child mortality) are the infant mortality rate, the under-
five mortality rate, and the proportion of one-year-old children 
immunized against measles. Achieving Goals 5 and 6 (improve 
maternal health and combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other 
diseases) should go far toward accomplishing Goal 4.
Most importantly, the MDGs are a clear set of targets 
for the developing countries themselves. Each country is 
expected to work on its own needs, but it is expected that 
all of the countries will do so in partnership with developed 
countries and development agencies, consistent with Goal 
8 (forge a global partnership for development). The low-in-
come countries simply lack the resources to go it alone. It is 
important to note that the MDGs are not focused on the eco-
nomic development normally tracked by measures like gross 
national income. They specifically address extreme poverty 
wherever it is found. As the goals are achieved, however, 
3UNFPA State of World Population 2002. People, poverty, and possibilities: making 
development work for the poor. Ed Thoyaya Ahmed Obaid. UN Population Fund.
238

Population and Development
STeWaRDShIP
Protecting People’s Options
China’s Population 
Policies
When a country has un-
controlled population 
growth, it isn’t always 
obvious how to respond. Increasing social 
modernization may help but isn’t guaranteed 
to work; a country may be headed into a 
poverty trap. How countries respond to un-
checked population growth may have a great 
deal to do with the level of centralization 
and the culture. If ignoring the problem isn’t 
reasonable, and simply letting people die of 
starvation and disease is unethical (as most 
people would argue), then governments have 
to decide how strongly they will act to lower 
population growth.
The most acceptable option—the one that 
has been the theme of this chapter—is to create 
an economic and social climate in which people, 
of their own volition, will desire to have fewer 
children. Along with such a climate, society will 
provide the means (family planning) to enable 
people to exercise that choice. This option has 
been realized “unconsciously” in developed 
countries, but it raises certain ethical dilemmas 
when you attempt to apply it to developing 
countries.
China is a good example of a country whose 
government has pursued policies with which 
many people are uncomfortable. With its current 
population of 1.3 billion (a fifth of the world’s 
people), China offers extensive economic incen-
tives and disincentives aimed at reducing popu-
lation growth. This is in part because China was 
in an intolerable position. Under the Communist  
leader Mao Tse-tung, the government encour-
aged people to have large families. During 
the early Communist years, the country went 
through an epidemiological transition, but not 
a fertility transition. While Chairman Mao ruled, 
China’s population increased from 550 million to 
900 million people.
However, during the ‘40s and ‘50s, the gov-
ernment pursued a series of unfortunate plans 
for industry and agriculture that, along with 
mismanagement and natural disasters, led to 
famine. Between 1958 and 1960, crop produc-
tion dropped by 70%. Between 1958 and 1961, 
the greatest level of starvation in human history 
occurred in China; between 20 million and 43 
million people died. By the early ‘70s, China’s 
leaders recognized that, unless population 
growth was stemmed, the country would be 
unable to live within the limits of its resources. 
They began a voluntary family planning program 
of clinics and education, with some success. In 
1979, they introduced the one-child policy for 
mostly urban families. Exceptions were made 
for rural families, those who had daughters 
first, families in which both parents are only 
children, and ethic minorities. Only about 40% 
of married couples actually are obligated to this 
policy; others are allowed two and sometimes 
more children. To achieve population goals, the 
government instituted an elaborate array of 
incentives and deterrents. The prime incentives 
were as follows:
• Paid leave to women who have fertility-
related operations—namely, sterilization or 
abortion procedures;
• A monthly subsidy to one-child families;
• Job priority for only children;
• Additional food rations for only children;
• Housing preferences for single-child 
families; and
• Preferential medical care to parents whose 
only child is a girl. (There is a strong prefer-
ence for sons in China, and parents gener-
ally wish to have children until at least one 
son is born.)
Penalties for an excessive number of children 
in China included the following:
• Bonuses received for the first child must be 
repaid to the government if a second is born.
• A tax (now called a “social compensation 
fee”) must be paid for having a second child.
• Higher prices must be paid for food for a 
second child.
• Maternity leave and paid medical expenses 
apply only to the first child.
Besides improving economic opportuni-
ties, these incentives and deterrents have 
helped China achieve a precipitous drop in its 
total fertility rate, from a rate of about 4.5 in 
the mid-1970s to a rate of 1.5 in 2011. The 
policy is unpopular, but without it, China’s 
population would be 400 million larger. In 
practice, the one-child policy has been rigor-
ously pursued only in urban areas, home to 
some 36% of the population. People in cities, 
already feeling crowded, have experienced 
a drop in the desired size of their families 
as well. People in rural areas and minorities 
(who are exempted from the policy) have 
a higher fertility rate. The policy has been 
extremely controversial. Local governments 
in China, tasked with keeping population 
growth down, carried out egregious human 
rights violations. These included practices 
such as razing the homes of people with mul-
tiple children and forced sterilizations and 
abortions that caused outrage in China and 
in the world community. In the past decade, 
rapid economic growth and more personal 
freedoms have made the Chinese people 
harder to control. Many are willing to pay the 
penalties, more people know about human 
rights violations through social media, and 
there have been activists fighting for repro-
ductive rights for  Chinese citizens.
Despite such controls, the population of 
China is still growing due to momentum and 
will continue to do so. One disturbing conse-
quence of China’s policy is the skewed ratio 
of males to females. Males are preferred in 
Chinese families, so some parents try to make 
sure that their one child is a male, through 
such extreme measures as selective abor-
tion and even infanticide of female children. 
Loss of females is common in India as well 
and in some other countries where sons are 
strongly preferred. Unfortunately, this means 
that there are now millions more young men 
than women. There are concerns that this will 
cause social unrest.
You could look at the ethical dilemmas 
posed by China’s one-child policy as  
competing claims on stewardship. In order 
to protect resources for current and future 
people, China chose not to preserve individual 
freedom. That is, to have the option of sup-
porting everyone, they chose to remove the 
option of making individual decisions about 
family size and, in some cases, intimate rights 
to protection from sterilization and abor-
tion. In most of the world, such a trade-off is 
viewed as abhorrent. In China, people have a 
mixed view of the policy. China’s population 
policy has been a case study for environmental 
ethicists and a topic of passion for human 
rights workers since its inception. However, 
the Cairo population conference made it clear 
that on a worldwide basis, most countries be-
lieve people should be able to make individual 
choices about family size.
C
P
W
c
g
239

Population and Development
Some Other Successes. The Millennium Develop-
ment Goals Report 2012 lists a number of additional suc-
cesses. For example, in all but two regions, primary school 
 enrollment is 90% or higher. The number of deaths from 
measles has fallen dramatically; about 80% of children in 
developing countries are now immunized (Fig. 12). Many 
more women have skilled attendants during childbirth; 
81% of pregnant women have some prenatal care. In fact, 
the number of maternal deaths from childbirth has been 
halved in less than 20 years. Water availability is also a 
success. At least 1.6 billion people have gained access to 
safe drinking water since 1990, making Target 7c of the 
MDGs one of the first attained.
Unmet Goals. The report also lists areas where greater 
effort is required if goals are to be met, particularly nourish-
ment of children, ensuring environmental sustainability, low-
ering maternal mortality, and access to sanitation. The goal 
that has the greatest number of targets worsening instead of 
improving is Goal 7 (ensure environmental sustainability). 
Goals 
Affecting 
Children. Another 
goal 
that 
will likely be met (because of progress already made) is 
Goal 2 (achieve universal primary education). In fact, 
sub-Saharan Africa, which consistently ranks in the 
lowest on many quality of life measures, increased pri-
mary school enrollment from 58% to 76% in only a 
decade. The goal that seems least likely to be achieved 
is Goal 4 (reduce child mortality), with the target 
of reducing under-five mortality rates by two-thirds  
(Fig. 11). More than one-third of these deaths are asso-
ciated with malnutrition, a clear link to Goal 1, Target 
2 (reduce by half the people who suffer from hunger). 
In sub-Saharan Africa, though child mortality has fallen 
substantially, one in eight children still die before the 
age of five. All regions of the world except for Oceania, 
sub-Saharan Africa, and Southern Asia have seen drops 
in child mortality of 50% or more. As of 2011, research-
ers thought it was unlikely but still possible to reach the 
MDG by 2015, with aggressive action.
tAbLE 2 Millennium Development Goals and Targets (Conditions in 1990 are Compared with Those in 2015, 
the year for Reaching the Targets)
Goal 1. eradicate extreme poverty and hunger.
• Target 1: Reduce by half the proportion of people whose income is less than $1 (now $1.25) a day.
• Target 2: Reduce by half the proportion of people who suffer from hunger.
Goal 2. achieve universal primary education.
• Target 3: Ensure that all children, boys and girls alike, are enrolled in primary school.
Goal 3. Promote gender equality and empower women.
•  Target 4: Eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary education by 2005 and in all levels of education by 2015.
Goal 4. Reduce child mortality.
•  Target 5: Reduce mortality rates by two-thirds for all infants and children under five.
Goal 5. Improve maternal health.
•  Target 6: Reduce maternal mortality rates by three-quarters.
•  Target 7: Achieve, by 2015, universal access to reproductive health.
Goal 6. Combat hIV/aIDS, malaria, and other diseases.
•  Target 8: Have halted, by 2015, and begun to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS.
•  Target 9: Achieve, by 2010, universal access to treatment for HIV/AIDS for all those who need it.
•  Target 10: Have halted, by 2015, and begun to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
Goal 7. ensure environmental sustainability.
•  Target 11: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs, and reverse the loss of environmental resources.
•  Target 12: Reduce by half the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation.
•  Target 13: Achieve a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers by 2020.
Goal 8. Forge a global partnership for development.
•   Target 14: Develop a trading system that is open, rule based, and nondiscriminatory—one that is committed to sustainable development, good 
governance, and a reduction in poverty.
•   Target 15: With Official Development Assistance (ODA), address the special needs of the least developed countries (including the elimination of 
tariffs and quotas for their exports and an increase in programs for debt relief).
•  Target 16: Deal with the debt problems of all developing countries by taking measures that will make debt sustainable in the long run.
•   Target 17: In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information and communications 
technologies.
Sources: United Nations, World Bank, Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.
240

Population and Development
the MDGs. This foreign investment and participation in 
global markets is important because it directly stimulates 
and helps grow the economies of the developing coun-
tries. More important yet to the poorest people, however, 
is the work of various organizations that directly provide 
assistance and funnel aid to the developing countries. 
These agencies are discussed next, followed by the issues 
of development aid and the debt crisis.
World agencies at Work
In 1944, during World War II, delegates from around the 
world met in New Hampshire and conceived a vision of de-
velopment for the countries ravaged by World War II. They 
established the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (now called the World Bank). The World Bank 
functions as a special agency under the UN umbrella, owned 
by the countries that provide its funds. As the more devel-
oped countries of Europe and Asia got back on their feet, 
the World Bank directed its attention toward the developing 
countries. With deposits from governments and commercial 
banks in the developed world, the World Bank now lends 
money to governments (and only governments) of develop-
ing nations for a variety of projects at interest rates some-
what below the going market rates. In effect, the World Bank 
helps governments borrow large sums of money for projects 
they otherwise could not afford.
Annual loans from the World Bank have climbed stead-
ily, from $1.3 billion in 1949 to $43 billion in 2011. Through 
its power to approve or disapprove loans and the amount 
of money it lends, the World Bank has become the major 
single agency providing aid to developing countries for the 
past 60 years. The World Bank is actually five closely asso-
ciated agencies. They have different roles, as you can see 
in Figure 13. One typical action of World Bank agencies is 
providing loans for a wide range of development activities 
including supporting the Millennium Development Goals.
Figure 11 Millennium Development Goal 4, Target 5. As a result 
of efforts toward this goal—reduce child mortality—deaths among children 
under five finally dropped below 10 million. About half of these deaths occur in 
sub-Saharan Africa. Death from measles has dropped dramatically; 80% of chil-
dren in developing countries now receive a measles vaccine. (Source: Millennium 
Development Goals Report 2011 (New York: United Nations, 2011).)
Under-five mortality rate, 1990 and 2009 
(Deaths per 1,000 live births)
180
129
122
69
76
59
78
37
73
36
68
32
80
26
52
23
45
19
15
7
99
66
0
50
100
1990
2009
2015 target
200
Southern Asia
Sub-Saharan
Africa
150
Oceania
Caucasus &
Central Asia
South-Eastern
Asia
Western Asia
Northern Africa
Latin America &
the Caribbean
Eastern Asia
Developed
regions
Developing
regions
Freshwater resources, forests, and fish stocks are all declin-
ing, and species extinctions and greenhouse gasses are in-
creasing. However, on the good side, ozone-depleting CFCs 
have declined, and many more people have access to im-
proved water.
Individual countries. Global and regional reports are 
important in providing a general picture of progress being 
made toward the MDGs, but the real action is in the in-
dividual countries. Toward that end, some 140 countries 
now produce reports, coordinated and often funded by 
the UNDP. Some, such as Albania’s, are available on the 
Internet. It is the responsibility of the developing coun-
tries themselves to manage their own economic and social 
development and to create a climate that will facilitate 
the partnership envisioned in Goal 8 of the MDGs. They 
must also devote significant financial resources toward 
achieving the goals. The best estimates of the Millennium 
Project suggest that for the lowest-income countries, the 
costs will have to be split evenly between domestic sources 
and Official Development Aid (ODA) from wealthy donor 
countries. At a September 2010 Millennium Development 
Goals Summit at UN Headquarters, a coalition of govern-
ments, foundations, and businesses pledged an estimated 
$40 billion in new commitments over five years to meet 
Figure 12 Measles vaccination. 
One of the successes of the Millennium Development Goals has been the dra-
matic drop in measles. More than 80% of children are vaccinated worldwide, just 
as this child is in a primary school in Uganda.
241

Population and Development
for export and fostering huge mechanized plantations, while 
leaving the poor marginalized. At that time, the World Bank pro-
cedures considered environmental concerns as an add-on rather 
than as an integral component of its policies.
Good Bank. There has been a sea change in recent years 
in how the World Bank does business with the developing 
world. In the words of former World Bank President James 
D. Wolfensohn, “Poverty amidst plenty is the world’s greatest 
challenge, and we at the Bank have made it our mission to 
fight poverty with passion and professionalism. This objec-
tive is at the center of all of the work we do.” Toward that 
end, the bank helped initiate the Millennium Development 
Goals. It now requires Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers for 
all countries receiving IDA loans. The World Bank’s Country 
Assistance Strategy identifies how its assistance reduces pov-
erty and establishes and maintains sustainable development. 
Unfortunately, the World Bank is willing to suspend some of 
its requirements about sustainability and justice for projects 
in the poorest nations, a strategy that has provoked backlash.
Environmental Strategy. As evidence of a change in 
policies, the World Bank adopted a new environmental strat-
egy, Making Sustainable Commitments: An Environmental 
Strategy for the World Bank, in 2002. The stated goal of the 
strategy “is to promote environmental improvements as a fun-
damental element of development and poverty reduction strat-
egies and actions.” The strategy “recognizes that sustainable 
development, which balances economic development, social 
cohesion, and environmental protection, is fundamental to the 
World Bank’s core objective of lasting poverty alleviation.”
An analysis of more than 11,000 projects funded by the 
World Bank to address poverty reduction or biodiversity found 
that these goals were often mutually reinforcing. The analysis 
showed that, depending on the different objectives, some 60% to 
bad bank, Good bank. It is inaccurate either to credit 
the World Bank for all the progress made in development 
or to blame it for all areas in which progress has been lack-
ing. However, critics cite many examples wherein the bank’s 
projects have actually exacerbated the cycle of poverty and 
environmental decline.
Bad Bank.  The World Bank was criticized for a 2010 loan 
of $3.75 billion to South Africa to built the world’s fourth larg-
est coal-fired power plant. The country had been in an electric-
ity crisis, and major investments in electricity generation had not 
been made in decades. The plant will increase electricity produc-
tion but greatly increase harmful environmental effects from 
coal use. In the 1990s, the World Bank pressured Bolivia to open 
its water sources to multinational purchasers. The thinking was 
that local governments are often too corrupt or lack manage-
ment expertise to provide water, and privatization would bring 
infrastructure and skills. The World Bank threatened to not 
renew a large loan unless water rights were privatized. This led 
to civil unrest when prices rose and poor people had limited ac-
cess to water (Fig. 14). In other situations such as hydroelectric 
dams in a number of countries, projects funded by the World 
Bank have displaced people and exacerbated their poverty.
These and many past projects funded by the World Bank 
have been destructive to the environment and often to the poorer 
segments of society. For example, the World Bank funneled $1.5 
billion into Latin America from 1963 to 1985 to clear millions 
of acres of tropical forests. Most of the cleared land was given 
over to large cattle operations that produced beef for export. In 
other countries, projects have emphasized growing cash crops 
Figure 13 Roles of the World Bank. The World Bank consists of five 
different agencies with different roles.
The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
lends to governements of middle-income
and creditworthy low-income countries.
The International Development 
Association (IDA) provides interest-free
loans—called credits—and grants to 
governments of the poorest countries.
The International Finance Corporation
(IFC) provides loans, equity and technical
assistance to stimulate private sector
investment in developing countries.
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA) provides guarantees
against losses caused by non-commercial
risks to investors in developing countries.
The International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes (ICSID) provides
international facilities for conciliation and
arbitration of investment disputes.
Figure 14 Bolivian water wars. This 2000 scene in Cochabamba Bolivia, 
features people protesting privatization of water, including a man holding a sign 
that says “what’s ours is ours and it cannot be taken away.”
242

Population and Development
countries. In order to keep up even partial interest payments, 
poor countries often do one or more of the following:
1. Focus agriculture on growing cash crops for export. Tran-
sitioning from growing food for local families to large 
scale operations growing food for sale abroad clearly af-
fects the country’s ability to feed its people. In fact, indig-
enous people bear the brunt of this change as sometimes 
their land is taken and used for crops for export.
2. Adopt austerity measures. Government expenditures are 
reduced so that income can go to pay interest. But what 
is cut? Usually, it is funds for schools, health clinics, po-
lice protection in poor areas, building and maintenance 
of roads in rural areas, and other goods and services 
that benefit not only the poor, but also the country as a 
whole (Fig. 15).
3. Invite the rapid exploitation of natural resources (for ex-
ample, logging of forests and extraction of minerals) for 
quick cash. With the emphasis on quick cash, few, if any, 
environmental restrictions are imposed. Thus, the debt 
crisis has meant disaster for the environment.
In essence, these measures are all examples of liquidating eco-
system capital to raise cash for short-term needs. They do not 
represent sustainability. As is typical with the credit trap, many 
countries have paid back in interest many times what they orig-
inally borrowed, yet the debt remains. It has become obvious 
that many countries would never be able to repay their debts.
Debt Cancellation. The World Bank is addressing the 
problems of debt and poverty directly through two ini-
tiatives, one to provide small amounts of money to the 
poorest people and the other to relieve debt in the poor-
est counties. The Consultative Group to Assist the Poor-
est (CGAP) is  designed to increase access to financial 
services for very poor households through what is called 
microlending— lending of small amounts of money to peo-
ple with very little (to be discussed shortly). The Heavily 
Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative and its related 
85% of all projects were rated as satisfactory or highly satisfac-
tory. The South Africa coal plant would be an exception.
Other un agencies. To quote its mission statement, the 
“UNDP is the UN’s global development network, advocat-
ing for change and connecting countries to knowledge, ex-
perience and resources to help people build a better life.”4 
The agency has offices in 131 countries and works in 166. It 
helps developing countries attract and use development aid 
effectively. As we have seen, its network also coordinates glo-
bal and national efforts to reach the MDGs. The UN Food 
and Agricultural Organization (FAO) and the World Health 
Organization (WHO) are other important agencies.
How Useful Is the UN? The United Nations and its 
various agencies frequently come under attack in the United 
States, where critics charge that the organization is useless 
to us. These critics would like to reduce or eliminate foreign 
aid. The fact is that, without the work of the World Bank and 
UN agencies like the UNDP and the FAO, the world would 
be in much worse shape than it is. We are fortunate that we 
do not need development aid, but billions of others around 
the world depend on such aid for continued economic de-
velopment, especially as it is reflected in the MDGs. This is 
not a luxury but a necessity in this globally connected world 
where so many suffer from the effects of poverty.
We turn now to the debt crisis and to the role of conflict 
in poverty. To some extent, this crisis is an outcome of World 
Bank policies, but it is also a consequence of development 
aid in general.
The Debt Crisis
The World Bank, many private lenders, and other nations lend 
money to developing countries. In fact, China alone lends as 
much as the World Bank. Theoretically, development projects 
are intended to generate additional revenues that would be 
sufficient for the recipients to pay back their development 
loans with interest. Unfortunately, however, a number of 
things have gone wrong with this theory, such as corruption, 
mismanagement, and honest miscalculations.
Over time, developing countries as a group have be-
come increasingly indebted. Their total debt reached $4.08 
trillion in 2010. Interest obligations climb accordingly, and 
any failure to pay interest gets added to the debt, increasing 
the interest owed—the typical credit-debt trap. For example, 
Pakistan had an external debt of $52 billion in 2009, and it 
is expected to reach $73 billion by 2016. Pakistan has taken 
on heavy debt since about 1958. Since then, it has paid and 
repaid loans many times over in the cost of interest. Servicing 
the debt is so difficult that the government has sold off as-
sets, including state-owned services, which has left thousands 
jobless.
a Disaster. The debt situation continues to be an eco-
nomic, social, and ecological disaster for many developing 
Figure 15 Unemployment. 
Romania, the second poorest European nation, has unemployement of 80% in 
some villages. Unemployment is particularly high among ethnic minorities such as 
these Sinti, camped in Alunis, Romania. Austerity measures can worsen unemploy-
ment, keeping national debt down but making the lives of people hard.
4UNDP Washington Representation Office. http://www.us.undp.org/Washington
Office/Mission.shtml. July 5, 2012.
243

Population and Development
program, Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI), 
address the debt problem of the low-income developing 
countries (mostly from sub-Saharan Africa). To qualify, 
countries have to demonstrate a track record of carry-
ing out economic and social reforms that lead to greater 
stability and alleviate poverty. By 2011, 32 countries had 
gone through the application process and, proving them-
selves stable, had received more than $100 billion in debt 
relief. In most countries that qualified for debt relief, 
spending on education and health has risen substantially.
Zambia. To demonstrate how HIPC has worked, consider the 
case of Zambia. Before HIPC, Zambia’s debt was $7.1 billion. 
Through HIPC, that country’s total debt was reduced to $500 
million. Although this sounds like a tremendous break for Zam-
bia, the country routinely experiences food shortages, it has a 
gross national income (GNI) of close to $1,070 (2010) per cap-
ita, and servicing this debt was costing the country twice what it 
spends on education, more than 7% of its GNI. Thus, the news 
of debt cancellation was received with joy in Zambia, and the 
government responded by introducing free health care for peo-
ple in rural areas of the country.
Development aid
College students and their parents know all about the differ-
ences among scholarships, grants, and loans as they apply for 
financial aid. Paying back college loans is no picnic for the 
thousands of students who accept them in order to afford 
their education. It is all called “aid,” but the best kind of aid 
is the grant or scholarship, which does not have to be repaid. 
The developing countries are well aware of the differences, 
too, and have been receiving grant-type aid from private and 
public donors that is essential to their continued develop-
ment. How much aid have they been given?
Official Development assistance. The best records are 
for official development assistance (ODA), coming from 
donor countries. The total amount in 2011 was $129 billion, 
part of an encouraging trend following a decade of declining 
aid in the 1990s. Aid rises and falls with not only the need of 
low-income countries but also other world events, conflicts, 
and donor interests.
Aid as a percentage of the GDP of donor countries de-
clined to 0.22% around 1997 and then began to rise to its 
present rate of 28%. At the Rio Earth Summit of 1992, the 
aid target for donor countries was 0.7% of GNI. Only four 
European countries have met or exceeded the 0.7% target. 
At the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, repre-
sentatives from other donor countries pledged to raise their 
ODA to 0.35% by 2010, well short of the 0.7% target, but 
a significant increase. Norway, Denmark, Luxembourg, the 
Netherlands, and the United States exceeded their goals, 
the United States achieving its donor goal a year early. 
Switzerland, South Korea, and Canada met their goals; the 
other donor countries did not.
Some of the shortfall in aid is explained as donor 
 fatigue, when high-income countries have tired of handing 
out money. They see themselves asked for multimillion-dollar 
rescue packages, only to have a large percentage go to fill the 
pockets of corrupt leaders or to cover administrative costs. 
Steps have recently been taken to minimize this misdirection 
of funds. Allocation of aid is increasingly being tied to policy 
reform in the recipient countries.
Migration and Remittances. Some 215 million peo-
ple live outside the country of their birth, and many more 
second-generation immigrants maintain ties to their native 
countries. Most of these migrants left their home country 
looking for employment; wage levels in developed coun-
tries are five times those of the countries of origin of most 
migrants. The migrants typically send much of their money 
home—remittances, as they are called. This is a surprisingly 
large flow of funds—estimated at $325 billion in 2010 (just 
to developing countries) and more than double the size of 
international aid flows. There is no doubt that these funds al-
leviate the severity of poverty in the developing countries and 
can be thought of as a “do it yourself” kind of development 
aid. Figure 16 shows how important remittances are to the 
economy of Haiti, for example.
aid from the united States. How much aid does the 
United States give? Our ODA donations were $28.8 billion 
in 2009 ($30.2 billion in 2010), the largest of any donor, 
but only 0.21% of our GNI. Norway, by contrast, gives the 
equivalent of 1.06% of its GNI in development aid. To put 
it in its proper perspective, though, contributions from reli-
gious organizations, foundations, corporations, nongovern-
mental organizations, and individuals in the United States 
provided some $37.5 billion in aid in 2009, outstripping 
our ODA. When remittances and private capital investments 
are added to these, the total economic contributions from  
the United States to developing countries amount (for 2009) 
to $226.7 billion (Table 3); however, the global financial cri-
sis dramatically lowered some sources of philanthropic giv-
ing, so this total is actually lower than the 2007 total ($235 
billion).
Global Financial Crisis. Developing world economies 
experienced record economic growth during 2002–2007, 
a result of increased export earnings and substantial for-
eign direct investment. The collective GNI of developing  
countries grew more than 5% per year, peaking at 8% in 
2006 and well outpacing the developed countries. How-
ever, in late 2007, the U.S. housing bubble burst, lead-
ing to a collapse of financial markets that spread to other 
developed countries. The United States fell into a severe 
recession, and the recession spread globally. In 2011, the 
financial crisis deepened in the Eurozone, the European 
Union. This global crisis will likely perturb economies in 
developing countries in a number of ways, even though 
they are not as vulnerable as the developed countries to 
the meltdown of financial markets. There will be a reduc-
tion in their exports, there will be much less foreign in-
vestment in their markets, and the GNI growth they had 
recently experienced will likely decline. The developed 
244

Population and Development
assesses the relative roles played by development and family 
planning.
3  a new Direction: Social 
Modernization
As the cases of Thailand and Kerala, India, demonstrate, de-
mographic experts are recognizing that the shift from high 
to low fertility rates in the poorer developing countries does 
not require the economic trappings of a developed coun-
try. Instead, what is needed are efforts within the country, 
made on behalf of the poor, with particular emphasis on 
improving education—especially literacy and the education 
of girls and women; lowering infant mortality and improv-
ing life expectancy; making family planning both available 
and affordable; enhancing employment opportunities; and 
resource management (maintaining ecosystem sustainabil-
ity). It might be obvious that most of these track well with 
the Millennium Development Goals. That is, development 
targeted at alleviating the problems of the poorest people 
will bring down population growth rates even as they al-
leviate dire poverty (Section 2). Similarly, the solutions to 
problems that contribute to population growth are the 
solutions to the problems that cause people to have large 
families (Section 2).
A great deal of focus is on women because they not 
only bear children, but they also are the primary provid-
ers of nutrition, child care, hygiene, and early education. 
When women have more education and some income of 
their own, they are more likely to spend money on educa-
tion and health care for children and less likely to have 
large numbers of children. Here we will look at each part 
of social modernization briefly.
Improving education
Investing in the education of children (and adults who lack 
schooling) is a key element of the public-policy options 
countries may be tempted to reduce development aid and 
raise barriers to trade from developing countries. Also, as 
unemployment grows, foreign-born workers are likely to 
be affected and will be less able to send remittances to 
their countries of origin. Unfortunately, worldwide food 
prices have also risen since 2008.
Even though foreign assistance is vital, the developing 
countries themselves must also address the root causes of 
poverty, and this usually means public policy changes at more 
local levels. To illustrate, the discussion in the next section 
Figure 16 Haitian aid and remittances. Haiti has many 
citizens who live abroad and send money home. Their impact is 
greater than the aid Haiti receives from other countries. (Source: 
World Bank DAC2, Center for Global Development 2010.)
Public aid and private remittances to Haiti (million $, inflation-adjusted)
265
736
2000
912
1,300
2008
741
1,291
2007
627
1,149
2006
499
1,109
2005
301
1,082
2004
254
970
2003
190
826
2002
212
773
2001
Aid
Remittances
tAbLE 3  u.S. economic Contributions to 
Developing Countries, 2011
Type of Funding
billions of $
Official Development Assistance (ODA)*
28.3
Private philanthropy
37.5
Foundations
34.6
Corporations
8.9
Private and voluntary organizations
12
Volunteerism
3
Universities and colleges
1.8
Religious organizations
7.2
Remittances
90.7
Private capital investments
69.2
U.S. total economic engagement
226.2**
*Some ways to calculate U.S. government foreign aid report much larger 
numbers. For the most part, this is due to the inclusion of military aid. In 
2011, the United States donated more than $15 billion in military assistance. 
Israel, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan are the largest recipients.
**Down from 235 in 2007.
Source: The Index of Global Philanthropy 2011, Executive Summary. 
The Center for Global Prosperity. Hudson Institute, 2009 (www 
.global-prosperity.org).
245

Population and Development
20th century that have substantially increased the well-being 
of large segments of the human population. Critical is the epi-
demiologic transition: the trend of decreasing death rates that 
is seen in countries as they modernize. As this transition oc-
curred in the now-developed countries, it involved a shift from 
high mortality rates (due to infectious diseases) toward the 
present low mortality rates (due primarily to diseases of aging, 
such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases).
Despite the progress indicated by the general rise in life ex-
pectancy, there is a large difference in life expectancy between 
developed and developing countries. Monaco, for example, has 
an average life expectancy of 90 years and Japan’s is 84 years, 
while Chad, Afghanistan, South Africa, and several other coun-
tries have life expectancies as low as 49 years. The discrepancy 
between the most developed and least developed countries can 
be seen quite clearly in the distribution of deaths by main causes, 
shown in Figure 18. Infectious diseases were responsible for 47% 
of mortality in the least developed countries, compared with 
only 6% in the developed countries.
The solution is very evident: Primary health services need 
to be centered on people’s needs, they must provide health 
security in the context of people’s communities, and there must 
be universal access to primary health care. Disease prevention 
and the promotion of health are critical components of this 
primary health care. Clear focus on these issues has come from 
the MDGs, and the attention given to achieving the MDGs is 
improving the delivery of health care to people in low-income 
countries. Health care in the developing world must especially 
emphasize maternal pre- and postnatal care for mothers and 
children. Many government, charitable, and religious organi-
zations are involved in providing basic health care, and when 
this is extended to rural areas in the form of clinics, it is one 
of the most effective ways of delivering primary health care to 
of a developing country, one that returns great dividends  
(Fig. 17). In 1960, for example, Pakistan and South Korea 
both had similar incomes and population growth rates 
(2.6%), but very different school enrollments—94% in 
South Korea versus 30% in Pakistan. Within 25 years, South 
Korea’s economic growth was three times that of Pakistan’s, 
and now the rate of population growth in South Korea has 
declined to 0.5% per year, while Pakistan’s is still 2.2% per 
year. Kerala, where literacy is greater than 90%, is another 
case in point. The lowest net enrollment of children in pri-
mary schools (about 71%) is in sub-Saharan Africa, where 
38 million children are still out of school. An educated popu-
lace is an important component of the wealth of a nation. 
Remember, Millennium Development Goal 2 is to ensure 
that children everywhere receive a primary-school education. 
This is a worthwhile goal, but in some ways, it is insuffi-
cient. Evidence shows that achieving at least 50% second-
ary schooling will help large segments of a poor country’s 
population out of poverty and will have a strong impact in 
decreasing fertility and improving the health of children.
Improving health
The health care needed most by poor communities in the de-
veloping world is the basics of good nutrition and hygiene—
steps such as boiling water to avoid the spread of disease and 
properly treating infections and common ailments such as di-
arrhea. (In developing countries, diarrhea is a major killer of 
young children. It is easily treated by giving suitable liquids, 
a technique called oral rehydration therapy.) The discrepancy 
in infant mortality rates (infant deaths per 1,000 live births) 
between the developed countries (6/1,000) and developing 
countries (46/1,000) speaks for itself.
Life expectancy. One universal indicator of health is human 
life expectancy. In 1955, average life expectancy globally was 
48 years. Today, it around 68 years and rising; it is expected 
to reach 73 years by 2025. This progress is the result of so-
cial, medical, and economic advances in the latter half of the  
Figure 18 Leading causes of mortality in the most developed 
and least developed countries. Infectious diseases are predominant 
in the least developed countries, while cancer and diseases of the cardiovascular 
system predominate in the highly developed countries. (Source: Data from World 
Health Organization, Projections of Mortality and Burden of Disease, 2002–2030 
(2008).)
Developed countries
Population = 991 million
Least developed countries
Population = 2.6 billion
Total number of mortalities = 8.5 million
Total number of mortalities = 25.6 million
43%
6%
6%
17%
27%
Cardiovascular
Injuries
Communicable diseases
Other and unknown causes
Cancers
47%
Communicable diseases
27%
Cardiovascular
10%
Injuries
9%
Other and unknown causes
7%
Cancers
Figure 17 Education in developing countries. Providing education 
in developing countries can be quite cost effective because any open space can 
suffice as a classroom and few materials are required. These girls are Afghan refu-
gees in Pakistan, attending an NGO-funded school.
246

Population and Development
Tuberculosis and Malaria; the U.S. President’s Emergency Plan 
for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR); and local country budgets. PEPFAR 
has provided $32 billion over nine years, with a plan for in-
creased funding in the next several years. The funds are used for 
a combination of testing, treatment, and prevention. By 2014, 
the goal is to get needed medications to 85% of those currently 
suffering from HIV/AIDS to prevent 12 million new infections.
Most prevention approaches involve getting people to 
change their sexual behavior—to practice safe sex, limit their 
sexual partners, and avoid prostitution. That these things can 
be accomplished is proven by the case of Uganda, where a 
70% decline in HIV prevalence has been registered in recent 
years, linked to a 60% reduction in casual sex. The Ugandan 
government has mounted a national AIDS control program 
that includes a major education campaign. Recent evidence 
has revealed another effective preventive measure—namely, 
male circumcision, which causes a 60% reduction in HIV 
risk in males involved in heterosexual relationships and pro-
tects more women than most other preventive strategies. The 
WHO strongly recommends that countries offer male cir-
cumcision as one of their anti-AIDS services.
Family Planning
Information on contraceptives, related materials, and treatments 
are the most direct ways to bring down high population growth 
and, for poor nations, are supported by agencies in turn sup-
ported by governments, international groups, and NGOs. The 
stated policy of family-planning agencies (or similar private serv-
ices) is, as the name implies, to enable people to plan their own 
family size—that is, to have children only if and when they want 
them. In addition to helping people avoid unwanted pregnan-
cies, family planning often involves determining and overcoming 
fertility problems for those couples who are having reproductive 
difficulties. Family planning is a critical component of reproduc-
tive health care (Fig. 19).
The vigorous promotion and provision of contraceptives 
has been proven all by itself to lower fertility rates, as seen 
in Figure 8. Those countries that have implemented effective 
families. When women are better off, whole populations are 
improved. This is the focus of reproductive health.
Reproductive health. A fairly new concept in population 
matters, reproductive health was strongly emphasized at the 
International Conference on Population Development held in 
Cairo, Egypt, in 1994. Reproductive health is a subset of gen-
eral health improvement that is focused on women and infants 
and, in some cases, on reproductive education and health for 
men. Several key components are involved, mostly focused on 
medical care and education such as prenatal care, safe childbirth, 
postnatal care, information about contraception, prevention and 
treatment of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), abortion serv-
ices (where legal) and care afterward, and prevention and treat-
ment of infertility. In addition, promotion of reproductive health 
also involves protecting women from violence and coercion. For 
example, reproductive health requires elimination of violence 
against women (coercive sex, rape), sexual trafficking, and fe-
male circumcision and infibulation (traditional practices in some 
African societies).
Reproductive health care underpins virtually all of the 
MDGs, especially Goals 4, 5, and 6. Goal 5 (improve maternal 
health) was expanded in 2005 to include reproductive health 
services, and the new target is to achieve universal access to re-
productive health by 2015. It must be addressed particularly to 
the needs of young people. This is often a controversial issue, but 
sex education for adolescents is a very real need, and not just 
in the developing world. Premarital sex is on the rise in most 
regions of the world, resulting in unplanned pregnancies and 
out-of-wedlock births. This represents a cultural shift for many 
societies and results in many young people having sex without 
the information they need. Of course, marriage does not protect 
against AIDS, other diseases, or unplanned pregnancies. How-
ever, many agencies study the impact of premarital sex, in part 
because unmarried members of society may not have access to 
health care and sex education and because some parts of the 
world have extremely large adolescent populations—a group 
likely to affect future fertility the most.
aIDS. One of the greatest challenges to health care in de-
veloping countries is the sexually transmitted disease known 
as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Unfortu-
nately, the global epidemic of AIDS is most severe in many 
of the poorest developing countries, which are least able to 
cope with the consequences. This communicable disease dev-
astates the economies of communities by killing people in the 
prime of their working lives, increasing the dependency ratio 
as children are left in the care of the elderly or other children. 
Thailand, in spite of high literacy, life expectancy, and clean 
water availability, had a weak response to HIV/AIDS when 
the epidemic first began. Eventually, it had the highest HIV 
infection rate in South Asia. Recent aggressive public educa-
tion campaigns have begun to pull the rate down.
These positive results are the outcome of a remarkable in-
crease in funding from the developed countries. Recall that Tar-
get 8 (part of Goal 6) of the MDGs is to have halted and begun 
to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS by 2015. Major sources of 
funding are the World Bank; the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Figure 19 Family planning. Thailand brought down its high fertility in 
part because of a humorous public education campaign. Cabbages and Condoms, 
shown here, is a restaurant chain whose profits fund the Population and Commu-
nity Development Association (PDA), a Thai non-profit.
247

Population and Development
In such a situation, it may be nearly impossible to implement 
family planning or other long-term assistance programs. The 
needs people have are for a basic, stable governance and secu-
rity. When that is achieved other poverty issues may be trac-
table. Somalia, which has been at war and lacked a central 
government for 20 years, is a good example of a fragile state.
u.S. Contributions to International Family Planning. 
In 1984 and again in 2001, the U.S. government was pro-
hibited by a presidential order from giving aid to foreign 
family planning agencies if they provide abortions, coun-
sel women about abortion if they are dealing with an un-
wanted pregnancy, or advocate for abortion law reforms 
in their own country. This was a blow to efforts to in-
crease the availability of contraceptive services in the de-
veloping countries because the United States had been the 
largest international donor to family-planning programs. 
At one point, the United States withdrew its support for 
the entire 1994 ICPD Program of Action because it uses 
terms such as reproductive services and reproductive 
health care. Critics of this move pointed out (unsuccess-
fully) that the conference documents made clear that, “in 
no case should abortion be promoted as a method of fam-
ily planning” and that the Cairo agreement was critical 
to the fight against HIV/AIDS and prevented the very un-
wanted pregnancies that could lead to abortions. The last 
word in this controversy comes from President Obama, 
who has taken steps to restore funding for UNFPA.
employment and Income
The bottom line of any economic system is the exchange of 
goods and services. At its simplest level, this entails a barter 
economy in which people agree on direct exchanges of cer-
tain goods or services. Barter economies are still widespread 
in the developing world.
The introduction of a cash economy facilitates the ex-
change of a wider variety of goods and services, and eve-
ryone may prosper, as they have a wider market for what 
they can provide and a wider choice of what they can get in 
return. In a poor community, everyone may have the poten-
tial to provide certain goods or services and may want other 
things in return, but there may be no money to get the system 
off and running. In a growing economy, people who wish to 
start a new business venture generally begin by obtaining a 
bank loan to set up shop. The poor, however, are considered 
high credit risks. Furthermore, they may want a smaller loan 
than a commercial bank wants to deal with, and many of the 
poor may be women, who are denied credit because of gen-
der discrimination alone. For these three reasons, poor com-
munities have trouble getting start-up capital. Fortunately, 
however, the situation is changing.
Grameen bank. In 1976, Muhammad Yunus (Fig. 20), an 
economics professor in Bangladesh, conceived of and cre-
ated a new kind of bank (now known as the Grameen Bank) 
that would engage in microlending to the poor. As the name 
implies, microloans are small—they averaged just $370 
family-planning programs have experienced the most rapid 
decline in fertility. For example, as we saw in the example 
of Thailand, a vigorous family-planning program was initi-
ated as part of a national population policy in 1971. Popula-
tion growth subsequently declined from 3.1% per year to the 
present 0.5% per year, and the Thai economy has posted one 
of the most rapid rates of increase over the same years.
Women who are not currently using contraception but 
who want to postpone or prevent childbearing and lack ac-
cess to contraception are said to have an unmet need. The 
unmet need for family planning ranges from 10% to 50% 
of women in the different developing countries. Because of 
the lack of other family planning services, some women re-
sort to abortions to terminate unwanted pregnancies. Nearly 
everyone agrees that an abortion is the least desirable way to 
avoid having an unwanted child—especially in view of the 
other alternatives that are available.
negotiating Disagreements. The major document result-
ing from the 1994 Cairo population conference (ICPD Pro-
gram of Action) explicitly states that abortions should not be 
used as a means of family planning. That is, it states, family 
planning focuses on education and the provision of services 
directed at avoiding unwanted or high-risk pregnancies. This 
statement was not aimed at either eliminating abortion or 
supporting a right to abortion as an option for women world-
wide. The statement was in the context of many other facets 
of reproductive health and was focused on maintaining sup-
port for family planning among stakeholders who disagree 
about abortion. Research has supported that abortions are 
higher when family planning services such as contraception 
and education are unavailable than when they are available. 
It is hard to make policy on an international level because 
of social and individual disagreement about important issues. 
The ICPD Program of Action helped forge a middle ground 
between people with very disparate views and emphasized the 
importance of family planning services to women worldwide.
Planned Parenthood, which operates clinics through-
out the world, is probably the best-known family planning 
agency. Another significant player is UNFPA, which provides 
financial and technical assistance to developing countries at 
their request. The emphasis of UNFPA is on combining fam-
ily planning services with maternal and child health care and 
expanding the delivery of such services in rural and marginal 
urban areas. Support for this UN agency and other fam-
ily planning agencies has become a difficult subject in the 
United States because of the strong opinions surrounding 
abortion.
Fragile States. Some of the poorest countries are desig-
nated fragile states. These conflict-prone countries lack a sta-
ble government. It is very difficult for aid agencies to work 
with them because of danger to aid workers. Much of the 
aid such countries receive is humanitarian and disaster re-
lief, but what they most need is to get to a point where they 
could build infrastructure and social capital. Such volatile  
situations are devastating for women and children. There are 
often floods of refugees, and rape and violence may be rife. 
248

Population and Development
World Bank dramatically increased its support of micro-
financing through the CGAP, which coordinates the work 
of some 54 different funding agencies around the world. A 
major development in this arena has been the work of the 
Microcredit Summit Campaign, an outgrowth of the 1995 
UN Fourth Conference on Women in Beijing. An update 
from this campaign indicates that, in 2010, some 137.5 mil-
lion microloans were in service helping more than 687 mil-
lion family members. These efforts may be doing more than 
anything else to meet the MDGs, as they empower the poor 
to improve their own well-being.
Resource Management
The world’s poor depend on local ecosystem capital re-
sources—particularly water, soil for growing food, and 
forests for firewood. Many lack access to enough land to 
provide an income and often depend on foraging in wood-
lands, forests, grasslands, and coastal ecosystems. This activ-
ity generates income and is vital to those in extreme poverty; 
90% of the world’s poorest people depend on forests for 
some of their sustenance (by extracting fuelwood, construc-
tion wood, wild fruits and herbs, fodder, and “bush meat” 
for both subsistence and cash). Forests, fisheries, reefs, grass-
lands, and waterways all can be resources for the poor— 
so-called common-pool resources. These can be a safety 
net, as well as an employment source, but if not man-
aged in some way, common-pool resources are liable to 
be overused, especially when populations are increasing.  
Figure 21 depicts a woman in Eritrea planting mangroves. In 
this group project, the women work together to plant trees 
that will, in turn, protect small fish and provide leaves to 
feed goats. This is a good example of protecting common re-
sources.
Empowering the poor to manage community- or state-
owned lands is one approach that has worked in Nepal. 
There forestry user groups are given the right to own trees, 
in 2011—and are short-term loans, usually just four to six 
months. Nevertheless, they provide such basic things as seed 
and fertilizer for a peasant farmer to start growing tomatoes, 
pans for a baker to start baking bread, a supply of yarn for a 
weaver, tools for an auto mechanic, or an inventory of goods 
to start a grocery store. By 2011, 3,590,923 people had taken 
these small loans.
Yunus secured his loans by having the recipients form 
credit associations—groups of several people who agreed 
to be responsible for each other’s loans. With this arrange-
ment, the Grameen Bank has experienced an exceptional 
rate of payback—greater than 97%. Small-scale agriculture 
loans from the Grameen Bank have had outstanding results. 
In a rural area of Bangladesh, small loans, along with hor-
ticultural advice, are now enabling peasant farmers to raise 
tomatoes and other vegetables for sale to the cities. These 
people doubled their incomes in three years. Microlending 
has been found to have the greatest social benefits when it 
is focused on women. The credit associations also create an-
other level of cooperation and mutual support within the 
community.
More Microlending. The unqualified success of micro-
lending in stimulating economic activity and enhancing the 
incomes of people within poor communities has been so 
remarkable that the Grameen concept has been adopted 
in more than 40 countries around the world (including the 
United States) with various modifications. Recently, the 
Figure 20 Muhammad Yunus. An economics professor in Bangladesh, 
Yunus created the Grameen Bank, which initiated the microlending movement. 
The Grameen Bank has loaned more than $6.6 billion over the past 35 years, and 
the microlending model has been duplicated in more than 40 countries. Yunus re-
ceived the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of the global impact of his work.
Figure 21 Improving resource management. A major step in en-
hancing incomes and protecting the environment is to encourage better resource 
management. Here a Nigerian woman plants mangrove seedlings in a conserva-
tion area in order to increase fish and grow wood for harvest.
249

Population and Development
about social modernization, the demographic transition, and 
sustainable development in the developing countries?
Globalization. Defined as the accelerating interconnected-
ness of human activities, ideas, and cultures, globalization is 
profoundly changing many human enterprises, especially in 
its economic impacts. A small number of developing coun-
tries (China, Malaysia, and Indonesia, for example) have suc-
cessfully entered the global market, and more strive to do 
so. Their exports have paved the way for economic progress, 
and these countries are becoming more connected to the 
 economic- and information-rich high-tech world.
The poorest countries, however, are mostly populated by 
self-employed peasants who have not made the transition to 
becoming wage earners in a market economy. This transition 
is not easy, and they can’t make it by themselves. The jobs 
have to be there, and that often requires investment from 
outside agencies—businesses and NGOs with the knowledge 
and capital needed. Also, there has to be some hope of mar-
keting the products, which means entering the global market 
on a level playing field. At present, however, the playing field 
is far from level because developed countries protect their ex-
ports with subsidies, quotas, and tariffs and all of these trade 
barriers work against the developing countries. Toward that 
end, Goal 8 of the MDGs (forge a global partnership for de-
velopment) calls for eliminating these barriers and encourag-
ing the poor countries themselves to develop a market-based 
trading system committed to sustainable development and 
attractive to foreign investment.
On the other hand, globalization can be harmful to the 
poor if it opens markets for agricultural products from the 
developed countries, which can ruin subsistence farming. 
Globalization can also widen the gap between the rich and 
poor within a society, as the wealthier members capitalize 
on the information flow and quick transfer of goods and 
services, leaving the poor farther behind. Aid can have a 
similar effect, undermining local economies. This is one rea-
son that the 2005 Paris Declaration (an agreement on aid) 
emphasized that donor countries should buy local products 
where possible, rather than donating from abroad.
Critics of globalization claim that it doesn’t seem ca-
pable of promoting some other goods, such as financial 
stability and social justice. It also has the potential to 
dilute and even destroy cultural and religious ideals and 
norms when it is uncritically welcomed into developing 
countries. Whether helpful or harmful, globalization is 
taking place, making it essential that the developing coun-
tries confront it head on and adapt its connections to their 
needs and cultures.
but not the land, and there are now some 6,000 user groups 
managing 450,000 hectares (1.1 million acres). The groups 
develop forest-management plans, set timber sale prices, and 
manage the surplus income from the operations. Protecting 
forest resources and tackling land degradation in drylands 
are two sustainable steps that can be addressed by country 
policies.
Putting It all Together
Each of the five components of social modernization— 
education, health, family planning, employment and in-
come, and resource management—depends on and supports 
the other components. For example, better health and nutri-
tion support better economic productivity, better economic 
productivity supports obtaining a better education, and a 
better education leads to a delay in marriage and the desire 
to have fewer children. The availability of family-planning 
services is essential to realizing the desire of parents to have 
fewer children. All the components work together to im-
prove lives. Conversely, the lack of any component under-
cuts the ability to achieve all the other components.
Sustainable development. The elements of social mod-
ernization are entirely compatible with the MDGs (Table 2).  
But as we move past the MDGs, we continue to face real hurdles 
trying to protect valuable ecosystem services even as we promote 
development. Doing so needs to be compatible with sustainable 
development, development that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs.5 In 2012, world leaders NGOs, and representa-
tives of many stakeholder groups met in Rio De Janeiro, Bra-
zil for a UN conference 20 years after the 1992 Earth Summit 
at which a global agenda for sustainable development was first 
described. At the 2012 Rio +20 meeting, world leaders hashed 
out goals described in a document, The Future We Want.6 While 
world leaders were not able to come to as many concrete deci-
sions as observers hoped, particularly on climate change, they 
did reaffirm the need for sustainable development and agreed to 
set a series of “sustainable development goals.”
One reality that the developing countries must confront 
in their progression toward economic and social development 
is globalization. What role can globalization play in bringing 
5World Commission on Environment and Development (1987). Our Common  Future. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 27.
6UN. The Future We Want Outcomes Document. United Nations Conference on 
Sustainable Development, Rio De Janiero, Brazil June 20-22, 2012https://rio20.
un.org/sites/rio20.un.org/files/a-conf.216l-1_english.pdf.pdf
250

Population and Development
1. What are the two basic schools of thought regarding the de-
mographic transition? How were these reflected in the three 
most recent global population conferences?
 2. Discuss five specific factors that influence the number of 
children a poor couple may desire.
 3. What are the MDGs? Where did they come from? Cite an 
example of one goal and a target used to measure progress 
in attaining it.
 4. What are two major agencies that promote development in 
poor nations, and how do they carry out their work?
 5. What is meant by the debt crisis of the developing world? 
What is being done to help resolve this crisis?
Review Questions
6. What is development aid, and how does it measure up 
against the need for such aid?
7. What are the five interdependent components that must be 
addressed to bring about social modernization?
8. Define family planning, and explain why it is critically 
important to all other aspects of development.
 9. What is meant by an unmet need?
 10. What is microlending? How does it work?
 11. What is the significance of globalization for economic and 
social development in the developing countries?
ReVISITInG The TheMeS
sound science
The sciences of demography, epidemiology, and sociol-
ogy have brought us the insights into what causes the 
success of the demographic transition and the causes 
of the demographic dividend, Medical advances and health care have 
helped bring many countries through the epidemiologic transition—
however, there is still great need for basic health care in the poorer 
countries. Sound science has brought us improved AIDS treatment 
through anti-HIV medicines but so far has not come up with an effec-
tive vaccine. Demographers test hypotheses about what factors most 
predict, and in some cases cause, a drop in high fertility. In some parts 
of the world, aging populations require a different set of supports, 
medical and social.
sustainability
The demographic transition is essential for a sustainable 
future. This chapter is about what has to be done econom-
ically and socially to bring about development that is sus-
tainable. Economic progress is being made in many developing countries, 
and it is accompanied by most of the elements of social modernization. 
However, economic progress is still lacking in many others. For these, so-
cial modernization is the most feasible approach, as it will bring fertility 
rates down and enable countries to open the demographic window that 
may make economic progress possible.
An element of development activities that is unsustainable is the 
debt built up over the years by many poorer developing countries. 
Although this has been helped by much debt cancellation, the overall 
debt of developing countries continues to build up, and the repayment 
of these debts forces many developing countries to liquidate ecosystem 
capital in order just to make their payments.
Sustainable development requires facilitation by integrating princi-
ples of sustainability into country policies and programs and by reversing 
the loss of environmental resources. Improving the management of these 
resources is an important component of social modernization. The 2012 
Rio +20 UN conference reaffirmed the need to protect the environment 
even as we improve people’s lives.
Social sustainability is another aspect of sustainability. Large-scale 
economic efforts by the World Bank and other organizations have some-
times actually harmed the poor and increased inequality. Any solution to 
either economic or environmental issues needs to be just in order to be 
socially sustainable as well. This is one of the reasons the Grameen Bank, 
owned by the poor, has been successful.
stewardship
Justice for the developing world is a key ethical issue. 
Distributive justice is an ethical ideal that considers the 
gross inequality of the human condition as unjust—the 
kind of inequality represented by the billion-plus people who live on 
less than $1.25 a day versus typical people in the wealthy countries. 
Although equal distribution of the world’s goods and services is neither 
attainable nor necessary, the existing poverty in the poor countries is an 
affront to human dignity. In order to address this injustice, the alleviation 
of poverty must be made a priority of public policy.
The case study of China contrasts with that of Thailand. Both have 
seen drops in high fertility, but Thailand did it primarily though educa-
tion, clinics, free contraception, and other parts of social modernization. 
While China had some of these elements, it also had an involuntary policy 
associated with some serious human rights abuses. Because of the au-
thoritarian approach taken by China, many people worldwide see Chinese 
population control as symbolic of the problems of government control.
s
J
D
g
kind of inequali
s
T
f
i
tainable Econo
s
T
o
s
of the demogra
251

Population and Development
tHinKinG enviRonMentALLY
 1. Is the world population below, at, or above the optimum? 
Defend your answer by pointing out things that may im-
prove and things that may worsen as the population in-
creases.
 2. Suppose you are the head of an island nation with a poor, 
growing population and natural resources that are being de-
graded. What kinds of policies would you initiate, and what 
help would you ask for to try to provide a better, sustainable 
future for your nation’s people?
 3. List and discuss the benefits and harms of writing off debts 
owed by developing nations.
 4. Look up the document The Future We Want. Describe what 
future you would want on a personal, regional, national and 
global level for 30 years from now. How much depends on 
environmental health? How does the future you want match 
what other people around the globe hope for?
 5. Do you believe contraceptives should be made available free 
of charge by governments, as this would have the potential 
to curb population growth and/or abortion rates? Defend 
your answer.
MAKinG A DiffeRence
 1. Think carefully about your own reproduction. What con-
cerns will you and your mate weigh as you plan your family?
 2. Become involved in, and support, programs promoting ef-
fective sex education and responsible sexual behavior. Con-
sider the advantages of abstinence and monogamy as ways 
to avoid needing an abortion or contracting a sexually trans-
mitted disease.
 3. If you are not convinced of the profound impacts of poverty 
in the developing world, log on to the Millennium Project 
Web site and read about the Millennium Village movement 
(www.unmillenniumproject.org/mv/index.htm).
 4. Encourage sustainability by buying products that originate 
from the developing world.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cReDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top right): Thor Jorgen Udvang/Shutterstock; (bottom right): foto76/Fotolia; (cent-
er right): Amit Bhargava/Bloomberg via Getty Images; (bottom left): F1online/Getty 
Images; (bottom right): Images & Stories / Alamy; (top right): Alex Segre/Alamy; 
Gallo Images / Alamy; (top left): Courtesy of The World Bank; AP Photo/Julie 
Plasencia; Caro / Alamy; Fabienne Fossez/Alamy: Xinhua /Landov; (top left): Peter 
D. O’Neill TW : EEC/Alamy; (bottom right): STR/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom
Text Credits
Table 1: Source: based on data from various World Population Data Sheets. Source: 
Based on “Population, Human Resources, Health, and the Environment: Getting the 
Balance Right.” by Anthony J. McMichael, from Environment, January/February 
2008, Volume 50(1); Figure 1: Sources: Data from 2008 World Population Data 
Sheet and 2011 World Population Data Sheet. Population Reference Bureau; Figure 
2: “Technology & Development” Kavita Watsa from Global Economic Prospects 
2008: Technology Diffusion in the Developing World. Copyright © 2008 by 
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. 
Reprinted with permission; Figure 3: World Development Report 2012: Gender 
and Equality Development. Copyright © 2012 by the World Bank Group. Reprinted 
with permission; Figure 4: World Development Report 2003. Copyright © 2003 by 
World Bank Group. Reprinted with permission; Figure 5: Source: based on data 
from World Data Sheet 2011. Population reference Bureau; and World Economic 
Outlook Database-September 2011. International Monetary Fund; Figure 8: 
Source: based on data from World Data Sheet 2011. Population reference Bureau; 
Figure 10: “Proportion of people living on less than $1.25 a day, 1990 and 2005 
(Percentage),” from The Millennium Development Goals Report 2011. Copyright 
© 2011 by United Nations. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved; Figure 
11: “Under-five mortality rate, 1990 and 2009 (Deaths per 1,000 live births),” from 
The Millennium Development Goals Report 2011. Copyright © 2011 by United 
Nations. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved; Figure 13: List of five 
World Bank Group organizations from the World Bank website. Copyright © 2012 
The World Bank Group, All Rights Reserved. Reprinted with permission; Figure 
16: “Haiti Aid Facts,” by David Roodman, from Center for Global Development 
website, January 15, 2010. Copyright © 2010 by Center for Global Development. 
Reprinted with permission; Figure 18: Source: Based on data from Projections of 
Mortality and Burden of Disease, 2002–2030. World Health Organization.
252

Population and Development
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) A fatal disease 
caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and 
transmitted by sexual contact or the use of nonsterile needles (as 
in drug addiction).
credit associations Groups of poor people who individually lack the 
collateral to assure loans but who collectively have the wherewithal 
to assure each other’s loans. Associated with microlending.
demographic dividend As a country goes through the demographic 
transition, there is a stage when the dependency ratio is low, 
giving the country the opportunity to spend more on poverty 
alleviation and economic growth.
dependency ratio In a human population, the ratio of the 
nonworking-age population (under 15 and over 65) to the 
working-age population.
donor fatigue The tendency of donor organizations or countries 
to withhold their aid because of long-term misuse of aid funds in 
the recipient countries.
fragile states Countries that are poor and conflict-prone, often 
lacking a stable government; an example is present-day Somalia.
globalization The accelerating interconnectedness of human 
activities, ideas, and cultures, especially evident in economic and 
information exchange.
Grameen Bank A banking network serving the poor with 
microloans, created by Muhammad Yunus of Bangladesh.
MDG Support Team The successor to the Millennium Project, this 
team works with developing countries to achieve the targets of the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
microlending The process of providing very small loans (usually 
$50–$500) to poor people to facilitate their starting a small 
enterprise and becoming economically self-sufficient.
Millennium Project A UN-commissioned project given a 
mandate to develop an action plan to coordinate the efforts of 
various agencies and organizations to achieve the Millennium 
Development Goals. Succeeded by the MDG Support Team.
remittances Money sent back to the country of birth by guest 
workers and immigrants to help family and friends meet their 
financial needs.
reproductive health Health care directed primarily toward the 
needs of women and infants, strongly emphasized in the 1994 
Cairo population conference.
sustainable development Development that provides people with 
a better life without sacrificing or depleting resources or causing 
environmental impacts that will undercut the ability of future 
generations to meet their needs.
World Bank A branch of the United Nations that acts as a conduit 
for handling loans to developing countries.
GLossARY
253

This page intentionally left blank 

Running out of water. These villagers in the dry southwest of China are lined up to get 
water. Parts of China are in the midst of the worst drought in 60 years, an event that is making 
China’s water problems worse.
LEARNING ObjEctIvEs
 1. Water, a Vital Resource: Explain 
the unique properties that make 
water so vital, the differences 
in water availability in different 
societies, and conflicts over avail-
ability of clean water.
 2. Hydrologic Cycle, and Human 
Impacts: Explain the movement 
of water through the hydrologic 
cycle and human impacts on the 
cycle.
 3. Human Controlled Flooding and 
Drought: Describe the ways 
humans try to provide clean 
freshwater and some of their 
outcomes.
 4. Water Stewardship,  Economics, 
and Policy: Describe options 
for meeting rising demands for 
water, new innovations in water 
science and technology, and 
 public policies for water in a 
water-scarce world.
Water: 
Hydrologic 
Cycle and 
Human Use
C
hina has a water problem. The growing population requires more and more to 
grow food and sustain cities, and yet much of the country is dry. The wetter 
southeast is crowded with people, while the drier southwest is experiencing 
the worst drought in 60 years. In the center of the country lies the central plateau, an 
area of intense agricultural production; in the north and northwest is the extremely 
dry Gobi desert, which is creeping south and east yearly. Ten provinces of China are 
so water-poor that they fall beneath the World Bank’s definition of water poverty: 
1,000 m3 of water per year per person. The karst, or limestone regions, of the south 
offer a unique problem. Precipitation, while not scarce, rapidly percolates through 
porous rock to travel in vast underground rivers, inaccessible to most rural residents 
of the area. Such underground river water is undrinkable because of all of the surface 
pollutants that percolate down it to the water table.
DAm buILDING. China’s explosive economic growth has fueled a rising middle 
class that wants a more diverse diet, but such foods are energy and water intensive. 
China’s need for power has triggered a dam-building spree. The central plateau, home 
of the richest agriculture, is experiencing 
crop loss from too much ground-
water removal. Unfortunately, 
pumping the 100 km3 per 
year that China uses to 
irrigate requires a great 
deal of energy as well. 
Vice President Xi Jinping 
Hainan Dao
Taiwan Tao
South China 
Sea
East China 
Sea
Yellow
Sea
Annual Precipitation
1 : 20,000,000
Beijing
25
50
75 150 300 600 1000
2500 4000
100 200 400 800 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 3000 mm
From Chapter 10 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, 
Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. Copyright © 2013 by 
Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
visited the United States in 2012 to discuss, among other things, 
dropping trade barriers to some U.S. agricultural products. While 
China is already a big importer of U.S. products, growing more 
water-intensive crops elsewhere will save water in China, making 
the trade represent not only needed food but saved water.
LONG-DIstANcE tRANspORt. In addition to build-
ing dams, the Chinese government is working on moving water 
long distances. One such undertaking is the South-to-North 
Water Diversion Project (SNWT), a 50-year venture (two parts are 
scheduled to be delivering water by 2014) with an estimated cost 
of $64 billion that will bring water to the arid north. An eastern 
route will carry water from the Yangtze River 1,152 km (716 mi) to 
Tianjin, through a series of canals, reservoirs tunnels, and natural 
rivers, and a central route will carry water 1,264 km (785 mi) 
from the south of Beijing. Together they should carry 28 km3 
(6.7 mi3) of water per year.
China is a microcosm of the world. All over, we are trying 
to balance needs for energy, agriculture, drinking water, and 
biodiversity. As we welcome new people into our crowded glo-
bal community, finding clean, safe water for all will be one of 
our top priorities.
 This chapter focuses on water. The concepts here will be 
strongly intertwined with population and development as well as 
with soil, food production, and climate change.
1 Water: A Vital Resource
Water is absolutely fundamental to life as we know it.  Happily, 
Earth is virtually flooded with water. A total volume of some 
1.4 billion cubic kilometers (325 million mi3) of water cov-
ers 75% of Earth’s surface. About 97.5% of this volume is 
the saltwater of the oceans and seas. The remaining 2.5% 
is freshwater—water with a salt content of less than 0.1% 
(1,000 ppm). This is the water on which most terrestrial biota, 
ecosystems, and humans depend. Of the 2.5%, though, two-
thirds is bound up in the polar ice caps and glaciers. Thus, 
only 0.77% of all water is found in lakes, wetlands, rivers, 
groundwater, biota, soil, and the atmosphere (Fig. 1). Never-
theless, evaporation from the oceans combines with precipita-
tion to resupply that small percentage continually through the 
solar-powered hydrologic cycle, described in detail in Section 
2. Thus, freshwater is a continually renewable resource.
Streams, rivers, ponds, lakes, swamps, estuaries, ground-
water, bays, oceans, and the atmosphere all contain water, 
and they all represent ecosystem capital—goods and services 
vital to human interests. They provide drinking water, water 
for industries, and water to irrigate crops. Bodies of water 
furnish energy through hydroelectric power and control 
flooding by absorbing excess water. They provide transpor-
tation, recreation, waste processing, and habitats for aquatic 
plants and animals. Freshwater is a vital resource for all land 
ecosystems, modulating the climate through evaporation and 
essential global warming (when water is in the atmosphere as 
water vapor). During the past two centuries, many of these 
uses (and some threats to them) have led us to construct a 
huge infrastructure designed to bring water under control. 
We have built dams,  canals,  reservoirs, aqueducts, sewer 
systems, treatment plants, water towers, elaborate pipelines, 
irrigation systems, and desalination plants. As a result, water-
borne diseases have been brought under control in the devel-
oped countries, vast cities thrive in deserts, irrigation makes 
it possible to grow 40% of the world’s food, and one-fifth of 
all electricity is generated through hydropower. These great 
benefits are especially available to people in the developed 
countries (Fig. 2a).
In the developing world (Fig. 2b), by contrast, 1.1 billion 
people still lack access to safe drinking water, 2.6 billion do 
not have access to adequate sanitation services, and more than 
1.8 million deaths each year are traced to waterborne diseases 
(mostly in children under five). All too often in these countries, 
water is costly or inaccessible to the poorest in society, while the 
wealthy have it piped into their homes. In addition, because of 
the infrastructure that is used to control water, whole seas are 
being lost, rivers are running dry, millions of people have been 
displaced to make room for reservoirs, groundwater aquifers are 
being pumped down, and disputes over water have raised ten-
sions from local to international levels. Freshwater is a limiting 
resource in many parts of the world and is certain to become 
even more so as the 21st century unfolds.
Feeding a growing world population will challenge 
our water management infrastructure, especially as cities 
and industries compete with agriculture for scarce water 
resources. The growing impact of climate change on the hy-
drologic cycle is in turn worsening the problems brought on 
by droughts and floods. Rainfall variability can reduce the 
economic growth of nations as floods devastate some crop-
lands and droughts dry them up in other parts of the world. 
Even in the United States, effects from climate change will 
vary. A 2011 report from the Department of the Interior 
suggested that one of the biggest impacts will be to lower 
the summer availability of water in already dry areas of the 
Southwest.1
There are two ways to consider water issues. The focus 
in this chapter is on quantity—that is, on the global water 
cycle and how it works, on the technologies we use to con-
Figure 1 Earth’s water. The Earth has an abundance of water, but terres-
trial ecosystems, humans, and agriculture depend on accessible freshwater, which 
constitutes only 0.77% of the total.
97.5%
Saltwater
Freshwater 2.5%
Polar ice caps
and glaciers
Accessible
freshwater
1.7%
0.77%
1Alexander, P. et al., Reclamation, SECURE Water Act Section 9503(c), Reclama-
tion Climate Change and Water, Report to Congress 2011, U.S. Department of the 
Interior, Denver, CO.
256

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
ing but below boiling (212°F or 100°C), the kinetic energy of 
the molecules is such that hydrogen bonds keep breaking and 
re-forming with different molecules. The result is liquid water. 
As the water molecules absorb energy from sunlight or an ar-
tificial source, the kinetic energy they gain may be enough to 
allow them to break away from other water molecules entirely 
and enter the atmosphere. This process is known as evapora-
tion, and the result is water vapor—water molecules in the 
gaseous state.
 Watervapor is a powerful greenhouse gas. It contributes 
about two-thirds of the total warming from all greenhouse 
gases. The amount of water vapor in the air is the humid-
ity. Humidity is generally measured as relative humidity, 
the amount of water vapor as a percentage of what the air 
can hold at a particular temperature. For example, a rela-
tive humidity of 60% means that the air contains 60% of 
the maximum amount of water vapor it could hold at that 
particular temperature. The amount of water vapor air can 
hold changes with the temperature. When warm, moist air is 
cooled, its relative humidity rises until it reaches 100%, and 
further cooling causes the excess water vapor to condense 
back to liquid water because the air can no longer hold as 
much water vapor (Fig. 4).
Condensation is the opposite of evaporation. It occurs 
when water molecules rejoin by hydrogen bonding to form 
liquid water. If the droplets form in the atmosphere, the re-
sult is fog and clouds (fog is just a very low cloud). If the 
droplets form on the cool surfaces of vegetation, the result 
is dew. Condensation is greatly facilitated by the presence of 
aerosols in the atmosphere. Aerosols are microscopic liquid 
or solid particles (like hair spray) originating from land and 
water surfaces. They provide sites that attract water vapor 
trol water and manage its use, and on public policies we have 
put in place to govern our different uses of water. Water—so 
vital to life—moves through the land, oceans, and atmos-
phere in a cycle.
2  Hydrologic Cycle: Natural Cycle, 
Human Impacts
Earth’s water cycle, also called the hydrologic cycle, is rep-
resented in Figure 3. The basic cycle consists of water rising 
to the atmosphere through evaporation (movement of water 
molecules from the surface of the liquid to a gas state) and 
transpiration (the loss of water vapor as it moves from the 
soil through green plants and exits through leaf pores) and 
returning to the land and oceans through condensation (for-
mation of liquid water from a gas state) and precipitation 
(release of water from clouds in form of rain, sleet, snow, or 
hail). Modern references to the hydrologic cycle distinguish 
between green water and blue water. Green water is water 
in vapor form, while blue water is liquid water wherever it 
 occurs. Green water and blue water are vitally linked in the 
hydrologic cycle. Terms commonly used to describe water 
are listed and defined in Table 1.
Evaporation, Condensation, and Purification
Aweak attraction known as hydrogen bonding tends to hold 
water molecules (H2O) together. Below 32°F (0°C), the kinetic 
energy of the molecules is so low that the hydrogen bonding 
is strong enough to hold the molecules in place with respect to 
one another, and the result is ice. At temperatures above freez-
Figure 2 Differences in avail-
ability. Human conditions range 
from (a) being able to luxuriate in 
water to (b) having to walk long 
distances and pull from deep pumps 
to obtain enough simply to survive. In 
many cases, however, the abundance 
of water is illusory because water 
 supplies are being overdrawn.
(a)
(b)
257

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
100%
50%
0%
30 282624 2220 18 161412 10 8 6 4 2 0 –2 –4 –6
Mist
clouds
Precipitation
Rain
Condensation
begins
Water
vapor
Temperature °C
Relative humidity
Cooling air
Snow
Figure 4 Condensation. The amount of water vapor that air can hold 
changes with the temperature. The red line follows an air mass that starts with 
40% relative humidity (RH) at 30°C and is cooled. When the mass of air cools 
to 17°C, it has reached 100% RH, and condensation begins, forming clouds. If 
we started with a higher RH, clouds would form sooner when the air is cooled. 
 Further cooling and condensation result in precipitation.
Figure 3 The hydrologic cycle. The Earth’s freshwater is replenished as water vapor enters the atmos-
phere by evaporation and transpiration from vegetation, leaving salts and other impurities behind. As precipitation 
hits the ground, three additional pathways are possible: surface runoff, infiltration, and reabsorption by plants. 
Green arrows depict green water, present as vapor in the atmosphere; blue arrows show liquid water.
Condensation
cloud formation
Water
vapor
Precipitation
Well
Reabsorbed
by plants
Capillary water held
Water table
Groundwater
Impervious bedrock
Rock and soil
saturated with water
Infiltration
Percolation
Surface runoff
Spring
Spring
Evaporation
Transpiration
Transpiration
and promote the formation of droplets of moisture. Aero-
sols may originate naturally, from sources such as volcanoes, 
wind-stirred dust and soil, and sea salts. Anthropogenic 
sources—sulfates, carbon, and dust—contribute almost as 
much as natural sources (more in some locations) and can 
have a significant impact on regional and global climates.
Purification occurs when water is separated from the sol-
utes and particles it contains. The processes of evaporation and 
condensation purify water naturally. When water in an ocean 
or a lake evaporates, only the water molecules leave the sur-
face; the dissolved salts and other solids remain behind in solu-
tion. When the water vapor condenses again, it is thus purified 
water—except for the pollutants and other aerosols it may pick 
up from the air. The water in the atmosphere turns over every 
10 days, so water is constantly being purified. (The most chem-
ically pure water for use in laboratories is obtained by distilla-
tion, a process of boiling water and condensing the vapor.)
Thus, evaporation and condensation are the source of all 
natural freshwater on Earth. Freshwater that falls on the land 
as precipitation gradually makes its way through  aquifers, 
streams, rivers, and lakes to the oceans (blue water flow). In 
the process, it carries along salts from the land, which even-
258

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
lower atmospheric pressure at increasing altitudes, it gradu-
ally cools as it expands—a process known as adiabatic cool-
ing. When the relative humidity reaches 100% and cooling 
continues, condensation occurs and clouds form. As conden-
sation intensifies, water droplets become large enough to fall 
as precipitation. Adiabatic warming, by contrast, occurs as 
cold air descends and is compressed by the higher air pres-
sure in the lower atmosphere.
Precipitation on Earth ranges from near zero in some 
areas to more than 2.5 meters (100 in.) per year in oth-
ers (Figure 5 shows the pattern over land). The distribution 
tually accumulate in the oceans. Salts also accumulate in in-
land seas or lakes, such as the Great Salt Lake in Utah. The 
salinization of irrigated croplands is a noteworthy human-
made example of this process. Most of the freshwater from 
precipitation, however, is returned  directly to the atmosphere 
by evaporation and transpiration.
Precipitation
Warm air rises from Earth’s surface because it is less dense 
than the cooler air above. As the warm air encounters the 
 
 
 
 
0
1,000
3,000 KILOMETERS
0
1,000
3,000 MILES
2,000
2,000
MODIFIED GOODE'S HOMOLOSINE EQUAL-AREA PROJECTION
ARCTIC OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN      OCEAN
PACIFIC
      OCEAN
ARCTIC OCEAN
ARABIAN
SEA
BAY OF 
BENGAL
CORAL   SEA
Tropic of Cancer
Tropic of Capricorn
Tropic of Cancer
Arctic Circle
Equator
Equator
50
50f
40
30
20
10
0
10
30
40
50
60
70
80
60
50
40
30
20
10
20
30
40
50
50
40
30
20
10
0
30
40
50
40f
30f
20f
10f
10f
20f
30f
40f
50
140 130
120
110
100
90
50
60
70
80
90
140
150
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
20
30
20
30
40
180
150
140
130
120
110
120
150
160
170
20
160
160
80 and 
over
60–79
40–59
20–39
10–19
Under 10
200 and
over
150–199
100–149
50–99
25–49
Under 25
cm                 in.
Figure 5 Global precipitation. Note the high rainfall in equatorial regions and the regions of low rainfall 
to the north and south. (Source: Robert W. Christopherson, Elemental Geosystems, 7th ed., Pearson  Education, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ.)
tAbLE 1 Terms Commonly Used to Describe Water
Term
Definition
Water quantity
The amount of water available to meet demands.
Water quality
The degree to which water is pure enough to fulfill the requirements of various uses.
Freshwater
Water having a salt concentration below 0.1%. As a result of purification by evaporation, all forms of precipitation are 
freshwater, as are lakes, rivers, groundwater, and other bodies of water that have a throughflow of water from precipitation.
Saltwater
Water that contains at least 3% salt (30 parts salt per 1,000 parts water), typical of oceans and seas.
Brackish water
A mixture of freshwater and saltwater, typically found where rivers enter the ocean.
Hard water
Water that contains minerals, especially calcium or magnesium, that cause soap to precipitate, producing a scum, curd, or 
scale in boilers.
Soft water
Water that is relatively free of minerals.
Polluted water
Water that contains one or more impurities, making it unsuitable for a desired use.
Purified water
Water that has had pollutants removed or is rendered harmless.
Storm water
Water from precipitation that runs off of land surfaces in surges.
Green water
Water in vapor form originating from water bodies, the soil, and organisms—the source of water for precipitation.
Blue water
Precipitation, renewable surface water runoff, and groundwater recharge—the focus of management and the main source of 
water for human withdrawals and natural ecosystems.
259

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
Figure 5 shows general precipitation patterns for the 
land; the general atmospheric circulation (Fig. 6) and the ef-
fects of mountain ranges (Fig. 7) combine to give great vari-
ation in the precipitation reaching the land. The distribution 
of precipitation in turn largely determines the biomes and 
ecosystems found in a given region.
Groundwater
As precipitation hits the ground, it may either soak into the 
ground (infiltration) or run off the surface. The amount that 
soaks in compared with the amount that runs off is called the 
infiltration-runoff ratio.
 depends on patterns of rising and falling air currents. As air 
rises, it cools, condensation occurs, and precipitation results. 
As air descends, it tends to become warmer, causing evapora-
tion to increase and dryness to result. A rain-causing event 
that you see in almost every television weather report is the 
movement of a cold front. As the cold front moves into an 
area, the warm, moist air already there is forced upward be-
cause the cold air of the advancing front is denser. The ris-
ing warm air cools, causing condensation and precipitation 
along the leading edge of the cold front.
Two factors—global convection currents and rain 
shadow—may cause more or less continuously rising or fall-
ing air currents over particular regions, with major effects on 
precipitation.
Convection Currents. At the equator, the rays of the sun 
are nearly perpendicular to the Earth’s surface; at the poles, 
light rays come at an angle through the atmosphere. That dif-
ference causes the surface of the Earth to be hotter in some 
places than others and drives great air movements, called 
“global convection currents.” As the air at the equator is 
heated, it expands, rises, and cools; condensation and pre-
cipitation occur. The constant intense heat in these equatorial 
areas ensures that this process is repeated often, thus caus-
ing high rainfall, which, along with continuous warmth, sup-
ports tropical rain forests.
Rising air over the equator is just half of the convec-
tion current, however. The air, now dry, must come down 
again. Pushed from beneath by more rising air, it literally 
“spills over” to the north and south of the equator and de-
scends over subtropical regions (25° to 35° north and south 
of the equator), resulting in subtropical deserts. The Sahara 
of northern Africa and the Kalahari of southern Africa are 
prime examples. The two halves of the system composed 
of the rising and falling air make up a Hadley cell (Fig. 6a 
and b). Because of Earth’s rotation, winds are deflected from 
the strictly vertical and horizontal paths indicated by a Had-
ley cell and tend to flow in easterly and westerly  directions—
the trade winds (Fig. 6c), which blow almost continuously 
from the same direction.
Rain Shadow. When moisture-laden trade winds encoun-
ter mountain ranges, the air is deflected upward, causing 
cooling and high precipitation on the windward side of the 
range. As the air crosses the range and descends on the other 
side, it becomes warmer and increases its capacity to pick up 
moisture. Hence, deserts occur on the leeward (downwind) 
sides of mountain ranges. The dry region downwind of a 
mountain range is referred to as a rain shadow (Fig. 7). The 
severest deserts in the world are caused by the rain-shadow 
effect. For example, the westerly trade winds, full of moisture 
from the Pacific Ocean, strike the Sierra Nevada Mountains 
in  California. As the winds rise over the mountains, large 
amounts of water precipitate out, supporting the lush for-
ests on the western slopes. Immediately east of the southern 
 Sierra Nevada, however, lies Death Valley, one of the dri-
est regions of North America. Likewise, the Gobi desert in 
China is in the rain shadow of the Himalayas.
Figure 6 Global air circulation. (a) The two Hadley cells at the  equator. 
(b) The six Hadley cells on either side of the equator, indicating general vertical 
airflow patterns. (c) Global trade-wind patterns, formed as a result of Earth’s rota-
tion.
30°S
0°
Westerlies
Easterlies
 Equator
Northeast trades
Southeast trades
Doldrums
(b) Global air flow patterns
(c) Global trade winds 
60°S
30°S
30°N
60°N
Dry air
absorbs
moisture
as it
descends
Dry air
absorbs
moisture
as it
descends
Desert
Desert
Hadley cells
23.5°
23.5°
30°
30°
0°
Rainforest
Moist air
releases
moisture
as it ascends
(a) Hadley cells at the equator
Equator
30°N
60°N
60°S
Westerlies
260

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
groundwater in aquifers may be found at various depths be-
tween layers of impervious rock. Also, the  recharge area—
the area where water enters an aquifer—may be many miles 
away from where the water leaves the aquifer. Underground 
aquifers hold some 99% of all liquid freshwater; the rest is in 
lakes, wetlands, and rivers.
Underground Purification. As water percolates through 
the soil, debris and bacteria from the surface are generally 
 filtered out. However, water may dissolve and leach out cer-
tain minerals. Underground caverns, for example, are the 
result of the gradual leaching away of limestone (calcium 
carbonate). In most natural situations, the minerals that leach 
into groundwater are harmless. Indeed, calcium from lime-
stone is considered beneficial to health. Thus, groundwater is 
generally high-quality freshwater that is safe for drinking. A 
few exceptions occur when the groundwater leaches minerals 
containing sulfide, arsenic, or other poisonous  elements that 
make the water unsafe to drink.
Drawn by gravity, groundwater may move through aqui-
fers until it finds some opening to the surface. These natural 
exits may be seeps or springs. In a seep, water flows out over 
a relatively wide area; in a spring, water exits the ground as 
a significant flow from a relatively small opening. As seeps 
and springs feed streams, lakes, and rivers, groundwater 
joins and becomes part of surface water. A spring will flow, 
however, only if it is lower than the water table. Whenever 
the water table drops below the level of the spring, the spring 
will dry up. Groundwater movement actually constitutes one 
of the loops in the hydrologic cycle.
Loops, Pools, and Fluxes in the Cycle
The hydrologic cycle consists of four physical processes: 
evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and gravitational 
flow. There are three principal loops in the cycle: (1) In the 
Runoff flows over the surface of the ground into streams 
and rivers, which make their way to the ocean or to inland 
seas. All the land area that contributes water to a particular 
stream or river is referred to as the watershed for that stream 
or river. All ponds, lakes, streams, rivers, and other waters on 
the surface of Earth are called surface waters.
Water that infiltrates has two alternatives (Fig. 3). The 
water may be held in the soil in an amount that depends 
on the water-holding capacity of the soil. This water, called 
capillary water, returns to the atmosphere either by evapora-
tion from the soil or by transpiration through plants (a green 
water flow). The combination of evaporation and transpira-
tion is referred to as evapotranspiration.
The second alternative is percolation (a blue water flow). 
Infiltrating water that is not held in the soil is called gravita-
tional water because it trickles, or percolates, down through 
pores or cracks under the pull of gravity. Sooner or later, 
however, gravitational water encounters an impervious layer 
of rock or dense clay. It accumulates there, completely fill-
ing all the spaces above the impervious layer. This accumu-
lated water is called groundwater, and its upper surface is the 
water table (Fig. 3). Gravitational water becomes groundwa-
ter when it reaches the water table in the same way that rain-
water is called lake water once it hits the surface of a lake. 
Wells must be dug to depths below the water table. Ground-
water, which is free to move, then seeps into the well and fills 
it to the level of the water table.
Recharge. Groundwater will seep laterally as it seeks its 
lowest level. Where a highway has been cut through rock 
layers, you can frequently observe groundwater seeping out. 
Layers of porous material through which groundwater moves 
are called aquifers. It is often difficult to determine the loca-
tion of an aquifer. Many times these layers of porous rock are 
found between layers of impervious material, and the entire 
formation may be folded or fractured in various ways. Thus, 
Windward
Leeward
Ocean
Warm, moist
70°F (21°C)
53.5°F (11.9°C)
Condensation level
50.4°F (10.2°C)
48.5°F (9.1°C)
59.5°F (15.3°C)
70.5°F (21.4°C)
81.5°F (27.5°C)
Saturation
Chinook winds
Dry, hot
Rain shadow
Altitude
ft (m)
8,000 (2400)
6,000 (1800)
4,000 (1200)
2,000 (600)
43.9°F (6.6°C)
37.5°F (3.1°C)
Figure 7 Rain shadow. Moisture-laden air in a trade wind cools as it rises over a mountain range,  resulting 
in high precipitation on the windward slopes. Desert conditions result on the leeward side as the  descending air 
warms and tends to evaporate water from the soil.
261

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
 kilometers. Additional water evaporates from land and ice. 
All together the hydrologic cycle annually moves the equiva-
lent of 25 times the water in the Great Lakes.  Absent from 
Figure 8, however, are the human impacts on the cycle, which 
are large and growing.
Human Impacts on the Hydrologic Cycle
A large share of the environmental problems we face 
today stem from direct or indirect impacts on the water 
cycle. These impacts can be classified into four categories:  
(1) changes to Earth’s surface, (2) changes to Earth’s climate, 
(3) atmospheric pollution, and (4) withdrawals (or diver-
sions) for human use.
Changes to the Surface of Earth. Imagine a temper-
ate forest, its trees rooted in thick soil, drawing water from 
below, sending water up and out leaves, each tree stopping 
raindrops in a storm, letting them run down the trunk. The 
soil and leaf litter slow the water, letting it soak in. Then im-
agine cutting down the trees. What would happen? Put up a 
evapotranspiration loop (consisting of green water), the 
water evaporates and is returned by precipitation. On land, 
this water—the main source for natural ecosystems and 
rain-fed agriculture—is held as capillary water and then 
returns to the atmosphere by way of evapotranspiration. 
(2) In the surface runoff loop (containing blue water), the 
water runs across the ground surface and becomes part of 
the surface water system. (3) In the groundwater loop (also 
containing blue water), the water infiltrates, percolates 
down to join the groundwater, and then moves through  
aquifers, finally exiting through seeps, springs, or wells, 
where it rejoins the surface water. The surface runoff and 
groundwater loops are the usual focus for human water re-
source management.
In the hydrologic cycle, there are substantial ex-
changes of water among the land, the atmosphere, and the 
oceans; such exchanges are the cycle’s fluxes. Figure 8 shows 
 estimates of these fluxes and of the sinks that hold water glo-
bally. About 97% of the Earth’s water is in the oceans. Each 
year a volume of water evaporates off of the ocean surface 
that would cover it to 100 cm deep, about 425,000 cubic 
65,200 km3
Evaporation/
Transpiration
110,000 km3
Precipitation
502,800 km3
Evaporation
44,800 km3
Transfer from sea to land
42,600 km3
Runoff from land to sea
2,200 km3
Groundwater seepage
390,000 km3
Precipitation
Figure 8 Yearly water balance in the hydrologic cycle. The data show (1) the contribution of water 
from the oceans to the land via  evaporation and then precipitation, (2) the movement of water from the land to the 
oceans via runoff and groundwater seepage, and (3) the net balance of water  movement between  terrestrial and oce-
anic regions of Earth. Values are in cubic kilometers per year. (Source: Figure 4.2 from Earth Science, 8th ed., by  Edward 
 Tarbuck and Frederick K. Lutgens, copyright © 1997 by the authors, reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., 
Upper Saddle River, NJ; revised with data from  GEO Yearbook 2003, United Nations Environment Programme.)
262

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
impervious surface can cover 90% of the area. The lower 
48 states have more than 43,000 square miles of impervious 
surface, about the size of Ohio (Figure 9).
Dams. One of the chief ways people try to lower 
flood risk is by building dams. Dams store water and have 
the opposite effect from many of the other land changes: 
They slow the movement of water to the ocean. However, 
because they are not wetlands, they often do not result in 
increased groundwater recharge. In dry areas, the pooling 
of water in reservoirs can leave water exposed to evapora-
tion. Ironically, evaporative loss of water can cause regional 
water loss even when the object of the reservoir building 
was water provision during drought. Dams also cause some 
serious  ecological problems. The Three Gorges Dam on the 
Yangtze River is a good example.
Flooding on the Yangtze River took more than 300,000 
lives in the 20th century. This fact, combined with a need 
for power, prompted the building of one of the most 
 spectacular dams in the world, the Three Gorges Dam. 
Completed in 2006, it is the largest hydroelectric project in 
the world (in terms of its maximum capacity), holding back 
1.4 trillion cubic feet of water and generating as much as 
84.7 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity annually, as much 
as the energy produced by burning 50 million tons of coal. 
The power generated raised the proportion of China’s elec-
tricity generated from renewable sources from 7% to 15%. 
It will, for a time, bring much of the major flood potential 
of the Yangtze under control.
However, the dam has come with a high price. More 
than 1.3 million people have been displaced and relocated, 
and another 3 million to 4 million people will be relocated 
in coming years to make way for the 600-kilometer-long 
(410-mile long) reservoir. As the reservoir fills, lowering the 
Yangtze River flow by 50%, saltwater has crept upriver at 
the mouth of the river, ships have been stranded, pollutants 
have accumulated, and many fish populations have been 
reduced due to interference with breeding cycles. In spite 
parking lot, a strip mall, a highway. Soon, the very processes 
that make up the water cycle will be altered.  Alterations to 
the land surface stem primarily from removing vegetation, 
putting down impervious surfaces, and  degrading wetlands.
Loss of Vegetation. In most natural ecosystems, precip-
itation is intercepted by vegetation and infiltrates into porous 
topsoil. From there, water provides the lifeblood of natural 
and human-created ecosystems. As forests are cleared or land 
is overgrazed and plants are not there to intercept rainfall, 
the pathway of the water cycle is shifted from infiltration 
and groundwater recharge to runoff, and the water runs into 
streams or rivers almost immediately. This causes floods, sur-
face erosion, sediment, and other pollutants. Increased runoff 
means less infiltration and, therefore, less evapotranspira-
tion and groundwater recharge. Lowered evapotranspiration 
means less moisture for local rainfall. Groundwater may be 
insufficient to keep springs flowing during dry periods. Dry, 
barren, and lifeless streambeds are typical of deforested re-
gions—a tragedy for both the ecosystems and the humans 
who are dependent on the flow.
Taming Rivers and Wetlands. Wetlands function to 
store and release water in a manner similar to the way the 
groundwater reservoir does, only on a shorter time scale. 
Therefore, the destruction of wetlands has the same impact 
as deforestation: Flooding is increased, droughts are also 
increased, and waterways are polluted. In the Midwest, 
many fields have been provided with underground drainage 
pipes (tiles) to move water more quickly so the fields can be 
planted. This action lowers the water table, and the result is 
predictable: Rainwater is moved more quickly from the land 
to the rivers to the ocean. Channelizing rivers (by straighten-
ing them) has much the same effect.
Building Impervious Surface. Roads, buildings, park-
ing lots, and other structures actually cover the soil, so 
even a slow steady rain cannot infiltrate.2 In some places, 
2Schueler, Thomas R. “The Importance of Imperviousness.” Reprinted in The 
Practice of Watershed Protection. 2000. Center for Watershed Protection, Ellicott 
City, MD.
Figure 9 Impervious surface.
Impervious surface such as seen on roofs, roads and parking lots, decreases the 
amount of water that can go into the soil and recharge groundwater and in-
creases the amount of water and the speed with which water runs off surfaces.
tAbLE 2 U.S. Demands on Freshwater
Use
Gallons (Liters) Used 
per Person per Day
Consumptive
Irrigation and other agricultural 
use
485 (1,835)
Nonconsumptive
Electric power production
477 (1,805)
Industrial use
72 (273)
Public supply and self-supply
164 (621)
Source: S. S. Hutson, N. L. Barber, J. F. Kenny, K. S. Linsey, D. S. Lumia, 
and M. A. Maupin, Estimated Use of Water in the United States in 2000 
(Circular 1268) (Reston, Va.: U.S. Geological Survey, 2004).
263

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
heat. There is also a move to go to new types of surfaces, 
especially for driveways, that are more environmentally 
friendly. 
Climate Change. There is now unmistakable evidence that 
Earth’s climate is warming because of the rise in greenhouse 
gases, and as this occurs, the water cycle is being altered. 
A warmer climate means more evaporation from land sur-
faces, plants, and water bodies because evaporation increases 
with temperature. A wetter atmosphere means more and, 
frequently, heavier precipitation and more flood events. In 
effect, global warming is believed to be speeding up the hy-
drologic cycle. Already, the United States and Canada have 
experienced a 5–10% increase in precipitation over the past 
century. Regional and local changes are difficult to project; 
different computer models predict different outcomes for 
a given region. However, global climate models project a 
radically changing hydrological world as the 21st century 
unfolds. The climatologists calculate that a warmer climate 
will likely generate more hurricanes and more droughts; 
 extended droughts in the western United States are likely to 
occur more frequently. They also calculate that many of the 
currently water-stressed areas like East  Africa and the Sahel 
region will get less water, which will bring large agricultural 
losses.
Climate change has two other key impacts on water 
bodies. First, warm water has a greater volume. Warming 
the oceans contributes to sea level rise. Second is the move-
ment of water from ice (the cryosphere) to liquid water. 
Glaciers and polar ice melt, and that water makes its way 
to the ocean. Both thermal expansion and melting ice con-
tribute to the sea level rise that is already apparent. Melting 
ice adds freshwater, which is lighter than saltwater and does 
not mix well. The influx of great volumes of freshwater 
may affect ocean currents (see Sound Science, “What’s New 
in the Water Cycle?”). Models suggest that oceans will rise 
about 2 to 3 feet (0.8 to 1 m) by 2100. While that does not 
sound like much, more than 630 million people live in low 
elevation areas, less than 10 meters above sea level. You can 
imagine that many will have to move and others will expe-
rience flooding.
Atmospheric Particles. Tiny atmospheric particles (aero-
sols) form nuclei that enable water to condense into drop-
lets. The more such particles there are, the greater is the 
tendency for clouds to form. Anthropogenic aerosols are on 
the  increase, primarily in the form of sulfates (from sulfur 
dioxide in coal), carbon (as soot), and dust. They form a 
brownish haze that is associated with industrial areas, trop-
ical burning, and dust storms. Their impact on cloud for-
mation is substantial, and where these aerosols occur, solar 
radiation to Earth’s surface is reduced (so they have a cool-
ing effect).
Their most significant impact, however, is on the 
 hydrologic cycle. Because aerosols promote the formation 
of smaller-than-normal droplets in the clouds, aerosols actu-
ally suppress rainfall where they occur in abundance, even 
though they encourage cloud formation. As they do so, the 
of the many drawbacks, Chinese officials continue with the 
project.
Moving Water to the Ocean. Overall, almost all 
human actions on land surface move water more quickly 
from rain to the ocean and lessen the amount going into 
groundwater. These actions contribute to both floods and 
droughts and increase erosion. Floods are one of the most 
costly problems with the water cycle and have always been 
common. In many parts of the world, however, the fre-
quency and severity of flooding are increasing—not because 
precipitation is greater, but because land use has changed, 
as we have described. Deforestation, cultivation, imper-
vious surfaces, wetland loss, and other changes have in-
creased, causing erosion and reducing infiltration. A recent 
study of floods in 56 developing countries has confirmed 
the “sponge” effect of forests, concluding that continued 
loss of forests will lead to greater loss of lives and econo-
mies for the developing countries where floods are frequent. 
For example, extreme flooding in Bangladesh (a very flat 
country only a few feet above sea level) is now more com-
mon because the Himalayan foothills in India and Nepal 
have been deforested. Due to sediment deposited from up-
river erosion, the Ganges River basin has risen 5–7 meters 
(15–22 ft) in recent years. Floods are also increasing as a 
result of climate change, discussed shortly. Figure 10 shows 
the impacts of flood waters in flooding that occurred in 
2010 in Pakistan.
Solutions to water problems caused by land use 
changes include changes in requirements for new con-
struction. One change in land use planning has been the 
requirement in many places to build flood retention ponds 
near new construction. These areas do not function as 
wetland habitat very well and often have pollutants and 
generalist weedy  species. However, they do stop floods and 
allow infiltration. The protection of wetlands and river 
vegetation has been important to slowing run-off. Another 
solution is to grow more vegetation in cities. Urban gar-
dening, rooftop gardens, and the planning of parks can 
increase soil infiltration in some cases and can also lower 
Figure 10 Flooding in Pakistan. The 2010 floods in Pakistan broke 
records and walls. Twenty million people were displaced.
264

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
withdrawals of water for human use (as we make use of sur-
face waters and groundwater). We will discuss these impacts 
next, as we look at how humans try to have enough clean 
freshwater—and not too much.
3  Water: Getting Enough, 
Controlling Excess
Meeting water needs is a primary goal in our rapidly crowd-
ing world. We are seeing both stresses and successes. Between 
1990 and 2012, 2 billion people were given access to clean 
drinking water, an achievement that met the Millennium 
Development Goal for water. However, water needs are very 
serious in many countries (Fig. 11).
atmospheric cleansing that would normally clear the aero-
sols is suppressed, and they remain in the atmosphere longer 
than usual. With suppressed rainfall comes drier conditions, 
so more dust and smoke (and more aerosols) are the result. 
Ironically, this type of air pollution works just opposite to 
the impact of the greenhouse gases on climate and the hydro-
logic cycle. Again, there are significant differences; the aero-
sol impact is more local, whereas the impact of greenhouse 
gases on climate and the hydrologic cycle is more global. In 
addition, the greenhouse gases are gradually accumulating in 
the atmosphere, while the aerosols have a lifetime measured 
in days.
Withdrawal for Human Use. Finally, there are many 
problems related to the fourth impact, diversion and 
SoUND SCIENCE
What’s New in the Water Cycle?
The water cycle is pretty 
straightforward on a first 
approximation. Every 
fourth grader has stud-
ied at least the basics. 
But scientists still find more to study. The cutting 
edge in the study of hydrologic cycle science is 
in trying to figure out what will cause changes 
in the future, especially how the global water 
cycle will be affected by human actions.
Peter Wadhams, a professor of oceano-
graphic physics at the University of Cambridge, 
England, wanted to know more about the ocean 
and climate change. One big question he was 
interested in is how the ocean responds to 
changes in the water cycle as ocean tempera-
tures rise. There are large currents (thermohaline 
currents) in the water that move vast quantities 
of water around, in a slow-moving “ocean con-
veyor.” Wind and tides provide the energy for 
these currents. The speed, volume, and direction 
of currents can be affected by climate change 
because of two principles: cold water is denser 
than warm, and freshwater is less dense than 
saltwater. When deep water rises, it brings nutri-
ents toward the surface; as surface water sinks, 
it brings oxygen down. Waters warmed in the 
tropics redistribute heat to the cold poles.
These currents help warm Europe and the 
east coast of North America. But there may be 
changes in the future. As glacial melt water 
and rain run-off from Siberia increase in the 
Arctic, cold freshwater forms a layer on top of 
the saltwater there. Enough freshwater might 
change the ocean conveyor, some scientists 
have hypothesized. In 2005, Wadhams and his 
colleagues investigated the cold dense waters of 
the Greenland Sea where columns of very dense 
water form. These ”chimneys” (which can be 
100 km in diameter and which last for months) 
carry water down more than 2400 m towards 
the sea floor, contributing to the movement of 
masses of cold water in the deep ocean. But 
instead of the dozen gigantic rivers of water 
flowing downward that they had found other 
times, they found only two. Does this mean the 
deep ocean currents will slow? Is the change 
long term? Right now, Wadhams and others 
aren’t sure what will happen. Some scientists 
say any shift in the thermohaline circulation is 
likely to occur slowly; others think a slowing of 
the  conveyor could occur more abruptly.
The Greenland Sea isn’t the only place 
 marine currents are studied. In 2012, scientists 
from the University of Washington, includ-
ing graduate student Sarah Purkey, explored 
the deepest, coldest waters on Earth—off 
of  Antarctica. They found that those waters, 
dubbed the Antarctic Bottom Water, have 
 declined in volume by 60% (losing an equivalent 
of 50 times the flow of the Mississippi River) 
over the past several decades. The deep ocean 
is becoming less cold and dense, and scien-
tists expect this to change the way the oceans 
work. Even though the basic hydrologic cycle 
is well known, the details of how it works and 
what changes we might expect in a changing 
 environment are still part of today’s science. 
Wadhams, Purkey and all of their colleagues are 
on the cutting edge of sound science.
Sources: Wunsch, C. (2002). “What is the thermohaline 
circulation?” Science 298(5596): 1179–1181. doi:10.1126/
science.1079329. PMID 12424356. 
Wadhams, P. (2004). “Convective chimneys in the Greenland 
Sea: A review of recent observations.” Oceanography and 
Marine Biology 42, 1–27
Purkey, S. G., & Johnson, G. C. “Global contraction of Antarctic 
Bottom Water between the 1980s and 2000s.”. Journal of 
Climate, 2012
T
s
a
f
i
Cold
 and salty d
e
ep
 c
ur
re
nt
War
m 
s
h
a
ll
o
w c
urrent
Solar warming
of ocean waters
Sea-to-air
heat transfer
265

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
Sources
About 20% of domestic water comes from groundwater 
sources and 80% from surface waters (rivers, lakes, reser-
voirs) in the United States. Before municipal water supplies 
were developed, people drew their water from whatever 
source they could: wells, rivers, lakes, or rainwater. This ap-
proach is still used in rural areas in the developing countries. 
Women in many of these countries walk long distances each 
day to fetch water. Because surface waters and shallow wells 
often receive runoff, they frequently are polluted with vari-
ous wastes, including animal excrement and human sewage 
likely to contain pathogens (disease-causing organisms). In 
fact, an estimated 90% of wastewater in developing coun-
tries is released to surface waters without any treatment. Yet, 
unsafe as it is, this polluted water is the only water available 
for an estimated 1.1 billion people in less developed countries  
(Fig. 14). It is commonly consumed without purification, but 
not without consequences: According to the UN World Health 
Organization, contaminated water is responsible for the deaths 
of more than 1.6 million people in developing countries each 
year, 90% of whom are children. Increasing water sanitation is 
part of the Millennium Development Goals.
Technologies. In the industrialized countries, the collec-
tion, treatment, and distribution of water are highly developed. 
Larger municipalities rely primarily on surface-water sources, 
while smaller water systems tend to use groundwater. In the 
former, dams are built across rivers to create reservoirs, which 
hold water in times of excess flow and can be drawn down at 
times of lower flow. In addition, dams and reservoirs may offer 
power generation, recreation, and flood control. Reservoirs cre-
ated by dams on rivers are also major sources of water for irriga-
tion. In this case, no treatment is required. However, water for 
According to the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 
human use now appropriates about 3,600 cubic kilom-
eters of water per year, which represents 27% of the acces-
sible freshwater runoff on Earth. Annual global withdrawal 
is  expected to rise by about 10% every decade. While the 
human population tripled in the 20th century, use of water 
increased sixfold, much of that increase to enable water in-
tensive higher-yielding agriculture.
The U.S. Geological Service periodically prepares es-
timates of major uses of freshwater in the United States 
(Table 2). It is significant that Americans use less water now 
than they did in 1980, even with population increases (Fig. 
12). Most of the water used in homes and industries is for 
washing and flushing away unwanted materials, and the 
water used in electric power production is for  taking away 
waste heat. These are nonconsumptive water uses  because 
the water, though now contaminated with wastes, remains 
available to humans for the same or other uses if its quality is 
adequate or if it can be treated to remove undesirable materi-
als. In contrast, irrigation is a consumptive water use because 
the applied water does not return to the local water resource. 
It can only percolate into the ground or return to the atmos-
phere through evapotranspiration. In either case, the water 
does reenter the overall water cycle but is gone from human 
control.
Worldwide, the largest use of water is for irrigation 
(70%), second is for industry (20%), and third is for  direct 
human use (10%) (Fig. 13). These percentages vary greatly 
from one region to another, depending on natural precipita-
tion and the degree to which the region is developed (Fig. 
10). Most increases in withdrawal are due to increases in irri-
gated lands. In the United States, irrigation accounts for 65% 
of freshwater consumption.
No Data
Water Poverty Index (WPI)
Severe (WPI 35-47.9)
High (WPI 48-55.9)
Medium (WPI 56-61.9)
Medium Low (WPI 62-67.9)
Low (WPI 68-78)
Figure 11 Water  Poverty Index. Patterns of water availability across the Earth involve not only 
 precipitation but also human population uses.
266

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
discharged into a natural waterway. Often, wastewater is dis-
charged into the same river from which it was withdrawn, but 
farther downstream.
Whenever possible, both water and sewage systems 
are laid out so that gravity maintains the flow through the 
system. This arrangement minimizes pumping costs and 
municipal use is piped from the reservoir to a treatment plant, 
where it is treated to kill pathogens and remove undesirable 
 materials, as shown in  Figure 15. After treatment, the water is 
distributed through the water system to homes, schools, and in-
dustries. Wastewater, collected by the sewage system, is  carried 
to a  sewage-treatment plant, where it is treated before being 
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000 
2005
250
200
150
100
50
0
300
350
350
400
Withdrawals, in billion gallons per day
50
100
150
200
350
250
300
0
Population, in millions
Groundwater
Surface water
Total
Population
Figure 12 U.S. trends in population and freshwater withdrawals. Since 1980, Americans have been 
using less water, even though the population has increased substantially. (Source: S. S. Hutson, N. L. Barber, 
J. F. Kenny, K. S. Linsey, D. S. Lumia, and M. A. Maupin, Estimated Use of Water in the United States in 2000 
(Circular 1268) (Reston, VA: U.S. Geological Survey, 2004).)
World
North America
Europe
Africa
Asia
South America
100
80
60
40
20
0
Percent of total withdrawals
Domestic
Industry
Agriculture
Figure 13 Regional usage of 
water. The percentage used in each 
 category varies with the climate and relative 
development of the region. A less developed 
region with a dry climate (e.g., Africa) uses 
most of its water for irrigation, whereas an 
industrialized region (e.g., Europe) requires 
the largest percentage for industry.
267

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
1
WATER SOURCE
groundwater, rivers,
lakes, reservoirs
Chlorine disinfects
2
Alum aids settling
of suspended solids
Water from source
Sludge
removal
3
Settling basins allow
sludge removal
4
Sand filters water
5
Lime adjusts pH
6
Flouride added
to water storage
water often returned
to same source,
further downstream
WATER TREATMENT
PLANT
SEWAGE TREATMENT
PLANT
WATER USE
agriculture, industrial,
household
(a) Water is often taken from a river or reservoir, piped to the 
treatment plant, treated, used, then returned to the source.
(b) At the treatment plant, water is treated to kill pathogens and
remove undesirable material.
Mixing tank
Settling basin
Sand filter
Figure 15 Municipal water use and treatment. The stages of water treatment are outlined in the 
figure. Water is taken from a river or reservoir, piped to a treatment plant, treated with chemicals, filtered,  
adjusted for pH, and stored before being used.
 pollution. Pollutants include industrial wastes as well as pol-
lutants from households because industries and residences 
generally utilize the same water and sewer  systems.
Smaller public drinking-water systems frequently rely on 
groundwater, which often may be used with minimal treat-
ment because it has already been purified by percolation 
through soil. More than 1.5 billion people around the world 
rely on groundwater for their domestic use. Both surface 
water and groundwater are replenished through the water 
cycle (Fig. 3). Therefore, in theory at least, these two sources 
of water represent a sustainable or renewable (self-replenish-
ing) resource, but they are not inexhaustible. Over the past 
50 years, groundwater use has outpaced the rate of aquifer 
recharge in many areas of the world.
Is Bottled Water the Answer? One-half of Americans 
buy bottled water, which is sometimes seen as a solution to 
limited water availability, particularly after disasters. Sales of 
bottled water were $34 billion (about 50 billion bottles) in 
2008 in the United States alone. Unfortunately, use of bot-
tled water has a number of negative environmental effects. 
First, the bottling can occur on a large scale in areas where 
locals also want to use the water. Does a company have the 
right to pump out millions of gallons of water from an aq-
uifer? This has been disputed. For example, after many years 
in the courts, in 2009, Michigan  Citizens for Water Conser-
vation won a lawsuit to keep Nestlé Waters North America, 
Inc., from pumping 400 gallons of water a minute from a 
 increases reliability. On major rivers, such as the Mississippi, 
water is reused many times. Each city along the river takes 
water, treats it, uses it, treats it again, and then returns it to 
the river. In developing nations, the wastewater frequently is 
discharged with minimal or no treatment. Thus, as the water 
moves downstream, each city has a higher load of pollut-
ants to contend with than the previous city had, and ecosys-
tems at the end of the line may be severely  affected by the 
Figure 14 Water in the developing world. In many villages and 
cities of the developing world, people withdraw water from rivers, streams, and 
ponds. These sources are often contaminated with pathogens and other pollut-
ants. This Kenyan man is collecting water from a river used by people and animals.
268

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
lion smaller structures (Fig. 16). These have been built to run 
mills (now an obsolete usage), control floods, generate electric 
power, and provide water for municipal and agricultural use. 
These dams have enormous ecological impacts. When a river 
is dammed, valuable freshwater habitats, such as waterfalls, 
rapids, and prime fish runs, are lost. When the river’s flow is 
diverted to cities or croplands, the waterway below the diver-
sion is deprived of that much water.
The impact on fish and other aquatic organisms is obvious, 
but the ecological ramifications go far beyond the river. Wildlife 
that depends on the water or on food chains involving aquatic 
organisms is also adversely affected. Wetlands dry up, result-
ing in frequent die-offs of waterfowl and other wildlife that de-
pended on those habitats. Fish such as salmon, which swim from 
the ocean far upriver to spawn, are seriously affected by the re-
duced water level and have problems getting around the dam, 
even one equipped with fish ladders (a stepwise series of pools 
on the side of the dam, where the water flows in small falls that 
fish can negotiate). If the fish do get upriver, the hatchlings have 
similar problems getting back to the ocean. On the Columbia 
and Snake rivers, juvenile salmon suffer 95% mortality in their 
journey to the sea as a result of negotiating the dams and reser-
voirs that block their way.
Glen Canyon Dam is an example of a large dam with sig-
nificant environmental effects. On the Columbia River, the dam 
provides hydropower and created the second largest artificial 
lake in America: Lake Powell. An environmental impact study 
in the late 1980s and early 1990s concluded that the operation 
of the Glen Canyon Dam on the Colorado River had seriously 
damaged the downstream ecology of the Colorado River and its 
recreational resources (hiking, river rafting). In response, Con-
gress passed the Grand Canyon Protection Act in 1992, which 
required a process of “adaptive management” that would adjust 
groundwater supply in Michigan. The proposed pumping 
was drying a local stream. Nestlé was allowed to pump, but 
at a reduced rate. Bottled water also requires a great deal of 
energy, for the making of plastic bottles and the transporta-
tion of the product. Overall, bottled water may be good for 
emergencies but is not a good solution for a lack of drinking 
water generally.
Surface Waters
Surface waters are diverted for use, slowed and held in dams, 
and moved along swiftly by levees, impervious surfaces, chan-
nelized rivers, and devegetation. Of these effects, the use of dams 
is the most prominent for keeping and using surface water.
Dams and the Environment. To trap and control flow-
ing rivers, more than 48,000 large dams (more than 50 feet 
high) have been built around the world. Dams together have 
a storage capacity around 6,000 km3, serving 30–40% of 
the world’s irrigated land and providing 19% of the world’s 
total electricity supply. Of the 42,600 cubic kilometers of an-
nual runoff in the hydrologic cycle, only 31% is accessible 
for withdrawal because many rivers are in remote locations 
and much of the remaining water is required for navigation, 
flood control, and the generation of hydroelectric power. 
Sixty-five percent of ocean bound freshwater is stopped by 
dams at some point. The large dams have an enormous direct 
social impact, leading to the displacement of an estimated 40 
million to 80 million people worldwide (primarily in China 
and India) and preventing access by local people to the goods 
and services of the now-buried ecosystems.
Dam Impacts. The United States is home to some 
75,000 dams at least 6 feet in height and an estimated 2 mil-
0-25
NID by Height (ft.)
25-50
50-100
100-808
Figure 16 Number of dams in the United States. Each point represents a dam; the colors tell the 
height. (Source National Inventory of Dams Map)
269

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
bays and rivers in which freshwater mixes with seawater. 
 Estuaries are among the most productive ecosystems on 
Earth; they are rich breeding grounds for many species of 
fish, shellfish, and waterfowl. As a river’s flow is diverted 
(say, to irrigate fields), less freshwater enters and flushes 
the estuary. Consequently, the salt concentration increases, 
profoundly affecting the estuary’s ecology. This is exactly 
what is happening in San Francisco Bay. More than 60% 
of the freshwater that once flowed from rivers into the bay 
has been diverted for irrigation in the Central Valley (2.5 
million acres irrigated) and for municipal use in southern 
 California (25 million people served). In dry years (which 
are becoming more common), the farms and municipali-
ties remove a third of the water that would normally flow 
through the delta into San Francisco Bay. Without the fresh-
water flows, saltwater from the Pacific has intruded into the 
bay, with devastating consequences. Chinook salmon runs 
have  almost disappeared. Sturgeon, Dungeness crab, and 
striped bass populations are greatly reduced. Exotic species 
of plants and invertebrates have replaced many native spe-
cies, and the tidal wetlands have been reduced to only 8% of 
their former extent.
Upriver from the bay, more than a thousand miles of 
levees protect farmlands that have sunk 20 feet or more 
below sea level due to compacting. If the levees collapsed 
during an earthquake, massive amounts of saltwater would 
be sucked upriver and would shut down the huge pumps that 
divert freshwater to the cities and farms. Given these major 
problems, the CALFED Bay-Delta Program was established, 
according to its mission statement, to “develop and imple-
ment a long-term comprehensive plan that will restore eco-
logical health and improve water management for beneficial 
uses of the Bay-Delta System.” However, this is not working, 
as major stakeholders (farmers, government agencies, envi-
ronmental groups) have not been able to agree on changes to 
the delta recommended by scientists.
water-release rates in a manner designed to enhance the ecologi-
cal and recreational values of the river. This rule has helped bal-
ance the needs of different stakeholders.
Dams Gone. Increasingly, people are recognizing the 
costs of dams and finding them to be unacceptable. Removing 
a dam is not easy, however. Legal complexities abound where 
long-existing uses of a dam (to control floods or to provide 
irrigation water or lake-like still water for recreation) conflict 
with the expected advantages of removal (to reestablish his-
toric fisheries such as salmon and steelhead runs or to restore 
the river for recreational and aesthetic use). Practical problems 
also exist. However, more than 714 dams have already been 
removed. Figure 17 shows the successful removal of a dam on 
the White Salmon River.
Diversion of Surface Water. In addition to dams, hu-
mans move freshwater through diversion projects to take 
water to places where it is scarce. One example is the di-
version project in China mentioned at the beginning of 
the chapter. When water is moved from one watershed to 
another, it is called an interbasin water transfer. The larg-
est diversion project ever proposed for North America was 
the North American Water and Power Alliance (NAWAPA) 
XXI project. Designed in the 1950s, the ambitious project 
was proposed to bring water from Alaska, down through 
 Canada, and into the dry Midwest and western states 
through 369 separate construction projects. As proposed, 
it would double the water available to the lower 48 states. 
Public sentiment in Canada has run against the project, and 
it has been shelved. China has discovered already, though, 
that large water diversion projects can bring unexpected en-
vironmental costs including water pollution or the effects of 
water loss in the original rivers and lakes.
Impacts on Estuaries. When river waters are diverted on 
their way to the sea, serious impacts are seen in  estuaries—
Figure 17 Removal of a dam. The 2011 
removal of the Conditt Dam on the White Salmon 
River in Washington state cleared the way for 
salmon to spawn upstream.
270

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
the United States, the Ogallala aquifer supplies irrigation 
water to 4.2 million hectares (4 million acres), one-fifth of 
the irrigated land in the nation (Fig. 18). This aquifer is prob-
ably the largest in the world, but it is mostly “fossil water,” 
recharged during the last ice age. The recent withdrawal rate 
has been about 28 billion cubic meters (23 million acre-ft) 
per year, two orders of magnitude higher than the recharge 
rate. Water tables have dropped 30–60 meters (100–200 ft) 
and continue to drop at the rate of 6 feet per year. Irrigated 
farming has already come to a halt in some sections, and it 
is predicted that over the next 20 years another 1.2 million 
hectares (3 million acres) in this region will be abandoned or 
converted to dryland farming (ranching and the production 
of forage crops) because of water depletion.
Renewable groundwater is replenished by the perco-
lation of precipitation water, so it is vulnerable to vari-
ations in precipitation. In tapping groundwater, we are 
tapping large, but not unlimited, natural reservoirs, con-
tained within specific aquifer systems. Its sustainability 
ultimately depends on balancing withdrawals with rates 
of recharge. For most of the groundwater in arid regions, 
there is essentially no recharge. The resource must be con-
sidered nonrenewable. Like oil, it can be removed, but 
The problem is not limited to the United States. The south-
eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea was formerly flushed by 
water from the Nile River. Because this water is now held back 
and diverted for irrigation by the Aswan High Dam in Egypt, 
that part of the Mediterranean is suffering severe ecological 
consequences (such as severe coastal erosion) as sediments 
normally flowing out to the coast are kept behind the dam.
Groundwater
Groundwater is the large unseen storage of water that accu-
mulated slowly in porous rock over millennia. As mentioned 
before, some 99% of all liquid freshwater is in underground 
aquifers. Of this groundwater, more than three-fourths has 
a recharge rate of centuries or more. Such groundwater is 
considered “nonrenewable.” Because groundwater supplies 
are vital for domestic use and especially for agriculture, 
they are a resource that requires management.
Groundwater Levels. The agriculture of the  midwestern 
United States makes the country the breadbasket for the 
world. Water to support that agriculture is mined from deep 
underground. Within the seven-state High Plains region of 
Figure 18 Exploitation of an aquifer. (a) Pumping up water 
from the Ogallala aquifer has made this arid region of the United States 
into some of the most productive farmland in the country. (b) Water 
is applied by means of center-pivot irrigation, in which the water is 
pumped from a central well to a  self-powered boom that rotates around 
the well, spraying water as it goes. (c) An aerial photograph shows the 
extent of center-pivot irrigation throughout the region. Groundwater 
depletion will bring an end to this kind of farming.
Idaho
Montana
Wyoming
Utah
Arizona
Colorado
New Mexico
Kansas
Oklahoma
Missouri
Arkansas
Texas
North Dakota
South Dakota
Minnesota
Iowa
Nebraska
(a)
(b)
(c)
271

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
Figure 19 Sinkhole. The removal of groundwater may drain an under-
ground cavern until the roof, no longer supported by water pressure, collapses. 
The result is the sudden  development of a sinkhole, such as this one, which ap-
peared in Plant City, Florida, on May 29, 2000.
 regions, springs of outflowing groundwater may lie under 
the ocean. As long as a high water table maintains a suf-
ficient head of pressure in the aquifer, freshwater will flow 
into the ocean. Thus, wells near the ocean yield freshwater 
(Fig. 20a). However, lowering the water table or removing 
groundwater at a rapid rate may reduce the pressure in the 
aquifer, permitting saltwater to flow back into the  aquifer 
and hence into wells (Fig. 20b). Saltwater intrusion is a seri-
ous problem in many  European countries along the Medi-
terranean coast.
4  Water Stewardship: Supply and 
Public Policy
The hydrologic cycle is entirely adequate to meet human 
needs for freshwater because it processes several times as 
much water as we require today. However, the water is often 
not distributed where it is most needed, and the result is a 
persistent scarcity of water in many parts of the world. In the 
developing countries, there is still a deficit of infrastructure, 
such as wells, water-treatment systems, and (sometimes) large 
dams, for capturing and distributing safe drinking water. 
 Despite the growing negative impacts of overdrawing water 
resources, expanding populations create an ever- increasing 
demand for additional water for agriculture, industry, and 
municipal use. Water for food dominates the current water 
demand, estimated at 6,800 cubic kilometers per year. Of 
this, some 5,000 cubic kilometers are used as green water 
flow in the world’s rain-fed agriculture and 1,800 cubic kil-
ometers as blue water flow in the form of irrigation water 
withdrawn from rivers, lakes, and groundwater. It is esti-
mated that 4,500 cubic kilometers (of the total 6,800 km3) 
are attributed to the developing countries to fulfill current 
food needs. 
If we assume that virtually all of the future population 
increase will be in the developing countries, then so also will 
be the increased need for food.
any water removed today will be unavailable for the fu-
ture. Groundwater depletion has  several undesirable con-
sequences.
Falling Water Tables. The simplest indication that ground-
water withdrawals are exceeding recharge is a falling water 
table, a situation that is common throughout the world. Be-
cause irrigation consumes far and away the largest amount 
of freshwater, depleting water resources will ultimately have 
its most significant impact on crop production. Although 
running out of water is the obvious eventual conclusion of 
overdrawing groundwater, falling water tables can bring on 
other problems.
Diminishing Surface Water. Surface waters are af-
fected by falling water tables. In various wetlands, for in-
stance, the water table is essentially at or slightly above the 
ground surface. When water tables drop, these wetlands dry 
up, with the ecological results described earlier. Further, as 
water tables drop, springs and seeps dry up as well, diminish-
ing even streams and rivers to the point of dryness. Thus, ex-
cessive groundwater removal creates the same results as the 
diversion of surface water.
Land Subsidence. Over the ages, groundwater has 
leached cavities in the ground. Where these spaces are filled 
with water, the water helps support the overlying rock 
and soil. As the water table drops, however, this support 
is lost. Then there may be a gradual settling of the land, a 
 phenomenon known as land subsidence. The rate of sinking 
may be 10–15 centimeters (6–12 in.) per year. In some areas of 
the San Joaquin Valley in California, land has settled as much 
as 9 meters (29 ft) because of groundwater removal. Land 
subsidence causes building foundations, roadways, and water 
and sewer lines to crack. In coastal areas, subsidence causes 
flooding unless levees are built for protection. For example,  
where a 10,000-square-kilometer (4,000-mi2) area in the 
Houston–Galveston Bay region of Texas is gradually sinking 
because of groundwater removal, coastal properties are 
being abandoned as they are gradually being inundated by 
the sea. Land subsidence is also a serious problem in many 
other places throughout the world. When it happens in cities, 
underground pipes break, causing leaks and wastage of 
domestic water. Sewage pipes can also fracture, contaminat-
ing the groundwater aquifer.  Subsidence is a serious problem 
in many cities in developing countries, where the public water 
supply is not dependable.
Another kind of land subsidence, a sinkhole, may de-
velop suddenly and dramatically (Fig. 19). A sinkhole  results 
when an underground cavern, drained of its supporting 
groundwater, suddenly collapses. Sinkholes may be 300 feet 
(91 m) across and as deep as 150 feet. The problem of sink-
holes is particularly severe in the southeastern United States, 
where groundwater has leached numerous passageways and 
caverns through ancient beds of underlying limestone. An 
estimated 4,000 sinkholes have formed in Alabama alone, 
some of which have “consumed” buildings, livestock, and 
sections of highways.
Saltwater Intrusion. Another problem resulting from 
dropping water tables is saltwater intrusion. In coastal 
272

Recharge
area
Recharge
area
Water table
Lower
water table
Freshwater
aquifer
Freshwater
aquifer
Well
Wells
Salt water
Salt water
Ocean salt water
Ocean salt water
(a)
(b)
Figure 20 Saltwater intrusion. (a) Where aquifers 
open into the ocean, freshwater is maintained in the aquifer 
by the pressure of freshwater inland. (b) Excessive removal of 
water may reduce the pressure so that saltwater moves into 
the aquifer.
What are the possibilities for meeting existing needs and 
growing demands in a sustainable way? Planners call for a 
Blue Revolution, a radical change in the way we use water. 
There are only about five options: (1) capture more of the 
runoff water, (2) gain better access to existing groundwater 
aquifers, (3) desalt seawater, (4) conserve present supplies 
by using less water, and (5) make food production more ef-
ficient. Making matters more difficult, there is no single U.S. 
agency responsible for forming public policy on such water 
supply issues.
Capturing Runoff
While individuals may put out rain barrels to capture runoff 
from roofs and villages may use cisterns to catch rainwater, 
dams are the best example of surface water capture and are 
widely used. China is the best example of both the pros and 
cons of dam building, which we have already discussed. In an 
effort to provide hydropower while cutting greenhouse gas 
emissions, China has committed to an aggressive program of 
dam building. New dam projects threaten China’s remain-
ing biodiversity. In the United States, protection has been ac-
corded to some rivers with the passage of the Wild and Scenic 
Rivers Act of 1968, which keeps rivers designated as “wild 
and scenic” from being dammed or affected by other harmful 
operations. There are 252 designated wild and  scenic rivers 
in the United States. Some 12,600 miles of  rivers have been 
protected. The numerous large and small dams across the 
country have affected some 600,000 miles of our rivers, by 
comparison. Those rivers designated as wild and scenic are in 
many ways equivalent to national parks.3
Tapping More Groundwater
Already, more than 2 billion people depend on groundwa-
ter supplies. In many areas, groundwater use exceeds aqui-
fer  recharge, leading to shortages as the water table drops 
below pump levels. Groundwater depletion is considered 
the single greatest threat to irrigated agriculture, and it is 
happening in many parts of the world. India, China, West 
Asia, countries of the former Soviet Union, the western 
United States, and the Arabian Peninsula are all experienc-
ing declining water tables. Calculations by the International 
Water Management Institute suggest that an expansion of 
3Wild and Scenic Rivers: Leading the Charge to Protect the Nation’s Last, Best 
 Rivers. American Rivers. http://www.americanrivers.org/our-work/protecting-
rivers/wild-and-scenic/ Sept 2012.
Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
273

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
from a power plant and reverse osmosis to produce 25 mil-
lion gallons of drinking water per day (MGD), providing 
Pasco County, Pinellas County, St. Petersburg, and other cit-
ies with some 10% of their drinking water. The Tampa Bay 
region has experienced chronic water shortages and is ex-
ploiting an opportunity that has attracted worldwide atten-
tion. The water is expected to cost Tampa Bay Water $2.49 
per 1,000 gallons wholesale over 30 years—more than the 
$1 per 1,000 gallons for existing groundwater sources, but 
still a reasonable cost.
Although the higher cost might cause some people to cut 
back on watering lawns and to implement other conserva-
tion measures, most people in the United States could afford 
desalinized water without unduly altering their lifestyles. For 
irrigating croplands, however, the higher cost of desalinized 
seawater would probably be prohibitive, except possibly for 
high-value cash crops like greenhouse flowers or vegetables.
The world’s largest RO desalination plant employs a 
unique energy recovery device (a rotary displacement pump) 
that is helping greatly to make desalination affordable. It 
was built at Hadara, between Tel Aviv and Haifa in Israel, 
and will produce 72 MGD, with a potential expansion to 94 
MGD. The largest distillation plant is the Jebel Ali desalina-
tion plant in the United Arab Emirates, producing 215 MGD, 
or 2,500 gallons per second.
Using Less Water
A developing-nation family living where water must be car-
ried several miles from a well finds that one gallon per per-
son per day is sufficient to provide for all of its essential 
needs, including cooking and washing. Yet, a typical house-
hold in the United States consumes an average of 380 liters 
(100 gal) per person per day. If all indirect uses are added 
(especially irrigation), this figure increases to 4,900 liters 
(1,300 gal) per person per day. Similarly, a peasant farmer 
may  irrigate by carefully ladling water onto each plant with 
a dipper, while typical modern irrigation floods the whole 
field. The way water resource planners think is beginning 
irrigation on the order of 20% might be possible, but this 
will not meet the food needs in the developing countries by 
2030.4
Exploiting renewable groundwater will continue to be 
an option, but it is unlikely to provide great increases in 
water supply because these same sustainable supplies, re-
charged by annual precipitation, are being increasingly 
polluted. Agricultural chemicals such as fertilizers and pes-
ticides, animal wastes, and industrial chemicals readily enter 
groundwater, making groundwater pollution as much of a 
threat to domestic water use as depletion. For example, some 
60,000 square kilometers of aquifers in western and central 
Europe will likely be contaminated with pesticides and fer-
tilizers within the next 50 years. Also, India and Bangladesh 
are plagued with arsenic-contaminated groundwater, which 
has extracted a heavy toll in sickness and death for millions 
in those countries.
Desalting Seawater
The world’s oceans are an inexhaustible source of water, not 
only because they are vast, but also because any water removed 
from them will ultimately flow back in. Not many plants can 
be grown in full seawater, however, and although researchers 
are developing salt-tolerant plants via genetic modification, we 
are not there yet. Thus, with increasing water shortages and 
most of the world’s population living near coasts, there is a 
growing trend toward desalination (desalting) of seawater for 
domestic use. More than 15,000 desalination plants have been 
installed in some 120 countries, especially in the Middle East. 
Many Australian cities, such as Perth, also rely on desalination. 
Perth relies on water from the Indian Ocean, desalinized in a 
plant powered by wind turbines.
Two technologies—microfiltration (reverse osmosis, or 
RO) and distillation—are commonly used for desalination. 
Smaller desalination plants generally employ  microfiltration, 
in which great pressure forces seawater through a reverse 
 osmosis membrane filter fine enough to remove the salt. 
Larger facilities, particularly those that can draw from a 
source of waste heat (for example, from electrical power 
plants), generally use distillation (evaporation and condensa-
tion of vapor). Efficiency is gained by using the heat given off 
by condensing water to heat the incoming water. Even where 
waste heat is used, however, the costs of building and main-
taining the plant, which is subject to corrosion from  seawater, 
are considerable. Costs can be two to four times what most 
city dwellers in the United States currently pay, but it is still 
not a high price to pay for drinking water in areas of the 
world that are prone to drought and is much cheaper than 
bottled water.
In January 2008, the Tampa Bay seawater desalination 
plant was completed, signaling a new day for desalination 
(Fig. 21). The plant is the country’s first ever built to serve as 
a primary water source. The plant uses salty cooling water 
4M. Falkenmark and J. Rockström, “The New Blue and Green Water Paradigm: 
Breaking Ground for Water Resources Planning and Management,” Journal of 
Water Resources Planning and Management 132 (May/June 2006): pg 131
Figure 21 Desalination plant. The Israel Ashkelon Seawater  desalination 
plant is the largest reverse osmosis desalinization plant in the world, producing 
330,000 m3/d of drinking water.
274

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
The reason that so few farms have changed over to drip 
irrigation systems is that it costs about $1,000 per acre to in-
stall them. In comparison, water for irrigation is heavily sub-
sidized by the government, so farmers pay next to nothing 
for it. Therefore, it makes financial sense to use the cheapest 
system for distributing water, even if it is wasteful. Calcula-
tions of construction costs and energy subsidies to provide ir-
rigation water to farmers indicate an annual subsidy of $4.4 
billion for the 11 million acres of irrigated land in the west-
ern United States, an average of $400 an acre. Governments 
collect an average of 10% or less of the actual cost in water 
fees charged to farmers. Reducing this subsidy would greatly 
encourage water conservation through the use of more ef-
ficient irrigation technologies.
Treadle Pumps. In the developing countries, irrigation 
often bypasses the rural poor, who are at the greatest risk 
for hunger and malnutrition. Affordable irrigation technol-
ogies can be remarkably successful, as in Bangladesh, where 
low-cost treadle pumps (Fig. 23) enable farmers to irrigate 
their rice paddies and vegetable fields at a cost of less than 
$35 a system. The pump is worked with the feet like a step 
exercise machine, is locally manufactured, and has been 
adopted by millions. The irrigation it affords makes it pos-
sible for farmers to irrigate small plots during dry  seasons 
to change, however: Instead of asking how much water we 
“need” and where can we get it, people are now asking how 
much water is available and how can we best use it. The 
good news is that the U.S. rate of water use per capita has 
actually begun to drop, which can be attributed to some 
well-needed water conservation strategies already put in 
place. Some specific measures that are being implemented 
to reduce water withdrawals are described in the next sev-
eral subsections.
Agriculture. Agriculture is far and away the largest con-
sumer of freshwater—some 40% of the world’s food is 
grown in irrigated soils, which produce 100–400% higher 
yields than traditional farming. Most present-day irriga-
tion wastes huge amounts of water, and in fact, half of it 
never yields any food. Where irrigation water is applied 
by traditional flood or center-pivot systems, 30–50% is 
lost to evaporation, percolation, or runoff. Several strat-
egies have been employed recently to cut down on this 
waste. One is the surge flow method, in which computers 
control the periodic release of water, in contrast to the 
continuous-flood method. Surge flow can cut water use 
in half.
Drip, Drip. Another water-saving method is the drip 
 irrigation system, a network of plastic pipes with pinholes 
that literally drip water at the base of each plant (Fig. 22). 
 Although such systems are costly, they waste much less 
water. Also, they have the added benefit of retarding sali-
nization. Studies have shown that drip irrigation can re-
duce water use 30–70%, while actually increasing crop 
yields, compared with traditional flooding methods. 
 Although drip irrigation is spreading worldwide, espe-
cially in arid lands such as Israel and Australia, 97% of 
the irrigation in the United States, and 99% throughout 
the world, is still done by traditional flood or center-pivot 
methods.
Figure 22 Drip irrigation. Irrigation consumes the most water. Drip 
 irrigation offers a conservative method of applying water.
Figure 23 Treadle pump. This treadle pump in Zambia is operated like a 
step exercise machine. Millions of these pumps now allow rural farmers to raise 
crops during dry seasons.
275

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
in developing countries is rain-fed, depending on green 
water flow from soil and resulting in evapotranspiration. 
Further, most of the soils are dryland soils, receiving only 
10 to 30 inches of rainfall per year. Crops raised on these 
soils are characteristically low in yield. Storing the sea-
sonal rainfall with “check dams” (small rock or raised 
soil dams across seasonal water courses) increases yields. 
These dams recharge aquifers, restrain soil erosion, and 
provide for some irrigation water.  Another strategy is 
from groundwater lying just a few feet below the surface. 
More than 1.5 million treadle pumps have been sold in 
Bangladesh alone, increasing the productivity of more than 
600,000 acres of farmland there. The pumps are now also in 
use in India, Nepal, Myanmar, Cambodia, Zambia, Kenya, 
and South Africa.
Enhance Soil Water Retention. We have already 
addressed the need and options for improvement in ir-
rigation technology. However, most of the agriculture 
STEWARDSHIP
The Energy/Water/Food Trade: 
Waste One, Waste Them All
Ever stand in a public 
restroom and see some-
one run the sink water 
and not turn it off? What 
about seeing someone 
leave their car idling? Or throwing food in the 
trash? Drive you crazy? It should! Because the 
way the world is intertwined, if you waste one 
(energy, water, or food), you waste the others or 
at least waste the opportunity to obtain them. It 
works this way:
It takes energy to get clean freshwater, espe-
cially if you live in a dry area or a place with 
water pollution. The water might have to be 
cleaned or moved long distances. Bottled water 
is even more energy intensive. For example, in 
California, the California State Water Project is 
the largest single user of energy in the state. 
One of its activities is moving water over the 
Tehachapi Mountains, which requires as much 
energy as a third of the household energy use in 
the region. Wasting water means you waste the 
energy it took to get it, clean it, and heat it, too. 
Because we need to be efficient with energy so 
we can avoid greater harm to the environment, 
water waste isn’t just about the water—it hurts 
the whole system.
It takes water to get energy. This is true when 
water is used in cooling (nuclear plants), in coal 
mining, and in coal power plants. The newest 
way of getting natural gas, called hydraulic frac-
turing, uses enormous amounts of water. There 
are more than 35,000 wells fractured in the 
United States each year, using an estimated 70 
billion to 140 billion gallons of water. When the 
water is used, it is mixed with toxic chemicals 
and injected deep into the Earth, rather than 
returned to the regional water cycle. The use of 
water for fracking, as this process is called, di-
rectly competes with other uses of water such as 
agriculture and has been the source of lawsuits 
in dry states such as Wyoming and Montana.
Another example is biofuels. Crops used for 
biofuels such as ethanol are usually raised 
using land and water that could have been 
used for food crops. Their use to fuel vehicles 
drove up the cost of basic food staples in 2007, 
 contributing to the world food crisis.  Wasting 
 energy might mean we have to obtain more 
energy and use more water, making it harder to 
produce adequate food.
We use water and energy to grow, store, and 
move food. Wasting food means that water 
and energy cannot be used for something else. 
It takes 1,300 liters of water to produce a kilo-
gram of wheat, 3,000 liters for a kilogram of 
eggs, and 15,500 liters for a kilogram of beef. It 
also takes energy to store food and a great deal 
to transport it. The average American foodstuff 
travels 1,500 miles. As much as 40% of the 
energy used in food production is in the manu-
facture of pesticides and fertilizers. But much of 
the recent increase in food energy cost is due 
to increased processing and packaging, such as 
for single-serving foods.
Food is often wasted. A Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO)–commissioned study found 
that 1.3 billion tons, roughly a third, of the food 
we produce for human consumption is wasted 
each year. This is the equivalent of half of the 
world cereals crop. Some food waste is lost at 
harvest or in storage or processing. Some is in 
stores and at consumers’ tables. Any way you 
work it, if we can save food, we can feed more 
people and use less water and energy.
Sources: NRDC. (2004). “Energy Down the Drain: 
The Hidden Costs of California’s Water Supply.” http://
www.nrdc.org/water/conservation/edrain/edrain.pdf; 
EPA. (2011). Draft Plan to Study the Potential Impacts 
of Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water Resources. 
Report Number: EPA/600/D-11/001
Chapagain, A. K., Hoekstra, A. Y. (2004). “Water Foot-
prints of Nations.” Value of Water Research Report 
Series (UNESCO-IHE) 6; Jenny Gustavsson, Christel 
Cederberg, Ulf Sonesson, Robert van Otterdijk, and 
Alexandre Meybeck. (2011). Global Food Losses and 
Food Waste, FAO.
E
r
o
a
a
276

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
a number of cities are using treated wastewater (sewage 
water) for irrigating golf courses and landscapes, both 
to conserve water and to abate the pollution of receiv-
ing waters. Residents of California use more than 160 
billion gallons of treated wastewater for such purposes, 
and in Israel, 70% of treated wastewater is reused for ir-
rigation of nonfood crops. If the idea of reusing sewage 
water turns you off, recall that all water is recycled by 
nature. There is hardly a molecule of water you drink that 
has not moved through organisms— including humans—
numerous times. A number of communities are already 
treating their wastewater so thoroughly that its quality 
exceeds what many cities take in from lakes and rivers.
Virtual Water. Another option for reducing water 
loss in water-stressed regions is to import food or goods 
that require a great deal of water, to ship virtual water, 
as it is called. Many arid countries avoid using their own 
water supplies by importing farm products from regions 
that have excess freshwater. Indeed, an estimated 800 cubic 
kilometers of virtual water are traded yearly in the form 
of foodstuffs. However, many of the arid countries are also 
economically poor and have a limited ability to purchase 
great quantities of food. Furthermore, shipping takes en-
ergy, and as we have seen, wasting energy is eventually bad 
for water, too.
One thing consumers can do is purchase products 
that have a low “water footprint.” Production of meat, 
for example, almost always requires a great deal more 
water, but locally grown vegetables, whole foods you 
cook yourself, and whole grains require less. Packaging 
and things transported across the world represent greater 
water inputs. Individuals can figure out their own water 
footprint by looking on the Web for one of several ways 
to calculate it.
Public-Policy Challenges
The hydrologic cycle provides a finite flow of water through 
each region of Earth. When humans come on the scene, this 
flow of water is inevitably divided between the needs of the 
existing natural ecosystems and the agricultural, industrial, 
and domestic needs of humans, with the latter usually being 
met first. In fact, recent calculations indicate that humans 
now use 26% of total terrestrial evapotranspiration and 
54% of accessible precipitation runoff. We are major play-
ers in the water cycle, and as we have seen, many facets 
of our water use are unsustainable. It takes public policy 
to strike a sustainable balance between competing water 
needs, and this is often sadly lacking.
Conflict. Maintaining a supply of safe drinking water 
for people is a high-priority issue. In addition, water for 
irrigation is vital to food production across much of the 
world. Often, these two demands come into conflict, gen-
erating what have been referred to as “water wars.” One 
example was in Cochabamba, Bolivia, when the World 
Bank refused to renew loans unless the country opened 
water resources to foreign privatization. Investors were 
to enhance rainfall retention, maintain soil fertility, and 
restrain soil erosion through conservation tillage, where 
crop residues are left in place and new crops are planted 
with little or no tilling.
Municipal Systems. The 100 gallons of water each per-
son consumes per day in modern homes are used mostly 
for washing and removing wastes—that is, for flushing toi-
lets (3–5 gallons per flush), taking showers (2–3 gallons per 
minute), doing laundry (20–30 gallons per wash), and so on. 
Watering lawns, filling swimming pools, and other indirect 
consumption only adds to this use.
Water conservation has long been promoted as a 
“save the environment” measure, though without much 
effect. Now, numerous cities are facing the stark reality 
that it will be extremely expensive—and in many cases, 
impossible—to increase supplies by the traditional means 
of building more reservoirs or drilling more wells. The 
only practical alternative, they are discovering, is to take 
real steps toward reducing water consumption and waste. 
A considerable number of cities have programs whereby 
leaky faucets will be repaired and low-flow showerheads 
and water-displacement devices in toilets will be installed 
free of charge.
Lawns. Grass is the most heavily irrigated crop. Cities 
in Arizona are paying homeowners to replace their lawns 
with xeriscaping—landscaping with desert species that re-
quire no additional watering—and the business is thriv-
ing. Many cities and towns ban certain uses of water when 
droughts reduce the available supply.
A Flush World. In 1997, the last phase of a regula-
tion authorized by the 1992 National Energy Act took ef-
fect, and it became illegal to sell 6-gallon commodes. In 
their place is the wonder of the flush world: the 1.6-gallon 
toilet. Newer versions use even less water than the first, less 
effective low-flow toilets; the newest work perfectly well 
and save 10 gallons or more a day per person. In fact, the 
newest models are dual flush, with options for a 1.28-gal-
lon (solids) or 0.8-gallon (liquids) flush. The 50 million 
low-flow toilets now in place in the United States save an 
estimated 600 million gallons of water a day. Los Angeles 
is offering the low-flow toilets free as part of its efforts to 
restore Mono Lake, which had lost a great deal of water. 
In 2011, the City of San Francisco found the downside of 
low-flow toilets: While the city had saved 20 million gal-
lons of water a year (just from toilets!), the low-flow toilets 
weren’t pushing the sewage through the pipes as quickly as 
before. To solve the problem, city engineers are planning to 
kill bacteria with chemicals, though other solutions have 
been pointed out.
Gray Water. It seems wasteful to raise all domes-
tic water to drinking-water standards and then use most 
of it to water lawns and flush toilets. Increasingly, gray 
water recycling systems are being adopted in some water-
short areas. Gray water, the slightly dirtied water from 
sinks, showers, bathtubs, and laundry tubs, is collected 
in a holding tank and used for such things as flushing 
toilets, watering lawns, and washing cars. Going further, 
277

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
5Peter H. Gleick, “Global Water: Threats and Challenges Facing the United States,” 
Environment 43 (March 2001): 18–26.
sources and problems and issue recommendations on how 
the federal government could facilitate water stewardship 
in the 21st century.
Key Issues. Any water resources policy commission needs 
to address several key ideas. Two of these are increasing 
 efficiency and stopping subsidies. In the United States, scar-
city and rising costs have led to significant gains in effi-
ciency. As a result, water withdrawals peaked in the early 
1980s and have leveled off since then (Fig. 9). This change 
has been attributed to steps taken in all three sectors (do-
mestic, industry, and irrigation) to reduce water losses. The 
United States still has a high per capita water use compared 
with the rest of the world. Also, water subsidies need to be 
reduced or eliminated. Policy makers have persistently sub-
sidized water resources, especially for agricultural use, and 
the result has been enormous waste and inefficiencies. This 
undervaluing of the resource harms ecosystem services. In 
addition, polluters must be charged according to their ef-
fluents. When municipalities, farmers, and industries are 
 allowed to pollute waterways without any accountability, 
the result is that everyone downstream is forced to pay 
more to clean up the water and aquatic ecosystems are de-
graded accordingly. Various approaches are possible, such 
as permit fees, “green taxes,”  direct charges, and market-
based trading. In the 2012 Water for Food conference in 
Lincoln, Nebraska, one of the major messages was that 
there is no one-size-fits-all policy for protecting water 
 supplies.
Public policy needs to focus on the watershed level as 
well. Watershed management must be integrated into the 
pricing of water. Watersheds hold the key to water purity, 
aquifer recharge, and water storage, as well as the main-
tenance of natural wetland and riparian habitats that are 
vital to many plants and animals. The City of New York 
supposed to put money into providing clean drinking 
water, but some locals found they lost access to water 
and rates skyrocketed. This led to protests and the gov-
ernment eventually had to change plans. Figure 24 depicts 
protesters in California after a federal judge ordered that 
less water could be pumped from the Sacramento Delta, 
where endangered fish live. This ruling pitted environ-
mentalists against farmers and urban residents in a state 
with continual water stress.
National Water Policy. Many countries have addressed 
their water resources and water needs with a national 
policy; not so the United States. The Clean Water Act 
and subsequent amendments authorize the U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency (EPA) to develop programs 
and rules to carry out its mandate for oversight of the 
nation’s water quality. The EPA, however, does not deal 
with water quantity. There is no federal agency to provide 
similar oversight for the water quantity issues discussed 
in this chapter.
Peter Gleick, a leading expert on global freshwater 
resources, addresses this public-policy need,5 pointing out 
that most water policy decisions in the United States are 
made at local and regional levels. National policies, how-
ever, are needed to guide these lower-level decisions and 
also to deal with interstate issues and federally managed 
resources. The last time a water policy report was issued 
was in 1950, when President Harry S Truman established 
a water resources policy commission and the commis-
sion gave its report. This commission needs to be revived 
or a new one needs to be established, and in either case, 
it must be given a mandate to collect data on water re-
Figure 24 Water wars. Tensions mount 
over water rights in a world with  increasing num-
bers of people trying to use the same resource. 
Here farmers protest lack of water in Gustine, 
California in 2009. National and  international 
policies can ease these tensions.
278

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
developing world already experiencing shortages of clean 
water or water for agriculture, the population increases 
and pressure to develop these countries’ resources that are 
certain to come in the next few decades will undoubtedly 
subject hundreds of millions to increased water stress. The 
problem is not that the Earth contains too little freshwa-
ter; rather, it is that we have not yet learned to manage the 
water that our planet provides. To quote the World Water 
Council’s World Water Vision report, “There is a water cri-
sis, but it is a crisis of management. We have threatened our 
water resources with bad institutions, bad governance, bad 
incentives, and bad allocations of resources. In all this, we 
have a choice. We can continue with business as usual, and 
widen and deepen the crisis tomorrow. Or we can launch a 
movement to move from vision to  action—by making water 
everybody’s business.”6
found out that every dollar it invested in watershed man-
agement paid off handsomely, saving as much as $200 for 
new treatment facilities. One part of managing watersheds 
is to regulate dam operations so that river flow is main-
tained in a way that simulates natural flow regimes. When 
this happens, rivers below dams can sustain recreational 
fisheries and other uses, and the natural biota flourishes.
Finally, the United States must respond to the global 
water crisis with adequate levels of international develop-
ment aid. Achieving the Millennium Development Goal of 
reducing by half the 1.1 billion people without access to safe 
drinking water will save millions of lives and billions of dol-
lars annually.
International Action. On the international front, the 
World Commission on Water for the 21st Century sponsors 
the World Water Forum, which convened for the sixth time 
in March 2012. The findings of the forum relate directly to 
solving the great water-related needs of Earth, especially 
in the developing countries. With a large proportion of the 
6World Water Vision: Making Water Everybody’s Business. World Water Council, 
2000.
REVISITING THE THEMES
sound science
What is known about the hydrologic cycle is the result 
of sound scientific research—research that is needed 
to make progress in managing water resources. Work 
performed under the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
has given us a better understanding of such matters as groundwater 
recharge, essential river flows, and the interactions between different 
land uses and water resources. The techniques of water treatment have 
been fine-tuned by scientific work as well as the development of reverse 
osmosis for desalination. Sound science is being used to figure out cur-
rent questions. One we do not yet have an answer to is what is likely to 
happen with oceanic thermohaline circulation.
sustainability
The opening story showed how unsustainable China’s 
water use is. Still, the hydrologic cycle is a remarkable 
global system that renews water and does so sustainably. 
Groundwater—especially the fraction that is nonrenewa-
ble because it was formed centuries ago—is being used in an unsustaina-
ble manner. The consequences are immediate: Water tables disappear into 
the depths of the Earth, farms dry up because there is no water, and land 
subsidence ruins properties and groundwater storage itself.  Conserving 
water through xeriscaping, low-flush toilets, gray water use, and more ef-
ficient food production and consumption is a sustainable path.
stewardship
Exchanges among land, water, and atmosphere represent 
a cyclical system that has worked well for eons and that 
can continue to supply all our needs into the future—if 
we manage water wisely. However, we are changing the 
cycle in ways that reflect a lack of wisdom and a lack of resolve to meet 
people’s needs in a just way. One way to remedy this is to look at water, 
energy, and food as interrelated. Increased inefficiency and lower waste 
are necessary in all three areas if we are to provide water and food for 
more people. Stewardship of water resources means that we consider 
the needs of the natural ecosystems—and especially endangered spe-
cies—when we make policy decisions. It means that we address the 
wastefulness that characterizes so much of our water use. It means in 
particular that we show concern and help the millions who lack ad-
equate clean water and are suffering because of it. Some examples of 
good stewardship are the Glen Canyon Dam operation, the removal of 
outdated dams to restore river flow, the use of treadle pumps in many 
developing countries, and xeriscaping. In the United States, developing a 
national water policy would be a huge step in stewardship management.
s
E
a
c
w
s
T
w
g
G
s
W
o
t
p
279

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
THINKING ENVIRONMENTALLY
 1. Imagine that you are a water molecule, and describe your 
travels through the many places you have been and might go 
in the future as you make your way around the hydrologic 
cycle time after time. Include travels through organisms.
 2. Suppose some commercial interests want to create a large 
new development on what are presently wetlands. Describe 
a debate between those representing the commercial in-
terests and those representing environmentalists who are 
concerned about the environmental and economic costs of 
development. Work toward negotiating a consensus.
 3. Describe how many of your everyday activities, including 
your demands for food and other materials, add pollution 
to the water cycle or alter it in other ways. How can you be 
more stewardly with your water consumption?
 4. An increasing number of people are moving to the arid 
southwestern United States, even though water supplies are 
already being overdrawn. If you were the governor of one of 
the states in this region, what policies would you advocate 
to address this situation?
 5. Suppose some commercial interests want to develop a golf 
course on what is presently forested land next to a reservoir 
used for city water. Describe the impacts this development 
might have on water quality in the reservoir.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. What are the lessons to be learned from China’s water 
 hardships?
 2. Give examples of the infrastructure that has been fashioned 
to manage water resources. What are the challenges related 
to developing countries?
 3. What are the two processes that result in natural water 
 purification? State the difference between them. Distinguish 
between green water and blue water.
 4. Describe how a Hadley cell works, and explain how Earth’s 
rotation creates the trade winds.
 5. Why do different regions receive different amounts of 
 precipitation?
 6. Define precipitation, infiltration, runoff, capillary water, 
transpiration, evapotranspiration, percolation, gravitational 
water, groundwater, water table, aquifer, recharge area, seep, 
and spring.
 7. Use the terms defined in Question 6 to give a full descrip-
tion of the hydrologic cycle, including each of its three 
loops—namely, the evapotranspiration, surface runoff, and 
groundwater loops. What is the water quality (purity) at 
different points in the cycle? Explain the reasons for the 
differences.
 8. How does changing Earth’s surface (for example, by defor-
estation) change the pathway of water? How does it affect 
streams and rivers? Humans? Natural ecology?
 9. Explain how climate change and atmospheric pollution can 
affect the hydrologic cycle.
 10. What are the three major uses of water? What are the major 
sources of water to match these uses?
 11. How do dams facilitate the control of surface waters? What 
kinds of impacts do they have?
 12. Distinguish between renewable and nonrenewable ground-
water resources. What are the consequences of overdrawing 
these two kinds of groundwater?
 13. What are the five options for meeting existing water scarcity 
needs and growing demands?
 14. Describe how water demands might be reduced in agricul-
ture, industry, and households.
 15. What is the status of water policy in the United States? Cite 
some key issues that should be addressed by any new initia-
tives to establish a national water policy.
280

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
MAKING A DIFFERENCE
 1. Since 1992, showerheads and faucets have been required to 
use no more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. If you 
have older plumbing, it’s possible that you may not meet 
these standards. Equipment such as aerating showerheads 
can help you reduce your water use (and your water bill) 
without decreasing effectiveness too much.
 2. Consider taking a “navy” shower (so-called because ships at 
sea must conserve water): Wet down, then turn the shower 
off, then soap down, and then rinse down. You will save 
both water and energy this way.
 3. Americans drink billions of single-use water bottles per 
year. In addition to the carbon miles it takes to ship these 
 products, most Americans simply throw the recyclable con-
tainers away. A much more sustainable method of drinking 
is simply to fill reusable bottles with filtered tap water.
 4. Old water heaters are most likely running at less than 50% 
efficiency. If this is the case for you, you can replace your 
water heater with a newer model or simply use a tankless 
heater, which heats water only when you need it.
 5. A dishwasher can save more than 5,000 gallons of water 
per year as well as hundreds of hours of your time. Scraping 
your dishes first, running the washer only for full loads, and 
using the energy-saver settings can reduce water and energy 
usage even more.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
CREDITS
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): FOREST LUGH/EPA/Newscom; (bottom left): Stringer Shanghai/
REUTERS; (top left): Fotolia; (top right): Andrew Woodley / Alamy; Dead Shot 
Keen / Alamy; Caro / Alamy; Alison Jones / DanitaDelimont.com Danita Delimont 
Photography/Newscom; PacifiCorp/AP Images; (top right): Stephen Mcsweeny/
Shutterstock; (center right): Francois Gohier/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (top): AP 
Photo/Dale Wilson; Eitan Simanor / Alamy; (bottom left): Lowell Georgia/Photo 
Researchers, Inc.; (bottom right): Jake Lyell / Alamy; (top right): berna namoglu/
Shutterstock; AP Photo/Gary Kazanjian
Text Credits
Source: World Water Vision by William J. Cosgrove and Frank R. Rijsberman, 
2000. Copyright © 2000 by World Water Council. Table 2: Source: U.S. Geological 
Survey; Page 246, Figure 1: Source: based on pie chart from USGS; Figure 5: 
Elemental Geosystems, 7th Edition, by Robert W. Christopherson. Copyright © 
2013 by Pearson Education. Reprinted with permission; Figure 11: Adapted from 
“Water Poverty Index,” by C. A. Sullivan, et al., Report to DFID, 2000. Copyright 
© by Centre for Ecology & Hydrology. Reprinted with permission; Figure 12: 
Source: Adaptation of Figure 13 from Estimated Use of Water in the United States 
in 2005 (Circular 1344) by Joan F. Kenny, et al. United states Geological Survey, 
2009; Figure 16: Source: CorpsMap, National Inventory of Dams website. United 
States Army Corps of Engineers. NOAA. 
adiabatic cooling The cooling that occurs when warm air rises 
and encounters lower atmospheric pressure. Adiabatic warming 
is the opposite process, whereby cool air descends and encounters 
higher pressure.
aerosols Microscopic liquid and solid particles originating from 
land and water surfaces and carried up into the atmosphere.
aquifer An underground layer of porous rock, sand, or other 
material that allows the movement of water between layers of 
nonporous rock or clay. Aquifers are frequently tapped for wells.
Blue Revolution A proposed radical change in managing water 
supplies intended to make more water available for human use.
blue water In the hydrologic cycle, precipitation and its further 
movement in infiltration, runoff, surface water, and groundwater; 
liquid water wherever it occurs.
capillary water Water that clings in small pores, cracks, and spaces 
against the pull of gravity (e.g., water held in a sponge).
condensation The collecting of molecules from the vapor state 
to form the liquid state, as, for example, when water vapor 
condenses on a cold surface and forms droplets. Opposite: 
evaporation.
consumptive water use The use of water for such things as 
irrigation, wherein the water does not remain available for 
potential purification and reuse.
desalination A process that purifies seawater into high-quality 
drinking water via distillation or microfiltration.
estuary A bay or river system open to the ocean at one end and 
receiving freshwater at the other. In the estuary, freshwater and 
saltwater mix, producing brackish water.
evaporation The process whereby molecules leave the liquid state 
and enter the vapor or gaseous state, as, for example, when water 
evaporates to form water vapor. Opposite:  condensation.
evapotranspiration The 
combination 
of 
evaporation 
and 
transpiration that restores water to the atmosphere.
freshwater Water that has a salt content of less than 0.1% (1,000 
parts per million).
gravitational water Water that is not held by capillary action in 
soil but that percolates downward by the force of gravity.
gray water Wastewater, as from sinks and tubs, that does not 
contain human excrement. Such water can be reused without 
purification for some purposes.
GLOSSARY
281

Water: Hydrologic Cycle and Human Use
rain shadow The low-rainfall region that exists on the leeward 
(downwind) side of a mountain range. This rain shadow is 
the result of the mountain range causing precipitation on the 
windward side.
recharge area The area over which groundwater will infiltrate and 
resupply an aquifer.
relative humidity The percentage of moisture in the air compared 
with how much the air can hold at the given temperature.
saltwater intrusion, saltwater encroachment The phenomenon of 
seawater moving back into aquifers or estuaries. Such intrusion 
occurs when the normal outflow of freshwater is diverted or 
removed for use.
seep An area where groundwater seeps from the ground. Contrast 
with a spring, which is a single point from which groundwater 
exits.
sinkhole A large hole in the ground resulting from the collapse of 
an underground cavern.
springs Natural exits of groundwater to the surface.
surface water All bodies of water, lakes, rivers, ponds, and so on 
that are on Earth’s surface. Contrast with groundwater, which 
lies below the surface.
trade winds The more or less constant winds blowing in horizontal 
directions over the surface as part of Hadley cells.
transpiration The loss of water vapor from plants. Water evaporates 
from cells within the leaves and exits through the stomata.
watershed The total land area that drains directly or indirectly into 
a particular stream or river. The watershed is generally named 
from the stream or river into which it drains.
water table The upper surface of groundwater, rising and falling 
with the amount of groundwater.
water vapor Water molecules in the gaseous state.
xeriscaping Landscaping with drought-resistant plants that need 
no watering.
green water In the hydrologic cycle, water that is evaporated or 
transpired and returned as water vapor to the atmosphere; water 
in vapor form.
groundwater Water that has accumulated in the ground, completely 
filling and saturating all pores and spaces in rock or soil. Free to 
move more or less readily, it is the reservoir for springs and wells 
and is replenished by infiltration of surface water.
Hadley cell A system of vertical and horizontal air circulation 
predominating in tropical and subtropical regions and creating 
major weather patterns.
humidity The amount of water vapor in the air. (See also relative 
humidity.)
hydrologic cycle The movement of water from points of 
evaporation, through the atmosphere, through precipitation, and 
through or over the ground, returning to points of evaporation.
infiltration The process in which water soaks into soil as opposed 
to running off the surface of the soil.
infiltration-runoff ratio The ratio of the amount of water soaking 
into the soil to that running off the surface. The ratio is obtained 
by dividing the first amount by the second.
land subsidence The gradual sinking of land. The condition may 
result from the removal of groundwater or oil, which is frequently 
instrumental in supporting the overlying rock and soil.
nonconsumptive water use The use of water for such purposes as 
washing and rinsing, wherein the water, albeit polluted, remains 
available for further uses. With suitable purification, such water 
may be recycled indefinitely.
percolation The process of water seeping downward through 
cracks and pores in soil or rock.
precipitation Any form of moisture condensing in the air and 
depositing on the ground.
purification For water, purification occurs whenever water is 
separated from the solutes and particles it contains.
282

Soil: The 
Foundation 
for Land 
Ecosystems
From Chapter 11 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

“The nation that destroys its soil, destroys itself.”
—Franklin D. Roosevelt 1
Learning Objectives
 1. Soil and Plants: Describe the 
basic parts of soil, soil communi-
ties, and soil profiles.
 2. Soil Degradation: Explain how 
soils are degraded by several 
effects, including overcultivation, 
overgrazing, deforestation, min-
ing, and killing soil biota.
 3. Soil Conservation: Describe soil 
conservation requires action 
at two levels, from  individual 
landholders and through public 
policy.
A 
churning wall of soil, two miles high, bore across the plains. People 
caught outside fled for buildings, cloths held to their faces. Some faced 
with the blinding swirl lost their way and died, suffocated by dust. Dust 
was everywhere, driven by the howling winds: blinding, choking, filling cracks 
and windows. People wept, prayed, cried, despaired; the Apocalypse had come. 
The day was Black Sunday, April 14, 1935. The dust storm was the worst of the 
“black blizzards” in the tragic period we call the American Dust Bowl. The almost-
decade-long period of drought and dry storms was arguably the longest and worst 
environmental disaster in US history. The storms carried tons of soil across seven 
states and left devastation in their wake. Some people fled the dust states or died, 
while others stayed and survived, only to find themselves coughing and sickly 
when storm after storm filled the air with dust, victims of a disorder called “dust 
pneumonia.”
the Dust bOwL begins. A drought 
beginning in 1931 precipitated the disaster. By 
1934, it was profound: More than 75% of the 
country was in drought, and 27 states were 
severely affected. Although drought was the 
trigger, human policies and practices made 
the Dust Bowl worse. Rising wheat and cot-
ton prices encouraged people to plant more 
and more land, even in areas more suited to 
ranging animals. During wet years, crops were 
Soil: The 
Foundation 
for Land 
Ecosystems
Dust Bowl States
Dust Storm Damage, 1930-1940
Area with most severe dust storm damage
Other areas damaged by dust storms
The Dust Bowl. The Dust Bowl era in the 1930s was a time of drought and wind erosion 
that devastated farming in the American Midwest. This wall of dust approached Rolla, Kansas 
on April 14, 1935.
1Letter, February 26, 1937, to state governors. Available from 
http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=1537 3
284

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
Figure 1 A dust storm in Phoenix, Arizona.  A 2011 dust storm in 
Phoenix showed just a tiny picture of what the 1930s dust bowl was like.
bountiful, but plowing broke through the tough roots of prairie 
plants that held soil together, broke open the ground, and laid the 
dirt open to be borne about by the winds. Lack of trees or other 
windbreaks allowed soil to move freely. By 1935, estimates were 
that 850 million tons of topsoil had been blown off of the south-
ern plains in that year alone. By the end of the Dust Bowl, many 
areas had lost 75% of their topsoil, once some of the richest soil 
in the world.
The Homestead Act of 1862, which enabled settlers to 
claim land and settle it, played a role in the disaster. By en-
couraging hundreds of thousands of small farms (160 to 320 
acres) to be established between 1880 and 1920, the act 
ensured that too much land was cultivated in some areas of 
the country. Small farm owners were unlikely to let land lie 
fallow, diversify into pasture, plant crops with strips of vegeta-
tion in between, or farm less intensively. These homesteads 
were more vulnerable to financial ruin during drought. Home-
steaders fled the southern plains in the largest migration in 
American history, described by John Steinbeck in his novel The 
Grapes of Wrath.
A dust storm on June 5, 2011 that hit Phoenix, Arizona, 
gave only the tiniest glimpse of such storms to modern Ameri-
cans. The storm hit a peak height of at least 5000 to 6000 ft 
(1500 to 1800 m). The front edge was almost 100 mi (160 km) 
long (Fig. 1). As was the case in the ‘30s, an ongoing drought in 
Arizona in 2011 was a contributing factor to the severity of the 
storm. But such storms are rare now, in part because of better 
soil protection practices and the movement from more inten-
sive cultivation of marginal lands. Around the world however, 
loss of soil continues to plague farmland and contribute to poor 
crops, water pollution, and the spread  
of deserts.
Past negLect. Ninety percent of the world’s food comes 
from land-based agricultural systems, and the percentage is 
growing as the ocean’s fish and natural ecosystems are increas-
ingly being depleted. Protecting and nurturing agricultural soils, 
which are the cornerstone of food production, must be a central 
feature of sustainability. Yet it is a feature that has been over-
looked repeatedly in the past. The Dust Bowl is not the only 
time such land degradation has occurred. The fall of the ancient 
Greek, Roman, and Mayan empires was more the result of a 
decline in agricultural productivity due to soil erosion than of 
outside forces.
As the world’s population grows past 7 billion, croplands 
and grazing lands are being increasingly pressed to yield more 
crops. A landmark 1991 Global Assessment of Soil Degradation 
(GLASOD) study reported that 15% of Earth’s land was de-
graded, mostly due to soil erosion. Yet a new study by the Land 
Degradation  Assessment in Drylands (LADA) found that land 
degradation is worse than that.2 More than 20% of cultivated 
areas, 30% of forests, and 10% of grasslands were degraded 
between 1981 and 2003. Some 2 billion people depend directly 
on the land undergoing degradation. Throughout the world, 
soils have been (and continue to be) degraded by erosion, the 
buildup of salts, and other problems that can only undermine 
future productivity. Farm soils are not the only concern. Mining 
affects soils, as does deforestation. Both contribute to water 
and soil pollution as well as loss of ecosystem services from the 
ecosystems that were displaced.
Our objective in this chapter is to develop an understanding 
of the attributes of soil required to support good plant growth, 
of how these attributes may deteriorate under various practices, 
and of what is necessary to maintain a productive soil. We will 
then look at what is being done nationally and internationally to 
rescue this essential resource and to establish practices that are 
sustainable.
2Bai, Z. G. et al. (2008). Global Assessment of Land Degradation and Improve-
ment 1: Identification by Remote Sensing. Report 2008/01, FAO/ISRIC—Rome/
Wageningen.
1 Soil and Plants
Soil can be defined as solid material of geological and biolog-
ical origin that is changed by chemical, biological, and physi-
cal processes, giving it the ability to support plant growth. 
A rich soil is much more than the dirt you might get out of 
any hole in the ground. Indeed, agriculturists cringe when 
anyone refers to soil as “dirt.” The quality of soil can make 
the difference between harvesting an abundant crop and 
abandoning a field to weeds. Various detritus feeders and 
285

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
down) to the point where often it is impossible to tell just 
what kind of rock the soil came from. As rock weathers, it 
breaks down into smaller and smaller fragments—stones 
and smaller “soil separates.” These are classified as sand, silt, 
and clay. Sand is made up of particles from 2.0 to 0.063 
millimeters in size, silt particles range from 0.063 to 0.004 
millimeters, and clay is anything finer than 0.004 millimeters 
(Fig. 3). Particles larger than sand are called gravel, cobbles, 
or boulders, depending on their size. You can see the indi-
vidual rock particles in sand, and you may be familiar with 
the finer particles called silt, but you would need a good mi-
croscope to see clay particles.
Proportions. The sand, silt, and clay particles constitute 
the mineral portion of soil. Soil texture refers to the rela-
tive proportions of each type of particle in a given soil. If 
one predominates, soil is said to be sandy, silty, or clayey. 
A  proportion that is commonly found in soil consists of 
roughly 40% sand, 40% silt, and 20% clay. A soil with these 
proportions is called a loam. You can determine the texture 
of a given soil by shaking a small amount of it with water 
in a large test tube to separate the particles and then allow-
ing them to settle. Because particles settle according to their 
weight, sand particles settle first, silt second, and clay last. 
 decomposers feed on organic debris in an ecosystem. Nutri-
ents from the detritus are released into the soil and absorbed 
by producers, thus recycling the nutrients. In short, produc-
tive topsoil involves dynamic interactions among organisms, 
detritus, and mineral particles of soil (Fig. 2).
Soil Characteristics
Most soils are hundreds or thousands of years old and 
change very slowly. Soil science is cross-disciplinary and is at 
the heart of agricultural and forestry practice. Many years of 
the study of soils have resulted in a system of classification of 
soil profiles and soil structure and a taxonomy of soil types 
from all over the world—as well as a large body of scientific 
literature investigating relevant topics. This section presents 
just enough of this information to enable you to open the 
door to soil science; you may even be motivated to follow up 
on your own in this fascinating field.
Soil Texture. The mineral material of soil, or parent mate-
rial, has its origin in the geological history of an area. Parent 
material can be rock or sediments deposited by wind, water, 
or ice. Sooner or later parent material is broken down by 
natural weathering (gradual physical and chemical break-
DETRITUS
MINERAL PARTICLES
• Parent materials
Leaves, stems, flowers, seeds
derived from plants
Continual
deposition
• Biological breakdown
  of detritus to humus
• Bioturbation and mixing
   with mineral particles
• Nitrogen
  fixation
• Leached minerals
• Weathered clay,
   sand, silt from bedrock,
     glacial deposits,
        wind and alluvial
          deposits
DETRITUS FOOD WEB
DYNAMIC 
INTERACTIONS =
TOPSOIL
Figure 2 Topsoil formation. Soil production involves a dynamic interaction among mineral particles, detritus, and 
members of the detritus food web.
286

a block in half again and again. Each time you cut it, 
you create two new surfaces, but the total volume of the 
block remains the same.)
3. Nutrient ions and water molecules tend to cling to sur-
faces. (When you drain a nongreasy surface, it remains 
wet.)
These properties of matter profoundly affect such soil 
properties as infiltration, nutrient- and water-holding capaci-
ties, and aeration (Table 1). Note how soil properties corre-
spond to particle size (sand, silt, and clay) in the table.
Soil texture also affects workability—the ease with which 
a soil can be cultivated. Workability has a tremendous impact 
on agriculture. Clayey soils are very difficult to work with be-
cause even modest changes in moisture content can turn them 
from too sticky and muddy to too hard and even  bricklike. 
(More precise measurements require a laboratory analysis.) 
Soil scientists classify soil texture with the aid of a triangle 
that shows the relative proportions of sand, silt, and clay in 
a given soil (Fig. 4).
Properties. Soil scientists often ask questions about how 
the components of soil determine its properties. Three basic 
considerations determine how several important properties 
of soil are influenced by texture:
1. Larger particles have larger spaces separating them than 
smaller particles have. (Visualize the difference between 
packing softballs and packing golf balls in containers of 
the same size.)
2. Smaller particles have more surface area relative to their 
volume than larger particles have. (Visualize cutting 
Figure 3 The relative sizes of soil particles. Clay particles are too 
small to see with the naked eye, while silt particles are slightly larger. Sand par-
ticles vary from small (but still larger than silt) to large. Gravel and boulders are 
larger still.
Clay
(below 0.002 millimeters)
Coarse sand
(0.5 to 1.0 millimeters)
Silt
(0.002 to 0.05 millimeters)
Medium sand
(0.25 to 0.5 millimeters)
Fine sand
(0.10 to 0.25
millimeters)
Figure 4 The soil texture triangle. Relative proportions of sand, clay, 
and silt are represented on each axis. Major classes of soil are indicated on the 
triangle. For clay, read across horizontally; for silt, read diagonally downward to-
ward the left from the right axis; for sand, read diagonally upward to the left from 
the bottom axis. The texture content of any soil should total 100% if the triangle 
is read properly.
Percent clay
Percent silt
Percent sand
100
100
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Clay
Clay loam
Silty
clay
Silty clay
loam
Silt loam
Silt
Loam
Sandy loam
Sandy clay
loam
Sandy
clay
Loamy
     sand
Sand
tabLe 1 Relationship Between Soil Texture and Soil Properties
Soil 
Texture
Water 
Infiltration
Water-Holding 
Capacity
Nutrient-Holding 
Capacity
Aeration
Workability
Sand
Good
Poor
Poor
Good
Good
Silt
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Clay
Poor
Good
Good
Poor
Poor
Loam
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
287

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
Below the E horizon is the B horizon. This layer is 
characterized by the deposition of minerals that have 
leached from the A and E horizons, so it is often high in 
iron, aluminum, calcium, and other minerals. Frequently 
referred to as the subsoil, the B horizon is typically high 
in clay and is reddish or yellow in color from the oxidized 
metals present. Below the B horizon is the C horizon, 
which is the parent mineral material that originally occu-
pied the site. This layer represents weathered rock, glacial 
deposits, or volcanic ash and usually reveals the geologi-
cal process that created the landscape. The C horizon is 
 affected little by the biological and chemical processes that 
go on in the upper layers.
Because there are innumerable soils across the diverse 
landscapes of the continents, soil profiles will differ in the 
thickness and the content of the layers. However, all soils 
exist in layers and can be characterized by their texture.
Soil Classification. Soils come in a wide variety of verti-
cal structures and textures. To give some order to this diver-
sity, soil scientists have created a taxonomy, or classification 
system, of soils. It works much like the biological taxonomy 
with which you may be familiar. The most inclusive group 
in the taxonomy is the soil order. If you are classifying a 
soil, you find the order first and then work your way down-
ward through the taxonomic categories (suborders, groups, 
subgroups, families) until you come to the soil class that 
best corresponds to the soil in question. There are liter-
ally hundreds of soil classes. Figure 6 displays the world-
wide distribution of the 12 major orders. Following are the 
characteristics of the four major soil orders that are most 
important for agriculture, animal husbandry, and forestry 
and a fifth soil type that is particularly important to envi-
ronmental health.
Mollisols. Mollisols are fertile, dark soils found in tem-
perate grassland biomes. They are the world’s best agricul-
tural soils and are encountered in the Midwestern United 
States; across temperate Ukraine, Russia, and Mongolia; and 
in the pampas (a broad region of grassy plains) in Argentina. 
They have a deep A horizon and are rich in humus and min-
erals; precipitation is insufficient to leach the minerals down-
ward into the E horizon.
Oxisols. These are soils of the tropical and subtropical 
rain forests. They have a layer of iron and aluminum oxides 
in the B horizon and have little O horizon, due to the rapid 
decomposition of plant matter. Most of the minerals are in 
the living plant matter, so oxisols provide limited fertility for 
agriculture. If the forests are cut (as in “slash-and-burn” ag-
riculture, a common practice in the tropics), a few years of 
crop growth can be obtained, but in time, the intense rain-
fall leaches the minerals downward, forming an impervious 
hardpan that resists further cultivation.
Alfisols. Alfisols are widespread, moderately weathered 
forest soils. Although not deep, they have well-developed O, 
A, E, and B horizons. Alfisols are typical of the moist, tem-
perate forest biome and are suitable for agriculture if they 
are supplemented with organic matter or mineral fertilizers 
to maintain soil fertility.
Sandy soils are very easy to work because they become nei-
ther muddy when wet nor hard and bricklike when dry.
Soil Profiles. The processes of soil formation create a verti-
cal gradient of layers that are often (but not always) quite 
distinct. These horizontal layers are known as soil horizons, 
and a vertical slice through the different horizons is called 
the soil profile (Fig. 5). The profile reveals a great deal about 
the factors that interact in the formation of a soil. The top-
most layer, the O horizon, consists of dead organic matter 
(detritus) deposited by plants: leaves, stems, fruits, and seeds. 
Thus, the O horizon is high in organic content and is the 
primary source of energy for the soil community. Toward the 
bottom of the O horizon, the processes of decomposition are 
well advanced, and the original materials may be unrecogniz-
able. At this point, the material is dark and is called humus.
Subsurface Layers. The next layer in the profile is the A 
horizon, a mixture of mineral soil from below and humus 
from above. The A horizon is also called topsoil. Fine roots 
from the overlying vegetation permeate this layer. The A ho-
rizon is usually dark because of the humus that is present 
and may be shallow or thick, depending on the overlying 
ecosystem. Vital to plant growth, topsoil grows at the rate of 
an inch or two every hundred years. In many soils, the next 
layer is the E horizon, where E stands for eluviation—the 
process of leaching (dissolving away) many minerals due to 
the downward movement of water. This layer is usually paler 
in color than the two layers above it.
O Horizon: Humus.
(surface litter, decomposing
plant matter)
A Horizon: Topsoil.
(mixed humus and leached
mineral soil)
E Horizon: Zone of
leaching. (less humus,
minerals resistant to
leaching)
B Horizon: Subsoil.
(accumulation of leached
minerals like iron and
aluminum oxides)
C Horizon: Weathered
parent material. (partly
broken-down minerals)
Figure 5 Soil profile. Major horizons from the surface to the parent  material in 
an idealized soil profile.
288

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
rates of decay will occur. This would act as positive feedback, 
putting more greenhouse gases released from decaying peat 
into the atmosphere.
Soil Constraints. Soil scientists study more than soil classi-
fication. They often research the relationship of soil to plants 
it supports. Such scientists speak of “soil constraints,” mean-
ing the various characteristics of soils that limit primary 
productivity, especially in agriculture and forestry. These 
constraints include poor soil drainage (hydromorphy), low 
ability to retain nutrients, high levels of aluminum, low levels 
of phosphorous, soil cracking (from certain types of clays), 
the presence of soluble salts (salinity and sodicity), shallow-
ness, and high erosion likelihood. Let’s look at the charac-
teristics that enable soils to support plant growth, especially 
agricultural crops.
Soil and Plant Growth
For their best growth, plants need a root environment that 
supplies optimal amounts of mineral nutrients, water, and air 
(oxygen). The pH (relative acidity) and salinity (salt concen-
tration) of soil are also critically important. Soil fertility—soil’s 
ability to support plant growth—often refers to the presence 
of proper amounts of nutrients, but it also includes soil’s abil-
ity to meet all the other needs of plants. Farmers speak of a 
given soil’s ability to support plant growth as the tilth of soil.
Aridisols. These are the very widespread soils of dry-
lands and deserts (drylands are arid, semiarid, and seasonally 
dry areas). The paucity of vegetation and precipitation leaves 
aridisols relatively unstructured vertically. They are thin and 
light colored and, in some regions, may support enough veg-
etation for rangeland animal husbandry. Irrigation used on 
these soils usually leads to salinization, as high evaporation 
rates draw salts to surface horizons, where they accumulate 
to toxic levels.
The descriptions of these four classes of soil demonstrate 
that different soils vary.
Another Type of Soil: Hydric. Another soil type that 
is particularly important, although not necessarily good for 
agriculture, is hydric soils. These soils indicate a wetland or 
aquatic site. Hydric soils are not a soil class on their own, 
but are members of a number of other classes. Hydric soils 
are used in delineating the boundaries of wetlands, in order 
to get permits for construction, and to protect wetlands and 
water bodies from the negative impacts of development. The 
soil order histosols includes several types of hydric soils. 
They contain a buildup of undecayed vegetation called peat 
and hence are called peatlands. Peat contains a great deal of 
energy and can be dried and burned. Vast areas of northern 
zones are hydric soils, including soil order gelisols, that are 
permanently frozen at some depth, a condition called per-
mafrost. One of the concerns about climate change is that 
in a warmer world, permafrost areas will thaw and greater 
Figure 6 Global map of soil orders. The map shows the worldwide distribution of the 12 soil orders. 
(Source: After the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Services, World Soil Resources staff.)
0
0
1,000
2,000
1,000
2,000
3,000 MILES
3,000 KILOMETERS
MILLER PROJECTION
Alfisols (High-Nutrient Soils)
Andisols (Volcanic Soils)
Aridisols (Desert Soils)
Entisols (New Soils)
Gelisols (Permafrost Soils)
Histosols (Organic Soils)
Inceptisols (Young Soils)
Mollisols (Prairie Soils)
Oxisols (Tropical Forest Soils)
Spodosols (Conifer Forest Soils)
Ultisols (Low-Nutrient Soils)
Vertisols (Swelling Clay Soils)
Rock Land
Shifting Sands
Ice/Glacier
289

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
Water and Water-Holding Capacity. As with nutrients, the 
supply of water in soil is crucial to plant growth. Water is con-
stantly being absorbed by the roots of plants, passing up through 
the plant and exiting as water vapor through microscopic pores 
in the leaves—a process called transpiration. The pores, called 
stomata (singular, stoma), are essential to permit the entry of car-
bon dioxide and the exit of oxygen in photosynthesis; however, 
the plant’s loss of water via transpiration through the stomata is 
dramatic. A field of corn, for example, transpires an equivalent of 
a field-sized layer of water 43 centimeters (17 in.) deep in a sin-
gle growing season. Plants with inadequate water may wilt (close 
their stomata to save water and fold up) and eventually die.
Water is resupplied to soil naturally by rainfall or artifi-
cially by irrigation. Three attributes of soil are significant in this 
respect. First is soil’s ability to allow water to infiltrate or soak 
in. If water runs off the ground surface, it won’t be useful to the 
plants. Worse, it may cause erosion, which is discussed shortly.
Second is soil’s ability to hold water after it infiltrates, a 
property called water-holding capacity. Poor water-holding 
capacity implies that most of the infiltrating water percolates 
on down below the reach of roots—not very far in the case of 
seedlings and small plants—again becoming useless. What is 
desired is a good water-holding capacity—the ability to hold 
a large amount of water like a sponge—providing a reser-
voir from which plants can draw between rains. Sandy soils 
are notorious for their poor water-holding capacity, whereas 
clayey and silty soils are good at holding water.
The third critical attribute of soil is its ability to mini-
mize evaporative water loss. This kind of evaporation de-
pletes soil’s water reservoir without serving the needs of 
plants. The O horizon functions well to reduce evaporative 
water loss by covering soil. These aspects of soil-water rela-
tionship are summarized in Figure 7.
Mineral Nutrients and Nutrient-Holding  Capacity. 
Mineral nutrients—phosphate (PO3
4
2) potassium (K1), calcium 
(Ca21), and other ions—are present in various rocks, along 
with non-nutrient elements. Minerals initially become available 
to roots through the weathering of rock. Weathering, however, 
is much too slow to support normal plant growth. The nutri-
ents that support plant growth in natural ecosystems are sup-
plied mostly through the breakdown and release (recycling) of 
nutrients from detritus.
Leaching. Nutrients may literally be washed from soil as 
water moves through it, a process called leaching. Leaching 
not only lessens soil fertility but also contributes to pollution 
when materials removed from soil enter waterways. Conse-
quently, soil’s capacity to bind and hold nutrient ions until 
they are absorbed by roots is important. This property is re-
ferred to as the soil’s nutrient-holding capacity.
Fertilizer. In agricultural systems, there is an unavoidable re-
moval of nutrients from soil with each crop because nutrients 
absorbed by plants are contained in the harvested material. 
Therefore, agricultural systems require inputs of nutrients to 
replace those removed with the harvest. Nutrients are replen-
ished with applications of fertilizer—material that contains 
one or more necessary nutrients. Fertilizer may be organic or 
inorganic. Organic fertilizer includes plant or animal wastes or 
both; manure and compost (rotted organic material) are two 
examples. Organic fertilizer also includes leguminous fallow 
crops (alfalfa, clover) or food crops (lentils, peas), which fix 
atmospheric nitrogen. Inorganic fertilizers are chemical for-
mulations of required nutrients, without any organic matter 
included. Inorganic fertilizers are much more prone to leach-
ing than organic fertilizers.
Transpiration
Precipitation
Evaporation
Soil
porous
Infiltration
Water-holding
capacity
Good
Poor
Soil
Compacted
Runoff
Figure 7 Plant-soil-water  relationships. When 
water evaporates from the leaves of a plant, a vacuum is 
created that pulls the water up through the plant tissues. 
The roots draw water from soil to replenish the evaporated 
water. The sun’s energy drives transpiration via the initial 
evaporation process. Water lost from the plant by transpira-
tion must be replaced from a  reservoir of water held in soil. 
In addition to the amount and frequency of precipitation, 
the size of this reservoir depends on soil’s ability to allow 
water to infiltrate, to hold water, and to minimize direct 
evaporation.
290

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
The Soil Community
As we’ve seen, to support desired plant growth, soil must (1) 
have a good supply of nutrients and good nutrient-holding 
capacity; (2) allow infiltration, have good water-holding ca-
pacity, and resist evaporative water loss; (3) have a porous 
structure that permits good aeration; (4) have a pH near neu-
tral; and (5) have low salt content. Moreover, these attributes 
must be sustained. How does a soil provide and sustain such 
attributes? Which is the best soil?
Consider the principle of limiting factors: The poorest 
attribute is the limiting factor. The poor water-holding ca-
pacity of sandy soil, for example, may preclude agriculture 
altogether because soil dries out so quickly. The inability 
of clay soils to allow water infiltration or aeration pre-
vents these from being good soils. As Table 1 indicates, the 
best soil textures are silts and loams because limiting fac-
tors are moderated in these two types of soil. Even though 
silts and loams are rated only “medium” for use in agricul-
ture, their soil texture limitations are greatly improved by 
the organic parts of the soil ecosystem—the detritus and 
soil organisms.
Organisms and Organic Matter in Soil. The dead 
leaves, roots, and other detritus accumulated on and in soil 
support a complex food web, including numerous species of 
bacteria, fungi, protozoans, mites, insects, millipedes, spiders, 
centipedes, earthworms, snails, slugs, moles, and other bur-
rowing animals (Fig. 8). The most numerous and important 
organisms are the smallest—the bacteria; literally millions of 
bacteria can be seen and counted in a gram of soil.
Humus. As all these organisms feed, the bulk of the 
detritus is consumed through cell respiration. Carbon diox-
ide, water, and mineral nutrients are released as by-products. 
However, each organism leaves a certain portion undigested; 
that is, a portion resists breakdown by the organism’s diges-
tive enzymes. This residue of partly decomposed organic 
matter is humus, found in high concentrations at the bottom 
of the O horizon. A familiar example is the black or dark 
brown spongy material remaining in a dead log after the 
center has rotted out. Composting is the process of fostering 
the decay of organic wastes under more or less controlled 
conditions, and the resulting compost is  essentially humus. 
Humus is good for plant growth because it has an extraor-
dinary capacity for holding both water and  nutrients—as 
much as 100 times greater than the capacity of clay, on the 
basis of weight.
Soil Structure and Topsoil. As animals feed on detri-
tus on or in soil, they often ingest mineral soil particles as 
well. For example, it is estimated that as much as 37 tons per 
hectare (15 tons per acre) of soil pass through earthworms 
each year in the course of their feeding. As the mineral parti-
cles go through the worm’s gut, they actually become “glued” 
together by the indigestible humus compounds. Thus, earth-
worm excrements—or castings, as they are called—are rela-
tively stable clumps of inorganic particles plus humus. The 
burrowing activity of organisms keeps the clumps loose. 
This loose, clumpy characteristic is a desirable soil structure 
Aeration. Novice gardeners commonly kill plants by over-
watering, or “drowning,” them. Roots need to “breathe.” Ba-
sically, they need a constant supply of oxygen for energy via 
metabolism. Land plants depend on soil being loose and po-
rous enough to allow the diffusion of oxygen into, and car-
bon dioxide out of, the soil, a property called soil aeration. 
Overwatering fills the air spaces in soil, preventing adequate 
aeration. Plants that live in very wet soil have special adapta-
tions to get oxygen. Compaction, or packing of soil, which 
occurs with excessive foot or vehicular traffic, also lowers 
soil air content. Compaction also reduces infiltration and 
increases runoff. Again, soil texture strongly influences this 
property, as indicated in Table 1.
Relative Acidity (pH). The term pH refers to the acid-
ity or alkalinity of any solution. A solution that is neither 
acidic nor alkaline is said to be neutral and has a pH of 7. 
The pH scale runs from 1 to 14. Different plants are adapted 
to different pH ranges. Most plants do best with a pH near 
neutral, but many plant species are specialized for distinctly 
acidic or alkaline soils (blueberries, for example, are notori-
ous acid lovers).
Salt and Water Uptake. A buildup of salts in soil makes 
it impossible for the roots of a plant to take in water. Indeed, 
if salt levels in soil get high enough, water can be drawn out 
of the plant (by osmosis), resulting in dehydration and death. 
Only plants with special adaptations can survive saline soils, 
and to date, none of those are crop plants. The importance 
of the problem is explained in Section 2, when we discuss 
how irrigation may lead to the accumulation of salts in soil 
(salinization).
Soil and Carbon Storage. Soils hold carbon from dead 
organisms. Sometimes this matter decays rapidly and some-
times slowly, but scientists estimate that soils hold as much 
as three times the amount of carbon held in the atmosphere 
and living plants. Right now, scientists are keenly interested 
in knowing what drives the rate of organic matter decay 
in soils. It used to be thought that temperature was the 
main driving factor, but a study in 2011 suggested that soil 
factors such as moisture, physical separation of particles, 
and placement of roots may play a role.3 Microbial com-
munities also play a role. This information may be used to 
make more accurate predictions of the carbon cycle. Char-
coal (burned wood) is an organic material that decays very 
slowly. Some researchers have suggested burying charcoal 
(“biochar”) as a way of sequestering carbon in soil, after 
discovering that Amazonian indigenous peoples had used 
charcoal in fields. The newest research, however, suggests 
that biochar may be less effective than first hoped. Either 
way, soils with organic matter that decays slowly have 
higher fertility.
3Schmidt, Michael W. I. et al. (2011). Persistence of soil organic matter as an eco-
system property. Nature, 478(7367), 49.
291

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
Figure 10 shows a site where the topsoil was removed 50 
years ago to provide fill for a highway. Although a lichen 
cover and some stunted trees have developed on the exposed 
gravel, there is still no topsoil there.
Interactions. There are some important interactions be-
tween plants and soil biota. A highly significant one is the 
symbiotic relationship between the roots of some plants and 
certain fungi called mycorrhizae. Drawing some nourishment 
from the roots, mycorrhizae penetrate the detritus, absorb 
nutrients, and transfer them directly to the plant (Fig.  11). 
Thus, there is no loss of nutrients to leaching. Another impor-
tant relationship is that of certain bacteria that add nitrogen 
to soil.
(Fig. 9). Whereas soil texture describes the size of soil parti-
cles, soil structure refers to their arrangement. A loose soil 
structure is ideal for infiltration, aeration, and workability. 
The clumpy, loose, humus-rich soil that is best for supporting 
plant growth is topsoil, represented in a soil profile as the A 
horizon (see Figure 5).
If plants are grown on adjacent plots, one of which has 
had all its topsoil removed, the results are striking: The yield 
from plants grown on subsoil is only 10% to 15% of that 
from plants grown on topsoil. In other words, a loss of all 
the topsoil would result in an 85% to 90% decline in pro-
ductivity. The development of topsoil from subsoil or parent 
material is a process that takes hundreds of years or more. 
Soil
fungi
Wood
roach
Rove beetle
Centipede
Snail
Millipede
Carpenter ant
Cicada
nymph
Wireworm
Mite
Springtail
Pseudoscorpion
Constricting
fungi killing
a nematode
Soil protozoans
Sow bug
Earthworm
Slug
Figure 8 Soil as 
a  detritus-based 
 ecosystem. A host of organ-
isms, major examples of which 
are shown here, feed on detritus 
and burrow through soil, forming 
a humus-rich topsoil with a loose, 
clumpy structure.
Figure 9 Humus and the development of soil structure. On the 
left is a humus-poor sample of loam. Note that it is a relatively uniform, dense 
“clod.” On the right is a sample of the same loam, but rich in humus. Note that it 
has a very loose structure, composed of numerous aggregates of various sizes.
Figure 10 The results of removing topsoil. This “soil” is nothing but 
gravel with topsoil removed. After 50 years, only lichens and a few stunted trees 
have developed. The white object is a ballpoint pen.
292

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
Soil Enrichment or Mineralization. You can now see 
how the aboveground and soil portions of an ecosystem 
 support each other. The bulk of the detritus, which supports 
soil organisms, is from green-plant producers, so green plants 
support soil organisms. In turn, by feeding on detritus, soil 
organisms create the chemical and physical soil environment 
that is most beneficial to plant growth.
Green plants protect soil and, consequently, themselves 
in two other important ways: The cover of living plants and 
detritus (1) protects soil from erosion and (2) reduces evapo-
rative water loss. Thus, it is desirable to maintain an organic 
mulch around any garden vegetables that do not maintain a 
complete cover themselves.
Unfortunately, the mutually supportive relationship be-
tween plants and soil can be broken all too easily. The mainte-
nance of topsoil depends on additions of detritus in sufficient 
quantity to balance losses. Without continual additions of 
detritus, soil organisms will starve, and their benefit in keep-
ing soil loose and nutrient rich will be lost. Additional conse-
quences can occur as well. Although resistant to digestion by 
soil organisms, humus does decompose at the rate of about 
2% to 5% of its volume per year. As soil’s humus content 
declines, the clumpy aggregate structure created by soil par-
ticles glued together with the humus breaks down. Water- and  
nutrient-holding capacities, infiltration, and aeration decline 
as well. This loss of humus and the consequent collapse of top-
soil are referred to as the mineralization of soil because what 
is left is just the gritty mineral content—sand, silt, and clay.
Thus, topsoil is the result of a dynamic balance be-
tween detritus additions and humus-forming processes, on 
the one hand, and the breakdown and loss of detritus and 
humus (Fig. 12) on the other. Soil deteriorates or is revitalized 
through loss or additions of organic matter.
Not all soil organisms are beneficial to plants, however. 
For example, nematodes, small worms that feed on living 
roots, are highly destructive to some agricultural crops. In 
a flourishing soil ecosystem, however, nematode populations 
may be controlled by other soil organisms.
Figure 11 Mycorrhizae. Symbiotic fungi connect to the roots of plants; 
they help get nutrients and increase root absorption, while getting protection and 
food. Here you can see a canning electron micrograph of the small fungal hyphae 
entering the plant root hair. Mycorrizae can be purchased as a soil additive and 
increase crop yields for gardeners. 
Topsoil
mineralization
Subsoil
Subsoil
Topsoil
Topsoil
formation
Subsoil
Lack of
detritus
Humus oxidation
Addition
of detritus
Loss of humus
results in topsoil mineralization
and consequent loss of:
• Water-holding capacity
• Nutrient-holding capacity
• Water infiltration
• Aeration
Gain of humus
results in topsoil formation
and consequent gain in:
• Water-holding capacity
• Nutrient-holding capacity
• Water infiltration
• Aeration
Figure 12 The importance of humus to 
topsoil. Topsoil is the result of a balance between 
 detritus additions and humus-forming processes as 
well as their breakdown and loss. If  additions of de-
tritus are insufficient, soil will  gradually deteriorate.
293

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
ing which time the population more than doubled. Eventu-
ally, the GLASOD data were considered suspect and out of 
date.
GLASOD was followed by a project launched by the 
Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO), called the Land Degradation Assessment in Drylands 
(LADA). Land degradation is defined as a reduction in the 
capacity of land to perform ecosystem functions and services 
that support society and development. This project used sat-
ellite remote-sensing techniques to produce an overall view 
of soil quality, called the Global Assessment of Land Deg-
radation and Improvement (GLADA).4 The GLADA assess-
ment employed data from a 23-year time series by National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellites 
and precipitation data from more than 9,300 land stations. 
One analysis combined plant productivity with rain-use 
 efficiency to produce a map of regions that are worsening, 
calling them “hot spots,” and regions that are showing im-
proving trends, calling them “bright spots.”
Updating Soil Science
GLADA was updated in 2010. The update used new tech-
niques to estimate aboveground plant biomass from satel-
lite images. Satellites can measure light variations, which 
can be used to calculate measures of greenness. Greenness 
is then used as an index of aboveground biomass, which in 
turn is used to assess land degradation because degraded 
land produces less vegetation. But even undergraded lands 
in some biomes do not produce a lot of vegetation, so the 
program actually measures changes—is the ability of the 
land to produce vegetation declining over time? In times 
of drought or at certain times of year, one would expect 
vegetation to decline anyway, so the program must account 
for seasons and the effect of droughts to measure whether 
the land is degraded for any length of time. This is an area 
where scientific ability to accurately model what is hap-
pening is both rapidly improving and crucial. One of the 
findings of the updated GLADA study was that land deg-
radation is changing in China differently than people ex-
pected. Land degradation is most conspicuous in the humid 
south and east, where urban development is more intense, 
rather than the dry north and west, because of aggressive 
land protection and reforestation efforts in the north by the 
Chinese government. Other researchers have tried to esti-
mate the effect of soil degradation on China’s crop yields 
(Fig. 14). One of the most critical land degradations is ero-
sion, discussed next.
Erosion
How is topsoil lost? The most pervasive and damaging force 
is erosion, the process of soil and humus particles being 
picked up and carried away by water or wind. Erosion 
2 Soil Degradation
In natural ecosystems, there is always a turnover of plant 
material, so new detritus is continuously supplied. However, 
when humans come on the scene and cut forests, graze live-
stock, or grow crops, the soil is at the mercy of our manage-
ment or mismanagement. When key soil attributes required 
for plant growth or for other ecosystem services deterio-
rate over time, the soil is considered degraded. Before we 
were able to ask how serious this problem was, we needed 
some way to track and assess soil changes (Figure 13). This 
has now been done on a global scale, though it was very 
 difficult.
The GLASOD report on degraded land quoted earlier 
(15% degraded) was for a long time the only truly global 
assessment. The data for the report came from question-
naires sent to soil experts around the world. Very little of the 
information was validated by collecting data on actual soil 
conditions or information on crop productivity. The authors 
actually pointed this out in the report. Long before GLA-
SOD, however, scientists had been trying to gather soil data. 
The ISRIC World Soil Information (once the International 
Soil Research Information Centre) was started in 1966 as 
an offshoot of a World Soil Museum created in 1961 and 
housed in the Netherlands. All over the world, regional gov-
ernments were collecting data on land, land use, agriculture, 
and soils, but it was often in different formats and scales or 
with different vocabulary. Standardizing information from 
around the world and providing data to researchers has 
been part of the job of the ISRIC World Soil Information 
organization.
The GLASOD map was a huge undertaking, but it was 
not as accurate as we needed. For example, 75% of the 
soils in Burkina Faso, one of the poorest and most densely 
 populated countries in the dryland region of West Africa, 
were considered degraded. However, agricultural yields for 
virtually all crops have increased in the past 40 years, dur-
Figure 13 Soil research. Researchers such as the one shown here 
measure soil radiation. They study soil in the hopes of protecting and enhancing 
 productivity.
4Bai, Z. G., Jong, R. de, & van Lynden, G. W. J. (2010). An Update of GLADA—
Global Assessment of Land Degradation and Improvement. ISRIC report 2010/08, 
ISRIC—World Soil Information, Wageningen.
294

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
 converges into rivulets and streams, which have greater vol-
ume, velocity, and energy and hence greater capacity to pick 
up and remove soil. The result is the erosion into gullies, or 
gully erosion (Fig. 15). This process of erosion can become a 
cycle that perpetuates.
Desert Pavement and Cryptogamic Crusts. Wind 
and water erosion both involve the differential removal of 
soil particles. The lighter particles of humus and clay are 
the first to be carried away, while rocks, stones, and coarse 
sand remain behind. Consequently, as erosion removes the 
finer materials, the remaining soil becomes progressively 
coarser—sandy, stony, and finally, rocky. Such coarse soils 
frequently reflect past or ongoing erosion. Did you ever won-
der why deserts are full of sand? The sand is what remains 
after the finer, lighter clay and silt particles have blown away. 
However, in some deserts, the removal of fine material by 
wind has left a thin surface layer of stones and gravel called 
a desert pavement, which protects the underlying soil against 
 further erosion (Fig. 16). Damaging this surface layer with ve-
hicular or pedestrian traffic allows another episode of ero-
sion to commence.
 follows any time soil is bared and exposed to the elements. 
The removal may be slow and subtle, as when soil is gradu-
ally blown away by wind, or it may be dramatic, as when 
gullies are washed out in a single storm.
In most natural terrestrial ecosystems, a vegetative cover 
protects against erosion. Falling raindrops are intercepted by 
the vegetation, and the water infiltrates gently into the loose 
topsoil without disturbing its structure. With good infiltra-
tion, runoff is minimal. Runoff that does occur is slowed as 
the water moves through the vegetative or litter mat. Simi-
larly, vegetation slows the velocity of wind and holds soil 
particles.
Splash, Sheet, and Gully Erosion. When soil is left bare 
and unprotected, however, it is easily eroded. Splash erosion 
occurs in storms as the impact of falling raindrops breaks 
up the clumpy structure of the topsoil. The dislodged par-
ticles wash into spaces between other aggregates, clogging 
pores and thereby decreasing infiltration and aeration. The 
decreased infiltration results in more water running off, car-
rying away the fine particles from the surface, a phenome-
non called sheet erosion. As further runoff occurs, the water 
Kilometers
0
500
1,000
Impact Class
Negligable
Light
Moderate
Strong
Extreme
Figure 14 Soil degradation and crops in China. Across China, soil degradation is affecting croplands, especially 
in the south and east, even though the north and west are where desertification occurs. (Source: Liming Ye and Eric Van Ranst. 
(2009). Production scenarios and the effect of soil degradation on long-term food security in China. Global Environmental 
Change, 19(4), 464–481.)
295

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
intrusion, and if the soil below is loosened, it can again be 
subject to wind and water erosion. Accordingly, let us now 
take a closer look at the practices that lead to erosion, one of 
the major elements of land degradation.
Causing and Correcting Erosion
Three major practices that expose soil to erosion and lead 
to soil degradation are overcultivation, overgrazing, and de-
forestation, all of which are a consequence of unsustainable 
Water erosion can cause other changes in soil composi-
tion. Often, when rainfall clogs soils, the soils harden when 
they dry. Following this, the soil may be colonized by dif-
ferent kinds of primitive plants (algae, lichens, and mosses) 
called cryptogams. Their growth and colonization create a 
crust on the soil, called a cryptogamic crust. Such crusts have 
a positive ecological impact; they can stabilize soil, slow ero-
sion, and add nutrients through nitrogen fixation. However, 
they can also inhibit water infiltration and seed generation. 
They are readily broken up by livestock trampling or human 
Figure 15 Erosion.
Severe erosion due to poor 
 farming practices near 
Bosencheve, Mexico.
Time
(a)
(b)
Concentration
of larger pebbles
Desert
pavement
Wind
erosion
Figure 16 Formation of desert pavement. (a) As wind erosion removes the finer particles, the larger 
grains and stones are concentrated on the surface. (b) The result is desert pavement, which protects the underlying 
soil from further erosion. The Sinai Desert has a mixture of desert pavement, rock and tracks from vehicles, which 
break up the desert pavement and initiate further erosion.
296

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
A variation on this theme is low-till farming, which is 
catching on in Asia. For example, to plant wheat after a rice 
crop has been harvested, only one pass over a field is made—
to plant seed and spread fertilizer. Previously, farmers would 
plow 6 to 12 times to break up the muddy soil and dry it out 
for the wheat, and then they would irrigate the land.
Fertilizer. Another aspect of overcultivation involves 
the use of inorganic versus organic fertilizer. There is no 
question that optimal amounts of required nutrients can be 
efficiently provided by the suitable application of inorganic 
chemical fertilizer. The failing of chemical fertilizer is its lack 
of organic matter to support soil organisms and build soil 
structure. Under intensive cultivation—one or more cash 
crops every year—nutrient content may be kept high with 
inorganic fertilizer, but mineralization, and thus soil degrada-
tion, proceeds in any case. Then, with the soil’s loss of nutri-
ent-holding capacity, applied inorganic fertilizer is prone to 
simply leach into waterways, causing pollution.
This is not to say that chemical fertilizers do not have 
a valuable place in agriculture—after all, the exclusive use 
of organic material may not provide enough of certain nu-
trients to support optimal plant growth. What is required is 
for growers to understand the different roles played by or-
ganic material and inorganic nutrients and then to use each 
as  necessary.
Natural Resources Conservation Service. Regardless 
of cropping procedures and the use of fertilizer, a number 
of other techniques are widely employed to reduce erosion. 
Among the most conspicuous are contour farming (plowing 
and cultivating at right angles to contour slopes) and shelter-
belts (protective belts of trees and shrubs alongside plowed 
fields) (Fig.  18). The U.S. Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (NRCS), formerly the Soil Conservation Service, was 
established in response to the Dust Bowl tragedy of the early 
1930s. Through a nationwide network of regional  offices, the 
NRCS provides information to farmers or other interested 
persons regarding soil and water conservation practices. 
(Federal extension service offices will test soil samples, pro-
vide an analysis thereof, and make recommendations.) The 
NRCS performs an inventory of erosion losses in the United 
States (the Natural Resources Inventory, last conducted in 
2007). Estimates indicate that soil erosion on croplands has 
lessened in recent years, from 2.1 billion tons in 1992 to 1.7 
billion tons in 2007. This decrease is likely a consequence 
of improved conservation practices, such as windbreaks, 
grassed waterways, and field border strips of perennial veg-
etation to filter runoff.
Overgrazing. Grasslands that receive too little rainfall to 
support cultivated crops or are too steep for cropping have 
traditionally been used for grazing livestock. In fact, some 
65% of dryland areas are rangelands. Unfortunately, such 
lands are too often overgrazed. As grass production fails to 
keep up with consumption, erosion follows and the land be-
comes barren.
Overgrazing is not a new problem. In the United States 
in the 1800s, the American buffalo (bison) was slaughtered 
to starve out Native Americans and allow for stocking the 
management practices. All of these are practices with impacts 
that can be reversed, as we will see.
Overcultivation. Traditionally, the first step in growing 
crops has been plowing to control weeds. The drawback is 
that the soil is then exposed to wind and water erosion. Fur-
ther, soil may remain bare for a considerable time after plant-
ing and again after harvest. Plowing is frequently considered 
necessary to loosen soil to improve aeration and infiltra-
tion through it, yet all too often the effect is just the reverse. 
Splash erosion destroys soil’s aggregate structure and seals the 
surface, so that aeration and infiltration are decreased. The 
weight of tractors used in plowing adds to the compaction of 
soil. In addition, plowing accelerates evaporative water loss.
Despite the harmful impacts inherent in cultivation, sys-
tems of crop rotation—a cash crop such as corn every third 
year, with hay and clover (which fixes nitrogen as well as 
adding organic matter) in between—have proved sustain-
able. If farmers abandon rotation, degradation and erosion 
exceed regenerative processes, and the result is a decline in 
the quality of soil. This is the essence of overcultivation.
No-Till. A technique that permits continuous cropping, 
yet minimizes soil erosion, is no-till agriculture, which is now 
routinely practiced in areas of the United States. According to 
this technique, the field is first sprayed with herbicide to kill 
weeds, and then a planting apparatus is pulled behind a tractor 
to accomplish several operations at once. A steel disk cuts a 
furrow through the mulch of dead weeds, drops seed and ferti-
lizer into the furrow, and then closes it (Fig. 17). At harvest, the 
process is repeated, and the waste from the previous crop be-
comes the detritus and mulch cover for the next. Thus, the soil 
is never left exposed, erosion and evaporative water loss are 
reduced, and there is enough detritus, including roots from the 
previous crop, to maintain the topsoil. Of course, this requires 
the use of herbicides, which have their own problems and may 
increase the effects of pests that remain in crop residues from 
one season to another.
Figure 17 Apparatus for no-till planting. This no till planter is plant-
ing corn over stubble with minimal disturbance to the protective vegetation layer 
on the surface of the soil. The apparatus creates furrows with cutting discs, ap-
plies herbicide and fertilizer, drops in seeds, and closes the furrows.
297

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
are wooded zones along streams and rivers, zones that are 
trampled by cattle seeking water. The resulting water pol-
lution by sediments and cattle waste is high on the list of 
factors making fish species the fastest-disappearing wildlife 
group in the United States. A study of rangeland manage-
ment concluded that (1) desertification affects some 85% of 
North America’s drylands and (2) the most widespread cause 
of rangeland desertification is livestock grazing.5
Public Lands. In many cases, overgrazing occurs because 
rangelands are public lands not owned by the people who 
own the animals. Where this is the case, herders who choose 
to have fewer livestock on the range sacrifice income, while 
others continue to overgraze the range. This problem is 
known as the “tragedy of the commons.” 
In a variation of the tragedy of the commons, the U.S. 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and the Forest Serv-
ice lease grazing rights for 2 million square kilometers of 
federal (i.e., taxpayer-owned) lands. The income to the gov-
ernment is less than private land owners would be paid for 
grazing rights, though ranchers have to do more on federal 
lands, such as provide water and fences and get permits. 
Altogether it pays the government far less than the costs of 
administration: The grazing program loses money, and the 
2012 grazing fee ($1.35 per cow and calf per month) is less 
than a tenth of what grazing fees are on private lands. A 
worse problem is the ecological cost exacted by livestock to 
watersheds, streams, wildlife, and endangered species, con-
sidered to be as high as $500 million. Attempts in Congress 
and the Department of the Interior (which houses the BLM) 
to raise grazing fees are consistently met with opposition 
from western congressmen, who threaten to cut the BLM 
budget.
One solution lies in better management. Restoration of 
rangelands could benefit both wildlife and cattle production. 
The NRCS has a program (the Conservation Stewardship 
Program) that provides information and support to enable 
ranchers who own their lands to burn unwanted woody 
plants, reseed the land with perennial grass varieties that 
hold water, and manage cattle so that herds are moved to a 
new location before overgrazing occurs. One solution gain-
ing favor among ranchers and environmental groups is for 
the government to buy up some of the 26,000 existing graz-
ing permits and “retire” rangelands. The ranchers would be 
offered a generous payment for the permits they hold, and 
the land would be used for wildlife, recreation, and water-
shed protection.
Deforestation. Forest ecosystems are extremely efficient 
systems both for holding and recycling nutrients and for ab-
sorbing and holding water because they maintain and protect 
a very porous, humus-rich topsoil. Investigators at Hubbard 
Brook Forest in New Hampshire found that converting a 
hillside from forest to grass doubled the amount of runoff 
rangelands with cattle. Cattle overgrazing became rampant, 
leading to erosion and encroachment by hardy desert plants 
such as sagebrush, mesquite, and juniper, which are not pal-
atable to cattle. Western rangelands now produce less than 
50% of the livestock forage they produced before the advent 
of commercial grazing. Yet overstocking and the federal sub-
sidizing of ranching means that in 2005 the grazing program 
on federal public lands cost $144 million and brought in 
only $21 million to the federal government. The Obama ad-
ministration has proposed a grazing fee increase.
The broader ecological impact of overgrazing should 
not go unnoticed, either. The National Public Lands Grazing 
Campaign documents the many harmful effects of livestock 
grazing on public lands. Livestock compete with native ani-
mals for forage, reducing the latter’s numbers substantially 
(about one-third of the endangered species in the United 
States are in jeopardy because of overgrazing or other prac-
tices associated with raising cattle, such as predator-control 
programs and the suppression of fire). Particularly hard hit 
Figure 18 Contour farming and shelterbelts. (a) Cultivation up and 
down a slope encourages water to run down furrows and may lead to severe ero-
sion. The problem is reduced by plowing and cultivating along the contours at a 
right angle to the slope. In this photograph, strip cropping is also being utilized: The 
light green bands are one type of crop, the dark bands another. (b) Shelterbelts—
belts of trees around farm fields—break the wind and protect soil from erosion, 
seen in New Zealand.
(b)
(a)
5Government Accountability Office. Livestock Grazing: Federal Expenditures 
and Receipts Vary, Depending on the Agency and the Purpose of the Fee Charged 
( September 30, 2005).
298

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
 Antarctica. Since these dryland areas are commonly in-
habited by some of the poorest people on Earth, promot-
ing sustainable land management is essential for improving 
standards of living and meeting the Millennium Develop-
ment Goals (MDGs) successfully.
Recognizing the severity of this problem, the United 
 Nations established the Convention to Combat Desertifica-
tion (UNCCD), which was signed and officially ratified by 
more than 100 nations in 1996. Regular conferences of the 
parties and other UNCCD meetings have been concerned 
with such issues as the funding of projects to reverse land 
degradation, “bottom-up” programs that enable local com-
munities to help themselves, the gathering and dissemination 
of traditional knowledge on effective drylands agricultural 
practices, and the development of a 10-year strategic plan. 
Affected countries have also been developing National  Action 
Programs. One alliance, TerrAfrica, was formed in 2005 by 
several UN agencies and African countries to fight land deg-
radation in sub-Saharan Africa. The alliance is designed to 
coordinate efforts toward arresting land degradation and 
promoting sustainable land management. For example, the 
government of Madagascar has been working on sustainable 
land management with several TerrAfrica partners, combat-
ing land degradation in its upland watersheds and southern 
arid lands. Even though variations in climate often play a 
role in the processes of desertification, it is human impacts 
that pose the greatest threat to the health of dryland ecosys-
tems. This highlights yet again the connection between soil, 
water, and human actions.
Water and Soil: Irrigation, Salinization, and 
Leaching
How we use water has a huge effect on soil health, espe-
cially in agricultural systems. Nowhere is this more clear 
than with irrigation—supplying water to croplands by ar-
and increased the leaching of nutrients many-fold. Much 
worse is what occurs if the forest is simply cut and soil is 
left exposed. The topsoil becomes saturated with water and 
slides off the slope in a muddy mass into waterways, leaving 
barren subsoil that continues to erode. Forests continue to be 
cleared at an alarming rate. The problem is particularly acute 
when tropical rain forests are cut. Tropical soils (oxisols) are 
notoriously lacking in nutrients from leaching by rainwater. 
When the forests are cleared, the thin layer of humus with 
nutrients readily washes away. Only the nutrient-poor sub-
soil is left.
The Other End of the Erosion Problem. Water that is 
unable to infiltrate flows over the surface immediately into 
streams and rivers, overfilling them and causing flooding. 
Eroding soil, called sediment, is carried into streams and riv-
ers, clogging channels and intensifying flooding, filling reser-
voirs, killing fish, and generally damaging the ecosystems of 
streams, rivers, bays, and estuaries. Excess sediments and nu-
trients resulting from erosion are recognized as the greatest 
pollution problem of surface waters in many regions of the 
world. Meanwhile, groundwater resources are also depleted 
because the rainfall runs off rather than recharging ground-
water. This is another example of the tight connection be-
tween water availability and quality and the health of soils.
Drylands and Desertification
Recall that clay and humus are the most important com-
ponents of soil for both nutrient- and water-holding capac-
ity. As clay and humus are removed, nutrients are removed 
as well because they are bound to those particles. The loss 
of  water-holding capacity is even more serious, however. 
Regions that have sparse rainfall or long dry seasons sup-
port grasses, scrub trees, or crops only insofar as soils have 
good water-holding and nutrient-holding capacity. As these 
soil properties are diminished by the erosion of topsoil, such 
areas become deserts, both ecologically and from the stand-
point of agricultural production. Indeed, the term desertifica-
tion is used to denote this process. Note that desertification 
doesn’t mean advancing deserts; rather, the term refers to a 
permanent reduction in the productivity of arid, semiarid, 
and seasonally dry areas (traditionally called drylands). It 
is a process of land degradation with a number of possible 
causes, including extended droughts, overgrazing, erosion, 
deforestation, and overcultivation.
Dryland ecosystems cover 41% of Earth’s ice-free land 
area. They are defined by precipitation, not temperature. 
Beyond the relatively uninhabited deserts, much of the land 
receives only 25 to 75 centimeters (10 to 30 in.) of rain-
fall a year, a minimal amount to support rangeland or non- 
irrigated cropland (Fig. 19). Droughts are common features 
of the climate in drylands. When the rainfall returns, how-
ever, vegetation often returns. Despite this, according to the 
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 10–20% of these lands 
suffer from some form of land degradation. These drylands, 
occupying some 6 billion hectares, are home to more than 
2 billion people and are found on every continent except 
Figure 19 Drylands cultivation. Farmers till soil in Jinan, China, planting 
a crop in the semi-desert soil in anticipation of some rainfall.
299

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
Worldwide, an estimated 1.5 million hectares (3.7 mil-
lion acres) of agricultural land—or the equivalent of Con-
necticut and Rhode Island—is lost yearly to salinization and 
waterlogging. Pakistan alone has lost an estimated 6.3 million 
hectares (15.5 million acres) of farmland to salinization. In 
Mozambique, a promising irrigation project in the Limpopo 
Valley brought water to more than 33,000 hectares (81,500). 
Unfortunately by 2012, more than 10,000 of those hectares 
(25,000) were unusable because of salinization. Adding to the 
problems, water supplies in many places are fast being de-
pleted by withdrawals for irrigation.
Salinization can be avoided, and even reversed, if suf-
ficient water is applied to leach the salts down through 
soil. Attention must be paid to where the salt-laden water 
goes. For example, the Kesterson National Wildlife Refuge 
in California was destroyed by pollution from irrigation 
drainage from selenium-enriched soils of the San Joaquin 
Valley. After receiving the salty drainage water for only 
three years, birds, fish, insects, and plants began to die off. 
The site was declared a toxic waste dump and has been 
drained and capped with soil. At least 14 other locations in 
the western United States have been identified as having the 
potential to accumulate toxic irrigation water, now known 
as the Kesterson Effect.
Leaching. In places that are heavily irrigated or have heavy 
rainfall, soils can lose nutrients to leaching. This is particu-
larly true in tropical soils. Sometimes this is a problem be-
cause nutrients are leached out of soil, and sometimes it is 
a problem because toxins are released from being bound to 
soil particles. One good example of the latter results from 
a change in soil pH. Soil pH can change with acid rain, a 
byproduct of burning fossil fuels. As acid rain percolates 
through soil, it can change the amount of attraction between 
some chemicals and soil particles. This change can have two 
important effects. Nutrients such as calcium, magnesium, 
and potassium that are bound to clay and humus can be sep-
arated from soil particles more easily and can be leached out 
tificial means. Irrigation has dramatically increased crop 
production in regions that typically receive low rainfall 
and is a major part of the Green Revolution. However, ir-
rigation is also a major contributor to land degradation. 
Traditionally, water has been diverted from rivers through 
canals and flooded through furrows in fields, a technique 
known as flood irrigation (Fig. 20). Center-pivot irrigation, 
in which water is pumped from a central well through a 
gigantic sprinkler that slowly pivots itself around the well, 
has gained popularity as an irrigation method. In more re-
cent years, the much more efficient drip irrigation, in which 
water is taken directly to plants through small tubes, is used 
at least on some crops.
In the United States, the Bureau of Reclamation is the 
major government agency involved with ongoing supplies of 
irrigation water to the western regions. More than 800 dams 
and reservoirs have been constructed by the bureau since its 
inception in 1902, and it now provides irrigation water for 
4 million hectares (10 million acres) of farmland. Total irri-
gated land acreage in the United States is 22 million hectares 
(55 million acres), one-sixth of all cultivated cropland, ac-
cording to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Worldwide, irrigated acreage has risen dramatically in 
the past few decades. The FAO estimates that total irrigated 
land now amounts to just more than 300 million hectares 
(741 million acres). New irrigation projects continue to be 
built, but the expansion in acreage is now being offset in 
large part by a negative trend: salinization.
Salinization. Salinization is the accumulation of salts in and 
on soil to the point where plant growth is suppressed 
(Fig. 21). Salinization occurs because even the freshest  irrigation 
water contains at least 200 to 500 ppm (0.02% to 0.05%) dis-
solved salts. Adding water to dryland soils also dissolves the high 
concentrations of soluble minerals that are often present in those 
soils as salts when water evaporates. Because it happens in dry-
lands and renders the land less productive or even useless, salini-
zation is considered a form of desertification.
Figure 20 Flood irrigation. The traditional method of irrigation is to 
flood furrows between rows with water from an irrigation canal. This method is 
extremely wasteful because most water evaporates or percolates beyond the root 
zone or because the water table rises to waterlog soil and prevent the crop from 
growing.
Figure 21 Salinization. Millions of acres of irrigated land are now worth-
less because of the accumulation of salts left behind as water evaporates.
300

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
(May), on the impacts of mining on the environment and the 
need for effective land restoration. Hopefully, this is a direc-
tion scientists will pursue.
3 Soil Conservation
There is broad consensus that soils are vital to human soci-
eties and that they should be preserved. This is encouraging, 
and so long as this consensus translates into action, we will 
be moving in the direction of sustainability. Because top-
soils grow so slowly (an inch every hundred years at best), 
sustainability means doing all we can to reduce soil erosion 
and prevent degradation. However, we will also briefly dis-
cuss soil restoration, which can be done after degradation 
has occurred.
Soil conservation must be practiced at two levels. The 
most important is the level of the individual landholder. 
As the story of Gabino López demonstrates (see Sound 
Science, “Sustainable Agriculture Research with Farmer 
Experimenters”), those working on the land are best situ-
ated to put into practice the conservation strategies that 
not only enhance their soils, but also bring better harvests 
and improve their way of life. A great deal of traditional 
knowledge exists with landholders, who routinely practice 
soil conservation techniques. The increased production you 
will read about in Burkina Faso is a prime example. This is 
stewardship in action.
The second level is public policy. In particular, farm 
policies play a crucial role in determining how soils are con-
served. Policies governing the grazing of public lands and 
forestry practices also lead to either good or poor steward-
ship of soils. The two levels must work in harmony to bring 
about effective, sustainable stewardship of soil resources. Let 
us examine briefly what is being done in these two areas, 
 beginning with individual landholders.
Helping Individual Landholders
In the developing world as well as the developed world, it is 
the individual landholders, farmers, and herders who hold 
the key to sustainable soil stewardship. They must be con-
vinced that what they do will work, that it is affordable, and 
that, in the long run, their own well-being will improve. It 
may require help in the way of microlending, sound advice 
(often best coming from their peers) or simply encourage-
ment to experiment.
Toward those ends, the UN Convention to Combat 
Desertification is a large step in the right direction. Other 
efforts include the new TerrAfrica Alliance and the Sustain-
able Agriculture and Rural Development Initiative (SARD) 
facilitated by the FAO. The latter is a kind of umbrella or-
ganization that coordinates efforts to reach small farmers 
with sound agricultural practices; SARD puts the efforts in 
the context of encouraging sustainable development and 
achieving the MDGs. An example is found in the Bobo 
Diaulasso region of Burkina Faso, a rural community in 
of soil by rain. Another effect is the mobilization of toxins. 
Aluminum is usually held in soil in a nontoxic form: alumi-
num hydroxide. Acid rain breaks chemical bonds, releasing 
toxic aluminum ions from the insoluble aluminum hydrox-
ide, a process that stunts the roots of plants, keeping them 
from absorbing nutrients.
Loss of Soil Biota
Soil health is largely regulated by microorganisms and de-
tritus. Organic material holds water, binds mineral parti-
cles together, and slowly releases nutrients. Soil microbes 
help plants germinate, obtain nutrients, and perform 
other activities. Erosion, salinization, acid rain, and wa-
terlogging can kill soil biota. Some other human activities 
we have not discussed can also lower soil fertility. One 
new effect on soil is that of nanoparticles. Nanoparticles 
are tiny and are used for a variety of purposes. For ex-
ample, extremely small beads of silver are added to many 
products as an antimicrobial agent. You can buy “anti-
microbial” socks and other products. Unfortunately, na-
noparticles can have negative effects on water and soil. 
A study in the Journal of Hazardous  Materials in 2011 
showed that nanoparticles can kill beneficial soil bacteria 
and can keep plants from being able to take up nitrogen. 
However, the study looked at high concentrations of na-
noparticles. It is unclear what their effects will be in soils 
 generally. One of the problems with nanoparticles is that 
they became widely used before sufficient prior study on 
their environmental effects was completed.
Land Use Changes: Impacts of Mining
Agriculture is the human activity that probably affects soils 
the most. However, other activities damage soil as well. Just 
as in the water cycle, soils are affected by land use changes. 
Construction projects, for example, remove vegetation and 
topsoil and often lead to erosion. One of the most significant 
non-agricultural impacts on soil due to land use is the effect 
of mining.
The scene after a strip mining operation is completed is 
often similar to a moonscape—great piles of rocks with top-
soil removed. In some parts of the United States, these areas 
are required to be restored, though restoration success varies.  
In the removed mountaintops of Appalachia, the plateaus left 
after coal mining are green but relatively unproductive. The 
topsoil is gone, too poor to support crops or most trees, and 
the vegetation that is planted is usually the non-native Les-
pedeza cuneata.
Mining is big business around the world. In addition 
to coal, people mine gypsum, phosphates, salts, metals, and 
many other materials, even materials called rare earths that 
are used in making electronics. Mining removes vegetation 
and has huge impacts on water quality, human health, and 
soil erosion.  In 2008, the first International Conference on 
Mining Impacts on the Human and Natural Environments 
was held in Florida. In 2012, conferences were held in 
 Manila, Philippines (March), and Nevada City, Nevada 
301

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
Africa’s drylands. Here intensive farming, driven by popu-
lation growth, has led to a loss of soil fertility and declin-
ing crop yields. An FAO project has stepped in to enable a 
group of farmers to  organize and adopt a range of sustain-
able practices, such as mixing legume and cereal grain plots 
to preserve soil fertility, cultivating soybeans to diversify 
income sources, and producing forage to feed livestock dur-
ing the extended dry season. FAO brought the landholders 
and other stakeholders together to consolidate these find-
ings into a set of established practices that could be imple-
mented in other similar situations.
The Keita Project. Preventing and reversing the deg-
radation of dryland soils remains a key need for helping 
the more than 2 billion people who live in drylands, who 
are often among the poorest on Earth and subject to cli-
matic variations that can destroy their livelihood and well-
being. Niger is one of the hottest countries of the world, 
with much of its land in the Sahara Desert itself. Below the 
Sahara, Niger is part of the Sahel, an ecoclimatic belt that 
runs across Africa from the Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea. 
It is a semiarid grassland, receiving 6–20 inches of rainfall 
a year, but often less in drought years. In 1982, the Italian 
government initiated a project in the Keita district of Niger, 
more than 4,000 square miles of plateaus, rocky slopes, 
and grasslands inhabited by 230,000 people. The project 
targeted the serious degradation brought on by overpopu-
lation and the effects of soil and wind erosion. Some 41 
dams were established to catch water from the monsoonal 
summer rains, more than 18 million trees were planted, and 
countless check dams were constructed to stop rainwater 
sheet erosion and provide soil and moisture for crops 260. 
Most of the work was carried out by local people, espe-
cially women, who were paid with food. The antierosion 
land management scheme took many years, but it worked. 
The Keita district is now a flourishing environment for 
crops (Fig.  22), livestock, and people. Desertification has 
been halted. The people now have control over their plots 
of land, an important step toward long-term stewardship of 
local  resources.
SOUND SCIENCE
Sustainable Agriculture Research with 
Farmer Experimenters
Thirty-five years ago, 
Gabino López attended 
classes on sustainable 
agriculture in San Martín 
Jilotepeque,  Guatemala, 
and then returned to his village to apply what he 
had learned to his own small farm. He planted 
vegetation barriers along the contours of his land 
to stop erosion and applied cow manure to enrich 
the soil. His maize harvest increased from 0.8 to 
1.3 tons/hectare (1,050 lb/acre). López’s harvest 
jumped to 3.4 tons/hectare when he plowed 
under his crop residues, as opposed to when he 
burned them or rotated crops. Aware of his suc-
cess, his friends asked him for advice, and before 
long, López became an international consultant 
in ecological agriculture, traveling from Mexico 
to Ecuador and even India. He and his fellow 
farmers employ a number of practices that follow 
the “five golden rules of the humid tropics”:  
(1) keeping soil covered, (2) using minimal or 
even no tillage, (3) using mulch to provide nutri-
ents for crops, (4) maximizing biomass produc-
tion, and (5) maximizing biodiversity. As a result, 
the maize harvest has averaged 4.3 tons/hectare 
in a number of local villages.
López and his fellow farmers had to deal 
with both erratic rainfall and the possibility of 
mudslides. López worked with COSECHA, a Hon-
duran nongovernmental organization (NGO) to 
connect farmers to research by involving them 
from the start as “farmer experimenters.” To 
overcome the problem of irregular rainfall, the 
farmers tested a number 
of different contraptions 
for trapping and holding 
the water for small-scale 
irrigation. The farmers 
decided that 1- to 2-cubic-
meter catchments were 
ideal and found many ad-
ditional uses for the water. 
Water harvesting is joining 
green manures and natural 
pest control in the grow-
ing reach of agricultural 
development that involves 
villagers experimenting 
and teaching others what 
they learn.
Many Central American 
farmers have to work fields 
on hillsides, called steep 
lands. They are difficult to 
till with machinery, and 
mudslides are common. 
While much of the soil 
conservation work in the world is focused on 
drylands (lands where soil moisture is very 
low), steep lands offer their own problems. 
American researchers have worked with farmer 
experimenters in the Philippines, another area 
with steep land farming, to solve some of the 
unique problems such agriculture causes. In 
one study, experimenters used high-value crops 
that grow thickly as a type of hedge between 
plots of other crops. They also changed when 
crops were planted in order to have plants that 
lowered erosion in the field during times when 
more erosion occurs. For example, corn and 
 cabbage were grown during rainy months rather 
than tomato because soil loss was lessened. The 
participation of farmers in the research provided 
real-world data and made it easier to adopt 
 better soil conservation practices.
T
G
c
a
J
302

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
ecosystem services. The productivity of the land declines as 
overgrazing and overcultivation lead to increased erosion. 
These results are only made worse in the face of extended 
drought and some impacts of climate change.
This series of events is not inevitable, however. In  contrast, 
in places such as such as Burkina Faso and Niger, dryland 
dwellers take corrective measures, including better managing 
livestock and grazing, adopting soil and water conservation 
measures, and diversifying their income in ways that relieve 
pressure on the land. The result is a sustainable relationship 
with dryland ecosystems that results in improving human 
well-being. Some of the processes of desertification, although 
distressing, may be signs of the cyclical nature of dryland ec-
osystems; they simply mean that in time things are likely to 
change and that what seemed irreversible was in fact not.
Soil Restoration. Although prevention of soil degradation 
is the best policy, in some cases, soil restoration can be done. 
Addition of organic material and use of rooted plants to trap 
soils as well as introduction of soil biota are all components. 
Sometimes contaminants need to be removed as well. When 
this is done using organisms, it is called bioremediation. For 
example, in the case of petroleum contamination, soil mi-
crobes are used to break down the contaminant. In other 
cases, compost, manure, other plant products, and earth-
worms are added to enhance degraded soils.
Two Chains of Events. Desertification has been happen-
ing in many places and, when made worse by climate change 
or extended drought, can lead to permanent degradation and 
to greater poverty and misery. The human factors responsi-
ble include population growth and immigration, unjust land  
tenure policies, and economic pressure to produce cash crops, 
all of which intensify the pressure on the land to increase its 
Figure 22 Land in the Keita district of Niger. This district was 
the recipient of a remarkable land restoration effort headed by the  
government of Italy.
SUSTAINABILITy
New Ditches Save Soil
A hard rain pounds 
on a dusty farm field. 
Water races down a 
slope, running in rivulets 
through the rows, flow-
ing over weeds at the field’s edge, swelling the 
ditch that runs between it and the next field. In 
minutes the ditch is full, its banks covered with 
the rushing water. Thunder and lightning fill the 
sky overhead. The ditch’s walls begin to crack, 
slumping into the torrent. Eddies of water carry 
brown soil away. The soil leaves the field to head 
downstream—to a river that does not need this 
sediment, to clog an estuary, to cover organisms, 
and to remove a valued resource from the farm 
that needs it.
Farm ditches are a valuable way to control 
the flow of water. They keep fields from lying 
sodden after long rains, but they can also be 
channels of erosion and can become eroded 
themselves in a thundering summer downpour. 
Researchers in Iowa are trying to design a new 
kind of ditch—one that is effective under normal 
conditions but can also keep down erosion in 
extreme storm events. They call this approach 
“two-stage ditch design.” At the bottom of the 
ditch is a typical nar-
row channel. Partway 
up the ditch are two 
broad vegetated areas 
(like benches) that lie 
on either side of the 
channel, enclosed by 
banks that go up to 
the level of the field. 
The vegetated flat 
areas are designed to 
slow water and stop 
sediment in the case 
of a storm event. The 
ditches do more than 
save farmer’s soil. In 
rivers, they protect 
freshwater mussels 
from the effects of silt. Sediment can over-
load waterways and kill vulnerable organisms. 
Far away, less sediment and fewer nutrients will 
arrive to pollute the distant Gulf of Mexico, an 
indication of just how connected ecosystems are.
The two-stage ditch design was created 
by the Nature Conservancy and collaborating 
 partners. General Mills, Cargill, and the Natural  
Resource Conservation Service provided 
funding. Other partners helped with testing, 
monitoring, and working with landowners. It 
has been used extensively in Ohio and other 
states. The two-stage drainage ditch is a good 
example of a low-tech solution to a common 
problem—one that will help limit erosion of 
valuable farm soil.
A
o
W
s
t
Two-stage ditch design
Additional filters
next to fields
Original water table
Grass benches
Main channel
303

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
Farm Legislation. The Federal Agricultural Improvement 
and Reform Act (FAIR) of 1996 attempted to bring needed 
reforms. Subsidies and controls over many farm commodities 
were reduced or eliminated, giving farmers greater flexibility 
in deciding what to plant, but also forcing them to rely more 
heavily on the market to guide their decisions. Unfortunately, 
declining commodity prices prompted yearly emergency 
farm aid packages, essentially maintaining the subsidies and 
controls targeted by FAIR.
The 2002 Farm Security and Rural Investment Act 
succeeded FAIR. It continued to subsidize a host of farm 
products, maintaining price supports and farm income for 
American farmers. The latest farm bill is the Farm Bill of 
2012, which as of this writing is still under discussion.  Before 
that, the Farm Bill of 2008 was passed by Congress over 
President George W. Bush’s veto. The president objected to 
the continued high level of support to big farms, arguing that 
payment limitations and subsidies for crops were too high. 
Unfortunately, because of subsidies for corn ethanol produc-
tion, the bill encouraged farmers to plow under remaining 
native grasslands. It does, however, continue a number of 
programs aimed at soil and wetland conservation.
Conservation Programs. In 1985, Congress passed the 
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), under whose author-
ity highly erodible cropland could be established as a “con-
servation reserve” of forest and grass. Farmers are paid each 
year for land placed in the reserve.
Farm bills continue to set out conservation funding. Fund-
ing has been provided for two newer programs, the Wildlife 
Habitat Incentives Program (WHIP) and the Environmental 
Quality Incentives Program (EQIP), both of which encourage 
conservation-minded landowners to set aside portions of their 
land or address pollution problems. The 2002 farm bill initiated 
the Conservation Security Program (CSP), a voluntary program 
that encourages stewardship of private farmlands, forests, and 
watersheds by providing landowners incentives to conserve soil 
and water resources on their lands. This was renamed the Con-
servation Stewardship Program in the 2008 farm bill; more than 
$1 billion was provided for the new CSP. More than 12 million 
acres of farmlands may be enrolled each year. The 2012 farm 
bill is still in process at the time of this writing.
Public policies aside, farmers should have incentives 
to nurture the soil on lands under cultivation. The more 
farmers incorporate conservation practices in their op-
erations, the more productive their farms will become in 
the long run. The same applies to those who care for live-
stock that graze open rangelands. Most observers agree 
that the most significant obstacle to establishing sustain-
able soil conservation is a lack of knowledge about what 
such conservation can do. In particular, this applies to the 
developing countries, where agricultural policies often are 
poorly developed and the majority of landholders have lit-
tle  access to agricultural extension services like those pro-
vided in the United States by the NRCS. In cases where 
they are provided with such services, as with Gabino 
López, they often accomplish surprising gains in agricul-
tural  production.
Public Policy and Soils
Despite the crucial importance of saving agricultural land, 
forests, and rangeland, soil degradation in the form of ero-
sion, desertification, and salinization continues to occur 
because of human activities. The losses are on a collision 
course with sustainability. Who is responsible for making 
changes? At the first level, it is the individual landowner, but 
 landowners are subject to public policies, which is the second 
level of decision making for soil conservation.
Subsidies. Farm policy in the United States was origi-
nally focused solely on increasing production. This goal 
has been achieved, as is demonstrated by continuing high 
yields and surpluses. The federal government supports U.S. 
agriculture through a number of programs; the farm lobby 
is a powerful one that has successfully maintained its sup-
port through the years. In more recent years, farm policy 
has emphasized maintaining farm income and support of 
farm commodities—in other words, subsidies. Farmers 
are guaranteed price levels for many products, including 
grains, cotton, sugar, peanuts, dairy products, and soy-
beans. This helps keep food prices from fluctuating year to 
year. In their book Perverse Subsidies, Norman Myers and 
Jennifer Kent6 point out how subsidies are bad news for 
the economy and the environment. Myers and Kent argue 
that subsidies encourage excessive use of pesticides and 
fertilizers, reduce crop rotation by locking farmers into an-
nual crop support  subsidies, and promote the continued 
drawdown of groundwater aquifers through irrigation. 
Recall from Section 2 how similar subsidies to ranchers 
for grazing on federal lands have undercut the  objectives 
of soil conservation for those lands.
Sustainable Agriculture. In comparison, the goals of 
sustainable agriculture are to (1) maintain a productive 
 topsoil, (2) keep food safe and wholesome, (3) reduce the 
use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, and last, but far 
from least, (4) keep farms economically viable. Profes-
sional agriculturists are becoming increasingly aware of the 
shortfalls of modern farming and are at work developing 
alternatives. Many options actually mimic practices of the 
past, such as contouring, crop rotation, terracing, the use 
of smaller equipment, and the application of a reduced 
amount of chemicals or no chemicals at all. In 1988, the 
U.S. Department of  Agriculture started the Sustainable Ag-
riculture Research and Education (SARE) program, which 
provides funding for investigating ways to accomplish all of 
the goals of sustainable agriculture just listed. The program 
has continued to receive funding of $5 million to $12 mil-
lion annually, a small but  encouraging amount earmarked 
for building and disseminating knowledge about sustainable 
agricultural systems.
6Norman Myers and Jennifer Kent, Perverse Subsidies: How Tax Dollars Can Un-
dercut the Environment and the Economy (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2001).
304

REvISITING THE THEMES
sound science
Soil science uses the principles of sound science to under-
stand how soils are formed, how they are structured, and 
how they can be sustained. As with any science, however, 
it is possible to draw erroneous conclusions from the data, as seen with 
the GLASOD data on world soils and soil degradation and with the data 
on soil erosion in the United States. The truth is that more field meas-
urements are desperately needed, and the UNCCD’s Land Degradation 
Assessment in Drylands (LADA) is a big step in that direction. In the 
United States, soil erosion is measured with map reading and equations, 
and when some scientists actually measured erosion, they found that 
the equation approach grossly overestimated erosion rates. Science can 
include farmers as scientists, giving data on soil use that might be hard 
to obtain otherwise.
sustainability
Topsoils take hundreds of years to form and represent 
the most vital component of land ecosystems. Under 
most conditions, they are highly sustainable. Because of 
heavy human use for agriculture, grazing, and forestry 
and activities like urban expansion and mining, however, lands are being 
 degraded, causing the productivity of those ecosystems to decline. In 
particular, the drylands have been recognized as extremely vulnerable, 
and the UNCCD has been helping farmers to adopt new approaches 
to farming. Programs like COSECHA and TerrAfrica are spreading the 
word on these new approaches as well as on many sound traditional 
approaches that are not widely known. The sustainable agriculture 
practices in Guatemala and around the world are a way to improve soil 
health. On the other hand, the fees charged for grazing livestock on 
public lands in the United States are woefully inadequate and promote 
poor and unsustainable use of public lands.
stewardship
Those who work the land or graze their livestock are 
stewards of the soil. So are miners or anyone else using 
land. They are temporary tenants whose lives will be 
far shorter than the time it took to form the soil. Their 
stewardship can lead to sustainable soil health, or it can lead to further 
erosion and degradation of soil. A few short years of poor management 
can lead to the loss of hundreds of years’ worth of topsoil. Soil is cared 
for at the local level. Soil stewardship takes place one field at a time, by 
the people who are most familiar with the land. In many countries, soil 
erosion is being reversed with practices like no-till agriculture and con-
tour strip cropping. In the United States, the Conservation Stewardship 
Program encourages farmers to care for soils on their lands. This and 
other conservation programs under the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
have been adequately supported by the Food, Conservation, and Energy 
Act of 2008.
s
T
s
l
f
s
T
t
m
h
s
S
s
h
it is possible to
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe the events that led to the devastation of the Dust 
Bowl and what role human decision making played.
 2. Name and describe the properties of the three main compo-
nents of soil texture.
 3. What are the different layers, or horizons, that compose a 
soil profile? What makes each one distinct from the others?
 4. Name and describe four major soil orders listed in this 
 chapter. Where are they mainly found? How do hydric soils 
relate to soil orders?
 5. What are the main things that plant roots must obtain from 
soil? Name and describe a process (natural or unnatural) 
that can keep plants from obtaining the amounts of each of 
these things they need for survival.
 6. Describe, in terms of both content and physical structure, 
the soil environment that will best fulfill the needs of plants.
 7. State and define the relationships among humus, detritus, 
and soil organisms. Describe the role each of these factors 
plays in creating a soil favorable to plants.
 8. What is meant by mineralization? What causes it? What are 
its consequences for soil?
 9. What are some problems with the sweeping claims made 
about soil erosion and soil degradation? How have these 
claims been challenged?
 10. What is the impact of water and wind on bare soil? Define 
and describe the process of erosion in detail.
 11. What is meant by desertification? Describe how the proc-
ess of erosion leads to a loss of water-holding capacity and, 
hence, to desertification.
 12. What are drylands? Where are they found, and how impor-
tant are they for human habitation and agriculture?
 13. What are three major cultural practices that expose soil to 
the weather?
 14. What is meant by salinization, and what are its conse-
quences? How does salinization result from irrigation?
 15. Explain how soil biota can be killed by human actions and 
some of the effects.
 16. What are the two levels at which soil conservation must be 
practiced? Give an example of what is being done at each 
level.
Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
305

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
 MAKING A DIFFERENCE
 1. To prevent soil erosion in your gardens, mulching twice a 
year can hold moisture in during the summertime and keep 
plants warmer during the winter. It also keeps rain from 
washing away your precious topsoil.
 2. Don’t use a leaf blower. It can erode topsoil more than even 
some of the most violent winds. It also burns fossil fuels.
 3. Try mowing your fallen leaves to make shreds. Leave the 
shredded leaves in place and cover some with bark chips 
in garden beds to generate soil that is aerated, is rich with 
 nutrients, and holds moisture better. Both of these practices 
combat erosion.
 4. Composting is extremely sustainable and a very good 
method to practice. Two-thirds of solid waste is made up of 
purely organic material such as table scraps, trimmings from 
the yard, and paper products. Information on how to com-
post is available on the Internet. If you don’t have enough 
space for traditional composting, you could try vermicom-
posting, which utilizes the surprising sustainable powers of 
worms. Many municipalities have yard waste composting as 
well.
 5. When you use fertilizers, use organic products and ones 
 labeled “slow-release” because “quick-release” fertilizer can 
be easily washed out and pollutes groundwater.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
THINKING ENVIRONMENTALLY
 1. Why is soil considered to be a detritus-based ecosystem? 
 Describe how the aboveground portion and the below-
ground portion of an ecosystem act as two interrelated and 
interdependent communities.
 2. Suppose you have uncovered an excellent new technique for 
keeping dryland soils moist and fertile. How would you get 
your message to the subsistence farmers?
 3. Critique the following argument: Erosion is always with us; 
mountains are formed and then erode, and rivers erode can-
yons. You can’t ever eliminate soil erosion, so it is foolish to 
ask people to do so.
 4. The current system of management of grazing lands by the 
BLM is clearly unsustainable. What would you suggest in 
the way of public policy to make it sustainable?
CREDITS
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(bottom right): fotolE/iStockphoto; (top right): National Archives; Ted Foxx / 
Alamy; (bottom left): Bernard J. Nebel; (bottom right): Richard T. Wright; Eye of 
Science / Photo Researchers, Inc.; Philippe Psaila / Photo Researchers, Inc.; (top): 
Charles R. Belinky/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (center right): Jon Arnold Images Ltd/
Alamy; Edwin Remsberg/Alamy; (top left): U.S. Department of Agriculture; (center 
left): David Wall/Alamy; Leng Yuehan - CNImaging/Newscom; (top left): Betty 
Derig/Photo Researchers; (top right): DAVID GRAY/REUTERS/Newscom; (top 
right): Richard Lord/PhotoEdit; (bottom left): Issouf Sanogo/AFP/Getty Images 
Text Credits
Figure 3: “Relative Size of Soil Particles,” from CMG Garden Notes. Copyright 
© by Colorado State University Extension. Reprinted with permission; Figure 6: 
Source: “Global Soil Regions” by Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
November 2005. United States Department of Agriculture; Figure 14: Based on 
“Production Scenarios and the Effect of Soil Degradation on Long-Term Food 
Security in China,” by Liming Ye and Eric Van Ranst, from Global Environment 
Change, October 2009, Volume 19(4). Copyright © 2009 by Elsevier. Reprinted 
with permission. All rights reserved.
aeration Soil: The exchange within the soil of oxygen and carbon 
dioxide necessary for the respiration of roots. Water: The 
bubbling of air or oxygen through water to increase the amount 
of oxygen dissolved in the water.
center-pivot irrigation An irrigation system consisting of a spray 
arm several hundred meters long, supported by wheels, pivoting 
around a central well from which water is pumped.
clay Any particles in soil that are less than 0.004 millimeters in 
size.
compaction Packing down. Soil: Packing and pressing out air 
spaces present in the soil. Compaction reduces soil aeration and 
infiltration and thus diminishes the capacity of the soil to support 
plants. Trash: Packing down trash to reduce the space that it 
requires.
composting toilet A toilet that does not flush wastes away with 
water but deposits them in a chamber where they will compost. 
(See composting.)
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) A federal program whereby 
farmers are paid to place highly erodible cropland in a reserve. A 
similar program, the Conservation Stewardship Program, encourages 
farmers to conserve soil and water resources on their lands.
contour farming The practice of cultivating land along the 
contours across, rather than up and down, slopes. In combination 
with strip cropping, contour farming reduces water erosion.
GLOSSARY
306

Soil: The Foundation for Land Ecosystems
nutrient-holding capacity The capacity of a soil to bind and hold 
nutrients (fertilizer) against their tendency to be leached from the soil.
parent material Rock material whose weathering and gradual 
breakdown are the source of the mineral portion of soil.
peat Compacted plant material that accumulates in wet 
environments where oxygen is lacking; it may be used for fuel or 
extracted for use in gardening.
pH The scale used to designate the acidity or basicity (alkalinity) of 
solutions or soil, expressed as the logarithm of the concentration 
of hydrogen ions (H1). pH 7 is neutral; values decreasing from 7 
indicate increasing acidity, and values increasing from 7 indicate 
increasing basicity. Each unit from 7 indicates a tenfold increase 
over the preceding unit.
sand Mineral particles 0.063 to 2.0 mm in diameter.
sediment Soil particles—namely, sand, silt, and clay—carried by 
flowing water. The same material after it has been deposited. 
Because of different rates of settling, deposits generally are pure 
sand, pure silt, or pure clay.
sheet erosion The loss of a more or less even layer of soil from 
the land surface due to the impact of rain and runoff from a 
rainstorm.
shelterbelts Rows of trees around cultivated fields for the purpose 
of reducing wind erosion.
silt Soil particles between the size of sand particles and that of clay 
particles—namely, particles 0.004 to 0.063 mm in diameter.
soil A dynamic terrestrial system involving three components: mineral 
particles, detritus, and soil organisms feeding on the detritus.
soil fertility A soil’s ability to support plant growth; often refers 
specifically to the presence of proper amounts of nutrients. The 
soil’s ability to fulfill all the other needs of plants is also involved.
soil horizons Distinct layers within a soil that convey different 
properties to the soil and that derive from natural processes of 
soil formation.
soil order The highest group in the taxonomy of soils; there are 12 
major orders of soil worldwide.
soil profile A description of the different naturally formed layers, 
called horizons, within a soil.
soil structure The composition of soil in terms of particles (sand, 
silt, and clay) stuck together to form clumps and aggregates, 
generally with considerable air spaces in between. Soil structure 
affects infiltration and aeration and develops as organisms feed 
on organic matter in and on the soil.
soil texture The relative size of the mineral particles that make up 
the soil. Generally defined in terms of the soil’s sand, silt, and 
clay content.
splash erosion The compaction of soil that results when rainfall 
hits bare soil.
subsoil In a natural situation, the soil beneath topsoil. In contrast 
to topsoil, subsoil is compacted and has little or no humus or 
other organic material, living or dead. In many areas, topsoil has 
been lost or destroyed as a result of erosion or development, and 
subsoil is at the surface.
tilth In farming, the ability of a soil to support crop growth.
topsoil The surface layer of soil, which is rich in humus and other 
organic material, both living and dead. As a result of the activity 
of organisms living in the topsoil, it generally has a loose, crumbly 
structure, as opposed to being a compact mass.
transpiration The loss of water vapor from plants. Water evaporates 
from cells within the leaves and exits through the stomata.
water-holding capacity The ability of a soil to hold water so that 
it will be available to plants.
weathering The gradual breakdown of rock into smaller and 
smaller particles, caused by natural chemical, physical, and 
biological factors.
workability The relative ease with which a soil can be cultivated.
cryptogamic crust Made up of primitive plants, called cryptogams, 
the crust develops on hardened soils and can stabilize soil but also 
prevents water infiltration and seed germination.
desertification The formation and expansion of degraded areas 
of soil and vegetation cover in arid, semiarid, and seasonally 
dry areas, caused by climatic variations and human activities. 
Desertified land is most commonly traced to erosion due to 
human mismanagement.
desert pavement A covering of stones and coarse sand protecting 
desert soils from further wind erosion. The covering results from 
the differential erosion of finer material.
drip irrigation A method of supplying irrigation water through 
tubes that literally drip water onto the soil at the base of each plant.
drylands Ecosystems characterized by low precipitation (25 to 75 
cm per year) and often subject to droughts; some 41% of Earth’s 
land is drylands.
eluviation In soils, the process of leaching many minerals due to 
the downward movement of water; the E in E horizon of soil 
profiles stands for eluviation.
erosion The process of soil particles being carried away by wind 
or water. Erosion moves the smaller particles first and hence 
degrades the soil to a coarser, sandier, stonier texture.
evaporative water loss The loss of moisture from soil by 
evaporation; it can be lessened by covering the soil with detritus 
or plant cover.
fertilizer Material applied to plants or soil to supply plant 
nutrients, most commonly nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium 
but possibly others. Organic fertilizer is natural organic material, 
such as manure, that releases nutrients as it breaks down. 
Inorganic fertilizer, also called chemical fertilizer, is a mixture of 
one or more necessary nutrients in inorganic chemical form.
flood irrigation A technique of irrigation in which water is 
diverted from rivers by means of canals and is flooded through 
furrows in fields.
gully erosion Soil erosion produced by running water and resulting 
in the formation of gullies.
humus A dark brown or black, soft, spongy residue of organic 
matter that remains after the bulk of dead leaves, wood, or 
other organic matter has decomposed. Humus does oxidize, 
but relatively slowly. It is extremely valuable in enhancing the 
physical and chemical properties of soil.
land degradation The processes where land is rendered less 
capable of supporting plant growth, often through soil erosion.
leaching The process in which materials in or on the soil gradually 
dissolve and are carried by water seeping through the soil. 
Leaching may eventually remove valuable nutrients from the 
soil, or it may carry buried wastes into groundwater, thereby 
contaminating it.
loam A soil texture consisting of a mixture of about 40% sand, 
40% silt, and 20% clay; loam is usually good soil.
low-till farming Similar to no-till farming, except that instead 
of using herbicides, farmers plow just once over residues of a 
previous crop and plant their new crop.
mineralization The process of gradual oxidation of the organic 
matter (humus) present in soil that leaves just the gritty mineral 
component of the soil.
mycorrhiza, pl. mycorrhizae The mycelia of certain fungi that 
grow symbiotically with the roots of some plants and provide for 
additional nutrient uptake.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Formerly the 
Soil Conservation Service, a nationwide network of offices that 
provides extension services to farmers and encourage soil and 
water conservation throughout the United States.
no-till agriculture The farming practice in which weeds are killed 
with chemicals (or other means) and seeds are planted and grown 
without resorting to plowing or cultivation. The practice is highly 
effective in reducing soil erosion.
307

This page intentionally left blank 

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 1. Major  Patterns of Food Produc-
tion: Explain the ways the Indus-
trial Revolution and the Green 
 Revolution radically transformed 
the practice of farming; compare 
to subsistence agriculture and 
animal farming.
 2. From Green Revolution to Gene 
Revolution: Explain genetically 
modified crops and their pros 
and cons.
 3. Food Distribution and Trade: 
Describe the broad movements 
of world trade in foodstuffs and 
relate to food security for people.
 4. Hunger, Malnutrition, and  Famine: 
Understand the differences 
between hunger and malnutrition 
and the causes of shortages.
 5. The Future: Increasing Production 
and Distribution of Food: Describe 
changes needed to feed the world 
as we move toward 2030 and 
2050. Explain new trends in agri-
culture, sustainable agriculture, 
organic, and urban agriculture. Be 
able to describe the key elements 
of sustainable agricultural systems.
The Production 
and Distribution 
of Food
W
hat does it take to get a MacArthur “Genius Grant” (a grant given by the 
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation to people who show 
 exceptional merit and promise for creative work)? For one famous ath-
lete it took a vision for a farm in the city. Will Allen, a former pro basketball player, 
had an idea for a way to provide fresh local food for the people of Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, so he purchased a defunct plant nursery and began his foray into urban 
farming. The nonprofit he now directs, Growing Power, is a sustainable agriculture 
organization. It runs the last functioning farm within the city limits of Milwaukee, 
operates a 40-acre farm outside of the city, and has branched out as far as Chicago. 
Of the whole operation, the piece that most captures the imagination is the original 
farm carved into the north side of Milwaukee. On a 3-acre plot lies an intensive 
urban agricultural operation with greenhouses, fish, bees, chickens, and goats. The 
integrated system brings food to an estimated 10,000 people annually. Every piece of 
space is carefully used.
A WhOLE LIfE. Growing Power’s Milwaukee farm meets needs other than 
simply providing food. More than 5,000 visitors come to the facility a year, and the 
farm uses 400 tons of the city’s food waste. It produces and sells worms, worm cast-
ings, compost, fruits and vegeta-
bles, goat milk and cheese, fish, 
and honey. It also provides job 
training for urban youth. Grow-
ing Power’s Chicago location also 
provides job skills training and 
fresh food.
These examples of urban 
agriculture highlight the themes 
of this chapter: The future of 
agriculture will be different from 
agriculture of the past. It must 
produce enough food to support 
people and to be accessible, while 
William Allen, at the urban farm Growing Power in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
From Chapter 12 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

The Production and Distribution of Food
cycles, population growth, poverty, water availability, soil, pests 
and their control, environmental health, climate change, water 
pollution, and sustainable cities. Food is central to our lives as 
humans and central to topics in environmental science. We will 
look at three things necessary to provide nourishment for a bur-
geoning population and protect the environment for the long 
term: the production of more food, the elimination of the harmful 
effects of food production on the environment, and the distribu-
tion of the right kinds of food to everyone on the planet.
lessening negative effects on the environment caused by modern 
agriculture. The need for change is real. Throughout the world, 
three decades of rapid population growth have left hundreds of 
millions of people dependent on imported food or food aid, while 
one in five in the developing world remains undernourished. As 
the world population continues its rise, no resource is more vital 
than food.
This chapter examines food-production systems, problems 
surrounding the lack of food, and the global effort being made 
to reduce hunger and malnutrition. Food production connects to 
topics such as politics and economics, nitrogen and phosphorus 
Figure 1 Subsistence farming. 
Subsistence farming feeds more than 1.4 bil-
lion people in the developing world. Here we 
see a farmer planting rice near Yangshuo in 
Guangxi Province, China.
1  Crops and Animals: Major 
Patterns of Food Production
By many measures, human societies have done very well at 
putting food on the table. More people are being fed, and 
with more nutritional food, than ever before. In the past 
30 years, world food production has more than doubled, ris-
ing even more rapidly than population. In addition, the daily 
amount of food available in the developing countries has in-
creased by 25%. A lively world trade in foodstuffs forms the 
bulk of economic production for many nations. How did we 
get to a place where we produce this much food?
Some 12,000 years ago, the Neolithic Revolution saw the 
introduction of agriculture and animal husbandry, which prob-
ably did more than anything else to foster the development of 
human civilization. Virtually all of the major crop plants and 
domestic animals were established in the first thousand years 
of agriculture. In most of the developing world, plants and 
animals continue to be raised for food by subsistence farmers, 
using traditional agricultural methods that go back millennia. 
These farmers represent the great majority of rural populations.
Subsistence Agriculture  
in the Developing World
Subsistence farmers live on small parcels of land that pro-
vide them with enough food for their households and, it is 
hoped, a small cash crop. From the point of view of the mod-
ern world, such farmers are very poor, although many do 
not consider themselves to be so. The food they produce and 
consume themselves is not counted in the global economy 
and is sometimes undervalued by others. Like past agricul-
tural practice in the United States, subsistence farming is 
labor intensive and lacks practically all of the inputs of in-
dustrialized agriculture. Also, it is often practiced on margin-
ally productive land (Fig. 1).
310

The Production and Distribution of Food
subsistence agriculture involves shifting cultivation within 
tropical forests—often called slash-and-burn agriculture 
(Fig. 2). Research has shown that this practice can be sus-
tainable. The cultivators create highly diverse ecosystems in 
which the cleared land supports a few years of crops and 
gradually shifts into agroforestry—a system of tree plan-
tations with different ground crops employed as the trees 
grow. The reason this works, though, is because the local 
human population is low.
Africa. Parts of Africa serve as good examples of the diffi-
culties with subsistence agriculture. Low yields, rapid popula-
tion growth, poverty, and hunger are the rule in sub-Saharan 
Africa. Two-thirds of the region’s people live in rural lands 
and are dependent on agriculture for their livelihood. Agri-
cultural production in sub-Saharan Africa has lagged behind 
that of the rest of the developing world (Fig. 3). Because of 
the failures of agriculture, many in the region are dependent 
on imported food, and world food prices have been soaring. 
With the help of foreign investment, African crop scientists 
are working with conventional breeding techniques to im-
prove traditional African food crops. The alliance will also 
work throughout the subcontinent to help improve irrigation, 
soil health, and local and regional agricultural markets. The 
basic goal of this work is to enable the millions of subsist-
ence farmers in sub-Saharan Africa to grow enough food to 
sustain their families and to produce enough to encourage the 
economic development of their communities and their coun-
tries. Many people would like Africa to see the changes in ag-
riculture that much of the rest of the world has already seen.
The Development of Modern 
Industrialized Agriculture
In 2012, the U.S. Department of Agriculture celebrated its 
150th anniversary. At the time of its founding, the  majority 
Typically, a family owns a small parcel of land for grow-
ing food and maintains a few goats, chickens, or cows. The 
system may be sustainable if crop residues are fed to livestock, 
the livestock manure is used as a fertilizer, and the family’s 
nutrition is adequate. Such a family is making the best use 
of very limited resources. Keep in mind, however, that sub-
sistence agriculture is primarily practiced in regions experi-
encing the most rapid population growth, even though that 
kind of agriculture is best suited for low population densities. 
An estimated 1.4 billion people in Latin America, Asia, and 
Africa—more than one-third of the people there— depend on 
subsistence agriculture. It has been called the  “silent giant” 
that feeds most of the world’s rural poor.
Successes. Because subsistence agricultural practice varies 
with the local climate and with local knowledge, there are 
regions of the world where it works well. In some areas, 
Figure 2 Slash-and-burn agriculture. Countryside showing slash-and-
burn agriculture in Para State, Brazil. Such agriculture can be a  sustainable mix of 
forest and fields.
Figure 3 The yield gap for cereals. Subsistence 
 agriculture often has lower crop yields. The difference in yield 
in terms of tons per acre between sub-Saharan Africa and other 
 regions continues to widen. (Source: FAOSTAT.)
5
1
2
3
4
0
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005
2009
Cereal Yield, tons per acre
Developed countries
East Asia & Pacific
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America 
& Caribbean
311

The Production and Distribution of Food
infrastructure. This involved rural electrification and road 
building, agricultural programs in state colleges and universi-
ties, agricultural and soil extension services for farmers, the 
establishment of markets and efficient transportation of farm 
goods, banks and credit unions to handle farm loans, irriga-
tion facilities, the formation of farm cooperatives, price and 
income support programs, and many other forms of govern-
ment subsidies of farming. Most of these developments were 
essential in achieving the agricultural revolution, but many 
believe that the long-term maintenance of farm subsidies 
simply favors large corporate farms and works against the 
interests of farmers in developing countries.
Machinery.  An incredible array of farm machinery 
handles virtually every imaginable need for working the soil: 
seeding, irrigating, weeding, and harvesting. This machinery 
of people in the United States lived and worked on small 
farms. Human and animal labor turned former forests and 
grasslands into systems that produced enough food to supply 
a robust and growing nation (Fig. 4a). Farmers used tradi-
tional approaches to combat pests and soil erosion: Crops 
were rotated regularly, many different crops were grown, 
and animal wastes were returned to the soil. Farming, al-
though difficult, was efficient enough to allow an increas-
ing number of people to leave the farm and join the growing 
ranks of merchants and workers living in cities and towns. 
Then, in the mid-1800s, the Industrial Revolution came to 
the United States, and it had a major impact on farming.
The Transformation of Traditional Agriculture. The 
Industrial Revolution transformed agriculture so profoundly 
that today, in the United States, some 2 million farmers 
produce enough food for all the nation’s needs, plus a sub-
stantial amount for trade on world markets (Fig. 4b). This 
revolution increased the efficiency of farming remarkably. 
Since the mid-1930s, the number of farms has decreased by 
two-thirds (from 6.8 million to 2.02 million), while the size 
of farms has grown fourfold. (They now average 418 acres, 
or 170 hectares). Farming is a large and important business 
in the United States. Indeed, the revolution has achieved such 
gains in production that the United States frequently has had 
to cope with surpluses of many crops.
Virtually every industrialized nation has experienced 
this agricultural revolution. The pattern of developments in 
U.S. agriculture could just as well describe that in France, 
Canada, or Japan. Crop production has been raised to new 
heights, doubling or tripling yields per acre (Fig. 5). To un-
derstand how this tremendous increase in production was 
made possible, you need to understand the components of 
the agricultural revolution. These in turn reveal some of the 
problems brought on by the revolution.
Infrastructure. It is not enough to simply allow farm-
ers to produce crops on their land. The transformation of 
agriculture was greatly facilitated by developing a supporting 
Figure 4 Traditional versus modern farming. (a) Traditional farming practiced in Arkansas. For hun-
dreds of years, traditional practices on American farms supported the growing U.S. population.  
(b) Modern agricultural practice, illustrated by a combine loading corn into a tractor trailer in America’s Midwest.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5 U.S. crop yields. Corn, wheat, and soybean yields (measured as 
kilograms per hectare) have increased over time. (Source: FAOSTAT.)
Maize
Soybeans
Wheat
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
YIELDS OF US CROPS FROM 1961-2010 
2010
2005
2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975
1970
1965
Year
Yield (Kg/Ha)
312

The Production and Distribution of Food
machinery and fertilizer use, pesticide manufacture depends 
on fossil fuel energy. 
Irrigation. Worldwide, irrigated acreage has  doubled 
since 1950, while water withdrawals have tripled. By 2011, 
irrigated acreage represented 18% of all cropland—some 
683 million acres (277 million ha)—and produced 40% of 
the world’s food. Irrigation is still expanding, but at a much 
slower pace because of limits on water resources  (irrigation 
represents 70% of all water use). Muchcurrent  irrigation is 
unsustainable because groundwater resources are being de-
pleted. In addition, production is being adversely affected on 
as much as one-third of the world’s irrigated land because 
of waterlogging and  salinization—consequences of irrigat-
ing where there is poor drainage. Unfortunately, irrigation 
ditches are also  associated with the spread of as many as 30 
diseases, because open water breeds mosquito larvae, houses 
snails that carry parasites, and supports other  vectors of dis-
ease.
High-Yielding Varieties of Plants. Several decades 
ago, plant geneticists developed new varieties of wheat, corn, 
and rice that gave yields double to triple those of traditional 
varieties. This feat was accomplished by selecting strains that 
diverted more of the plant’s photosynthate (photosynthetic 
product) to the seeds and away from the stems, leaves, and 
roots. The seeds of modern wheat, rice, and corn now re-
ceive more than 50% of the plant’s photosynthate, close to 
the calculated physiological limit of 60%. As these new va-
rieties were grown in the developed countries and then in-
troduced throughout the world, production soared, and the 
Green Revolution was born.
The Green Revolution
The same technologies that gave rise to the agricultural 
 revolution in the industrialized countries were eventually 
has enabled farmers to cultivate far more land than ever. 
However, the shift from animal labor to machinery has cre-
ated a dependency on fossil fuel energy. When the price of oil 
rises, so does the cost of food production.
Land Under Cultivation. The United States has the 
largest area of arable land in the world. Cropland and pas-
tureland comprise more than one billion acres (400 million 
ha). This is about 45% of the total land area of the United 
States. Agriculture, therefore, has an enormous impact on the 
landscape. Before 1960, much of the increased production in 
the United States came from bringing new land into produc-
tion. Since then, increases in crop yields and consistent crop 
surpluses have lessened pressure to convert additional land 
to cropland, enabling farmers to be selective in the land they 
cultivate. The surpluses have also given farmers the oppor-
tunity to take erosion-prone land out of production. Under 
current farm policy, the Conservation Reserve Program reim-
burses farmers for “retiring” erosion-prone land and plant-
ing it with trees or grasses. It is likely that some of this land 
will soon be brought back into production to meet a rising 
demand for corn used in ethanol production.
Essentially, all of the good cropland in the United States 
is now under cultivation or held in short-term reserve. Glo-
bally, agriculture occupies about 38% of the land, a number 
that has remained relatively steady since 1994, although 
yields have increased. Any expansion of cropland anticipated 
in the future will come at the expense of forests and wet-
lands, however, which are both economically important and 
ecologically fragile.
Fertilizers and Pesticides. Farmers long ago learned 
that animal manure and other organic supplements to soil 
could increase their crop yields. When chemical fertilizers, 
made with fossil fuels, first became available for use, how-
ever, farmers discovered that they could achieve even greater 
yields. Moreover, the fertilizers were more convenient to 
use and more available than manure. When fertilizers were 
first employed, 15 to 20 additional tons of grain were gained 
from each ton of fertilizer used (Fig. 6). Between 1950 and 
1990, worldwide fertilizer use rose tenfold. Then, following 
a decline traced to hard times in the countries of the former 
Soviet Union after it broke up in the 1990s, the worldwide 
use of fertilizer resumed its rise and is now higher than ever 
(176 million tons in 2011). Most of the current increase in 
fertilizer use is in “underfertilized” countries such as China, 
India, and Brazil. However, fertilizer prices vary with the 
cost of fuel and other factors. World fertilizer prices doubled 
in 2007, for example, affecting the cost of food.
Chemical pesticides provided significant control over in-
sect and plant pests, at least initially. However, due to natu-
ral selection, pests have become resistant to many pesticides. 
This leads to a cycle. More pesticides are used, and pests re-
cover and increase. The amount of money spent on pesticides 
has increased more than tenfold between 1970 and now, and 
today 37% of food and fiber crops are still lost to pests. Cur-
rently, more than 113 weed species, 150 plant diseases, and 
520 insects and mites are resistant to pests. Efforts to reduce 
the use of pesticides have begun because of side effects to 
human and environmental health. As with the use of farm 
Figure 6 The effects of fertilizer. This 1942 photo shows the  difference 
between fertilized and unfertilized crops and was part of a campaign to help 
farmers increase yields. (Source: Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and 
Museum.)
313

The Production and Distribution of Food
world population was increasing at its highest rate (2% 
per year), rice and wheat production increased 4% or more 
per year. In 35 years, global food production doubled. The 
Green Revolution has probably done more than any other 
single scientific or other achievement to prevent hunger and 
malnutrition. Borlaug was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 
1970 in recognition of his contribution.
Impacts. The CGIAR sponsored a study of the impact of the 
Green Revolution in the developing world between 1960 and 
2000.1 The study’s findings have shed light on that impor-
tant agricultural development. The early years of the Green 
Revolution (1960–1980) were only the beginning; research on 
high-yielding crops has continued, and more varieties continue 
to be developed, released, and adopted by farmers. Recent 
research has focused on resistance to diseases, pests, and cli-
matic stresses. The early Green Revolution contributed greatly 
to expanded food production in Asia and Latin America; the 
later years of the Green Revolution benefited Africa and the 
Middle East as a greater variety of crops was developed.
Panacea? High-yielding modern crop varieties are now cul-
tivated throughout the world and have become the basis of 
food production in China, Latin America, the Middle East, 
southern Asia, and the western nations. Because the technol-
ogy raises yields without requiring new agricultural lands, the 
Green Revolution has also held back a significant amount of 
 introduced into the developing world. There, they gave birth 
to the remarkable increases in crop production called the 
Green Revolution.
In 1943, the Rockefeller Foundation sent agricultural 
expert Norman Borlaug and three other U.S. agricultural 
scientists to Mexico, with the objective of exporting U.S. 
agricultural technology to a less developed nation that had 
serious food problems. Their aim was to improve the tra-
ditional crops grown in Mexico, especially wheat. Mexican 
wheat was well adapted to the subtropical climate, but it 
gave low yields and responded to fertilization by growing 
very tall stalks that were easily blown over. Using wheat 
from other areas of the world, Borlaug and his coworkers 
bred a dwarf hybrid with a large head and a thick stalk. The 
hybrid did well in warm weather when provided with fer-
tilizer and sufficient water (Fig. 7). The program was highly 
successful: By the 1960s, Mexico had closed the gap between 
food production and food needs, wheat production had tri-
pled, and Mexican wheat appeared on the export market.
Nobel Effort. Research workers with the Consultative 
Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) ex-
tended the work done in Mexico, introducing modern va-
rieties of high-yielding wheat and rice to other developing 
countries. In one success story, Borlaug induced India to im-
port hybrid Mexican wheat seed in the mid-1960s, and in six 
years, India’s wheat production tripled. Within a few years, 
many of the world’s most populous countries turned the cor-
ner from being grain importers to achieving stability and, 
in some cases, even becoming grain exporters. Thus, while 
Figure 7 Traditional versus high-yielding wheat. A comparison of an old variety of wheat, with a 
new, high-yielding variety of dwarf wheat growing in Mexico.
1R. E. Evenson and D. Gollin, “Assessing the Impact of the Green Revolution, 
1960 to 2000,” Science 300 (May 2, 2003): 758–762.
314

The Production and Distribution of Food
Close to 314 million tons of animal waste is produced by 
CAFOs each year in the United States, some of which leaks 
into surface waters and contributes to die-offs of fish, con-
tamination with pathogens, and a proliferation of algae. 
CAFOs now produce more than 50% of the animals raised 
for meat in the United States. The Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) asserts that animal-based agriculture is the 
most widespread source of pollution in the nation’s rivers.
The crowded factory farms are perfect conditions for 
diseases to incubate and spread among animals as well as 
from animals to humans. Some very serious public-health 
concerns have emerged, such as the avian flu. Further, many 
bacteria associated with animal farming are human patho-
gens, causing food-borne human diseases. The bacterium 
Salmonella alone is estimated to cause losses of $2.5 billion 
per year in the United States. Because antibiotics are used 
heavily in animal feed, many of the bacterial contaminants 
have developed resistance to antibiotics, and these are far 
more difficult to treat when humans are infected.
Large Ranches. Australia is home to 28 million cattle, mak-
ing it the world’s top beef exporter. These cattle are ranch 
raised, on farms called “cattle stations,” grazing over vast 
areas of the Australian rangelands. In the wetter coastal re-
gions, some support high numbers of cattle. While Australian 
cattle farms are very large, in drier regions of the continent, the 
number of cattle they can support rises and falls with drought 
cycles. Anna Creek Station, the world’s largest cattle farm, is 
larger than the country of Israel. Because of a drought in the 
2000s, the farm now supports only about 3,000 cattle and 
15 workers. At its high point, it could support 16,000 cattle.
Ranches account for a great deal of the loss of rain for-
ests. Half of the world’s rain forests have been cut or de-
graded. In Latin America, more than 58 million acres (23 
million ha) of tropical rain forests have been converted to 
cattle pasture, often after the land was briefly farmed for 
crops. Even though most of this land is best suited for grow-
ing rain-forest trees, some of it does support a rural popu-
lation of subsistence farmers producing a diversity of crops. 
deforestation in the developing world. As remarkable as it was, 
however, the Green Revolution is not a panacea for all of the 
world’s food-population difficulties. Each of the Green Revo-
lution technologies included externalities—costs not  associated 
with the price of the food. These costs mean that ecosystems 
have been harmed and ecosystem capital has been lost. By 
2004, the hidden costs of U.S. industrial agriculture were esti-
mated at $5.7 billion to $16.9 billion a year.2
The high-yielding varieties of crops can be hard to grow. 
Grains do best on irrigated land, and water shortages have 
begun to occur as a result of this dependence. Also, modern 
varieties of grains require constant inputs of fertilizer, pesti-
cides, and energy-using mechanized labor, all of which can 
be in short supply in developing countries. Further, Green 
Revolution agriculture did not eradicate hunger or poverty. 
Although India has been self-sufficient in terms of food since 
1990, one-fifth of the population still suffers from malnutri-
tion because they can’t afford to purchase the food they need 
and there is no effective safety net.
Animal Farming and Its Consequences
Another world change has been the development of con-
centrated livestock and poultry production, as well as the 
problem of overgrazing in many areas with high human 
populations and traditional herds. Raising livestock—sheep, 
goats, cattle, buffalo, and poultry—has many parallels to 
raising crops, and there are many connections between the 
two. One-third of the world’s croplands are used to feed do-
mestic animals. In the United States alone, 70% of the grain 
crop—one-half the cultivated acreage—goes to animals. The 
care, feeding, and “harvesting” of some 4.7 billion four-
footed livestock and almost 21.5 billion birds constitutes one 
of the most important activities on the planet. The primary 
force driving this livestock economy is the large number 
of the world’s people who enjoy eating meat and dairy 
 products—primarily, most of the developed world and grow-
ing numbers of people in less developed nations. As with 
crop farming, however, there are multiple patterns. In the 
developed world, and increasingly in the developing world, 
animals are raised in large numbers in confinement (the so-
called concentrated animal feeding operations, or CAFOs) 
(Fig. 8), and others are raised on extremely large ranches. In 
still other places, such as rural societies in the developing 
world, livestock and poultry are raised on family farms or by 
pastoralists who are subsistence farmers.
CAFOs. Industrial-style animal farming can damage the en-
vironment and human health in a host of ways. Because so 
much of the plant crop is fed to animals, all of the problems 
of industrialized agriculture apply to animal farming. An-
other serious problem is the management of animal manure. 
In developing countries, manure is a precious resource that 
is used to renew the fertility of the soil, build shelters, and 
provide fuel. In developed countries, it is a wasted resource. 
2E. Tegtmeier and M. Duffy. (2012). “External Costs of Agricultural Production in 
the United States.” International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability, 2(1), 1–20.
Figure 8 CAFOs. Concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs), like this 
cattle lot in Arizona, are common. These cattle are held in very tight quarters 
while they are fed grains to fatten them. This results in high concentrations of 
animal wastes, sometimes leading to water pollution.
315

The Production and Distribution of Food
rural farms and pastoral herds of the developing world than 
in the CAFOs of the developed world, where there is a press-
ing need to address problems of pollution and disease.
Biofuels and Food Production
Because of the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmos-
phere, global climate change is affecting virtually every coun-
try. The most basic cause of climate change is the burning of 
fossil fuels, which has driven atmospheric CO2 (a greenhouse 
gas) more than 39% above preindustrial levels. One of the 
important ways to mitigate climate change is to burn biofuels 
(ethanol and oils derived from agricultural crops) instead of 
fossil fuels (Fig. 10). Because there is no new CO2 being released 
Much of the land, however, is held by relatively few ranchers 
who own huge spreads. Today, cattle production in the Ama-
zon basin has expanded and is export driven; for example, 
Brazilian beef exports bring in more than $5 billion annually.
Climate Change. Deforestation and other changes in land 
use in the tropics release an estimated 980 million tons of 
carbon to the atmosphere annually, contributing a significant 
amount of carbon dioxide to the greenhouse effect. Also, 
because their digestive process is anaerobic, cows and other 
ruminant animals annually emit some 80 million tons of 
methane, another greenhouse gas, through belching and flat-
ulence. The anaerobic decomposition of manure leads to an 
additional 30 million tons of methane per year. In the United 
States, methane released by livestock makes up about 20% 
of methane produced. However, better and more efficient 
diets for animals can lower methane  production.
Pastoralists. Even though their animals also contribute to 
the methane problem, it is callous to fault the subsistence 
farmers whose domestic animals enhance their diet and im-
prove their quality of life. In fact, one of the most important 
kinds of sustainable development aid brought to rural fami-
lies is the gift of a cow or a few goats or rabbits, as carried 
out by Heifer Project International (Fig. 9). Working in 125 
countries, the project has distributed large animals, beehives, 
fowl, and fish fingerlings to families. The organization works 
with grassroots groups of local people who oversee a given 
project. Those receiving the animals must agree to raise them 
properly and to pass on the gift in the form of donating off-
spring of their livestock to other needy people.
Animals that are well managed can enhance the soil and 
enable rural farmers to maintain a balanced farm ecosystem, 
unless herds overgraze local resources. Farmers in develop-
ing countries now own two-thirds of the world’s domestic 
animals, a trend that has made an important contribution to 
nutrition, especially for women and small children. In sum, 
animal farming is far more likely to be sustainable in the 
Figure 9 Heifer Project International. A vet inspects a dairy heifer for 
a Rwandan man. Heifer Project International provides animals for families in need. 
Participants agree to pass on offspring of their livestock to others.
Figure 10 Biofuels. Although they show promise as an alternative fuel, 
biofuels raise the price of corn by diverting it from food use.
316

The Production and Distribution of Food
Part of feeding the modern world’s high population has 
been the irrigation, fertilizers, pesticides, plant breeding, and 
concentrated animal operations just described, but emerging 
technologies promise to change the face of agriculture even 
more.
2  From Green Revolution to Gene 
Revolution
Genetic engineering makes it possible to combine charac-
teristics from genetically different organisms and to incor-
porate desired traits into crop lines and animals, producing 
so-called transgenic, or genetically modified (GM), varieties. 
This is a radically different technology from the genetic re-
search that produced the Green Revolution: Researchers are 
no longer limited to genes that already exist within a species 
or that could arise via mutation; it is now possible to ex-
change genes among bacteria, animals, and plants.
This kind of technology can help the developing world 
to produce more food. Genetically modified organisms are 
under intense research and development, with many new 
GM organisms coming out of the lab. Still, in spite of the ob-
vious potential of these organisms, there are concerns about 
their development and use. We need to look at both sides of 
this controversy.
The Promise
The earliest and still most widely adopted genetically altered 
products to be marketed are of two types. First are cotton 
plants with built-in resistance to insects that comes from 
genes taken from a bacterium (so-called Bt, standing for 
Bacillus thuringiensis, the name of the bacterium) (Fig. 11). 
Second are corn and soybeans resistant to herbicides, includ-
ing the chemicals glufosinate (several brands) and glyphosate 
(usually the brand Roundup®), allowing farmers to spray 
herbicide without harming their crops and to employ no-
till techniques. More recently, biotechnology has developed 
other genetically altered products, including sorghum (an im-
portant African crop) resistant to a parasitic plant known as 
witchweed, which infests many crops in Africa; corn, pota-
toes, and cotton resistant to insects; rice resistant to bacterial 
blight disease; and trees and salmon that grow very rapidly.
In the years since bioengineered seeds became commer-
cially available, farmers have overwhelmingly turned to the 
transgenic breeds of soybeans, cotton, and corn. World-
wide, 370 million acres (134 million ha) in 29 countries were 
planted with bioengineered crops in 2011 (Fig. 12). Most of 
this area is accounted for by just four crops (corn, soybeans, 
canola, and cotton). Bioengineered sugar beets are also in-
creasing in use. In the United States, bioengineered crops are 
planted on about half of all acreage planted with crops. A 
rapidly increasing trend is toward the so-called “stacked” 
products, containing two or more biotech genes in a crop 
(e.g., traits directed toward different insects or insect resist-
ance plus herbicide tolerance).
to the atmosphere with this use, biofuels are a form of renew-
able energy. But there is another, more basic reason for using 
biofuels. In the past, fossil fuel oil was less expensive than bio-
fuels, but in recent years, oil prices have fluctuated wildly, and 
biofuels have become very attractive.
The primary biofuel in production today is ethanol, 
derived from the fermentation of cornstarch (in the United 
States) or cane sugar (in Brazil). Ethanol is a suitable substi-
tute for gasoline, and with inflated gasoline prices, ethanol 
manufacture is quite competitive. Corn farmers are happy to 
sell their corn to the highest bidder, so a rising fraction (35% 
in 2012) of U.S. corn is devoted to meeting the growing de-
mand from ethanol distilleries. At the same time, food prices 
have risen worldwide to the point of crisis.
Consequences. The United States produces more than 
40% of the world’s corn, 80% of which is used for livestock, 
poultry, and fish feeds. Corn is also a staple food around the 
world. The diversion of corn to biofuel production lowered 
its availability for other uses. A nutritionist with the UN 
World Food Program stated that “global price rises mean 
that food is literally being taken out of the mouths of hungry 
children whose parents can no longer feed them.”3 How ac-
curate is this accusation?
While it is certainly true that biofuel production has 
created a new demand for corn, it must be noted that the 
prices of wheat, rice, and soybeans also rose dramatically—
in fact, more than the price of corn. So far, the new demand 
for corn is being met with larger corn plantings; the increase 
was accomplished by taking land out of soybean production. 
Ethanol production uses field corn, which is usually fed to 
livestock. Only the cornstarch is used for ethanol produc-
tion; the proteins, vitamins, and fiber are converted to high-
energy animal feed, sweeteners, and corn oil.
Other factors contribute to high food prices. These in-
clude (1) the price of oil (used by farm machinery and in 
fertilizer manufacture), which reflects a growing competi-
tion from developing countries like China and India for a 
resource that is limited; (2) bad weather and poor harvests in 
many parts of the world, and especially in Australia, which is 
normally a major wheat exporter; and (3) the rising demand 
for meat and animal products, again from emerging econo-
mies like China.
Research by the International Food Policy Research In-
stitute (IFPRI) suggested that perhaps 30% of the grain price 
increases between 2000 and 2007 was linked to biofuel pro-
duction. Many observers suggest that some limit be put on 
corn ethanol production, while making a greater investment 
in a new generation of biofuels based on grasses and timber 
waste. The surge in biofuel production in the United States is 
not likely to subside anytime soon. In 2012, more than 5 bil-
lion bushels of corn, more than one-third of the crop, were 
diverted to ethanol production, a demand that is expected to 
rise; consequently, less corn will be available for animal feed 
and export.
3World Food Program News. “Price Rises Eating Away at Children’s Futures: An 
Interview with WFP Nutritionist Andrew Thorne-Lyman.” April 28, 2008.
317

The Production and Distribution of Food
Biotech crop research that can benefit developing 
countries is proceeding at a rapid pace, often in those very 
 countries. China, in particular, has emerged as a leader in 
plant biotechnology, having recently sequenced the rice ge-
nome. Among other aims, the objectives of agricultural bio-
technology are (1) to incorporate resistance to diseases and 
pests that  attack important tropical plants; (2) to increase 
tolerance to environmental conditions, such as drought and 
a high salt level, which stress most plants; (3) to improve the 
nutritional value of commonly eaten crops (like the work 
with golden rice described later); and (4) to produce pharma-
ceutical products in ordinary crop plants (“pharma” crops). 
Thus, products under development include virus- resistant 
cassavas, sweet potatoes, melons, squash, tomatoes, and 
papayas; protein-enhanced corn, soybeans, and cassavas 
(Fig.  13); fungus-resistant  bananas;  bananas and tomatoes 
that contain an antidiarrheal vaccine; and drought-tolerant 
sorghum and corn. The potential for transgenic crops and 
animals seems almost unlimited.
Among the important possible environmental benefits of 
bioengineered crops are reductions in the use of pesticides 
because the crops are already resistant to pests, less erosion 
because no-till cropping is facilitated by the use of herbicide-
resistant crops, and less environmental damage associated 
with bringing more land into production because existing 
agricultural lands will produce more food. While the jury is 
still out on GM crops, countries everywhere are cautiously 
examining the technology, and the trend is in favor of its 
adoption; in 2011, 29 countries, including several in the EU, 
were growing biotech crops.
Marker-Assisted Breeding. Some new technologies also 
 involve crop improvements without resorting to transgenic 
traits. For example, a technique called marker-assisted 
 breeding essentially speeds up traditional plant breeding. 
Scientists identify genes for desirable traits in crop plants or 
Figure 11 Bt cotton. Bioengineered cotton has a gene from a bacterium 
that helps it resist insect pests.
Figure 12 Global area of genetically mod-
ified crops. The plot shows the rapid increase in 
global areas planted with genetically modified crops 
(primarily cotton, soybeans, canola and corn) for 
industrial (high income) and developing countries as 
well as total global use. (Source: Clive James. “Global 
Status of  Commercialized  Biotech/GM Crops.” ISAAA, 
2011, p. 3.)
140
160
Million Hectares
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Total
Industrial
Developing
318

The Production and Distribution of Food
crops. If pests have a broad exposure to the toxin or some 
other resistance incorporated into the plant, it is possi-
ble that they will develop resistance to the toxin and thus 
render it ineffective as an independent pesticide. The trans-
genic crop then loses its advantage. Indeed, glyphosate re-
sistance has been found in a number of weeds that infest 
soybean, corn, and cotton fields. Because so much acreage 
worldwide is now planted with glyphosate-resistant crops, 
resistant weeds could spread widely and cause economic 
disaster for farmers. Insect pests could also become resist-
ant to transgenic plants that are themselves supposed to be 
insect resistant. For example, Bt cotton is designed to re-
sist the cotton boll weevil by producing a toxin once made 
by a bacterium. However, boll weevils that can survive on 
the engineered cotton now abound. When Chinese cotton 
farmers began turning to Bt cotton in the early 2000s, they 
found that they used much less pesticide, saving money, 
time, and their own health in the process. These benefits did 
not last, however. In 2010, Chinese farmers suffered out-
breaks of secondary pests (pests that were minor but be-
come major in the  absence of a competing pest), mirid bugs, 
which increased by twelvefold over their occurrence before 
use of the Bt cotton (Fig. 14).
Another concern is the ecological impact of the crops 
on nontarget organisms. For example, pollen from Bt corn 
(resistant to the corn borer) can be spread by the wind to 
adjacent natural areas where beneficial insects may pick it up 
and be killed by the toxin. This effect was shown to occur in 
laboratory tests with monarch butterflies. Later studies indi-
cated, however, that the Bt corn poses a low risk to the but-
terflies, and the EPA cleared the corn for continued planting, 
although some scientists are still concerned.
A third environmental concern arises because genes 
for herbicide resistance or for tolerance to drought and 
other environmental conditions can also spread to ordinary 
crop plants or their wild relatives, possibly creating new or 
“super” weeds. Field studies indicate that this concern is 
their wild ancestors, using DNA sequencing. Next, plants 
with the desired gene are crossbred with a modern crop 
breeding line. Then DNA screening of seedlings for the de-
sired gene makes the process move more quickly. Using this 
technique, a gene from a wild rice ancestor was incorpo-
rated into a modern high-yield rice variety, raising the yield 
by 18%. Other crops being developed with this approach 
are carrots (a high-calcium “super-carrot”), potatoes (more 
starch), and pigeon peas (higher yields). This approach has 
the distinct advantage of not requiring the special testing and 
permits needed with transgenic crops, greatly reducing costs 
and time. It also bypasses the objections raised to transgenic 
crops in many countries.
Pharma Crops. The biotech industry has recognized the 
advantages of producing pharmaceuticals by engineering 
genes for desirable products into common crop plants. Be-
tween 1991 and 2011, there were 101 field trials for crops 
genetically modified to produce hormones, enzymes, diag-
nostic drugs, and other substances, but none has yet come 
to market. The Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS) brought 
together a panel of experts to examine the risks of this tech-
nology, and its report concluded that the primary risk is 
that these “pharma” crops could contaminate ordinary food 
crops—some of the compounds being developed could be 
harmful if ingested by people or animals. In fact, corn al-
tered to produce a pig vaccine spread in fields in Iowa and 
Nebraska in 2002; intervention by the USDA kept the altered 
corn out of food. Because it seems unlikely that a foolproof 
system could be established, UCS is urging an alternate strat-
egy: produce the pharmaceuticals with noncrop plants.
The Problems
Concerns about genetic engineering technology involve three 
main considerations: environmental problems, food safety, 
and access to the new techniques.
Environmental Concerns. A major environmental con-
cern focuses on the pest-resistant properties of the transgenic  
Figure 13 Genetically modified cassava. Cassava is a staple crop for 
millions, but one low in protein, vitamins, and minerals and vulnerable to viruses. 
GM varieties are more nutritious and resist disease.
Vitamin A  Fortified Cassava
Traditional Cassava
Figure 14 Mirid bugs. Mirid bugs, such as this one, became a major pest 
on cotton in China only when Bt cotton resisted other competing insects and their 
natural predators were killed.
319

The Production and Distribution of Food
GM crops, like the techniques of the Green Revolution, are 
not a magic bullet.
All of these concerns, combined with the general fear 
of what unknown technologies can bring, have stimulated 
a rather heated controversy over the spreading use of ge-
netically modified organisms. Activists around the world 
have rallied to protest the development of such organisms 
and the “Frankenfoods” derived from them (Fig. 15). The 
protests have been strongest in Europe, and some coun-
tries, like Ireland, have banned the crops. Far less concern 
has arisen so far in the United States. Because corn and 
soybeans are used in so many processed foods, an esti-
mated 70% of all processed foods in the United States are 
thought to contain some genetically modified substances. 
Some consumer groups would like to see mandatory la-
beling of all such foods, but U.S. policy does not require 
such labeling.
In 2004, the UN FAO gave its qualified approval to ag-
ricultural biotechnology in The State of Food and Agricul-
ture5 but concluded that the promise of the technology to 
alleviate global hunger and improve the well-being of farm-
ers in developing countries was still more theory than reality. 
Developing countries have potential to produce their own 
GM crop applications. Iran began in 2006 to deploy a Bt rice 
developed in that country and hopes within a few years to 
eliminate its need to import rice (currently 1 million tons a 
year). South African researchers have developed corn resist-
ant to the maize streak virus, which devastates corn crops 
throughout sub-Saharan Africa.
Clearly, the future almost certainly will have to in-
clude major advances in food production from biotechnol-
ogy, and many of these advances are likely to benefit the 
developing countries. If food production is to keep pace 
with population growth, biotechnological advances will be 
valid. In fact, one study on genetically modified canola plants 
(used in animal feeds and vegetable oils) found that the vast 
majority of escaped canola plants growing in North Dakota 
along roads had genes from GM canola crops.
Safety Issues. Food safety issues arise because transgenic 
crops contain proteins from different organisms and might 
trigger an unexpected allergic response in people who con-
sume the food. Tests have shown that a Brazil nut gene 
incorporated into soybeans was able to express (or manu-
facture) a protein in the soybeans that induced an allergic 
response in individuals already allergic to Brazil nuts. Also, 
antibiotic-resistance genes are often incorporated into trans-
genic organisms. If antibiotic resistance got into human sys-
tems by a separate process of gene transfer or a food product 
prevented an antibiotic from being used effectively, that 
would obviously pose a health risk. Another concern relates 
to the possibility that plants could produce substances in 
their tissues or that new combinations of genes could have 
as yet unexpected health effects on consumers. However, 
the World Health Organization, summarizing the finding of 
many researchers, has stated, “GM foods currently available 
on the international market have passed risk assessments and 
are not likely to present risks for human health. In addition, 
no effects on human health have been shown as a result of 
the consumption of such foods by the general population in 
the countries where they have been approved.”4
Access in the Developing World. The problems con-
cerning access to the new technologies relate to the devel-
oping world. For the first few years, almost all genetically 
modified organisms were developed by large agricultural-
industrial firms, with profit as the primary motive. Ac-
cordingly, farmers were forbidden by contract from simply 
propagating the seeds themselves and had to purchase seeds 
annually. Farmers in the developing countries are less able to 
afford the higher costs of the new seeds, which must be paid 
up front each year. Fortunately, some noncommercial and 
donor-funded laboratories are taking aim at this problem. 
Further, biotech research is booming in China, India, and the 
Philippines, where most of the fruits of the research are being 
made available to developing-world farmers. In addition, the 
genetically modified seeds are spreading rapidly through seed 
“piracy.”
The experience of GM cotton growers in India illus-
trates a number of the concerns associated with GM crops. 
In 2002, India began planting Bt cotton and doubled its har-
vest, but 10 years later, farmers were frustrated. In six years, 
the crop had not increased, though the amount of GM crops 
planted increased fourfold. Bt cotton required more nutri-
ents, fertilizer, and water and was vulnerable to bacterial 
disease. Local cottonseed varieties disappeared, and farmers 
could not afford the GM varieties. In 2012, the harvest was 
half of what it was in 2011 in most areas. The “white revolu-
tion” had not panned out the way farmers had hoped. Thus, 
4World Health Organization. “20 Questions on Genetically Modified Foods/
Question 8.” http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/20questions/en/  
June 25, 2012.
Figure 15 GM crop protests. Protesters in France rip up genetically 
modified corn in protest.
5United Nations, Food and Agricultural Organization, The State of Food and Ag-
riculture 2003–2004: Agricultural Biotechnology: Meeting the Needs of the Poor? 
(Rome: UN FAO, 2004).
320

The Production and Distribution of Food
6National Research Council, Committee on Genetically Modified Pest-Protected 
Plants, Impact of Genetically Engineered Crops on Farm Sustainability in the 
United States (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2000), 8.
STEWARDShIP
Golden Rice
Half the people in the 
world—most of them 
in the developing 
countries—eat rice daily. 
Although an  excellent 
food for energy, rice is a poor source of vitamins 
and other nutrients; hence, it must be supple-
mented with other foods for a balanced diet. 
Unfortunately, millions depend heavily on rice for 
their nutrition, resulting in two of the most com-
mon nutritional deficiencies: vitamin A deficiency, 
which leads to blindness and immune-system 
failures, and iron deficiency, which ultimately 
causes anemia and also immune- system prob-
lems. More than 195 million children suffer from 
vitamin A deficiency. Iron deficiency causes more 
than 100,000 maternal deaths a year during 
pregnancy and childbirth.
Biochemist Ingo Potrykus, working at the 
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich, 
believed that rice could be supplemented with 
iron and vitamin A in order to conquer these 
two serious nutrient disorders. In the early 
1990s, Potrykus, colleague Peter Beyer of the 
University of Freiberg, Germany, and others 
began research that would lead to a remarkable 
accomplishment of plant biotechnology: golden 
rice. The group incorporated several genes into 
a rice genome that would enable the plant to 
synthesize beta carotene (a precursor to vitamin 
A) and iron in the body of the grain, rather than 
just in the leaves, where they normally appear 
in rice. The new rice was named golden rice 
because of the color of the beta carotene in the 
grains, though it still did not have enough beta 
carotene to help humans.
Since its development, 
golden rice has been im-
proved to the point where 
a new variety contains 
enough beta carotene to 
satisfy much of the vitamin 
A needed from foods in a 
typical developing country 
diet. Some genetic lines of 
golden rice are well along 
in the regulatory approval 
process. The golden rice 
concept has met with 
a less-than-universal 
welcome because it is a 
genetically modified (GM) 
crop, containing genes 
from corn and beans. The 
international debate is far 
from settled. However, 
golden rice lacks some of 
the traits that make other 
GM crops problematic. It 
is controlled by a humani-
tarian organization, not a 
for-profit company, and 
it does not contain genes 
that would benefit a super 
weed or to which pests would become resistant. 
Finally, while the genes come from two other 
crop plants, rice already has genes to make beta 
carotene in the grain; these genes have simply 
been turned off.
Detractors say that all GM crops are cause 
for concern and that the money invested in 
golden rice would be better spent supporting 
biodiverse diets containing green vegetables. 
Supporters argue that if GM crops are ever 
reasonable, this is a good example of a worth-
while crop that provides an opportunity to 
help millions. They might see it as a type of 
 stewardship—of food capacity. GM crops offer 
a good example of the tensions between risk of 
the unknown and meeting current needs.
H
w
i
c
A
Golden rice. The yellow rice kernels contain beta carotene, 
inserted into them with biotechnology to enable the rice to 
help meet nutritional needs for vitamin A. The early golden rice 
(GR1) is on the upper right, GR2 is on the left, and normal rice on the lower 
right. (Source: Martin Enserink, “Tough  Lessons from Golden Rice,” Science 
320 (April 25, 2008): 470.)
essential, in the view of most observers. Consequently, the 
world community has been developing national and inter-
national policies.
The Policies
In the United States, the EPA, the USDA, and the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) all have regulatory oversight 
of different elements of the application of biotechnology to 
food crops. Concern over their oversight led to a number of 
reports from the National Academy of Sciences’ National 
Research Council. One, Impact of Genetically Engineered 
Crops on Farm Sustainability in the United States (2010),6
concluded that herbicide resistance in weeds was a real prob-
lem but that, overall, GM crops have been a benefit. In sum, 
several reports endorsed the science, technology, and regula-
tion of GM crops, one stating, “The committee is not aware 
of any evidence that foods on the market are unsafe to eat 
as a result of genetic modification.”7 At the same time, the 
reports have called for more research on environmental and 
safety issues.
Cartagena Protocol. On the international level, the UN 
Convention on Biodiversity sponsored a key conference in 
Montreal, Canada, in January 2000 to deal with trade in 
genetically modified organisms. After heated negotiations, 
the conference reached an agreement, called the Cartagena 
Protocol on Biosafety. Surprisingly, the agreement was wel-
comed by governments, the private sector, and environmen-
tal groups alike.
7National Research Council, Board on Agriculture and Natural Resources,  Impact 
of Genetically Engineered Crops on Farm Sustainability in the United States 
(Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2010), 215.
321

The Production and Distribution of Food
The Precautionary Principle. The Cartagena Protocol 
states that the “lack of scientific certainty due to insufficient 
relevant scientific information and knowledge . . . shall not 
prevent [a country] from making a decision” on the import 
of genetically modified organisms. The protocol gives the 
right to deny entry of any of these organisms to the importing 
country. However, countries cannot ban imports on a whim 
or simply to protect their own producers. The decision must 
be based on sound science (involving an assessment of the 
risks involved) and the broad sharing of information about 
the products. Thus, the agreement makes operational—for 
the first time in international environmental affairs—the 
so-called precautionary principle, laid out in the 1992 Rio 
Declaration, which states that “Where there are threats of 
serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty 
shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective 
 measures to prevent environmental degradation.”8 There 
were other stipulations in the protocol, including one about 
labeling shipments of GM products. The protocol was rati-
fied by 147 countries (but not the United States) and became 
legally binding in 2003.
Table 1 shows a list of actions we take to increase food 
production as well as a list of effects and actions that eventu-
ally lower our ability to produce food. Solutions to the prob-
lems modern agriculture causes are going to require getting 
more human health from the food we produce and modify-
ing food production in ways that may seem hard to imagine. 
We will look at these topics in the latter half of the chapter. 
First, let’s look at food distribution. We already produce a 
lot of food, so we could ask, “Why doesn’t everyone have 
healthy food?”
3 Food Distribution and Trade
In the past, the general rule for basic foodstuffs—grains, 
vegetables, meat, and dairy products—was regional self-
sufficiency. Whenever climate, blight, or war interrupted the 
agricultural production of a nation or region, the inevita-
ble result was famine and death, sometimes on the scale of 
millions. Of course, refugees might flee a famine, and some 
cultures were naturally nomadic, so there was some moving 
around to escape famine. However, for the most part, natu-
ral disasters including crop failures drastically affected the 
people locally but not people far away. This is one of the rea-
sons human population was relatively stable for thousands 
of years before the modern era.
Trade on ancient routes moved goods from place to 
place in a limited way. This was expanded when colonies 
were established in the New World. Timber, furs, tobacco, 
fish, sugar, coffee, cotton, and other raw materials began to 
flow back to the Old World. In turn, the Old World exported 
manufactured goods, which in turn altered the culture of 
the colonies. With the Industrial Revolution, and especially 
with refrigeration and faster shipping, trade between nations 
TABLE 1 Drivers of Food Availability. Some factors 
of modern agriculture increase food availability, and 
some result in effects that decrease food availability.
Increase food 
availability
Limit or decrease  
food availability
Green Revolution 
high-yield crops
need for water, fertilizer
pesticide use
pest resistance, secondary pest outbreaks
irrigation
salinization 
erosion
overuse of ground water
fertilizers
disruption of nitrogen cycle, nitrous oxide
conversion to  
farmland
loss of cropland to development
use of poor quality land 
erosion, desertification
no-till farming with 
herbicides
herbicide resistance in weeds
GM crops with 
tolerance, high yield
resistance of pests to crops, 
super weeds, superpests 
loss of genetic diversity
monocultures
vulnerability to pathogens and pests
use of fossil fuels, 
equipment
cost of fuel
climate change effects—plant stress
from drought, insects,
damage from air pollution
shipping
energy and economic costs of shipping
refrigeration
energy and economic costs of refrigeration
food loss in storage and transport
large farms
loss of small farmers
subsidies in wealthy 
countries
subsidies in some countries reduce food 
availability in other countries
emphasis on cash 
crops
loss of mixed crops and consumptive use
poverty for some—lack of money to 
purchase food
concentrated animal 
feeding operations
pollution 
use of grains to feed animals
use of foods as biofuels
fishing efficiency 
overfishing
At issue was a difference in fundamental philosophy 
about how technologies, particularly new ones, should be 
regulated. Some felt that no one should be able to limit trade 
in a new product unless they had sufficient scientific evidence 
to know that it was harmful. Others believed that, because it 
takes a long time to do research, governments should be able 
to regulate trade in goods where there was good reason to 
be concerned about a product before all of the research was 
completed. This question is particularly important in an era 
of globalization.
8Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 1992, Article 15, upheld in 
Cartagena Protocol, Articles 1, 10.6, and 11.8.
322

The Production and Distribution of Food
States, Argentina, and Brazil have a corner on the export 
trade, and Europe and China are major importers. Most of 
this is used as a protein supplement in animal feeds.
Over the past 50 years, Asia and Africa have shown 
an increasing dependence on imported grain (and China, 
imported soybeans). These regions have also experienced 
50 years of continued population growth. Although much of 
the food needs of these regions are met by internal produc-
tion, the persistent dependency is an ominous signal. If, as 
is projected, the developing countries import twice as much 
grain by 2020, the grain-exporting countries will have to 
either greatly increase domestic production or use less grain 
(not likely). And the rising use of corn for biofuel production 
will make this harder.
Keeping a Reserve. At no time in recent history has the 
world grain supply run out. The global amount of grain pro-
duced in 2010 was 2.2 billion tons. Production was down 
slightly because, while rice and maize had record yields, wheat 
dropped significantly. Worldwide governments try to main-
tain 70 days, worth of grain stored in reserves; however, such 
reserves are often much higher, above 120 days during some 
years of the 80s. In 2007, world reserves fell to 64 days, ris-
ing shortly there after. In 2010, they fell again to 72. With 
some use of carryover stocks in weaker years, enough grain 
is available to satisfy the world’s food needs—and enough to 
feed millions of animals and continue to keep some in stor-
age. However, many people lack food. This is primarily be-
cause they cannot afford it. Even if we succeed in increasing 
food production as population grows, some people will still be 
poor. This problem is the chief cause of hunger in the world 
today and is not easily solved. Recently, it was exacerbated by 
several factors in the global food crisis of 2006–2008.
The Global Food Crisis
Between 2006 and 2008, the prices of food commodities 
on the world market rose precipitously—on average, 100% 
 intensified, and soon it became economically feasible to ship 
basic foodstuffs around the world. A lively and important 
world trade in foodstuffs arose, and, as it did, the need for 
self-sufficiency in food diminished. Like other sectors of the 
economy, food has become globalized. World trade in agri-
cultural products was worth $1.362 trillion in 2010.
Patterns in Food Trade
Given this global pattern, agricultural production systems 
supply more than a country’s internal food needs. The capac-
ity to produce more basic foodstuffs than the home popu-
lation needs represents an extremely important economic 
enterprise. For many other countries (especially those of the 
developing world), special commodities such as coffee, fruit, 
sugar, spices, palm oil, cocoa, and nuts provide the only 
significant export products. This trade clearly helps the ex-
porter, and it allows importing nations to enjoy foods that 
they are unable to raise themselves or that are out of sea-
son. In a market economy, the exchange works well only as 
long as the importing nation can pay cash for the food. Cash 
is earned by exporting raw materials, fuel, manufactured 
goods, or special commodities.
Grain on the Move. The most important foodstuffs on the 
world market are grain (wheat, rice, corn, barley, rye, and 
sorghum) and oilseeds, such as soybeans. Some grain is im-
ported by high- and middle-income countries to satisfy the 
rising demand for animal protein. It is instructive to examine 
the pattern of global trade in grain over the past seven dec-
ades (Table 2). In 1935, only western Europe was importing 
grain; Asia, Africa, and Latin America were self-sufficient. 
By 1950, new patterns were emerging, and today the trade 
in grains—as well as other basic foodstuffs—has changed 
again. As the table shows, North America has become the 
major source of exportable grains—the world’s “breadbas-
ket” or, in another sense, the world’s “meat market.” The 
trade in oilseeds is similarly lopsided. In this case, the United 
TABLE 2 World Grain Trade Since 1935
Amount Exported or Imported (Million Metric Tons)*
Region
1935
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
1995
2000
2004
2007
North America
5
23
39
56
131
123
108
98
101
120
Latin America
9
1
0
4
210
212
24
216
28
27
Western Europe
219
222
225
230
262
210
21
13
10
0.2
Africa
1
0
22
25
215
231
231
244
242
251
Asia
2
26
217
237
263
282
278
274
279
272
Australia and New Zealand
3
3
6
12
19
15
13
21
25
9
Source: FAO FAOSTAT, FAO Food Outlook, June 2008.
*A minus sign in front of a figure indicates a net import; no sign indicates a net export.
323

The Production and Distribution of Food
SuSTAINABILITy
Preventing Food Crises
On a cold day in 
February 1936, 
photographer Dorothea 
Lange was returning 
from a month-long 
assignment where she was photographing 
and documenting the plight of the poor in the 
Great Depression. As she passed a camp of 
ragged tents in Nipomo, California, she was 
only interested in returning home. But miles 
down the road, something called her to return 
to an enclave of pea pickers in tents, starving 
after the collapse of a pea crop. There she met 
and photographed the woman who became 
the iconic image of the effects of the Great 
Depression. A widow of 32, Florence Owens 
Thompson and her small children were living on 
vegetables scrounged from the frozen ground 
and birds her children had caught. She had sold 
her tires to buy food and had nowhere to go and 
no plan to escape their deprivation. Lange took 
only five photos, but they became the images 
that spoke of the suffering of farmworkers 
across the country. One known as “Migrant 
Mother” is probably the most famous picture 
of the time. Those photos woke the nation, 
food was brought to those pickers isolated in a 
barren field, and the images Lange took gripped 
the imagination and care of others.
Sometimes images of children starving 
wring our hearts and cause us to pour out kind-
ness and wealth. But sometimes, when the 
problems are not easily resolved, such images 
fill people with a sense of despair. Instead of 
doing  something, no matter how 
small, they do nothing. Relief and 
development agencies also know 
that to solve food shortages and 
prevent famine, food needs to be 
given when we know a drought 
or disaster is looming, not when 
children are already standing, blank 
eyed, with protruding bellies. In 
recent years, there have been sev-
eral years of poor crops in the Sahel 
region of Africa. In 2010, 2011, and 
2012, people who track and predict 
crop outcomes predicted severe 
food shortages months before they 
were realized. They reported these 
findings in the news, but interna-
tional aid from governments and 
charities was slow to come. Millions 
of people face starvation, when 
their plight could have be lessened, 
if not avoided, by timely aid. One 
worker for Save the Children said, 
“The humanitarian system is like an 
 ambulance—it is focused on disas-
ter response, not prevention.”9
In a sustainable world, pre-
vention has to play a larger role. 
 Dorothea Lange could not prevent 
the plight of the pea pickers in California. But 
she could help get them aid. Today’s aid organi-
zations are trying to prevent large-scale famines 
before they happen, though this can be difficult 
to do.
O
F
p
L
f
“Migrant Mother.” This iconic photo of a migrant 
pea picker by photographer Dorothea Lange cap-
tured the despair of the Great Depression. (Source: The 
Library of Congress)
9Andrew Wardell. “Extreme Hunger in East Africa and the 
Sahel: Forewarned but Not Forearmed. Poverty MattersBlog. 
The Guardian. May 9, 2012. http://www.guardian.co.uk/
global-development/poverty-matters/2012/may/09/extreme-
hunger-east-africa-sahel.
TABLE 3 Rise in World Market Prices of Selected 
Commodities
Average
2002–2006
2007–2008
Commodity
Cost Basis
Price
Price
Wheat
$/ton
$168
$319
Coarse grains
$/ton
 113
 181
Rice
$/ton
 262
 361
Oilseeds
$/ton
 293
 486
Vegetable oils
$/ton
 587
1,015
Butter
$/100 kg
 162
 294
Whole milk powder
$/100 kg
 192
 417
Source: OECD/FAO Agricultural Outlook 2008–2017.
(Table 3)—triggering food riots and emergency measures in 
many countries. In response, the United Nations addressed 
the issue at a scheduled World Food Summit in Rome in June 
2008, and the World Bank began a new effort to provide im-
mediate grants for food and agriculture in the poorest coun-
tries. If nothing else, this crisis reflected the interconnected 
global trade in food.
A number of factors conspired to create this situation, 
including the high cost of oil, which increased the costs of 
fertilizer and fuel and thus the cost of food production. Corn 
was diverted to produce biofuels rather than used for food. 
Demand increased, especially in Asia, for more expensive 
foods (e.g., meat, dairy products, vegetable oils). Weather-
related disasters slashed harvests in some exporting countries 
(Australia, Canada). Finally, world reserves of many com-
modities were declining.
Several of these factors were transitory, causing some 
relief to the food crisis, but some of the problems are here 
to stay. Better weather improved the exporting countries’ 
harvest shortfalls, farmers responded to higher prices by 
324

The Production and Distribution of Food
 leaders as details of food shortages, high food prices, and 
shortfalls in aid were presented.
More recently, however, the 2012 UN Conference on 
Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro (called Rio+20) 
brought world leaders together to reassess progress 20 years 
after the 1992 Rio Earth Summit. The document produced at 
Rio+20, The Future We Want, highlighted seven themes: jobs, 
energy, cities, food, water, oceans, and disasters. Food and ag-
riculture were central topics of the meeting and the outcomes 
document. At Rio+20, countries were given a  challenge—to 
lower hunger to zero, a plan discussed shortly.
Food Security
Bread for the World’s Hunger Institute defines food secu-
rity as “assured access for every person to enough nutritious 
food to sustain an active and healthy life.” Who is responsi-
ble for food security? Figure 16 displays three major levels of 
responsibility for food security: the family, the nation, and 
the global community. At each level, the players are part of 
a market economy as well as a sociopolitical system. In a 
market economy, food flows in the direction of economic 
demand. Need is not taken into consideration. A cash econ-
omy, following the rules of the market, provides the oppor-
tunity to purchase food, but not the food itself. Where the 
economic status of the player is very low (a jobless parent, 
a poor country), another group or individual may be willing 
and able to provide the needed purchasing power or the food 
(but maybe not).
 investing in available technologies to increase yields and 
croplands, and the current severe downturn in the global 
economy brought on a decline in petroleum prices. However, 
the new biofuel economy and the demand for better diets, 
especially in Asian emerging economies, remain. Since the 
food crisis, food prices have been volatile, spiking again in 
2010–2011 and remaining high in some parts of the world 
while declining in most.
One consequence of high commodity prices is that farm-
ers get much higher prices for their crops; this is especially 
true for the farmers in higher-income countries that dominate 
the food export business. However, farmers in developing 
countries are not connected to the world markets and benefit 
little from high market commodity prices. The developing 
countries whose food deficits force them to import commodi-
ties are faced with prices they can’t afford. For most people 
in these countries, food expenditures are more than 50% of 
their income, and any increase in food price can result in an 
increase in undernourishment and malnourishment.
RIO120. One basic function of world conferences is to 
draw the attention of national leaders to international is-
sues. For example, the World Food Summit, held in Rome in 
June 2008, was the third World Food Summit; earlier sum-
mits in 1996 and 2002 led to verbal commitments to eradi-
cate hunger and malnutrition. Although climate change and 
bioenergy were addressed in the 2008 meeting, the confer-
ence shifted much of its focus to the existing world food cri-
sis. The conference did indeed get the attention of national 
Figure 16 Responsibility for food security. Goals and strategies for meeting food needs at three 
levels of responsibility: the family, the nation, and the global community.
Family
Nation
Global community
Goal: Personal and family food security
Policies:
—Employment security
—Adequate land or livestock
—Good health and nutrition
—Adequate housing
—Effective family planning
—Access to food
Goal: Self-sufficiency in food and nutrition
Policies:
—Just land distribution
—Support of sustainable agriculture
—Effective family planning
—Promotion of market economy
—Avoidance of militarization
—Effective safety net to provide
   food when needed
Goal: Sustainable food and nutrition for all
          countries
Policies:
—Food aid for famine relief
—Appropriate technology in development aid
—Aid for sustainable agricultural 
   development
—Debt relief
—Fair trade
—Disarmament
—Family planning assistance
325

The Production and Distribution of Food
thousands. After the earthquake, several NGOs and scien-
tists collaborated to try a new rice-growing initiative, which 
produced yields that were 64% higher, with fewer seeds and 
less water and fertilizer. However, uneven trading policies 
still make it difficult for Haitian farmers to survive in the 
world market.
Other Needs. There are other initiatives that can help 
the poorer countries become self-sufficient in food. One of 
the most important is relieving the debt crisis in developing 
countries. Another factor in meeting global nutrition needs 
is the trade imbalance between the industrial and the devel-
oping countries. The developing countries typically export 
raw goods such as cash crops, mineral ores, and petroleum 
and import more-sophisticated manufactured products 
such as aircraft, computers, and machinery. Prices for the 
latter have risen, while those for the commodities from 
developing countries have only recently begun to rise. To 
some extent, the increasing use of labor in the developing 
countries in electronic assembly and in the manufacture of 
clothing has offset this imbalance. Indeed, the globalization 
of markets is now working to the advantage of the develop-
ing countries, which have a surplus of labor and low labor 
costs. As a result, many industrial corporations have out-
sourced their manufacturing to developing countries, which 
helps workers in developing countries improve their well-
being.
Appropriate global food security goals for the wealthy 
nations are listed in Figure 16. These are policies that pro-
mote self-sufficiency in food production and sustainable rela-
tionships between the poorer nations and their environments 
as well as address the trade imbalance and human exploita-
tion problems.
4  hunger, Malnutrition, 
and Famine
At a UN World Food Conference in 1974, delegates from 
all nations subscribed to the objective “that within a decade 
no child will go to bed hungry, that no family will fear for 
its next day’s bread, and that no human being’s future and 
capacities will be stunted by malnutrition.” That was an un-
attained dream, though great strides have been made. With 
the MDGs, a new, more modest target has been proposed: 
to cut world hunger in half by 2015 in the developing coun-
tries. This means a reduction in the proportion of hungry 
people from 20% to 10%. In 2008, 34 years after the initial 
goals, the United Nations held a World Food Summit and 
addressed the food crisis that was responsible for adding 75 
million to the 848 million people still suffering from hunger 
and malnutrition in the world. Let’s look at hunger and mal-
nutrition in the world.
Malnutrition Versus hunger
Hunger is the general term referring to a lack of basic food 
required to provide energy and to meet nutritional needs 
The most important level of responsibility is the fam-
ily. Family members purchase, raise, and gather food from 
natural ecosystems or have the food provided by someone, 
usually in the context of the family. When families cannot 
do so, they need a safety net—policies or programs at some 
national, state, or local level whose objective is to meet the 
food security needs of all individuals in the society. Locally, 
food banks and community groups such as shelters and faith 
communities may provide food. More than 50,000 local 
food charities help Americans who are hungry.
On a state and national level, safety-net policies and 
programs can be of two types: (1) official policies, repre-
sented by a variety of welfare measures, such as the Food 
Stamp Program and the Supplemental Security Income pro-
gram; and (2) voluntary aid through hunger-relief organi-
zations. For example, Feeding America, a network of food 
banks throughout the country, forms part of the voluntary 
safety net that provides emergency food help for more than 
25 million Americans. Feeding America retrieves food from 
food processors and suppliers and distributes it to the organ-
ization’s network of food banks. One law—the Charity, Aid, 
Recovery, and Empowerment Act of 2003 (CARE Act)— 
allows family farmers, ranchers, and restaurant owners to 
deduct the costs of food donated to agencies such as Feeding 
America as a charitable contribution.
National self-sufficiency in food—enough food to sat-
isfy the nutritional needs of all of a country’s people—can 
be achieved either by producing all the food people need or 
buying the food on the world market. This goal implies that 
countries have policies that allow the poorest members into 
the market, such as a just land-distribution policy and a func-
tioning market economy. Many nations, though, are not self-
sufficient in food and turn to the global community for food 
aid and other forms of technical development assistance.
Globally, a substantial amount of food aid flows from 
rich countries to food-poor countries. However, much 
more food is imported and paid for by the developing 
countries. The World Trade Organization (WTO) is the 
body that governs international trade. Meeting every few 
years, the WTO brings together developed and developing 
member countries for negotiations and policy decisions. 
Protective policies in developed countries result in tariffs—
taxes the developed countries set on imported agricultural 
 products—and in the subsidies given to the agricultural sec-
tor. U.S. farm bills have continued the subsidies of most 
agricultural products. The EU is notorious for its high tariff 
barriers and large subsidies for its agricultural sector, even 
though it has enacted agricultural reforms that change the 
rules for  subsidies.
Trade Policies. Haiti is a good example of the problem of 
uneven trade policies. It cut its tariff on rice from 50% to 
3% in 1995, opening the country’s markets to subsidized 
rice from the United States (called “dumping”). By 2000, 
rice production in Haiti was cut in half, leaving thousands of 
small rice farmers without a means of livelihood. Haiti began 
to import rice. Haiti’s problems were exacerbated by the 
2010 earthquake, with the additional loss of livelihood for 
326

The Production and Distribution of Food
fits-all approach that identified six food groups and a range 
of servings, has been replaced more than once: first with a 
different pyramid that differentiated by age and physical 
 activity, and most recently with a graphic of a food plate 
(Fig. 17). Bottom line? The best way to combat obesity is to 
increase the amount of exercise you get and to lower your 
total calorie intake and emphasize whole grains, vegetables, 
and unsaturated fats.
Although overnourishment does occur in developing 
countries, undernourishment is even more prevalent, espe-
cially in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. There the major 
nutritional problems are a lack of proteins and some vita-
mins (malnutrition), especially in children, and a lack of food 
for energy (undernourishment) for all ages.
Extent and Consequences of hunger
Accurate, reliable figures on the worldwide extent of hunger 
are unavailable, mainly because few governments document 
such figures. On the basis of household surveys, the FAO es-
timated in 2010 that close to 925 million people are under-
nourished.
such that the individual is unable to lead a normal, healthy 
life. Undernourishment is the lack of adequate food energy 
(usually measured in Calories). Malnutrition is the lack of 
essential nutrients, such as specific amino acids, vitamins, 
and minerals, and can occur in people who eat nutritionally 
bad diets even if they have other food available. Another nu-
tritional disorder that is becoming epidemic, even in many 
developing countries, is overnourishment, a condition of eat-
ing too much. Worldwide, more than 1.5 billion adults are 
overweight. More than one-third of the U.S. population is 
clinically obese (more than 30 pounds overweight). As the 
World Health Organization describes the situation, “65% of 
the world’s population lives in countries where overweight 
and obesity kill more people than underweight.”10
Food Advice in the united States
To address this and other nutritional problems in the United 
States, the USDA established six food groups and arranged 
them in a pyramid. The original pyramid, with its one-size-
Figure 17 The new food guide. The new food guide produced by the U.S. Department of  Agriculture to 
help people evaluate their food intake. Go to https://www.supertracker.usda.gov/default.aspx to get a personal-
ized recommendation.
Eat a variety of fruit
Go easy on fruit juices
Go low-fat or fat-free when
you choose milk, yogurt,
or cheese  
Choose low-fat or lean meats
and poultry 
Vary your protein routine–
choose more fish, beans,
peas, nuts, and seeds 
7 ounces
2 cups
3 cups
6 ounces
3 cups
Make half your
grains whole
Vary your veggies
Focus on fruits
Get your calcium-rich
foods 
Go lean with protein
Aim for these amounts 
each week:
Aim for at least 3 1/2
ounces of whole grains
a day   
Dark green veggies
 = 3 cups 
Orange veggies
 = 2 cups 
Dry beans & peas
= 3 cups 
Starchy veggies
 = 6 cups 
Other veggies
 = 7 cups 
Find your balance between food and physical activity
Be physically active for at least 30 minutes most days of the week. 
Know your limits on fats, sugars, and sodium
Your allowance for oils is 6 teaspoons a day. 
Limit extras–solid fats and sugars–to 290 calories a day. 
Your results are based on a 2200 calorie pattern.
Name:
This calorie level is only an estimate of your needs. Monitor your body weight to see if you need to adjust your calorie intake.
MEAT & BEANS
MILK
FRUITS
VEGETABLES
GRAINS
10World Health Organization. 2012 Obesity and Overweight Factsheet No. 311. 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/.
327

The Production and Distribution of Food
developing world cannot help but notice that few people in 
the rural areas look well fed. Most are thin and spare from a 
lifetime of difficult physical labor and limited access to food.
Root Cause of hunger
As we already saw, the root cause of hunger is poverty. Hun-
gry and malnourished people lack either the money to buy 
food or enough land to raise their own. One FAO report on 
food insecurity states that “Most of the widespread hunger 
in a world of plenty results from grinding, deeply rooted 
 poverty.”11 
Inadequate food is only one of many consequences of 
poverty. Addressing hunger and the poverty that causes 
it will be essential to making progress toward all the other 
Millennium Development Goals. One measure of progress 
toward reducing hunger is the proportion of children under 
five who are underweight because of chronic or acute hun-
ger. Figure 19 compares data on underweight proportions 
from 1990 and 2009, showing that a few regions—namely, 
eastern Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and north-
ern Africa—are on target to reduce this measure of hunger 
50% by 2015.
Hunger and poverty do not always go from bad to 
worse. A number of countries significantly reduced the ex-
tent of poverty and hunger during the 1980s and 1990s. In-
donesia has benefited from oil exports and Green Revolution 
technology, and it continues to put a major emphasis on rural 
development and the country’s social infrastructure. Malawi 
has been able to double its agricultural productivity through 
a voucher program for fertilizer and seed, helping poor farm-
ers to feed their families and produce crops for the market. It 
is possible, therefore, for societies to make progress in reduc-
ing the extent of absolute poverty and hunger. In contrast, 
in any given year, there are countries and sometimes whole 
regions that face exceptional food emergencies. It is here that 
international responsibility comes most sharply into focus.
Famine
A famine is a severe shortage of food accompanied by a sig-
nificant increase in the death rate. Famine is a clear signal 
that a society is either unable or unwilling to distribute food 
to all segments of its population. Two factors—drought and 
conflict—have been immediate causes of famines in recent 
years.
Drought. Drought is blamed for famines that occurred in 
1968–1974 and again in 1984–1985 and 2010–2012 in the 
Sahel region of Africa. The Sahel, a broad belt of drylands 
south of the Sahara Desert, is occupied by more than 70 mil-
lion people who practice subsistence agriculture or tend cattle, 
sheep, and goats. Although the region normally has enough 
rainfall to support dry grassland or savanna  ecosystems, 
Where? Almost two-thirds of the undernourished (642 
million) are in just seven countries: India, Bangladesh, the 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Paki-
stan, and China. Asia and the Pacific saw a 12% decline in 
undernourishment from 2009 to 2010. Sub-Saharan Africa 
has the highest percentage of undernourished, with 30% of 
the population, some 239 million people, afflicted. It is easy 
to lose track, when faced with so many numbers, of the fact 
that that each person is a unique individual whose potential, 
hopes, and dreams are limited by this lack of food.
Consequences. The effects of malnutrition and undernu-
trition are greatest in preschool children and next greatest 
in women. Hunger can prevent normal growth in children, 
leaving them thin, stunted, and often mentally and physically 
impaired (Fig. 18), a condition known as protein-energy mal-
nutrition. Research has shown that undernutrition in early 
childhood can seriously limit growth and intellectual devel-
opment throughout life. In Guatemala, for example, one out 
of two children under five are chronically undernourished, 
with rates much higher among indigenous people. Guatemala 
has the highest number of chronically malnourished children 
in the western hemisphere, sixth highest in the world. This 
state of malnourishment irreversibly stunts children and in-
hibits them physically and mentally. Estimates are that, as 
adults, their productivity is reduced by a third. UNICEF 
estimated that chronic malnutrition costs Guatemala $8.4 
million a day because of sickness, repeated schooling, hospi-
talization, and lowered productivity.
Sickness and death are companions of hunger. Because 
poor nutrition lowers a person’s resistance to disease, mea-
sles, malaria, and diarrheal diseases are common and are 
major causes of death in the malnourished and undernour-
ished. Hunger is often a seasonal phenomenon in rural areas 
that are supported by subsistence agriculture, as people are 
forced to ration their stored food in order to survive until 
the beginning of the next harvest. Anyone who travels in the 
Figure 18 Malnourished children. These Guatemalan children are not 
suffering from a famine but from chronic malnourishment, which will leave their 
growth stunted.
11FAO. “State of Food Insecurity in the World 2002.” Rome, Italy.
328

The Production and Distribution of Food
Warning Systems. In order to prevent droughts from lead-
ing to famines, two major efforts provide crucial warnings 
about food insecurity in different regions of the world. One, 
the FAO’s Global Information and Early Warning System 
(GIEWS), monitors food supply and demand all over the 
world, watching especially for those places where food sup-
ply difficulties are expected or are happening. The GIEWS 
issues frequent reports and alerts that are usually the result 
of its field missions or on-the-ground reports from other UN 
agencies and NGOs. The agency also relies on satellite im-
agery for crop-monitoring activities.
The second major effort is the Famine Early Warning 
System Network (FEWS NET), funded by the U.S. Agency 
for International Development. FEWS NET is a partnership 
of agencies involved in satellite operations focusing on sub-
Saharan Africa. It continually measures rainfall and agricul-
tural conditions in the region and, like the GIEWS, issues 
regular bulletins and special reports on the Internet, giving 
governments and relief agencies accurate and timely assess-
ments of the status of food security in African countries.
Conflict. Devastating and prolonged civil warfare put 
millions of people at risk of famine. Famines in which the 
causative factor was not drought, but war, threatened Ethi-
opia, Eritrea, Somalia, Rwanda, Sudan, Mozambique, An-
gola, and Congo in the 1990s. The civil wars disrupted the 
farmers’ normal planting and harvesting and displaced mil-
lions from their homes and food sources. In Mozambique 
alone, 900,000 people died from direct military action or 
from  indirect effects of the war there. At least 15 countries 
the rainfall is seasonal, undependable, and prone to failure. 
 Beginning in 1965, the region experienced 20 years of sub-
normal rainfall, with tragic results. Crops withered, forage 
for livestock declined, watering places dried up, and livestock 
died. Both farmers and pastoralists began abandoning their 
land and migrating toward urban centers, where they ended 
up in refugee camps. Unsanitary conditions in the camps led 
to the spread of infectious diseases such as dysentery and 
cholera, and many thousands died before effective aid could 
be organized. The 1984–1985 Sahelian famine is thought to 
have been responsible for almost a million deaths in Ethiopia 
alone. The number would have been higher if not for aid ex-
tended by Africans and numerous international agencies.
Since 1999, periods of drought and normal rainfall have 
alternated in the western Sahel. Sometimes, as in 2003–2004, 
favorable weather led to desert locust infestations, which dev-
astated crops in many regions. Drought and deforestation have 
brought on catastrophic desertification, which in turn has trig-
gered massive dust storms that spread clouds of Sahara dust 
across the Atlantic Ocean and into the Northern Hemisphere. 
Although rainfall is normal in the western Sahel at present, the 
eastern Sahel—the “Horn of Africa”—remains in the grip of 
an extended drought that has put more than 23 million peo-
ple at risk. The years 2011 and 2012 saw a continuation of 
drought. While drought is frequent in that region, an aquifer 
of ancient water discovered in 2012 deep under Namibia may 
help Africa’s driest sub-Saharan country.12
Figure 19 Underweight children. The figure shows the  percentages 
of children under age five who were underweight in 1990 and 2009. Mil-
lennium Development Goal 1 aims at reducing the 1990 proportion 50% by 
2015. (Source: Millennium Development Goals Report 2011 (New York: United Nations, 
2011), 10.)
0
20
23
30
All Developing Regions
6
10
Northern Africa
6
15
Eastern Asia
4
10
Latin America & the Caribbean
1990
2006
7
11
Western Asia
18
30
South-Eastern Asia
22
27
Sub-Saharan Africa
43
52
Southern Asia
40
60
Proportion of children under age five who are underweight,
1990 and 2006 (Percentage)
12McGrath, M. Vast Aquifer found in Namibia could last for centuries. BBC News 
2012. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-18875385.
329

The Production and Distribution of Food
assistance.”13 The “external assistance” here is food aid; the 
reasons for the need vary from conflict to drought to floods, 
hurricanes, and cyclones to localized crop failures. Wide-
spread, severe hunger and famine are being averted today 
only because of food aid, though it does not always work as 
well as we would like.
Food Aid
The World Food Program (WFP) of the United Nations coor-
dinates global food aid, receiving donations from the United 
States, Japan, and the countries of the European Union. In ad-
dition, many nations conduct their own programs of bilateral 
food aid to needy countries. Although international food aid 
was cut in half (to 6.2 million metric tons) between 1993 and 
1996, it reached 15 million metric tons in 1999; it has since 
dropped as low as 5.7 million metric tons (2010) (Fig. 20). 
Much of the increase in 1999 was the result of a major shortfall 
in grain production in the Russian Federation and a consequent 
extension of food aid primarily from the United States (admit-
tedly, to boost U.S. farm exports, which had been falling).
Food aid is distributed to countries all over the world, 
not just where famines are threatened. Food aid is closely 
negotiated on the world stage. In April 2012, a new Food 
Assistance Convention (FAC) was agreed on (replacing one 
from 1999). It is the only international treaty that requires 
members to provide a minimum amount of food assist-
ance. The 2012 FAC was a vast improvement over earlier 
treaties in some ways, in part because it addressed con-
cerns about the problems of food aid, including fostering 
 dependence and problems caused by aid that isn’t useful to 
the  recipients.
in  sub-Saharan Africa have experienced food emergen-
cies in recent years because of internal conflicts and their 
effects on neighboring countries. Continuing conflicts in 
 Afghanistan and Sri Lanka interfere with access to food, 
and a 30-year civil war in Guatemala is part of what set 
the stage for chronic malnutrition there, though it is not an 
actual  famine.
Famines from drought and war are preventable. India, 
Brazil, Kenya, and southern Africa have coped with droughts 
in recent years by mobilizing effective relief in the form of 
food, clothing, and medical assistance. Indeed, the drought 
of the early 1990s accelerated the peace process in Mozam-
bique and helped change the political landscape in southern 
Africa. Cooperation between South Africa and the 10 na-
tions of the Southern Africa Development Community to 
prevent famine lowered barriers between South Africa and 
its neighbors before democracy came to South Africa.
hunger hot Spots
Much of Africa has experienced long-term and severe 
droughts as well as widespread civil conflict. Erratic weather 
patterns and a general warming trend thought by some scien-
tists to be the outcome of global climate change have caused 
crop harvests to oscillate between average and poor. And 
with the recent precipitous rise in food prices, many mil-
lions in the region are experiencing food insecurity. Climate 
change is expected to affect global food production world-
wide, lowering south and southeastern Asian food produc-
tion, for example, by as much as 50% over the next three 
decades.
Other countries with recurrent hunger and food inse-
curity include North Korea, Haiti, and Bangladesh. In early 
2012, the FAO identified 34 countries, including 27 African 
countries in need, as being “in crisis and requiring external 
Figure 20 Global food aid. Global food aid from 1993 to 2010. Orange indicates food aid delivered by the 
World Food Program; green indicates food aid from all sources. (Source: World Food Program annual reports, FAIS, 
UNFAO.)
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
2000
1998
18,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
Food aid (thousands of metric tons)
1999
2001
2003
2002
2004
World food program
All food aid
2005
2006
2008
2009
2010
2007
World food aid (millions metric tons)
13FAO. Crop Prospects and Food Situation. No. 1. February 2009. 
330

The Production and Distribution of Food
zero loss or waste of food, including responsible consump-
tion. It is a tall order, but to get anywhere, we must begin by 
setting high goals. International agreements have held that 
the right to food must be considered a basic human right. It 
follows, then, that we as a nation have a moral obligation to 
respond to world hunger. Has that moral obligation made its 
way into public policy?
Although food is our most vital resource, we do not treat 
it as a commons (free to all that need it). Indeed, the produc-
tion and distribution of food constitute one of the most im-
portant economic enterprises on Earth. Alleviating hunger is 
primarily a matter of addressing the absolute poverty that 
afflicts one of every five people on the planet. To treat food 
as a commons would be to treat wealth as a commons. While 
this is one of the tenets of socialist systems, this notion has 
proved to be unworkable. We are part of the world economy 
now, and it is a market economy—for the perfectly good rea-
son that nothing else seems to work, given the realities of 
human nature.
What has not been done, however, is to bring this mar-
ket economy under the discipline of sustainability. Short-
term profit crowds out long-term sustainable management of 
natural resources. Rich nations have been content to main-
tain the current high subsidies to agriculture that allow them 
to flood markets with underpriced products. Many develop-
ing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, have been 
plagued with corrupt and inept elites who are more inter-
ested in staying in power than in reducing poverty in their 
countries. In some areas, tribal conflicts have taken a terrible 
toll in lives and hunger.
We understand the situation well, but the solutions are 
not simple. The solutions lie in the realm of political and so-
cial action at all levels of responsibility. Given the current 
groundswell of concern about the environment and the glo-
bal attention to the Millennium Development Goals and, we 
hope, the Sustainable Development Goals, there may never 
be a better time to turn things around and take more seri-
ously our responsibilities as stewards of the planet and as 
our brothers’ (and sisters’) keepers.
5  The Future: Feeding the World 
as We Approach 2030–2050
Looking ahead to 2020, we need to be able to feed an addi-
tional 700 million people and also make significant progress 
on meeting the Millennium Development Goal of reducing 
by half existing hunger and malnutrition in the world—and 
do so without the unsustainable practices agriculture cur-
rently employs. Is this possible? What are the prospects as 
we look even further ahead, to 2030–2050?
Future Prospects
Given the limits on suitable land for agriculture, there are 
several prospects for increasing food production. We could 
 continue to increase crop yields with new technologies. We 
When Aid Doesn’t help. Numerous humanitarian cam-
paigns to end world hunger have been mounted in the past 
50 years. The United States and Canada have been world 
leaders in giving away food (which is first purchased from 
farmers and, therefore, represents a subsidy). A number of 
serious famines have been moderated or averted by these ef-
forts, and certainly the need for ongoing emergency food aid 
is undeniable. However, routinely supplying food aid in an 
attempt to alleviate chronic hunger in developing countries 
may be the worst thing to do.
The problem is that people will not pay more than they 
have to for food. Therefore, free or very cheap foreign food 
undercuts the local market. In effect, local farmers must 
compete economically with free or low-cost imported food. 
When they cannot earn a profit, they stop producing and 
eventually enter the ranks of the poor. In the long run, the 
entire local economy deteriorates. Hence, the donation of 
food, while well intended, often aggravates the very condi-
tions that it is meant to alleviate.
When It Does help. The WFP is aware of this problem 
and targets most of its food aid to emergency situations. 
Some aid does go to “development projects,” benefiting poor 
people in countries where food security is at risk and regions 
where malnutrition is severe. The intention of this aid is to 
free poor people of the need to provide food for their fami-
lies and allow them to devote their efforts to other develop-
ment activities. As an important component of this strategy, 
the WFP now makes 80% of its food purchases in the de-
veloping countries themselves. This is a “win-win” solution, 
where small-scale farmers receive income for their crops and 
needy people are fed. In fact, WFP has special programs de-
signed to prevent hunger by better connecting poor farmers 
to the market.
Unfortunately, the United States has a law requiring 
food aid from the United States to be American grown and 
processed and transported by American companies. Many of 
our aid dollars go to pay shipping costs, but shipping food 
delays its arrival and uses fossil fuels. In 2008, Congress au-
thorized a four-year pilot program to purchase local food 
in crises. It was successful, saved money, and got food to 
needy people more quickly. In addition, the 2012 FAC treaty 
stressed assistance in the form of grants that support local 
economies, rather than food grown in donor countries. It is 
hoped that these two changes will alter the way the United 
States approaches food aid.
The Goal Is Zero, the Way There Is Complex
At the 2012 Rio+20 summit, UN Secretary-General Ban 
 Ki-moon offered the Zero Hunger Challenge to the world. 
Ki-moon said that achieving zero hunger would lower con-
flict and increase productivity and prosperity. The challenge 
was focused on five objectives: 100% access to adequate 
food all year round; zero stunted children under two years 
old and no more malnutrition in pregnancy and early child-
hood; all food systems sustainable; 100% growth in small-
holder productivity and income, particularly for women; and 
331

The Production and Distribution of Food
is in exactly the opposite direction. More people want to eat 
higher on the food chain. Finding a medium in which people 
have protein in their diets but are not heavily meat dependent 
is part of a more sustainable approach to food.
Reprising the green revolution may be a part of what 
we need to do, but it can’t be all of it. That is because mod-
ern farming is damaging to the environment. We cannot set 
up our most important systems (such as food production) to 
constantly damage the very ecosystems we depend on and 
expect this situation to last long. Modern agriculture has too 
many externalities to be sustainable; one example is the use 
of fossil fuels, which increases climate change. As the pre-
dicted warming of the 21st century occurs, it is impossible to 
project how rainfall patterns will change. However, scientists 
at NASA’s Goddard Institute of Space Studies estimate that 
developing countries could lose 334 million acres (135 mil-
lion ha) of essential farmland in the next 50 years due to 
temperature increases in the tropics. Many farming practices 
are heavily dependent on fossil fuels, and farming releases 
other greenhouse gases. In fact, one greenhouse gas, nitrous 
oxide, is released from fertilized farm fields and from ma-
nure; agricultural releases are at least 10 times higher than 
any other source. Methane production by livestock was al-
ready discussed. Nitrous oxide has 298 times the greenhouse 
gas effect of carbon dioxide, and methane is 20 times more 
effective at trapping thermal energy than CO2, so their pro-
duction by agriculture is important, and more of the same 
agriculture won’t solve the problem.
Feeding many people sustainably is going to take some-
thing different than more of the same. It will require sustain-
able agriculture, that is, agriculture that can be carried on 
indefinitely without environmental harm. In 2012, the Com-
mission on Sustainable Agriculture and Climate Change put 
out a report, Achieving Food Security in the Face of Climate 
Change, at a conference in London. In an interview, Com-
mission chair Professor Sir John Beddington said, “If you’re 
going to generate enough food both to address the poverty 
of a billion people not getting enough food, with another 
billion [in the global population] in 13 years’ time . . . you 
can’t do it using the same agricultural techniques we’ve used 
before, because that would seriously increase greenhouse gas 
emissions for the whole world . . .”15
Sustainable Agriculture
What would sustainable agriculture look like? It might include 
some of the large farms we are used to, though with fewer 
chemicals, fewer fossil fuels, and fewer of the most wasteful 
types of irrigation (. We will need to eat lower on the food 
chain, eating less meat in the developed world and allowing 
others to eat more (Fig. 21). But it will also require wild crea-
tive approaches very different from industrial agriculture, such 
as the intensive, mixed  product (polyculture) urban farm de-
scribed in the story of Growing Power. Here are some other 
trends in the future of food production.
could grow food crops on land that is now used for feedstock 
crops, biofuels, or cash crops. We could use new and unex-
pected agricultural opportunities such as urban agriculture or 
mixed permacultures. We could also attempt to feed more peo-
ple with the food we already produce by changing social struc-
tures so more people have a chance to enter the market—in 
turn lowering crop loss and food waste—and by eating foods 
that require less fuel, water, land, and pesticides to produce.
More Green Revolution
As mentioned earlier, a dramatic rise in crop yields in the 
developing countries was the major accomplishment of the 
Green Revolution: Wheat yields tripled, rice and corn yields 
more than doubled, potato yields rose 78%, and cassava 
yields rose 36%, according to the UN Food and Agricul-
tural Organization (FAO). Interestingly, grain yields have 
continued to rise in some of the developed countries, too. 
In France, for example, wheat yields have quadrupled since 
1950, reaching more than 6 tons per hectare. Rice yields in 
Japan have risen 67% in the same period. Actually, the ge-
netic potential exists for wheat yields of 14 tons per hectare 
or higher, and rice yields can be as high as 13 tons per hec-
tare under the right conditions. Can we expect yields to con-
tinue to increase up to their genetic potential?
It turns out that the great differences in grain yields 
among regions have less to do with the genetic strains used 
and more to do with the weather. Egypt and Mexico, for ex-
ample, irrigate their wheat and get higher yields, while U.S. 
wheat is rain-fed. Australian wheat yields are even lower, 
the result of the country’s sparse rainfall. Once the agricul-
tural land is planted with high-yielding strains and fertilized 
to the maximum, other factors—soil, rainfall, and available 
 sunlight—limit productivity. These environmental limits are 
a reminder that agricultural sustainability is highly depend-
ent on soil and water conservation and on the weather.
But some people still see the Green Revolution as the 
way forward. Gordon Conway, president of the Rockefeller 
Foundation, has called for a new Green Revolution. He has 
dubbed it a Doubly Green Revolution: “a revolution that is 
even more productive than the first Green Revolution and 
even more ‘green’ in terms of conserving natural resources 
and the environment. During the next three decades, it must 
aim to repeat the successes of the Green Revolution on a glo-
bal scale in many diverse localities and be equitable, sustain-
able, and environmentally friendly.”14
Less Meat and Biofuels. One way to produce more food 
is to eat less meat and divert fewer crops to biofuels. We can 
switch from the production of feed grain and cash crops to 
food for people. Almost 70% of domestic grain in the United 
States is used to feed livestock. The percentages drop over 
other regions of the world in proportion to the economic level 
of the region. Sub-Saharan Africa and India, for example, use 
only 2% of their grain to feed livestock. The trend, however, 
14Gordon Conway. “The Doubly Green Revolution: Food for All in the 21st 
 Century.” 1999. Cornell University Press. Ithaca, NY.
15Richard Black. “Farming Needs “Climate-Smart” Revolution, Says Report.” 
BBC News Science and Environment. March 28, 2012. http://www.bbc.co.uk
/news/science-environment-17495031 June 25, 2012.
332

The Production and Distribution of Food
In Seattle, community organizers designed a 7-acre mixed 
foraging and garden plot area called an urban food forest. 
The Beacon Food Forest, as it is called, was designed as a 
project for a class in permaculture—the growing of food 
with perennial plants. From a small class project, the forest 
grew with grants to be planned as the largest urban food 
forest on U.S. public land. The project will be realized over 
a period of years.
Algae to the Rescue. Imagine a world in which nutritious 
algae were grown in fish tanks on nearly everyone’s win-
dowsills, algae farms in the ocean grew sea lettuce and other 
 edible seaweeds, algae were grown in ponds and tanks for 
fish food, or vast bags of wastewater were treated with algae, 
which were then fed to fish. Algae would be used as a biofuel 
because of their high oil content (Fig. 22b), and algae ditches 
at the edges of farm fields would take up nutrients and in turn 
provide algal fertilizer for the fields. Algae as a food are very 
nutritious, high in omega-3 fatty acids, vitamins, and antioxi-
dants. As a biofuel, it is competitive because of its high oil 
content, as a nutrient extractor, it is efficient because of their 
rapid growth, and as a fertilizer, it is rich.
That imagined future is now. Work is proceeding rap-
idly on all of these fronts to produce a world in which algae 
can be used in a wide array of ways. Dr. Aaron Baum is a 
good example of an algal entrepreneur. He is working with 
NASA, which has a large algae project (the OMEGA project) 
designed to use wastewater to raise algae for biofuel produc-
tion (Fig. 22c). But Baum’s major effort is with small food 
algae production. He designs kits for people to raise Spir-
ulina, an extremely nutritious type of algae found in food 
supplements. Instead of taking a small-scale idea and try-
ing to scale up to industrial levels, Baum is trying to make 
household-sized algae-growing apparatuses that can be used 
by any apartment dweller to grow healthy food.
Organics. Organic farming has been around a long time and 
overlaps with the other sustainable practices outlined here. 
Locavore, Anyone? While trade is important in order to 
provide jobs and thus access to food markets for all, one way 
to lower the environmental cost of food is by eating locally. 
Locavores are people who try to purchase or grow most of 
their food within their own region. Of course, this means 
foods have to be preserved in some way, and many foods are 
not available in all seasons. There are many locavore groups 
in the United States and elsewhere. Community-supported 
agriculture farms (CSAs) are on the rise in American urban 
and suburban areas. These farms are supported by people 
who purchase shares and who often volunteer at the farms. 
Because shares are purchased in advance, the risks of a poor 
crop are shared, and farmers borrow less money and are 
likely to weather difficult seasons more easily. CSA farms are 
popular, as they provide local fresh produce, access to farm-
ing, and support for farms that might not be economically 
viable if they had to compete with cheap food trucked long 
distances from industrial farms.
urban Agriculture. Urban farming occurs across the 
world and is part of the future of food production. Cuba is 
the poster country for urban farming and the only country 
in the world with extensive state-supported urban agricul-
ture. Food shortages of the 1990s drove a grassroots effort 
to produce food in Cuban city neighborhoods. To meet the 
needs of small-scale urban farmers, the Cuban government 
created an Urban Agriculture Department. It provides ex-
pertise and places to buy seeds and equipment and supports 
 infrastructure. In Havana alone, there are more than 30,000 
people growing food in more than 8,000 farms and gardens 
(Fig. 22a). Cubans even began to grow rice in small plots. 
Small-scale rice production now rivals the large-scale pro-
duction of large farms in Cuba.
urban Foraging. Another model of urban food produc-
tion is foraging. Urban foragers find fruits and berries and 
other foods available in the urban landscape. Sometimes 
they create urban food maps, which are available on the 
Web. There is a growing community of urban foragers. 
Figure 21 Global population and grain 
and meat production. Grain production has 
kept up with the population increase, and meat 
production has greatly outpaced it over the past 35 
years. High meat consumption in the West makes it 
difficult to produce food sustainably.  
(Source: FAOSTAT.)
300
250
200
150
100
2005
1990
1995
2000
2010
1985
1980
1975
1970
Population
Grain production
Meat production
Year
Values Relative to 1970
333

The Production and Distribution of Food
In the United States, farms can be certified as organic by the 
USDA. Certified organic farms have to meet strict criteria. 
They are limited to natural pesticide products and cannot use 
the artificial fertilizers typical of modern agriculture. Often, 
organic farm yields are somewhat lower and organic food 
prices higher. In one study of more than 322 research papers, 
scientists found that organic yields were 80% of conventional 
yields on average (with a great deal of variability). However, 
in intensive mixed cultures (such as the Growing Power farm), 
with practices where different types of crops are grown to-
gether (companion planting) and the natural enemies of pests 
are supported, yields can be high.
In the United States, certified organic farms cannot use 
GM crops. This is a controversial issue. Many people who 
support organic farming also see GM crops (especially those 
modified for drought or salt tolerance or enhanced nutrition) 
as one of the tools we will need to use to feed the world. 
It is also difficult to keep organic farms GM free; farmers 
often find their crops contaminated with GM crop plants. As 
a result of some of these limitations, many farms, especially 
CSAs, are not certified as organic by the USDA although 
they may use less polluting methods.
Permanent Polycultures. In Salina, Kansas, Wes  Jackson 
(another MacArthur “Genius” award recipient) has spent a 
career working toward another model of sustainable agri-
culture—the permanent polyculture. Instead of the conven-
tional monoculture that is susceptible to insects and diseases 
and drought, Jackson and his colleagues are trying to cre-
ate an agricultural system modeled on a native prairie. The 
characteristics of a prairie include high biodiversity and per-
manent ground cover. If these could be duplicated even in 
an agricultural field, they figure, the growing of crops could 
be sustainable (Fig. 22d). What they describe is a permanent 
polyculture, a group of perennial plants of different species 
grown together that produce food or fuel. This is hard to 
achieve, in part because perennial plants put more energy 
into roots and leaves and less into the parts of the plant we 
eat. This type of research is important to a radically new ap-
proach to food production.
Figure 22 Types of sustainable agriculture. (a) An urban  garden in Havana, Cuba. (b) Scientists working on 
algae production for biofuels. (c) NASA has a project for algal treatment of wastewater. The algae are then fed to fish. (d) The 
land institute works to make agricultural systems similar to prairies.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
334

The Production and Distribution of Food
farmers abroad would go a long way toward solving job and 
food insecurity. Providing means to get crop insurance for 
small farmers, including those practicing subsistence, would 
help lessen the vulnerability of farmers to environmental 
changes we anticipate with climate change.
Individuals need to feel connected to the rest of the 
world and empowered to do something about the big is-
sues of our time. Food production is central to every topic 
in environmental science. In order to solve environmental 
problems, we will need to have new ways of approaching 
them.
Policy changes. The future also needs to include policy 
and individual changes. U.S. farm policies currently encour-
age large farms, support fewer workers, discourage sustain-
able agriculture, and subsidize industrial agriculture to the 
detriment of the environment. Incorporating externalities 
such as the true cost of erosion, water pollution, or overuse 
of water resources into the actual price of food would go a 
long way to changing the way we view both food and the way 
we produce it. Finding ways to support farmers in the United 
States without subsidizing large industrial agriculture and 
CAFOs at the expense of small or organic  farmers and small 
REVISITING ThE ThEMES
Sound Science
The new high-yield grains that led to the Green Revolu-
tion were developed using science. So is agricultural 
research that continues to seek new ways to improve crop 
yields and research that shows the environmental costs of conventional 
agriculture. Sound science is also needed to provide an accurate evalu-
ation of all genetically modified crops and foods before they are imple-
mented. Most importantly, science, using all of its tools, is necessary to 
find long-term solutions to food production. New science techniques are 
used to grow algae for food and biofuels and to accomplish other sus-
tainable agriculture goals.
Sustainability
Global land and water used for agricultural crops and 
animal husbandry represent two of the most crucial and 
irreplaceable components of ecosystem capital. However, 
the land must be nourished; it is a renewable resource, but it can be 
eroded and worn down by unsustainable practices. Water can be over-
used. As populations increase, pressure will mount to turn more forests 
and wetlands into croplands, a transformation with trade-offs that are 
not usually beneficial due to the loss of the goods and services of the 
natural lands.
Many of the techniques of modern agriculture are not sustainable, 
including heavy use of fossil fuels, ancient groundwater, pesticides, 
 artificial fertilizer, and monocultures. Many consider the diversion of 
food crops to biofuel production unsustainable. Likewise, some food 
aid is harmful to sustainability in developing countries, where self-
sufficiency in food is essential to establishing a sustainable society. A 
number of technologies and approaches make up sustainable agricul-
ture, the approach most likely to both feed populations and maintain 
ecosystem health.
Stewardship
The remarkable progress made in keeping the world’s 
 people fed is certainly good stewardship in action. This 
is especially true where efforts are being made, such as 
those by the national and international agencies and the many NGOs 
involved in hunger and development aid, to identify those suffering from 
food insecurity and to ensure that they have sufficient food for their 
needs. Thousands of organizations and people show that they care as 
this work goes on. The work of Borlaug and his team, of the CGIAR, and 
of the IRRI is particularly noteworthy because these groups have sought 
to improve the yields of the more important grains and make the new 
high-yielding varieties available to the developing countries. Steward-
ship requires us to protect access of all people to crops and seeds, rather 
than amassing power in a few companies. The Feeding America organi-
zation plays an important role in the United States in keeping people 
from going hungry in a land of plenty. We still need to do a better job 
of stewardship of ecosystem services affected by unsustainable food 
production. In part, this will involve changing ways people relate to the 
market—a focus on access rather than production, on lowering waste 
and crop loss, and on diverting less food to livestock feed or biofuels.
S
T
p
i
those by the na
S
G
a
i
the land must b
S
T
t
r
yields and resea
1. Describe the differences between subsistence and modern 
agriculture. What are major components of the agricultural 
revolution. What are the environmental costs of each?
 2. What is the Green Revolution? What have been its limita-
tions and its gains?
 3. How do sustainable animal farming and industrial-style 
 animal farming affect the environment on different scales?
 4. What are biofuels, and what are their impacts on food 
 production?
 5. What are the major advantages and problems associated 
with using biotechnology in food production?
 6. Describe the patterns in grain trade between different world 
regions over the past 70 years. How do the food crisis of 
2006–2008 and food shortages of 2010–2011 relate to these 
patterns?
 7. Describe the levels of responsibility for food security. 
At each level, list several ways food security can be 
 improved.
Review QuesTions
335

The Production and Distribution of Food
THinKinG enviRonMenTALLY
 1. Imagine that you have been sent as a Peace Corps volunteer 
to a poor African nation experiencing widespread hunger. 
Design a strategy for assessing the needs of the people and 
for contacting appropriate sources for help.
 2. Calculate your “food footprint” by looking for one of sev-
eral Web sites where this is calculated. Usually it gives a 
value of either the land or ocean area required to sustain you 
or, in some cases, your carbon dioxide production. How 
many Earths would it take to feed everyone if we all ate like 
you do?
 3. Use the Web to evaluate the work of FEWS NET (www.
fews.net) and the GIEWS (www.fao.org/GIEWS). How do 
these organizations function in bringing food aid to people 
with the greatest need?
MAKinG A DiFFeRenCe
 1. Try to buy cloth bags for food shopping instead of using 
paper or plastic. These are reusable, as opposed to the dis-
posable varieties, and are very sustainable. Even though 
paper bags come from trees (and are both renewable and 
recyclable), they generate air and water pollutants in their 
manufacture, more so than plastic.
 2. If you are cautious about genetically altered foods and you 
want to know whether a product is organic or not, check 
the barcode number on the package: If the first digit is 9, the 
food is organic. If that number is 4, the item was a result of 
conventional farming. If the number is 8, then it has been 
genetically engineered.
 3. Plant your own garden; you control all of the chemical in-
puts (if any), and no carbon dioxide is emitted in getting the 
goods onto your plate.
 4. Bring your lunch to work; you’ll save your own money as 
well as the environment.
 5. Demonstrate your concern for the hungry and homeless in 
your city by giving your time (or donating foodstuffs) to a 
local soup kitchen or food pantry.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
 8. Define hunger, malnutrition, and undernourishment. What 
is the extent of these problems in the world? What is their 
root cause?
 9. Discuss the causes of famine, severe hunger, and chronic 
malnutrition, and name the geographical areas most threat-
ened by them.
 10. How is relief from famine and severe hunger accomplished? 
Why does food aid sometimes aggravate poverty and  hunger?
 11. Define sustainability in an agricultural context. In what 
ways is modern industrial agriculture unsustainable?
 12. What are at least four cutting-edge concepts in sustainable 
agriculture?
CReDiTs
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): AP Photo/Carrie Antlfinger; (bottom left): Basel101658/Shutterstock; 
(bottom right): iStockphoto; (top left): Pete Oxford/Danita Delimont, Agent/Alamy; 
(top left): Garry D. McMichael/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (top right): Fotokostic/
Shutterstock; (top right): FDR Library; (top): Kip Ross/National Geographic/Getty 
Images; (top right): Jim West / Alamy; (bottom left): Wayne Hutchinson/Alamy; 
(top right): James Steidl/Shutterstock; (top left): Bill Barksdale/Age Fotostock; (top 
left): Courtesy Danforth Plant Science Center; (bottom right): kurt_G/Shutterstock; 
(bottom right): MICHEL GANGNE/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom; (top right): 
Golden Rice Humanitarian Board. www.goldenrice.org; (top right): Dorthea Lange/
[LC-DIG-fsa-8b29516]/Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division; (bot-
tom left): Susan Kuklin / Photo Researchers, Inc.; (bottom center): Todd Bannor/
Alamy; (bottom right): NASA Images; (top center): John Takai/Fotolia; (top left): 
David Cole/Alamy; (top left): John Birdsall/Age Fotostock; (top right): www.NASA 
Images.gov; (center left): Bloomberg/Getty Images; (center right): AP Photo/Orlin 
Wagner
Text Credits
Source: “20 questions on genetically modified foods,” World Health 
Organization; Source: The Doubly Green Revolution: Food for All in the 
21st Century by Gordon Conway. Source: “Farming Needs ‘Climate-smart’ 
Revolution, Says Report” by Richard Black, from BBC News website, March 
28, 2012; Page 306, Figure 12: Adapted from “Global Status of Commercialized 
Biotech/GM Crops: 2007,” from ISAA BRIEF, Number 37. Copyright © 2007 
by ISAAA. Reprinted with permission; Page 314, Figure 17: Source: MyPyramid 
from ChooseMyPlate.gov. United States Department of Agriculture.; Page 
316, Figure 19: “Proportion of children under age five who are underweight, 
1990 and 2006 (Percentage),” from The Millennium Development Goals 
Report 2008. Copyright © 2011 by United Nations. Reprinted with permis-
sion. All rights reserved; Page 318, Figure 20: Source: Data from World Food 
Programme; United States Department of Agriculture, Food Aid Information 
System; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; Figure 304, 
Figure 21: Figure from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. Reprinted with permission; Figure 22b: www.nasa.gov; Figure12.22c: 
NASA.
336

The Production and Distribution of Food
biofuel Any fuel, but usually liquids, derived from agricultural 
crops (e.g., ethanol and plant oils).
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety An international agreement 
governing trade in genetically modified organisms. The Cartagena 
Protocol was signed in January 2000.
community supported agriculture An arrangement between farms 
and local citizens where the citizens are shareholders in the farm, 
supporting the farmers and gaining access to fresh farm produce.
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) A federal program whereby 
farmers are paid to place highly erodible cropland in a reserve. A 
similar program, the Conservation Stewardship Program, encourages 
farmers to conserve soil and water resources on their lands.
famine A severe shortage of food accompanied by a significant 
increase in the local or regional death rate.
food security For families, the ability to meet the food needs of 
everyone in the family, providing freedom from hunger and 
malnutrition.
hunger A condition wherein the basic food required for meeting 
nutritional and energy needs is lacking and the individual is 
unable to lead a normal, healthy life.
locavore People who try to purchase or grow most of their food 
within their own region; eating locally.
malnutrition The lack of essential nutrients such as vitamins, 
minerals, and amino acids. Malnutrition ranges from mild to 
severe and life threatening.
marker-assisted breeding The science of locating genes with 
desirable traits using DNA sequencing and then using cross-
breeding with standard crop lines, thus avoiding the use of 
transgenics.
overnourishment The condition of obesity and overweight that 
results from overeating.
permanent polyculture A sustainable agriculture venture where a 
group of perennial plants of different species are grown together 
to produce food and fuel.
precautionary principle The principle that says that where there 
are threats of serious or irreversible damage, the absence of 
scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing 
cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.
subsistence farming Farming that meets the food needs of farmers 
and their families but little more. Subsistence farming involves 
hand labor and is practiced extensively in the developing world.
undernourishment A form of hunger in which the individual lacks 
adequate food energy, as measured in calories. Starvation is the 
most severe form of undernourishment.
urban food forest A new design for urban landscapes where 
perennial plants and trees are grown with the intention of 
allowing people to forage them for food.
urban foragers Those urban dwellers who forage for fruits, berries, 
mushrooms, and other foods in urban landscapes.
GLossARY
337

This page intentionally left blank 

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 1. The Need for Pest Control: Define 
the major groups of pests and 
the different methods we use to 
control them.
 2. Chemical Treatment, Promises 
and Problems: Explain the serious 
problems that accompany over-
use of new and more effective 
chemical pesticides, such as DDT.
 3. Alternative Pest Control Meth-
ods: Explain the major types of 
alternatives to using pesticides 
to control pests.
 4. Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM): Explain the main princi-
ples and give examples of the 
integrated pest management 
approach to reducing the use of 
pesticides.
 5. Pests and Policy: List and 
describe the federal and inter-
national policies for controlling 
pests and those for control of 
pesticides.
Pests and Pest 
Control
W
hat do New York City’s Abercrombie and Fitch stores, the University of 
Nebraska, Lincoln’s housing system, and the Fort Worth, Texas, housing 
authority have in common? In the past few years, they have all dealt with 
outbreaks of bedbugs (Cimex lectularius). Bedbugs, once common in the United States, 
had been well controlled since after WWII but have resurged to epidemic proportions 
in recent years. Small blood-sucking wingless insects, bedbugs are a public health nui-
sance. Their bites cause itchy rashes, though they do not transmit other diseases. While 
bedbug-sniffing dogs can be used to pinpoint infestations, sometimes getting rid of the 
pests is extremely difficult. Bedbugs lay a lot of eggs, can hide in small cracks, and can 
go a year without feeding. Once controlled by DDT, a pesticide no longer in use in the 
United States, bedbugs are finding the modern world to their liking. They are spread 
by an increase in domestic and international travel and can be found in hotels ranging 
from cheap to expensive. Many are resistant to the pesticides we do use. Some bed-
bugs in New York City are 264 times more resistant to a common pesticide than similar 
bedbugs in Florida. Once established, bedbugs are terribly difficult to eradicate.
ONE PARTICuLARLy BAd OuTBREAk. In 2010, a particularly bad 
summer outbreak of bedbugs prompted five states to ask the Department of Defense 
for resources to get rid of the pests. The state of Ohio petitioned the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) for permission to use a pesticide, Propoxur, for in-home 
use. The petition was denied because of concerns about the effect of the chemical 
on  children, leaving Ohio in a quandry. Bedbug  research found that commonly used 
foggers, or pesticide bombs, 
used in other types of domes-
tic infestation, are ineffective 
against the insects. In 2012, 
the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention and the EPA 
gave a joint statement about 
bedbugs as a public health 
From Chapter 13 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard 
T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Pests and Pest Control
for a combination of treatments used in concert. The heyday 
of chemical pesticides as a silver bullet is over due to the re-
ality of their environmental effects and pesticide resistance. 
Now we have to use new and innovative approaches to pests, 
whether they are found in agricultural settings, in structures, 
in the flour on your pantry shelf, or in beds. In this chapter, we 
will connect the issues of pests in our daily lives to environ-
mental science.
concern. Among the non-chemical means of controlling bedbugs, 
the CDC recommends vacuuming regularly, sealing cracks, treat-
ing with heat, removing clutter, and monitoring. A dry soil called 
diatomaceous earth, which is non-toxic but scratches the waxy 
coating found on bedbugs, can also be distributed.
A GREAT ILLuSTRATION. Bedbugs are a great il-
lustration of the issues surrounding controlling pests: the costs 
of pests, the difficulties with chemical controls, and the need 
1 The Need for Pest Control
Since earliest times, humans have suffered frustration and 
losses brought on by destructive pests. To this day, farmers, 
herdsmen, and homeowners wage a constant battle against 
the insects, plant pathogens, and unwanted plants that com-
pete with them for the biological use of crops, animals, and 
homes.
One dictionary defines a pest as “an insect or other small 
animal that harms or destroys garden plants, trees, etc.”1 This 
definition  includes a broad variety of organisms that interfere 
with  humans or with our social or economic endeavors such 
as pathogens, nuisance wild animals, annoying insects, and 
molds. The emphasis in this chapter is on those pests that in-
terfere with agriculture, households, stored products, wood 
products, and structures. Pests are often defined by the types of 
activity they affect or what they live on. Sometimes we  divide 
them by their taxonomic group.
Types of Pests and the Importance  
of Pest Control
Agricultural pests are organisms that feed on agricultural 
crops, ornamental plants, or animals. The most notorious 
of these organisms are various insects, but certain fungi, 
viruses, worms, snails, slugs, rats, mice, and birds also fit 
into the category (Fig. 1a–c). Weeds are plants that com-
pete with agricultural crops, forests, and forage grasses 
for light and nutrients (Fig. 1d–e). Some unwanted plants 
poison cattle or have other serious effects; others simply 
detract from the appearance of lawns and gardens. In-
sects, plant pathogens, and weeds destroy an estimated 
37% (before and after harvest) of potential agricultural 
production in the United States, at an estimated yearly loss 
of $122 billion to consumers and producers. Elsewhere, 
pests also destroy important crops. In the late 1990s, for 
example, Russia suffered a 70% yield loss from a potato 
fungus, Phythophtora infestans, considered to be global 
agriculture’s worst crop disease. Another fungal pest, soy-
bean rust, Phakopsora pachyrhizi, has spread throughout 
South America, causing $2 billion in losses in Brazil alone 
in 2004. When it was blown into the United States by 
winds from Hurricane Irene and began to spread north-
ward, people had to act quickly. Now there is a soybean 
rust alert system to treat it quickly when it is detected. A 
2011 plague of mice in Australia caused more than $300 
million in crop losses.
Some agricultural pests are veterinary pests (Fig. 1f), 
those affecting domestic animals. These include the screw-
worm fly, for example, or fleas, ticks, and mites on animals. 
Often such pests are disease vectors. They may be similar 
to pests attacking humans, the medical pests. Houseflies are 
significant pests because they can carry diseases onto food, 
especially from manure sources. Darkling beetles are sig-
nificant pests of poultry production worldwide; they carry 
human and animal diseases and destroy insulation. Mos-
quitoes (Fig. 1g) carry dengue and yellow fevers and ma-
laria; snails carry schistosomiasis, and chagas bugs carry a 
protzoan parasite. Other medical pests, such as the bedbug 
mentioned earlier, carry no diseases. The malaria-carrying 
mosquito, one of the most important medical pests, will be 
discussed at some length later (see Stewardship, “DDT for 
Malaria Control”).
Forest pests destroy living trees and wood products. 
The mountain pine beetle isdevastating to forest ecosys-
tems. Other wood pests include beetles such as the emerald 
ash borer (Fig. 1h). Originally from Russia, China, Japan 
and Korea, the beautiful green beetle was first discovered 
in the United States in 2002. Since then it has spread to at 
least 14 states and parts of Canada. Its spread is monitored 
with purple traps visible along highways (Fig. 2). It is esti-
mated to have killed 50 million to 100 million ash trees as 
it destroys the layers directly under the bark by burrowing. 
The borer threatens the nearly 7.5 billion trees (about 37.5 
million in urban and suburban settings) of several ash spe-
cies in North America. As they die, the trees lose limbs, re-
quire removal, and are dangerous. A 2012 report estimated 
that the emerald ash borer and another forest pest, the 
Asian longhorned beetle, cost $1.7 billion in local govern-
ment expenditures annually and an additional $830 million 
in lost property values.
1Random House Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary, 2005.
340

Pests and Pest Control
(a)
(c)
(e)
(g)
(b)
(d)
(f)
(h)
Figure 1 Important pests. (a) Soybean rust. (b) Cotton boll weevil. (c) Male medfly. (d) Giant hogweed. (e) 
Striga (witchweed). (f) Dog tick. (g) Anopheles mosquito. (h) Emerald ash borer.
341

Pests and Pest Control
The Pesticide Expense. Part of the credit for mod-
ern human prosperity can be attributed to pest control. 
Throughout the chapter, we will see many examples of these 
different types of pests and efforts to control them. Chemi-
cal pesticides have become one of the most frequently used 
tools in our effort to control pests, an effort that is quite 
costly. The EPA estimated that efforts to control pests in the 
United States in 2007 (the latest available survey) involved 
the use of 1.133 billion pounds (514,000 metric tons) of 
herbicides (chemicals that kill plants) and other pesticides 
(chemicals that kill animals and insects considered to be 
pests) annually (Fig. 4), at a direct cost of $12.5 billion. Ac-
cording to the EPA, 5.21 billion pounds (2.4 million metric 
tons) of pesticides were used worldwide in 2007, at a cost 
of $39 billion.2 Many of the changes in agricultural technol-
ogy, such as monoculture and the widespread use of geneti-
cally identical crops, have boosted yields and also brought 
an increase in the proportion of crops lost to pests—from 
31% in the 1950s to 37% today. During the past half-
century, the use of herbicides and other pesticides multi-
plied manyfold, leading to a disturbing and unsustainable  
dependency on them.
Different Philosophies of Pest Control
Medical practice employs several basic means of treat-
ing infectious diseases. One approach is to give the patient 
a massive dose of antibiotics or other medicines, hoping 
to either eliminate the pathogen or stop it before it can get 
established. Another approach is to stimulate the patient’s 
Figure 2 Monitoring. Traps for emerald ash borers are found along roads. 
They are important parts of monitoring.
Figure 3 Stored product pests. This Khapra beetle, hiding in a bag of 
rice, is one of the worst stored product pests worldwide. It is small, resistant to 
pesticides, can live with little water, and can go long periods without food.
2EPA Pesticide Sales and Usage 2006–2007 Market Estimates Report. (2011). 
http://www.epa.gov/opp00001/pestsales/07pestsales/table_of_contents2007.htm
Stored product pests are those which live in items such 
as cereals and processed foods. Rice weevils and flour moths 
may be familiar pests in kitchen pantries. The Khapra beetle 
(Trogoderma granarium) (Fig. 3) is one you probably have 
not seen because of the efforts of federal agents to keep it out 
of the country. It is tiny; can eat many types of food, includ-
ing those low in moisture; is resistant to many pesticides; and 
can even survive without food for long periods. In 2011, it 
was intercepted 100 times in various products at U.S. bor-
ders. Biofouling organisms are organisms that settle on sur-
faces in aquatic environments. Some make shipping more 
expensive and less fuel efficient; others clog intake pipes and 
screens for industries, cover piers, and settle bouys. Anything 
in the water can be covered. Biofouling is described later 
(see Sound Science, “Marine Fouling Organisms: Keeping 
One Step Ahead of the Barnacles”). Fabric pests include 
those which live on cloth, leather, feathers, and the like. 
They include dermestid beetles, carpet beetles, and others. 
There are other types of pests as well, specializing on paper 
and other products.
Pests and Climate Change. It is hard predict the exact ef-
fects climate change will have on pests, but scientists are try-
ing to figure out trends as the world changes. Many insects 
including several of medical or agricultural importance are 
already increasing their ranges, and pathogens will respond 
to changes in precipitation, temperature, and weather events. 
Researchers anticipate some increase in crop pests such as 
nematodes and weevils that attack the roots of the plan-
tain, a crop in the tropics, as temperatures increase. In other 
places, drought may lower mosquito populations. Overall, 
scientists expect an increase in pests, but a great deal of re-
search still needs to be done.
342

Pests and Pest Control
Ecological control emphasizes the protection of people and 
domestic plants and animals from damage from pests rather 
than eradication of the pest organism. Thus, the benefits of 
pest control can be obtained while maintaining the integrity 
of the ecosystem.
These two philosophies are actually combined in the ap-
proach called integrated pest management (IPM). IPM is an 
approach to controlling pest populations by using all suita-
ble methods—chemical and ecological—in a way that brings 
about long-term management of pest populations and also 
has minimal environmental impact. This approach is increas-
ing in usage, especially where pesticides are seen as undesira-
ble because of health risks and in developing countries where 
the cost of pesticides is often prohibitive. We will discuss 
IPM further in Section 4.
2  Chemical Treatment: Promises 
and Problems
Pesticides are categorized according to the group of organisms 
they kill. There are insecticides (for insects), rodenticides (for 
mice and rats), fungicides (for fungi), herbicides (for plants), 
immune  system with a vaccine to produce long-lasting pro-
tection against any future invasion. Yet another is to prevent 
a patient from becoming ill in the first place by maintaining a 
healthy lifestyle and cutting down on activities that transmit 
disease (for example, by washing hands or avoiding sneezing 
on others). In practice, all of these means are often used to 
keep a particular pathogen under control.
The same basic philosophies govern the control of pests. 
Sometimes we use chemical treatment. Like the use of an-
tibiotics and other medicines, chemical treatment seeks to 
eradicate or greatly lessen the numbers of the pest organism. 
Although it has had much success, this approach gives only 
short-term protection. Furthermore, the chemical often has 
side effects that are highly damaging to other organisms.
A different philosophy could be called ecological pest 
control. Like stimulating the body’s immune system, or pre-
venting pests by maintaining ecosystem health, this approach 
seeks to give long-lasting protection by developing control 
agents on the basis of knowledge of the pest’s life cycle and 
of ecological relationships. Such agents, which may be other 
organisms or chemicals, work in one of two ways: Either 
they are highly specific for the pest species being fought, 
or they manipulate one or more aspects of the ecosystem. 
Figure 4 Pesticide use in the United States. Nonagricultural and agricultural uses of pesticides (ac-
tive ingredients) are shown for the period 1964–2007. (Source: Data from the Environmental Protection Agency, Office of 
Pesticide Programs.)
Active pesticide (millions of lbs)
1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2007
Agriculture
Year
Nonagriculture
Agriculture
Nonagriculture
900
600
300
1200
1500
Re-estimated 1988
PESTICIDE USE IN THE UNITED STATES
1964 1966 1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978
1982
1980
1986
1984
343

Pests and Pest Control
and so on. None of these chemicals, however, is entirely spe-
cific to the organisms it was designed to control; they can all 
pose hazards to other organisms, including humans.
Development of Chemical Pesticides 
and Their Successes
Finding effective materials to combat pests is an ongo-
ing endeavor. The early substances (frequently referred to 
as first-generation pesticides) used to control agricultural 
pests included toxic heavy metals such as lead, arsenic, and 
mercury. Scientists now recognize that these substances 
may accumulate in soils, inhibit plant growth, and poison 
animals and humans. In addition, toxic heavy metals lose 
their effectiveness as pests become increasingly resistant to 
them. For example, in the early 1900s, citrus growers were 
able to kill 90% of injurious scale insects (minute insects 
that suck the juices from plant cells) by placing a tent over 
an infested tree and piping in deadly cyanide gas for a short 
time. By 1930, this same technique killed as little as 3% of 
these pests.
The next step had its origins in the science of organic 
chemistry in the early 1800s. During the 19th century, chem-
ists synthesized thousands of organic compounds, but for the 
most part, these compounds sat on shelves because uses for 
them had not yet been found. By the 1930s, however, with 
agriculture expanding to meet the needs of a rapidly increas-
ing population and with first-generation pesticides failing, 
farmers needed something new. In time, second-generation 
pesticides, as they came to be called, were developed as a re-
sult of synthetic organic chemistry. One of the most famous 
is the pesticide DDT, which will illustrate many of the major 
ideas in the chapter.
The DDT Story. In the 1930s, a Swiss chemist named Paul 
Müller began systematically testing some organic chemicals 
STEwarDShIP
DDT for Malaria Control
The use of DDT for 
controlling malaria is 
one of those situations 
where stewardship 
decisions involve 
conflicting views of the common good. 
Malaria exacts a terrible toll in death and 
disease: 150 million to 275 million bouts 
of sickness and 660,000 deaths in the year 
2011. The good news is that malaria deaths 
have dropped 25% since 2000, but the bad 
news is that we thought malaria would have 
been wiped out long ago. Fifty years ago, 
malaria seemed to be on the way out as new 
synthetic drugs killed the protozoan parasites 
that caused the disease and DDT wiped 
out mosquitoes everywhere. But resistance 
emerged in both parasites and mosquitoes, 
leaving us with fewer control options. DDT 
is one of a group of 12 persistent organic 
pollutants targeted for phasing out by the 
United Nations Environment Program, but it 
is still used against malarial mosquitoes in 
parts of the world because it is effective and 
inexpensive.
About 20 species of Anopheles mosquito 
carry malaria, which itself is caused by four dif-
ferent but related parasite species. Members of 
the Anopheles genus are night hunters, biting 
people as they rest or sleep. Many people in 
countries with malaria cannot afford bed nets to 
physically keep mosquitoes away. In about 11 
countries, DDT is still the main line of defense 
against the mosquito, in part because it is inex-
pensive. The typical application involves spray-
ing inside houses and eaves at a concentration 
of 2 g/m2, once or twice a year. Even where 
mosquitoes are resistant to DDT, it acts as a 
repellent or irritant that keeps the mosquitoes 
from staying around. In 2006, the WHO reversed 
a 30-year policy and officially put DDT on a par 
with bed nets and antimalarial drugs as major 
tools for controlling malaria.
One major downside of this approach is the 
difficulty of keeping DDT out of agricultural 
fields, where it can enter food chains and 
poison top predators. Another downside is the 
high exposure of some individuals when DDT 
is sprayed indoors. Alternative pesticides, such 
as synthetic pyrethroids, are already available, 
but resistance to these is appearing, too. An 
integrated public-health approach is needed 
wherein mosquito breeding places are elimi-
nated, bed nets are employed, and malaria 
cases are treated promptly to intercept the life 
cycle of the parasite. However, these steps are 
seldom all present in many developing-country 
locales.
There is no magic bullet. The story of DDT 
and malaria illustrates the history of problems 
with chemical pesticides: development of resist-
ance by pests, resurgences and secondary-pest 
outbreaks, and adverse environmental and 
human health effects. These problems can be 
extremely widespread and persistent and have 
led to an increased need for alternative methods 
of pest control.
T
c
o
w
d
344

Pests and Pest Control
for their effect on insects. In 1938, he hit on the chemical 
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), a chlorinated hy-
drocarbon that had first been synthesized some 50 years ear-
lier. Just traces of DDT killed flies in Müller’s laboratory.
DDT appeared to be nothing less than the long-sought 
“magic bullet,” a chemical that was extremely toxic to in-
sects and yet seemed nontoxic to humans and other mam-
mals. It was inexpensive to produce, broad spectrum 
(effective against a multitude of insect pests), and persist-
ent (it did not break down readily in the environment) and, 
hence, provided lasting protection. This last attribute low-
ered cost by eliminating both the material and the labor ex-
pense of repeated treatments.
In war . . . During World War II, DDT quickly became in-
dispensible (Fig. 5). The military used it to control body lice 
that spread typhus fever. As a result, World War II was one 
of the first wars in which fewer people died of typhus than of 
SouND SCIENCE
Marine Fouling organisms: Keeping 
one Step ahead of the Barnacles
Finding a home is a rite 
of passage for marine 
plankton that settle from 
a free swimming stage 
to a sessile (attached, 
sedentary) form. Barnacles are a good example; 
they have early life stages moving about in cur-
rents and eventually change to a form that has 
to land on some type of structure and attach in 
order to continue developing. This means that 
solid surface area is often the limiting factor for 
the growth of marine communities. Every ship 
that plies the oceans is not only a container for 
human use, but a moving habitat of usable real 
estate for small marine organisms.
These ”biofouling” organisms settle on the 
underwater parts of ships, piers, intake pipes 
for power plants, and often ruin them. On the 
hulls of ships, biofouling causes increased drag, 
which drastically increases the use of fuel by as 
much as 40%, raising both the economic cost and 
environmental impacts of shipping. Biofouling is 
estimated to cost the shipping industry $60  billion 
a year. Governments and industry spend  billions 
to prevent it. Solutions aren’t obvious.
Antifouling measures (the prevention or 
removal of fouling organisms) often involve bio-
cides: some type of toxin embedded on the sur-
face such as in a paint. Unfortunately, tributylyin 
(TBT), considered the most toxic pollutant ever 
deliberately released into the ocean, is also the 
most commonly used in antifouling. You might 
expect that something that kills barnacles and 
algae would be harmful to oysters and mussels, 
and it is. TBT is used on more than 70% of the 
world’s vessels because it is effective, but a ban 
on TBT coatings on new ships makes finding 
new solutions urgent. New research focuses on 
non-toxic coatings. Some are polymers, which 
create a low-friction environment that is hard 
to cling to. Others make it energetically dif-
ficult for organisms to attach. They are made 
of chemicals that have alternating positive and 
negative charges that repel organisms trying 
to attach. Other research focuses on mimicking 
biology. Whales often have barnacles on them, 
but sharks don’t. It looks like the tiny points that 
cover sharks may keep fouling organisms off. 
So a biomimetic (biology mimicking) film with 
tiny points similar to those in sharkskin is in the 
works. This is a type of nanotechnology that 
looks very promising.
Fouling organisms cost a great deal and 
waste fuel, increasing climate change. But it 
isn’t obvious how to solve the problem without 
toxins; at least, it hasn’t been until new research 
has provided alternatives. Finding these new 
solutions can be the fun part of the job for some 
scientists.
Sources: Vietti, P. (2009, June 4). “New Hull Coatings Cut Fuel 
Use, Protect Environment.” Office of Naval Research, http://
www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2009-06/oonr-nhc060409.
php Retrieved June 2012.
Evans, S. M., Leksono, T., & McKinnell, P. D. (1995, Janu-
ary), “Tributyltin pollution: A diminishing problem following 
legislation limiting the use of TBT-based anti-fouling paints.” 
Marine Pollution Bulletin, 30(1), 14–21.
F
o
p
a
t
Figure 5 DDT in war. During and after World War II, DDT was sprayed to 
kill vectors of typhus, malaria, and other diseases with great success. This image 
from 1945 shows a US soldier spraying DDT directly on a fellow soldier.
345

Pests and Pest Control
effects are among the most concerning, especially when pes-
ticides get into water bodies and ground water. People who 
work directly with pesticides, especially with inadequate 
safety gear, and children, whose developing bodies are heav-
ily affected by toxins, are among the most vulnerable.
adverse human health Effects. As with all toxic sub-
stances, pesticides can be responsible for both acute and 
chronic health effects.
Acute Effects. According to the American Association 
of Poison Control Centers, more than 86,419 persons called 
poison control centers after having been exposed to pesti-
cides in the United States during 2010. More than 14,000 
were treated in a health care facility, but only 121 died, a fact 
in part attributable to the system of poison control call cent-
ers throughout the United States, which collected this data. 
Most were farm workers or employees of pesticide compa-
nies who came in direct contact with the chemicals. Different 
pesticides affect different human systems: glyphosate poison-
ing, for example, can lead to nausea, abdominal pain, shock, 
and respiratory failure; pyrethrin poisoning leads to allergic 
reactions, seizures, pneumonia, and coma.
There is no global documentation of pesticide poison-
ing; however, the WHO has recently proposed standards 
for diagnosis and identification of acute pesticide poison-
ing cases. While the WHO has estimated 3 million serious 
poisoning episodes per year leading to hospitalization or 
death, numbers are far higher when detailed household sur-
veys are taken, leading to estimates 10 times as high for all 
acute pesticide poisoning cases. Most of these cases occur in 
the developing countries, where regulations and training are 
often lax and information on pesticides may be poorly un-
derstood. The use of pesticides by untrained persons is con-
sidered to be the major cause of these poisonings (Fig. 6), but 
in many cases, children and families come in contact with the 
TABLE 1 Characteristics of Some Pesticides
Insecticide Class
Examples
Toxicity to Mammals
Persistence
Organophosphates
Parathion, malathion, phorate, chloropyrifos
High
Moderate (weeks)
Carbamates
Carbaryl, methomyl, aldicarb, aminocarb, carbofuran
High to moderate
Low (days)
Chlorinated hydrocarbons
DDT, toxaphene, dieldrin, chlordane, lindane
Relatively low
High (years)
Pyrethroids
Permethrin, bifenthrin, esfenvalerate, decamethrin
Low
Low (days)
herbicide Class
Examples
Effects on Plants
Triazines
Atrazine, simazine, cyanizine
Interfere with photosynthesis, especially in broadleaf plants
Phenoxy
2-, 4-D; 2-, 4-, 5-T; methylchlorophenoxybutyrate (MCPB)
Cause hormonelike effects in actively growing tissue
Acidamine
Alachlor, propachlor
Inhibit germination and early seedling growth
Dinitroaniline
Trifluralin, oryzalin
Inhibit cells in roots and shoots; prevent germination
Thiocarbamate
Ethylpropylthiolcarbamate (EPTC), cycloate, butylate
Inhibit germination, especially in grasses
Phosponate
Glyphosate
Inhibit amino acid synthesis; kill a wide variety of plants
Source: Private Pesticide Applicator Training Manual, 1993, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region VIII.
battle wounds. On the island of Saipan, DDT helped in the 
fight against dengue fever. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) of the United Nations used DDT throughout the 
tropical world to control mosquitoes and greatly reduced the 
number of deaths caused by malaria. There is little question 
that DDT saved millions of lives. In fact, the virtues of DDT 
were so outstanding that Müller was awarded the Nobel 
Prize for medicine in 1948 for his discovery.
and in Peace . . . Postwar uses of DDT expanded dramati-
cally. The chemical was sprayed on forests to control spruce 
budworm, on salt marshes to kill nuisance mosquitoes, on 
suburbs to control the beetles that spread Dutch elm disease. 
DDT even proved highly effective in controlling agricultural 
insect pests. Indeed, DDT was so effective that many crop 
yields increased dramatically. Growers could ignore other, 
more painstaking methods of pest control such as crop ro-
tation and the destruction of old crop residues. They could 
grow more productive but less resistant varieties. They could 
grow certain crops in a broader range of conditions. In short, 
DDT gave growers more options for growing the most eco-
nomically productive crop.
The success of DDT led to the development of a great vari-
ety of synthetic organic pesticides. Currently, the U.S. Environ- 
mental Protection Agency (EPA) Pesticide Program regulates 
more than 18,000 pesticide products, most of which are syn-
thetic organic pesticides. Examples and some characteristics of 
these insecticides and herbicides are listed in Table 1.
Problems Stemming from Chemical 
Pesticide use
Overuse of chemical pesticides has led to a wide range of 
environmental and human health problems. Human health 
346

Pests and Pest Control
(herbicides) and DDT, endosulfan, diazinon, and methoxy-
chlor (insecticides), interfere with reproductive hormones. 
These endocrine disruptors are. A rise in the incidence of 
breast cancer among humans and reports of abnormal sex-
ual development in alligators, fish, and other animals have 
suggested the possibility that very low levels of a number of 
chemicals are able to mimic or disrupt the effects of estro-
genic hormones. Estrogneic hormones are sexual hormones 
that are highly potent at low concentrations. The Food 
Quality Protection Act (FQPA) of 1996 directed the EPA to 
develop procedures for testing chemicals for endocrine dis-
ruption activity, which it has done through the Endocrine 
Disruptor Screening Program (EDSP).
adverse Environmental Effects. The story of DDT is a 
good illustration of the environmental impacts of pesticides 
as well.
There Go the Birds. In the 1950s and 1960s, ornitholo-
gists (people who study birds) observed drastic declines in pop-
ulations of many species of birds that fed at the tops of food 
chains. Fish-eating birds such as the bald eagle and osprey  
(Fig. 7) were close to extinction. Investigators at the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife National Research Center near Baltimore, Mary-
land, showed that the problem was reproductive failure. The 
eggs were breaking in the nest before hatching. Furthermore, 
the eggs contained high concentrations of dichlorodiphenyl-
dichloroethylene (DDE), a product of the partial breakdown 
of DDT by the animal’s body. DDE interferes with calcium 
metabolism, causing birds to lay thin-shelled eggs.
Because of accumulation, small, seemingly harmless 
amounts received over a long period of time may reach toxic 
levels in one organism. This phenomenon—referred to as 
bioaccumulation—can be understood as follows: Many syn-
thetic organic chemicals are highly soluble in lipids (fats or 
fatty compounds), but less soluble in water. In the body, 
they become stored in lipids rather than being excreted by 
pesticides through aerial spraying, the dumping of pesticide 
wastes, incorrect storage of pesticides in the home, or the use 
of pesticide containers to store drinking water.
Chronic Effects. Pesticides are applied to fields and or-
chards to reduce pest damage to crops. They are also used 
to protect harvested food so that it is brought undamaged 
to market. Because of the wide-ranging use of pesticides by 
most farmers, consumers are inevitably exposed to pesticide 
residues on their food and farmers are exposed to low levels 
even when they avoid acute exposure. Symptoms of pesticide 
poisoning (headaches, blurred vision, fainting, and nausea) 
are often similar to other illnesses, and exposure may not 
be diagnosed. The public-health concern is that pesticides 
might have chronic effects including the potential for caus-
ing cancer, as indicated by animal testing. In fact, evidence of 
carcinogenicity has been observed for many pesticides. Epide-
miological evidence has implicated organochlorine pesticides 
in various cancers, including lymphoma and breast cancer.
Other chronic effects include dermatitis, neurologi-
cal disorders including permanent brain and nerve damage, 
birth defects, and infertility. For example, male sterility has 
been clearly linked to dibromochloropropane (DBCP), once 
used to control nematodes and now banned. Two disorders 
recently associated with pesticide use are suppression of the 
immune system and disruption of the endocrine system. New 
epidemiological evidence suggests that long-term exposure 
to pesticides can trigger Parkinson’s disease in some people. 
Workers in India and Russia exposed to pesticides experi-
enced abnormally low white blood cell counts. (White blood 
cells are crucial elements of the immune system.)
Endocrine Disruption. Laboratory tests have shown 
that a number of pesticides, including atrazine and alachlor 
Figure 6 Pesticides used unsafely. This farmer in Thailand is spraying 
pesticide on soybeans, without the benefit of protective gear.
Figure 7 Osprey. Populations of fish-eating birds such as the osprey (shown 
here feeding its young), brown pelican, and bald eagle were decimated in the 
1950s and 1960s by the effects of widespread spraying with DDT. With the ban-
ning of the pesticide, these populations have greatly recovered. The bald eagle 
was taken off the endangered species list in 1994.
347

Pests and Pest Control
through in environmental understanding. Eventually, con-
cerns about environmental and long-term health effects led 
to the banning of DDT in the United States and most other 
industrialized countries in the early 1970s. Numerous other 
chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticides (for example, chlordane, 
dieldrin, endrin, and heptachlor) were also banned because 
of their propensity for bioaccumulation in the environment 
and suspected potential for causing cancer. In the years since 
the banning of DDT, the bird species that were adversely af-
fected have recovered. Rachel Carson is credited with stimu-
lating the start of the modern environmental movement and 
the creation of the EPA. Silent Spring has become a classic, 
and the regulation of insecticides and other toxic chemicals is 
in a sense a monument to Rachel Carson, who died of cancer 
only two years after her book was published.
Development of resistance by Pests. One funda-
mental problem is that chemical pesticides gradually 
lose their effectiveness. Over the years, it becomes nec-
essary to use larger and larger quantities, to try new 
and more potent pesticides, or to do both to obtain the 
same degree of control. Synthetic organic pesticides 
fared no better than first-generation pesticides in this re-
spect. For example, in 1946, 2.2 pounds (1 kg) of pes-
ticides provided enough protection to produce about 
60,000 bushels of corn. By 1971, it took 141 pounds 
(64 kg) to produce the same amount, and losses due to pests 
actually increased during the intervening years. Resistance 
is not limited to agricultural pests. Stored products pests 
are resistant to a fumigant used in shipments, and many 
medical and veterinary pests have developed pesticide re-
sistance as well. In 2011, poison resistant “supermice” 
were discovered in Spain and Germany. They appeared to 
the kidneys. Thus, synthetic organics like pesticides and their 
breakdown products that are absorbed with food or water 
are trapped and held by the body’s lipids, while the water 
and water-soluble wastes are passed in the urine. The body 
cannot fully metabolize them and has no mechanism to ex-
crete them so they gradually accumulate in the body and 
may produce toxic effects.
Up the Chain. Bioaccumulation, which occurs in the 
individual organism, may be compounded at higher trophic 
levels. Each organism accumulates the contamination from 
its food, so the concentration of contaminant in its body is 
many times higher than that in its food. This effect concen-
trates contaminants as they go up the food chain. Eventually, 
this multiplying effect, biomagnification, causes extremely 
high levels of contaminants in the top levels of the bio-
mass pyramid. Figure 8 shows how DDT and its metabolic 
products worked their way up the food chain to the top  
predators.
Silent Spring. In the 1950s, Rachel Carson, a U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service biologist and an accomplished science 
writer, began reading the disturbing scientific accounts of the 
effects of DDT and other pesticides on wildlife. By 1962, Car-
son finished a book, Silent Spring, that documented the effects 
of the almost uncontrolled use of insecticides across the United 
States. Its basic message was that, if insecticide use continues 
as usual, there might someday come a spring with no birds—
and with ominous consequences for humans as well.
Silent Spring became an instant best seller and trig-
gered a debate that has not ended. Representatives of the 
agricultural and chemical industries claimed that the book 
was an unreasonable and unscientific account that, if taken 
seriously, would halt human progress. At the same time, 
however, the book was hailed as an unparalleled break-
Figure 8 Biomagnifica-
tion. Organisms on the first 
trophic level absorb the pesti-
cide from the environment and 
accumulate it in their bodies 
(bioaccumulation). Then each 
successive consumer in the food 
chain accumulates the con-
taminant to yet a higher level. 
Thus, the concentration of the 
pesticide is magnified manyfold 
throughout the food chain. Or-
ganisms at the top of the chain 
are likely to accumulate toxic 
levels.
DDT
concentration
(parts per million)
Fish-eating
birds
Bald eagle
Osprey
Magnification
of DDT concentration
(approximate)
Small fish
Small fish
Zooplankton
Protozoa, etc.
Phytoplankton
Algae
Water
20.00
107
106
105
104
1
2.0
0.20
0.04
0.000003
348

Pests and Pest Control
higher and more severe levels. This phenomenon is known as 
resurgence. To make matters worse, small populations of in-
sects that were previously of no concern because of their low 
numbers may suddenly start to explode, creating new prob-
lems. This phenomenon is called a secondary-pest outbreak, 
such as mirid bugs on cotton. Unfortunately, the species ap-
pearing in secondary-pest outbreaks quickly became resistant 
to pesticides, thus compounding the problem.
Some scientists use the term pesticide treadmill to de-
scribe attempts to eradicate pests with synthetic organic 
chemicals. Overuse of chemicals increases resistance and 
secondary-pest outbreaks, which lead to the use of new and 
larger quantities of chemicals, which in turn lead to more 
resistance and more secondary-pest outbreaks. The same can 
occur on weeds or stored product pests. The use of glypho-
sate on GM crops and the resistance of weeds to this pow-
erful herbicide is a good example. The chemical approach 
breaks down because it ignores basic ecological principles. 
It assumes that the ecosystem is a static entity in which one 
species, the pest, can simply be eliminated. In reality, the 
ecosystem is a dynamic system of interactions, and a chemi-
cal assault on one species perturbs the system and produces 
other, undesirable effects. Populations of plant-eating insects 
are frequently held in check by other insects that parasitize 
or prey on them (Fig. 9). Pesticide treatments often have a 
have resulted from the breeding of mice from Algeria and 
continental Europe.
Evolution at work. Resistance builds up because pesti-
cides destroy the sensitive individuals of a pest population, 
leaving behind only those few that already have some re-
sistance to the pesticide. Resistance develops most rapidly 
in in r-strategists with high reproductive capacity. A single 
pair of houseflies, for example, can produce several hundred 
offspring that may mature and reproduce themselves only 
two weeks later. Consequently, repeated pesticide applica-
tions result in the unwitting selection and breeding of genetic 
lines that are highly, if not totally, resistant to the chemicals 
that were designed to eliminate them. The Colorado potato 
beetle, for example, developed resistance to 52 compounds 
across all chemical insecticide classes, including cyanide, in 
50 years. This is the same type of process that has resulted 
in drug-resistant diseases. In short, pesticide resistance sim-
ply confirms that natural selection is a powerful evolution-
ary force. Many major pest species are resistant to all of the 
principal pesticides.
resurgences and Secondary-Pest outbreaks. The sec-
ond problem with the use of synthetic organic pesticides is 
that, after a pest has been virtually eliminated with a pesticide, 
the pest population not only recovers, but also explodes to 
Figure 9 Insect food chains. 
(a) Food chains exist among insects, just as 
they do among higher animals. (b) Ant lion 
(on right) capturing an ant.
(a)
(b)
Grass
Meadow grasshopper
Producers
Primary consumer
Secondary consumer
Caterpillar
Parasitic
wasp
Insect food chains
Praying
mantis
Pin oak
349

Pests and Pest Control
compounds creates an economic problem for beekeepers and 
jeopardizes pollination. Also, regular spraying of neighbor-
hoods with malathion to control mosquitoes leads inevitably 
to great declines in butterflies and fireflies. Many pesticides 
also harm predatory insects and spiders, which would other-
wise keep pests down.
Finally, nonpersistent chemicals are just as likely to 
cause resurgences and secondary-pest outbreaks as persistent 
pesticides are, and pests become resistant to nonpersistent 
pesticides just as readily.
Synergistic Effects. As scientists try to figure out what 
is happening in ecosystems, the answer may be compli-
cated by multiple factors that work together to create an 
unexpected outcome, something called a synergistic effect. 
A possible example is the mystery of what is killing pol-
linators. Pollinators are in decline worldwide. Some of the 
deaths are a phenomenon known as honey bee colony col-
lapse disorder (CCD), which came into the news in 2006–
2007 when beekeepers discovered their hives dying and 
their worker bees mysteriously gone (Fig. 10). Meanwhile, 
other pollinators such as bumblebees and various types of 
solitary bees are also in decline. Scientists know CCD is 
not caused by  a simple case of acute pesticide poisoning 
because in the case of acute poisonings, worker bees are 
found dead at the hive. Instead, in CCD cases, the worker 
bees are nowhere to be found. However, the answer might 
involve a mixture of pests, pathogens, and chemicals that 
weaken or confuse bees.
Some hypotheses are that several parasitic and patho-
genic factors may be involved, including the invasive var-
roa mite, viruses, a gut parasite, poor nutrition, and stress. 
Pesticides may interact with these other factors. Several 
recent pesticide studies on pollinators support the involve-
ment of chemicals in their decline. In one study on hon-
eybees, researchers found that the bees exposed to nectar 
with a type of pesticide called a neonicotiniod had more 
greater impact on these natural enemies than on the plant-
eating insects they are meant to control. Consequently, with 
their natural enemies suppressed, the populations of both the 
original target pest and other plant-eating insects explode.
Nonpersistent Pesticides: are They the answer? A 
key characteristic of chlorinated hydrocarbons is their per-
sistence; that is, they take a long time to break down. Linger-
ing in the environment for years, they can contaminate many 
organisms and become biomagnified. DDT, for example, has 
a half-life on the order of 20 years. Because the persistent pes-
ticides have been banned, the agrochemical industry has sub-
stituted nonpersistent pesticides for the banned compounds. 
The synthetic organic phosphates (for example, malathion, 
parathion, and chlorpyrifos), as well as carbamates such as 
aldicarb and carbaryl, have been used extensively in place of 
chlorinated hydrocarbons (see Table 1). These compounds 
are potent inhibitors of the enzyme cholinesterase, which is 
essential for proper functioning of the nervous system in all 
animals. They break down into simple nontoxic products 
within a few weeks after their application. Thus, there is no 
danger of their migrating long distances through the envi-
ronment and affecting wildlife or humans long after being 
applied.
Toxicity. For several reasons, however, nonpersistent 
pesticides are not as environmentally sound as they might 
appear. First of all, they are persistent enough to harm non-
target organisms. The total environmental impact of a pes-
ticide is a function not only of its persistence, but also of 
its toxicity, its dosage, and the location where it is applied. 
Many of the nonpersistent pesticides are far more toxic than 
DDT. They present a significant hazard to agricultural work-
ers and others exposed to these pesticides. For instance, the 
organophosphates are responsible for an estimated 70% of 
all pesticide poisonings. The law requires the EPA to develop 
new health-based standards that address the risk of chil-
dren’s exposure to such pesticides, which has led to the ban-
ning of any use of several chemicals from a range of home 
garden and agricultural uses.
Bird Kill. Nonpersistent pesticides may still have far-
reaching environmental impacts. For example, carbofuran is 
a pesticide widely used on alfalfa, rice, and soybeans. It is 
spread on the ground and absorbed into plants through their 
roots. Unfortunately, it is highly toxic to birds and other ver-
tebrates. In the ’80s, The EPA estimated that 1 million to 
2 million birds were killed annually by carbofuran. In one 
incident, 800 to 1,200 ducks and geese died after treatment 
of an alfalfa field with carbofuran. Because of its toxicity 
to humans and wildlife, the EPA announced in 2008 that it 
would no longer allow residues of carbofuran on any food, 
essentially revoking all uses. The EPA decision was based 
primarily on the grounds that the pesticide posed an unac-
ceptable risk to toddlers.
Another hazard of nonpersistent pesticides is that desir-
able insects may be just as sensitive to them as pest insects 
are. Bees, for example, which play an essential role in pol-
lination, are highly sensitive to them. Thus, the use of these 
Figure 10 Pollinators in decline. Scientists are working to understand 
why pollinators are in decline. Colony collapse disorder may have different causes 
than other pollinator die-offs. These bumble bees died of unknown causes.
350

Pests and Pest Control
life cycle. The development of each stage may be influenced 
by numerous abiotic factors, and at each stage, the insect 
may be vulnerable to attack by a parasite or predator. The 
proper completion of each stage depends on internal chemi-
cal signals provided by insect hormones. Locating mates, 
finding food, and other behaviors depend on external chemi-
cal signals. All these findings suggest ways in which pest 
populations may be controlled without resorting to synthetic 
chemical pesticides.
Four general categories of ecological pest control are  
(1) cultural control, (2) control by natural enemies, (3) genetic 
control, and (4) natural chemical control. We will consider 
each of these in turn.
Cultural Control
A cultural control is a nonchemical alteration of one or more 
environmental factors in such a way that the pest finds the 
environment unsuitable or is unable to gain access to its tar-
get. This type of control can be practiced on all scales—by a 
homeowner, a farmer, or even a government.
Control of Pests affecting Crops, Gardens, and Lawns. 
Weed problems in lawns are frequently a result of cutting the 
grass too short. If grass is left at least 3 inches (8 cm) high, it 
will usually maintain a dense enough cover to keep out most 
crabgrass and other noxious weeds. Thus, monitoring the 
difficulty finding their way back to the hive than those ex-
posed to a control. In another study, bumblebees treated 
with the same type of pesticide had lower growth rates and 
produced fewer queens than unexposed bees. In yet another 
study, honeybees were found to eat less food and perform 
fewer communication dances when exposed to pesticides. 
In answering the mystery of colony collapse disorder and 
other problems with pollinators, scientists are finding that 
chemicals may contribute to many other problems, causing 
a perfect storm of variables.
3  alternative Pest Control 
Methods
Numerous ecological and biological factors affect the re-
lationship between a pest and its host. Ecological control 
seeks to manipulate one or more of these natural factors so 
that crops and people are protected without jeopardizing 
environmental and human health. This natural approach, 
unlike the chemical treatment approach, depends on an 
understanding of the pest and its relationship with its host 
and with its ecosystem. The more we know about the or-
ganisms involved, the greater are our opportunities for eco-
logical control.
The life cycle typical of moths and butterflies is shown in 
Figure 11. Many groups of insects have a similarly complex 
Figure 11 Complex life cycle of 
insects. Like the moth shown here, most insects have a 
complex life cycle that includes a larval stage and an adult 
stage. Biological control methods recognize the different 
stages and attack the insect, using knowledge of its needs 
and life cycle.
Metamorphosis
Adults
Mating
Sterile male
technique
Laying
eggs
Eggs
Larvae
Feeding
and growth
Pupation
Pupa
Sex attractant,
trapping, and
confusion
techniques
Hormone sprays
Predators and
parasites
Physical and chemical
resistance in host plants
351

Pests and Pest Control
of the country. This is a major function of U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection and of the agriculture departments of some 
states. Biological materials that may carry pest insects or patho-
gens are either prohibited from crossing the border or subjected 
to quarantines, fumigation, or other treatments to ensure that 
they are free of pests. A recent example is the Asian longhorned 
beetle, which arrived in packing crates from China. The beetle 
infests healthy maple, birch, poplar, and ash trees and eventu-
ally kills them. As a result of this pest, new regulations require 
that wooden crates and pallets from China be kiln-dried or 
chemically treated. The Animal and Plant Health Inspections 
Service (APHIS) of the USDA has the job of tracking and stop-
ping the flow of pests into the United States and between states. 
APHIS is described further in Section 5.
Cultural Control of Pests affecting humans. We rou-
tinely practice many forms of cultural control against diseases 
and parasitic organisms. For instance, disposing properly of 
sewage and avoiding drinking water from unsafe sources are 
cultural practices that protect against waterborne disease- 
causing organisms. Brushing hair, bathing, laundering clothes 
and linens, and cleaning rugs and furniture are all cultural 
practices that eliminate head and body lice, fleas, bedbugs, 
and  other parasites. Special covers for mattresses can cut 
down on bedbugs and mites. Garbage disposal, housekeep-
ing, and sealing cracks in buildings help keep down popula-
tions of roaches, mice, rats, flies, mosquitoes, and other pests. 
Sanitation in handling food as well as refrigeration, freezing, 
canning, and drying of foods are cultural controls that inhibit 
the growth of organisms that cause rotting, spoilage, and food 
poisoning.
If these practices are compromised, as they usually are in 
any major disaster, there is the very real danger of additional 
height of grass is a form of cultural weed control. A gardener 
may also control pests by avoiding plants that act as attract-
ants or by planting ones that act as repellants for certain pests. 
Roses are attractants for common pests, while marigolds and 
chrysanthemums are justly famous for repelling insects.
Some parasites require an alternative host, so they can 
be controlled by eliminating that host (Fig. 12). Also, hedge-
rows, fencerows, and shelterbelts can provide refuges where 
natural enemies of pests (birds, amphibians, praying man-
tises, and so on) can be maintained.
Crops. Managing any crop residues that are not har-
vested is important. Spores of plant disease organisms and 
insects may overwinter or complete part of their life cycle in 
the dead leaves, stems, or other plant residues that remain in 
the fields after harvesting. Plowing under or burning the ma-
terial may be quite effective in keeping pest populations to a 
minimum. In gardens, a clean mulch of material such as grass 
clippings or hay will keep down the growth of weeds and 
protect the soil from drying and erosion. Crop rotation—the 
practice of changing crops from one year to the next—may 
provide control because pests of the first crop cannot feed on 
the second crop (Fig. 13) and vice versa. Similarly, breaking 
up monocultures, and planting mixed plantings, lowers the 
crop loss to any one pest. Finally, refuge plants (untreated 
plants near treated crops) allow natural enemies to survive. 
Natural enemies of pests are maintained in the uncultivated 
strips. In fact, this approach is used with insect-resistant GM 
crops as well to keep all of the insects from being exposed to 
the GM crop and becoming more resistant to the crop.
Stopping Imports.  Most of the pests that are hardest 
to control were unwittingly imported from other parts of the 
world. Therefore, it is important to keep would-be pests out 
Figure 12 Cultural control. Part of the life cycle of wheat rust, a parasitic 
fungus that is a serious pest on wheat, requires that the rust infest barberry, an 
alternate host plant. The elimination of barberry in wheat-growing regions has 
been an important cultural control.
Red
spores
infect
wheat
Must
infect
barberry,
alternate
host plant
Basidio-
spores
Soil
Black
spores
Red
wheat
rust
Reinfection
Late
spring
Early
summer
Early
spring
Winter
Late
summer
Figure 13 Tomato wilt. This tomato plant has been devastated by tomato 
wilt. Growing tomatoes in the same plot maintains wilt spores in the soil, guaran-
teeing that wilt will strike the plants every year.
(Source: Author’s garden.)
352

Pests and Pest Control
an attempt to control the (also imported) hemlock wooly 
adelgid, which is killing off hemlock trees. In Africa, 
mealybugs are controlled by parasitic wasps; these types of 
wasps are also effective in controlling caterpillar popula-
tions (Fig. 14). In sub-Saharan Africa, the swarming desert 
locust was controlled by spraying “Green Muscle,” a mix 
of dry spores of the fungus Metarhizium anisopliae with 
oil, on infested fields. Water hyacinth, which has blanketed 
many African lakes, is coming under control following 
the introduction of Brazilian weevils. More than 30 weed  
widespread mortality resulting from outbreaks of parasites 
and diseases.
Control by Natural Enemies
There are four well-defined types of natural enemies: 
predators, parasitoids, pathogens, and herbivores. This 
type of control is used all over the world. In the eastern 
United States, tiny predator beetles have been imported in 
Figure 14 Parasitic wasps. (a) The life cycle of the parasitic wasp that uses the gypsy moth as its host. (b) A wasp depositing eggs in a 
gypsy moth larva. (c) Another insect parasite, a braconid wasp, lays its eggs on the pest known as the tomato hornworm, which is the larva of the 
sphinx moth. The wasp larvae feed on the caterpillar, and shortly before the caterpillar dies, they emerge and form the cocoons seen here.
Gypsy moth pupa
Adult wasp
Eggs
Wasp
pupae
Wasp larvae
feeding on moth pupa
Wasp
larvae
Adult
wasps
(b)
(a)
(c)
353

Pests and Pest Control
lopezi, Modern releases are much more likely to succeed 
than earlier releases because of better science and more rigor-
ous controls.
Plant Breeding
Most plant-eating insects and plant pathogens attack only 
one species or a few closely related species. This specificity 
implies a genetic incompatibility between the pest and any 
species that are not attacked. Most genetic-control strategies 
are designed to develop genetic traits in the host species that 
provide the same incompatibility—that is, resistance to at-
tack by the pest. The technique has been used extensively in 
connection with plant diseases caused by fungal, viral, and 
bacterial parasites. For example, in the years 1845–1847, the 
potato crop in Ireland was devastated by late blight, a fungal 
parasite. Nearly a million people starved, and another million 
people emigrated to escape the same fate. The potato blight is 
still considered one of the worst pests of all time. Nowadays, 
protection against such disasters is provided in large part by 
growing varieties of potato that are resistant to the blight. 
Unfortunately, the battle between agricultural scientists and 
plant diseases never ends; before the 1950s, wheat stem rust 
used to devastate wheat fields until breeders developed wheat 
varieties resistant to the rust. However, a new strain of the 
fungus appeared in Africa in the early 2000s and is spreading 
eastward into Asia, infecting many varieties of wheat in the  
developing world.
Other plants are bred to produce substances that are le-
thal or at least repulsive to the would-be pest. One example 
(Fig. 16) is the resistance of new varieties of wheat to the Hes-
sian fly. The fly lays its eggs on wheat leaves, and the lar-
vae move into the main stem, weakening it. Arriving in the 
straw bedding of Hessian soldiers during the Revolutionary 
War and eventually spreading throughout much of the Mid-
west, the fly caused widespread devastation until scientists at 
the University of Kansas developed a variety of wheat that 
produces a chemical that is toxic to the insect; this reduced 
species worldwide are now limited by insects introduced 
into their habitats.
Protect the Natives. The problem with using natural en-
emies lies in finding organisms that provide control of the 
target species without attacking other, desirable species. En-
tomologists estimate that of the 50,000 known species of 
plant-eating insects that have the potential for being serious 
pests, only about 1% actually are. The populations of the 
other 99% are held in check by one or more natural enemies. 
Therefore, the first step in using natural enemies for control 
should be conservation—protecting the natural enemies that 
already exist. This means avoiding the use of broad-spec-
trum chemical pesticides, which may affect natural enemies 
of the target species even more than they do the target pests 
themselves. Restricting the use of broad-spectrum chemi-
cal pesticides will often allow natural enemies to reestablish 
themselves and control secondary pests—those that become 
serious problems only after the use of pesticides.
Import aliens as a Last resort. However, effective natu-
ral enemies are not always readily available. In many cases, 
the absence of a pest’s natural enemies is the result of acci-
dentally importing the pest without also importing its natu-
ral enemies. Quite often, effective natural enemies have been 
found by systematically combing the home region of an in-
troduced pest and finding its various predators or parasites. 
Identifying the enemy species is vital, and the species must 
be carefully tested before intentionally releasing it, some-
thing that has not always been done well. The cane toad  
(Fig. 15), imported into Australia in 1935 to control beetles 
in sugar cane fields, overran Queensland, eating, outcompet-
ing, and poisoning many native species without ever control-
ling the beetles that prompted its original release. On the other 
hand, the cassava mealybug, Phaenococcus manihoti, ran ram-
pant across Africa, destroying as much as 50% of a crop that 
was a staple for 200 million people, until it was successfully 
controlled by the introduced parasitoid wasp Epidinocarsis 
Figure 15 Cane toad. Introduced into Australia to control beetles in sugar 
cane fields, the cane toad (Bufo marinus) quickly became a pest itself.
Figure 16 Hessian fly. This pest of wheat is controlled by maintaining 
wheat plants that produce a chemical that is toxic to the fly.
354

Pests and Pest Control
Genetic Control of Pests
Another genetic-control strategy involves flooding a natural 
population with sterile males that have been reared in labo-
ratories. Combating the screwworm fly provides a prime il-
lustration. This fly, which is closely related to the housefly 
and looks much like it, lays its eggs in open wounds of cattle 
and other animals, causing pain, infection, and often death. 
Early in the 20th century, the problem became so severe that 
cattle ranching from Texas to Florida and northward was 
becoming economically impossible.
Screwworm flies have two essential features that make 
control possible: their populations are never very large, and 
female flies mate only once. If the female mates with a sterile 
male, no offspring are produced. Today sterile males are rou-
tinely used to control this pest. After huge numbers of screw-
worm larvae are grown in laboratories, the resulting pupae 
are subjected to just enough high-energy radiation to render 
them sterile. These sterilized pupae are then air-dropped into 
the infested area. Ideally, 100 sterile males are dropped for 
every normal female in the natural population, giving a 99% 
probability that wild females will mate with one of the ster-
ile males. The technique proved so successful that it elimi-
nated the screwworm fly from Florida in 1958–1959 and 
was subsequently employed to eradicate the screwworm fly 
in Mexico and most of Central America. The sterile-insect 
technique has saved billions of dollars for the cattle industry 
and has been used successfully on a number of agriculturally 
important pests.
The sterile male technique, along with spraying, has been 
used to eradicate the Mediterranean fruitfly, a citrus pest that 
has repeatedly invaded the United States and been repelled 
from all but Hawaii. In 1981, a serious infestation in Califor-
nia got out of hand, destroying millions of dollars of crops. 
The infestation was finally squelched with aggressive aerial 
spraying, the quarantining of fruits and vegetables by Na-
tional Guard checkpoints, and sterile male releases. More re-
cently, the technique was used to eradicate the tsetse fly from 
losses to this pest to less than 1% where resistant varieties 
have been planted for several years.
Plants can be bred to have physical traits that provide 
physical barriers and structural traits that impede the attack 
of a pest. For example, hooked hairs on the leaf surfaces of 
some plants tend to trap and hold insects and, glandular hairs 
that exude a sticky substance fatally entrap others (Fig. 17).
Biotechnology.  Biotechnologytechniques can be used to 
incorporate pest control into plants. One promising strategy 
is to incorporate the protein coat of a plant virus into the 
plant itself. When the plant “expresses” (that is, manufac-
tures) the virus’s protein coat, the plant becomes resistant to 
infection by the real virus. In this way, crop plants have been 
made resistant to more than a dozen plant viruses. Another 
strategy is to craft a chemical that interferes with an insect’s 
normal cell function, silencing a gene that controls molting 
and sidetracking that process—thus, a gene-silencing pesti-
cide.
Bt. Endowing plants with resistance to insects has been en-
gineered by incorporating a potent protein produced by a 
bacterium, Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). This protein kills the 
larvae of a number of plant-eating insects and is harmless to 
mammals, birds, and most other insects. Scientists have en-
gineered the gene into a number of plants, including cotton, 
potatoes, and corn (Fig. 18). Unfortunately, resistance to Bt 
by some pests and outbreaks of secondary pests are dampen-
ing the success of Bt cotton. Anticipating the development 
of resistance because of the heavy exposure of pests to the 
Bt toxin, the EPA has required seed companies to verify that 
farmers plant 20% of their fields with non-Bt versions of 
the crop. The non-Bt fields provide a refuge for pests that 
are susceptible to the Bt toxin, allowing for these insects to 
interbreed with potentially resistant colleagues from the Bt 
acreage and, hopefully, dilute resistance genes in the insect 
populations. Bt toxin is also used directly as a natural chemi-
cal control, described later.
Figure 17 Alfalfa glandular hairs. This scanning electron micrograph 
shows an immature potato leafhopper trapped by sticky glandular hairs on the 
stem of a resistant alfalfa strain.
Figure 18 Bioengineered potatoes. a researcher holds two plants of 
a potato cultivar Fortuna, in Limburgerhof, Germany. The left plant is not geneti-
cally modified, while the plant on the right is resistant to Phytophora infestans, a 
plant pest.
355

Pests and Pest Control
4 Making a Coherent plan
The increasing availability of alternative pest control meth-
ods and the accumulating evidence of the failures of chemical 
treatment have led to a growing movement toward avoiding 
the use of pesticides, particularly on foods. This movement 
must contend with a strong tendency on the part of farmers 
to employ pesticides.
Pressures to use Pesticides
A species becomes a pest only when its population multiplies 
to the point of causing significant damage. Natural controls 
are generally aimed at keeping pest populations below dam-
aging levels, not at total eradication of the populations. By 
keeping pest populations down, natural controls avert signif-
icant damage while preserving the integrity of the ecosystem.
Therefore, the question to be asked when facing any 
pest species is: Is the species causing significant damage? 
Damage should be deemed significant only when the eco-
nomic losses due to the damage considerably outweigh the 
cost of  applying a  pesticide. This point is called the economic 
 threshold (Fig.  20). If significant damage is not occurring, 
natural controls are already operating, and the situation is 
probably best left as is. Spraying with synthetic chemicals at 
this stage is more than likely to upset the natural balance and 
make the situation worse through resurgences. It is also not 
cost effective. If, however, significant damage is occurring, a 
pesticide treatment may be in order. A grower who believes 
that his or her plantings are at risk is likely to resort to insur-
ance  spraying (the use of pesticides to prevent losses to pests) 
such as occurs on European apple crops, where the most im-
portant threats are mildew and scab—airborne diseases that, 
the island of Zanzibar, thus eliminating the disease trypano-
somiasis (sleeping sickness), which the tsetse fly carries.
Natural Chemical Control
Natural chemicals can be compounds that are used directly 
as biocides (such as Bt toxin), pesticides made from plants, 
chemicals used to mimic communication chemicals, or chem-
icals that boost immunity.
Some natural chemicals mimic those used to communi-
cate internally or between members of a species. Hormones 
are chemicals produced in organisms that provide “signals” 
that control developmental processes and metabolic func-
tions. Some organisms also communicate via pheromones—
chemicals secreted by one individual that influence the be-
havior of another individual of the same species. Hormones 
or hormone mimics can be used to disrupt the life cycle of 
a pest. Two advantages of such natural chemicals are that 
they are nontoxic and that they are highly specific to the pest 
in question. (They do not affect the natural enemies of the 
pest to any appreciable extent.) If the affected pest is eaten 
by another organism, it is simply digested. For example, cat-
erpillar pupation is triggered by a decrease in the level of the 
chemical called juvenile hormone. If this chemical is sprayed 
on caterpillars, pupation does not occur. The larvae simply 
continue to feed and grow, become grossly oversized, and 
eventually die. One insecticide, called Mimic®, is a synthetic 
variation of ecdysone, the molting hormone of insects. 
Mimic® triggers the molting process to begin in insect larvae 
but not to continue, which eventually kills the larva. Mimic 
is specific to moths and butterflies and is viewed as a po-
tent agent in the control of the spruce budworm, the gypsy 
moth, the beet armyworm, and the codling moth—all highly 
devastating pests.
Pheromones, produced by insects to attract a mate, can 
be used in pest control as well. Once identified and syn-
thesized, pheromones may be used in either the trapping 
technique or the confusion technique. In the trapping tech-
nique, the pheromone is used to lure males or females into 
traps or into eating poisoned bait (Fig. 19). In the confu-
sion technique, the pheromone is dispersed over the field 
in such quantities that males become confused, cannot find 
females, and thus fail to mate. Research has identified a 
large number of pheromones, and these natural chemicals 
are now key tools employed in IPM on many insects, such 
as the boll weevil and the pink bollworm for cotton, the 
codling moth for pears and apples, the tomato pinworm for 
tomatoes, and several bark beetles that infest forest trees, 
among others.
Natural chemicals can also be used on crops to boost 
plant defenses. When plants (including tomato, maize, 
sweet pepper, and wheat) are grown from seeds dipped 
in jasmonic acid, a naturally occurring plant compound, 
aphid attacks and caterpillar damage decline. These early 
results may lead to promising new directions. The spraying 
of Bt toxin into water or on crops rather than incorpora-
tion into genetically modified plants is another example of 
natural chemical control.
Figure 19 Trapping technique. Adult Japanese beetles are lured into 
a trap by scented bait they find attractive. Once inside the trap, baffles prevent 
the beetles from escaping. These traps are available in hardware stores and are 
quite effective, though some users find that they are too effective, luring beetles 
to their yards and gardens without actually catching them. (Japanese beetles are 
notorious lawn grubs as larvae; as adults, they are voracious consumers of garden 
flowers and vegetables.)
356

Pests and Pest Control
extension services or farm cooperatives or by persons 
acting as independent consultants. These field scouts are 
trained in identifying and monitoring pest populations 
(traps baited with pheromones are used for this purpose) 
and in determining whether the population exceeds the 
economic threshold. Monitoring may be done by gov-
ernment agencies across large areas as well.
3. Prevent pests. Cultural and biological control practices 
form the core of IPM techniques. Practices such as crop 
rotation, polyculture (instead of monoculture), the de-
struction of crop residues, the maintenance of predator 
populations, refuge plants, and carefully timed planting 
and fertilizing are basic to IPM. “Trap crops” are often 
used. That is, early strips of a crop such as cotton are 
planted to lure existing pests and then the pests are de-
stroyed by hand or by the limited use of pesticides before 
they can reproduce. For aquatic disease vectors such as 
mosquitoes, getting rid of breeding sites was once a 
common cultural technique that fell into disuse when 
pesticides became prevalent. But removing old tires, con-
tainers, water-filled ruts, and other breeding grounds is 
important. For rodents, making sure food and garbage 
are not available is part of prevention.
4. 
Control pests. If the preceding steps indicate that pest con-
trol is needed in spite of the preventive methods, measures 
are taken to decrease the pest population. Here selected 
brands of pesticides may be used in quantities that do the 
least damage to the natural enemies of the pest.
Making the economic benefits of natural controls known 
to growers is an important aspect of IPM. Because pesticides 
increased yields and profits when they were first used, many 
farmers still cling to them, believing that they offer the only 
way to bring in a profitable crop. The rising costs of pesti-
cides, along with their tendency to aggravate pest problems, 
have eliminated their economic advantage. Pest-loss insur-
ance, which pays the farmer in the event of loss due to pests, 
has enabled insured growers in developed countries to re-
frain from unnecessary and costly “insurance spraying.”
Malarial mosquitoes provide a good example of the 
value of research in IPM. Control now consists of a com-
bination of cultural controls such as pesticide impregnated 
nets and removal of mosquito breeding sites like puddles or 
water-filled containers along with chemical sprays, Bt, and 
encouragement of natural enemies like birds and predatory 
insects. There is hope that current research will yield even 
more solutions. In the case of pesticide-resistant mosquitoes, 
scientists have found that a pathogenic fungus can kill mos-
quito larvae. Other research has shown that infection with 
a bacterium that is found in many insects doesn’t kill ma-
larial mosquitoes but keeps them from passing along the 
malarial parasite as effectively. Recently, scientists have been 
able to rear large numbers of mosquitoes in a lab environ-
ment cheaply in order to try the sterile male technique. In 
other research, scientists have found a virus that kills older 
mosquitos. Only older mosquitoes can pass on malaria. Con-
sequently, killing them as adults but before they are ready 
to transmit the disease, rather than constantly killing the 
once established, cause significant economic damage. Farmers 
typically employ insurance spraying to control these diseases.
Consumers also put indirect pressure on growers to use 
pesticides because they select the best-looking fruits and veg-
etables, leaving the remainder to be sold at lower prices or 
trashed. Growers know that blemished produce means less 
profit, so they indulge in cosmetic spraying—the use of pes-
ticides to control pests that harm only the item’s outward 
appearance. Cosmetic spraying accounts for a significant 
fraction of pesticide use, does nothing to enhance crop yield 
or nutritional value, and results in an increase in pesticide 
residues remaining on the produce.
Integrated Pest Management
IPM aims to minimize the use of synthetic organic pesticides 
without jeopardizing crops. This is made possible by address-
ing all the interacting sociological, economic, and ecological 
factors involved in protecting crops. With IPM, the crop 
and its pests are seen as part of a dynamic ecosystem. The 
goal is not eradicating pests, but maintaining crop damage 
below the economic threshold. The EPA uses a four-tiered 
approach in describing IPM:
1. Set action thresholds. With the economic threshold in 
mind, IPM identifies a point at which pest populations 
or environmental conditions indicate that some control 
action is needed.
2. Monitor and identify pests. Pest populations are moni-
tored, often by persons employed by local agricultural 
Figure 20 The economic threshold. The objective of pest control 
should not be to eradicate a pest totally. All that is needed is to keep population 
levels below the economic threshold.
Control effective
if population
kept down to
this level
Economic threshold
Pest population
Damage
Natural
controls
operating
Damage to crops
signals need for
pesticide treatment
357

Pests and Pest Control
pesticide treadmill. By contrast, Indonesia has provided a 
viable IPM model for other rice-growing countries. Faced 
with declining success in controlling the brown plant hop-
per (Fig. 21), Indonesian rice growers have switched from 
heavy pesticide spraying to a light spraying regime that pre-
serves the natural enemies of the insect. The success of the 
program can be traced to close cooperation between the In-
donesian government and the FAO (Fig. 22). FAO workers 
youngest stages, will cut malarial transmission and at the 
same time slow the development of pesticide resistance.
Example: Indonesia. Particularly in the developing 
world, governmental agricultural policy often determines 
the extent to which IPM is adopted. Governments and 
aid agencies usually subsidize the purchase of pesticides, 
thereby strongly encouraging growers to step onto the  
Figure 21 Brown plant hoppers. Immature brown plant 
hoppers (Nilaparvata lugens), shown on the stem of a rice plant.
Figure 22 Integrated pest management. IPM has helped Indonesian rice farmers bring the brown 
plant hopper under control after years of frustration on the pesticide treadmill.
For 15 years, Indonesian farmers
used heavy pesticide applications
on high-yielding rice.
Brown plant hoppers resistant to
the pesticides devastate rice crops.
Scientists from International Rice Research
Institute (IRRI) find that pesticides
are killing natural predators.
The government and the FAO set  up "farmer field schools," 
where farmers are taught rice ecology and IPM techniques.
IPM IN INDONESIA
Farmers now spread 
out and teach other farmers
what they have learned.  Rice harvests are
improved, and Indonesia saves millions each year.
In 1986, Indonesian
government banned most
pesticides used on rice.
358

Pests and Pest Control
also prohibit the use of conventional pesticides, antibiotics, 
growth hormones, and chemical fertilizers. To market certi-
fied organic foods, farmers now must have their operations 
scrutinized by USDA-approved inspectors. Only then may 
they use the USDA seal (Fig. 23) on their products. If the 
food is at least 95% organic, it may also display the seal, 
but may not claim to be 100% organic. Because it is ex-
pensive and relatively difficult to be certified organic, many 
farmers are not certified who use significantly less pesticides 
and artificial fertilizers. In addition, some organic farms are 
extremely large and distant, so the environmental costs of 
transportation, storage, and packaging of foods remain. For 
this reason, buying local and supporting less toxic farming 
benefit the environment even if organic certification is not 
available.
5 Pests, Pesticides, and Policy
When you go to the grocery store and purchase food, most 
likely you assume it will have minimal pesticide residues. 
You might even think, “Well, they wouldn’t sell it if it 
wasn’t safe.” Likewise, when you go to a plant nursery and 
buy a plant, you probably assume that they wouldn’t sell it 
if it was a noxious weed pest that was likely to invade your 
state and cost farmers millions of dollars. Both of these as-
sumptions are at least partially true. While the fact that 
something is sold doesn’t guarantee its safety, the United 
States has a wide range of guidelines followed by state and 
federal agencies to monitor, eradicate, and prevent pests 
and to protect food safety. There are also international 
treaties designed to lower the impact of pests and prevent 
the misuse of dangerous pesticides. Let’s look at regulation 
of pests and then pesticides.
conducted training sessions for farmers that lasted through-
out the growing season. Eventually, more than 200,000 
farmers were taught about the rice agro-ecosystem and IPM 
techniques, and these farmers formed a corps that could in 
turn teach others.
The economic and environmental benefits of the In-
donesian IPM program have been remarkable. The gov-
ernment has saved millions of dollars annually by not 
purchasing pesticides, farmers have not had to invest in 
pesticides and spraying equipment, the environment has 
been spared the application of thousands of tons of pesti-
cide, fish are once again thriving in the rice paddies, and the 
health benefits of reduced pesticide use have been spread 
from applicators to consumers and wildlife. The FAO is 
sponsoring similar IPM training programs in many other 
developing countries.
organically Grown Food
For consumers concerned about pesticides in their food, or-
ganic food is an attractive option. Walk into any supermar-
ket and you will find counters of fresh vegetables, meats, 
prepared foods, and Fair Trade foods, all bearing the label 
of organic. Many farmers are turning away from the use of 
pesticides, chemical fertilizers, antibiotics, and hormones as 
they raise grains, vegetables, and livestock for the organic 
food trade. Typically, organic farms are small, employ tra-
ditional farming methods with diverse crops, and are tied 
to local economies. For the farmers, the organically raised 
crops often represent lower crop yields, but also lower ex-
penses. Sales of organics have increased rapidly over the 
past decade, and organically grown food is now a $26 bil-
lion enterprise in the United States (up from $1 billion in 
1990) and more than $55 billion worldwide. Organic foods 
are more costly, but recent tests have shown that these 
foods are far less likely to have any pesticide residues, and 
those that do have residues contain much lower amounts 
than conventionally grown foods. Most residues in organic 
foods came from older, persistent pesticides, such as DDT, 
lingering in the soil.
uSDa organic. The certification of organic foods has 
been a contentious process, and eventually, the industry 
requested help from the government. In response, in 1990 
Congress passed the Organic Foods Protection Act, which 
established the National Organic Standards Board (NOSB), 
under USDA auspices. After many years of work, proposed 
guidelines for certification from the NOSB were aired in 
early 1998. Possibly in response to lobbying from the food 
industry, the board allowed genetically engineered foods, ir-
radiated foods (foods subjected to radiation to kill bacteria), 
and crops fertilized with sewage sludge to be included as 
organic. A firestorm of protest from the organic-food com-
munity ensued. The NOSB went back to work, and in late 
2002, the USDA published its final standards for certifying 
organic foods. As a result, no product involving genetically 
engineered or irradiated foods or foods fertilized with sew-
age sludge can be certified as 100% organic. The standards 
Figure 23 Organic foods. This symbol on food signals that the food or 
crop has been produced on a certified organic farm.
359

Pests and Pest Control
Geranium imports from Kenya were halted until the out-
break could be contained.
APHIS also oversees the Agricultural Bioterrorism Pro-
tection Act of 2002, which regulates laboratories and vac-
cine companies that use, posess, or transport toxins and 
agents that could be harmful to humans, plants, or animals. 
The act aims to prevent the release of devastating diseases 
from a research lab or medical facility. APHIS also has the 
job of assessing the safety of bioengineered organisms. In 
2012, it completed asessments of the possible effects of 
glyphosphate-resistant sugar beets. The assessments are 
held open to public review and then APHIS makes a regula-
tory determination.
U.S. federal agenies collaborate with other countries to 
prevent the spread of pest organisms. The International Plant 
Protection Convention (IPPC) ratified by the United States in 
1972 set up an international system to quarantine products 
to prevent pest spread. One provision of the 1995 United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) was 
to prevent the introduction of marine species to new envi-
ronments. Other international agreements such as the Agree-
ment concerning Cooperation in the Quarantine of Plants 
and their Protection against Pests and Diseases of 1959 and 
the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosani-
tary Measures (SPS Agreement) of 1994 also are attempts by 
the international community to prevent the spread of plant 
diseases and other pests.
regulation of Pesticides
Regulation of pesticides focuses on three main areas: safety 
and testing of pesticides, protection of pesticide workers, and 
protection of consumers of products pesticides may be on. 
As is the case with regulation of potential pests, there are nu-
merous historic federal regulations about pesticides, which 
have been pulled together into modern laws, and there are 
international treaties.
Federal regulations. The Federal Insecticide, Fungi-
cide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), established in 1947 and 
amended in 1972, is administered by the EPA, which has 
total jurisdiction over the manufacture, sale, use, and test-
ing of pesticides. FIFRA requires manufacturers to register 
pesticides with the EPA. As part of registration, it must test 
for toxicity to animals (and, by extrapolation, to humans) 
and set usage standards. For example, chlordane, which was 
used for 40 years as a pesticide on crops, lawns, and gardens, 
was tested and shown to be acutely toxic to animals in high 
doses. Chronic exposure led to damaging effects on most 
vital systems and caused liver cancer in animals. Acute and 
chronic exposure of humans to chlordane showed similar re-
sults, except for the development of cancer. On the basis of 
these results, the EPA canceled all uses of chlordane for food 
crops in 1978, but allowed continued use against termites 
until 1988, when all uses of the chemical in the United States 
were banned. The law also stipulates that the EPA must de-
termine whether a product “generally causes unreasonable 
adverse effects on the environment,” and if it so determines, 
regulation of Pests
In the United States, Animal and Plant Health Inspection 
Service (APHIS), a part of the USDA, was established in 
1972 to monitor and control pests that could harm plants 
and animals. The jobs of the agency have changed over 
time. It has consolidated jobs formerly done by multiple 
agencies, including the Bureau of Animal Husbandry and 
various plant bureaus. It includes regulation of animals 
used in research and exhibition and by dealers, a function 
created after the Animal Welfare Act of 1966. One of the 
jobs of APHIS is to monitor potential pests in order to act 
quickly and prevent infestations that would require more 
pesticide use later. One example is its intensive monitor-
ing of soybean rust when it first entered the United States. 
The agency has a continual Web-based tracking system 
with records of all counties where the pest was discovered. 
APHIS organized governmental agencies, universities, and 
farmers to track the pest, using “sentinel plots”: small fields 
planted early that were rigorously surveyed to track fungal 
spread. This and other actions were effective, and the en-
vironment was different enough from its native Brazil that 
the fungus has never reached the epidemic proportions here 
that it has there.
Plant Protection act. Plants have been regulated in the 
United States since the 1912 Plant Quarantine Act, the 1957 
Federal Plant Pest Act, and the Federal Noxious Weed Act of 
1974. These functions were consolidated into the the Plant 
Protection Act of 2000, which, among other things, allowed 
APHIS to crack down on illegal smuggling of plants and 
 agricultural products that could harbor pests.
One program APHIS runs is the noxious weed program. 
Plants designated as noxious weeds cannot be moved across 
state lines, imported, or exported. States often have their 
own noxious weed lists and may have additional regulations. 
Plants not on the noxious weed list may also be pests. APHIS 
also tracks animal diseases and plant pests and regulates im-
ports and exports to prevent movement. In 2012, APHIS was 
carefully regulating the movement of ash tree products and 
firewood to allow interstate commerce but halt the spread 
of the emerald ash borer, a juggling act that makes shipping 
difficult.
Diseases, Bioterrorism, and GM organisms. Over the 
years, APHIS’ role has expanded to include monitoring for 
pests that might attack wildlife and the monitoring of bio-
engineered species. It regulates the welfare of domestic ani-
mals and protects U.S. plant and animal agriculture from 
incoming disease. One APHIS program tracks the efforts to 
eradicate diseases such as cattle brucellosis, bovine tubercu-
losis, and pseudorabies in swine. APHIS also tracks plant 
diseases. In 2003, APHIS personnel were able to detect a 
bacterial disease of geraniums in greenhouses in four mid-
western states. A devastating disease that could ruin potato 
crops as well as tomatoes and other plants, this particular 
bacterium had not been detected in the United States since 
1999. APHIS agents were able to determine that the dis-
ease had been imported in geranium cuttings from Kenya.  
360

Pests and Pest Control
from food; reassessing older products according to the new re-
quirements within 10 years; and applying the same standards 
to raw and processed foods (previously regulated separately).
Care for Kids. One of the emphases in the new legislation 
was protection of children. The focus is on children both be-
cause they typically consume more fruits and vegetables per 
unit of body weight than do adults and because studies have 
shown that children are frequently more susceptible to car-
cinogens and neurotoxins. Accordingly, the FQPA requires 
the EPA to add a tenfold safety factor in assessing children’s 
risks from pesticides.
Government agencies have to work together to monitor 
food because the system is so complex. The USDA Pesticide 
Data Program (PDP) provides annual analyses of pesticides 
in fresh and processed foods. The EPA evaluates toxicity 
data on individual pesticides and then, using the USDA’s 
PDP analyses and other information on risk assessment, sets 
limits on the amounts of a pesticide that can remain in or 
on foods—called tolerances. To date, the EPA is on target 
with the directives of the FQPA, having published tolerance 
reassessments for more than 9,637 pesticide products (out of 
a total of 9,721). More than 4000 tolerances were rejected 
or had to be amended. For an example of a “tolerance,” a 
less toxic organophosphate, malathion, is listed at 8 ppm tol-
erance for many crops, meaning that no more than 8 ppm 
of malathion may be found on or in the product. For milk, 
however, the tolerance is set at 0.5 ppm, an indication of 
milk’s special place in children’s diets.
International Pesticide regulation
U.S. laws and international treaties both regulate the way the 
United States relates to the rest of the world regarding pesti-
cides. The United States currently exports thousands of tons 
of pesticides (active ingredients) each year, some of which 
are banned in the United States itself. A number of factors—
low literacy, weak laws, unfamiliarity with equipment—in-
crease the potential for serious exposure to toxic pesticides 
in the developing countries. FIFRA requires “informed per-
mission” prior to the shipment of any pesticides banned in 
the United States. This permission comes from the purchaser. 
The EPA must then notify the government as to the identity 
of the importing company. Internationally, there are treaties 
that regulate information about pesticides.
Treaties and Guidance. Two international treaties and 
one guidance document provide a framework for pesticides 
in the international arena. The Rotterdam Convention was 
adopted in 1998 and went into effect in February 2004. It is 
an international treaty ratified by 70 countries that promotes 
open exchange of information about hazardous chemicals in-
cluding pesticides. Central to the convention is the process 
of prior informed consent (PIC), whereby exporting coun-
tries inform all potential importing countries of actions they 
have taken to ban or restrict the use of pesticides or other 
toxic chemicals and label them clearly. Governments in the 
importing countries, UN agencies, and exporting countries 
the product may be restricted or banned. This was the basis 
for the banning of DDT.
The EPA’s Pesticide Program places high priority on regis-
tering “reduced-risk” pesticides, especially those that promise 
to replace more toxic chemicals. Many are biopesticides— 
naturally occurring substances that control pests. These 
include microbial pesticides like Bt, plant-incorporated 
protectants (in GM crops) such as corn bioengineered to 
manufacture Bt in its tissues, or biochemical substances 
that are naturally occurring, like pheromones (e.g., Mimic). 
These pesticides often clear the registration process within a 
year, compared with the typical three years a conventional 
pesticide might take. The EPA also approves pesticide labels 
that must meet certain criteria and protect pesticide workers. 
The agency issues requirements for safety training, protective 
equipment, emergency assistance, and permitting standards. 
The states must then demonstrate to the EPA that, on the 
basis of the federal regulation, they have adequate regulation 
and enforcement mechanisms.
FFDCA. Protecting consumers from exposure to pesti-
cides on food was a contentious and confusing process for 
many years. Three agencies are involved: the EPA, the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA), and the Food Safety and 
Inspection Service of the USDA. Basically, the EPA sets the 
allowable tolerances for pesticide residues, based on its as-
sessment of toxicity, and the FDA monitors and enforces the 
tolerances on all foods except meat, poultry, and egg prod-
ucts, which are managed by the USDA.
The original enabling act was the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) of 1938. For many years, one 
clause of the FFDCA, the so-called Delaney clause, was 
highly controversial. The clause stated, “No [food] addi-
tive shall be deemed to be safe if it is found to induce cancer 
when ingested by man or animal.” Because pesticides repre-
sent one of the largest categories of toxic chemicals to which 
people are exposed, this clause prohibited many pesticides 
from being used on foodstuffs when those pesticides had 
been found to cause cancer in laboratory tests with animals. 
In essence, the law stated that, if a given pesticide presents 
any risk of cancer, no detectable residue may remain on the 
food. Consequently, as analytical chemical techniques be-
came more and more sensitive, more and more pesticides 
were banned for food use.
FQPA. The National Research Council examined this 
dilemma and recommended in 1987 that the anticancer 
clause be replaced with a “negligible risk” standard, based 
on risk-analysis procedures that had been developed subse-
quent to the Delaney clause. After years of debate, Congress 
passed the Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA) in 1996 and 
did away with the Delaney clause and amended both FIFRA 
and FFDCA. The major requirements of the act include:
Setting “a reasonable certainty of no harm” as the safety 
standard for substances applied to foods; giving special con-
sideration to the exposure of young children to pesticide 
residues; defining a risk of more than one case of cancer per 
million people as the allowable upper limit over long periods 
of exposure to chemicals; requiring evaluation of all possible 
sources of exposure to a given pesticide, not just exposure 
361

Pests and Pest Control
The Future. These international efforts are leveling the 
safety field for pesticide use globally and pulling the worst 
chemicals out of the global stream, at least slowly. Pesticide 
use illustrates two trends we see in many environmental sci-
ence issues: the problems of cumulative impacts and of un-
intended consequences. As with many environmental issues, 
significant progress in both pest and pesticide control has 
benefited from grassroots action and pressure from public-
interest groups and NGOs, such as the Consumers Union 
and the Pesticide Action Network. These and other groups 
are pressing for continued movement in the direction of safe 
and sustainable pest prevention and management. Care for 
the welfare of both fellow human beings and all other crea-
tures is necessary to solve pest problems in a fashion that is 
sustainable in the long term.
communicate so everyone can make decisions with the infor-
mation they need.
The International Code of Conduct on the Distribution 
and Use of Pesticides is a worldwide guidance document that 
addresses conditions of safe pesticide use. The most recent 
version was approved by the FAO in November 2002. The 
code makes clear the responsibilities of both private compa-
nies and countries receiving pesticides in promoting their safe 
use. In 2004, the Stockholm convention, a treaty designed to 
eliminate or restrict persistent organic pollutants, came into 
effect. By 2011, 178 countries had signed. Countries are ex-
pected to ban nine of the 12 most dangerous chemicals (the 
“dirty dozen”), use DDT only for malaria control, and limit 
the accidental production of two pesticide breakdown prod-
ucts, dioxins and furans.
rEvISITING ThE ThEMES
Sound Science
It was sound science that uncovered the connections 
between DDT and the decline of many predatory birds—
biomagnification was a great surprise to everyone. Some 
amazing applications of sound science are seen in the imaginative work 
on alternative pest controls, such as sterile male technique, the use 
of pheromones to control pests, studies that have uncovered natural 
enemies of pests, research into a wide range of ways to control malaria-
carrying mosquitoes, and other parts of integrated pest management. 
Agricultural scientists are constantly challenged to keep up with new 
strains of plant pests by developing resistant varieties of the crops they 
attack.
Sustainability
Ecological control is a sustainable approach to controlling 
pests, while the chemical treatment approach guarantees 
that pesticides will need to be used indefinitely. Pest re-
sistance, resurgences, and secondary outbreaks have been the norm. The 
ecological control methods provide the means to achieve control of most 
pests in a sustainable way, especially when they are controlled by natu-
ral enemies. IPM presents a reasonable alternative for managing pests 
by limiting the use of pesticides. The organic food movement is proof 
that food can be grown without chemicals and, for consumers and the 
environment, is a great way to keep pesticides out of the natural world 
(and the refrigerator). Reducing or eliminating the use of pesticides and 
keeping food safe and healthy are two of the pillars of the sustainable-
agriculture movement. 
Stewardship
The widespread use of DDT during and just after World 
War II saved millions of lives. However, the continued, 
often indiscriminate, use of this persistent pesticide 
and others like it led to trouble in the environment, and the careful 
work of Rachel Carson in documenting this trouble in the 1960s was 
a landmark in environmental stewardship. Yet the continued use of 
DDT to control malaria-bearing mosquitoes shows that discerning the 
common good is not always easy. Because stewardship also includes 
human welfare and health, the focus of the federal and international 
regulations on the protection of children and agricultural workers 
is an example of stewardship. It can be argued that the work of the 
EPA in complying with federal regulation is stewardship in action. 
The agency is an aggressive promoter of reduced use of the more 
toxic pesticides.
S
T
W
o
and others like
S
E
p
t
sistance resurg
S
I
b
b
amazing applica
1. Define pests. Why do we control them? Describe at least 
four types.
 2. Discuss two basic philosophies of pest control. How effective 
are they?
 3. Explain the pros and cons of using the synthetic organic 
 pesticide DDT against malarial mosquitoes.
 4. What adverse environmental and human health effects can 
occur as a result of pesticide use?
 5. Define bioaccumulation and biomagnification.
Review Questions
6. Why are nonpersistent pesticides not as environmentally 
sound as first thought?
 7. Describe the four categories of natural, or biological, pest 
control. Cite examples of each and discuss their effectiveness.
 8. Define the term economic threshold as it relates to pest con-
trol. What are cosmetic spraying and insurance spraying?
 9. What are the four steps in IPM? Explain how IPM worked 
in Indonesia.
 10. What is organic food, and how is it now certified?
362

Pests and Pest Control
thinking enviRonmentally
 1. Consider the ethics of the United States’ exportation of pes-
ticides. A large portion of this exported material is banned 
in the United States itself. If the choice was up to you to con-
tinue this or put it to an end, what would you do? Remem-
ber that such pesticides have at least a positive immediate 
benefit to these countries. Are they a necessary evil?
 2. Almost one-third of the chemical pesticides bought in the 
United States are for use in houses and on gardens and 
lawns. What should manufacturers and users do to ensure 
the limited and prudent use of pesticides?
 3. Should the government give farmers economic incentives to 
switch from pesticide use to IPM? How might that work?
 4. Investigate how bugs and weeds are controlled on your cam-
pus. Are IPM techniques being used? Organic fertilizers? If 
not, consider lobbying for their use.
 5. Imagine you’re the mayor of a mid-sized suburban town 
where mosquitoes invade from neighboring marshes. What 
kind of restrictions would you place on local pesticide use? 
Defend your answer.
making a DiffeRenCe
 1. When you plant a garden, select hardy varieties of plants 
that are known to flourish in your particular region. Pests 
are less likely to destroy these types because they grow much 
faster than they can be eaten, even without pesticides.
 2. Try planting some herbs in your garden because they often 
have many pest-oriented benefits. They are very likely to at-
tract the good, predator bugs that will naturally take out the 
pests. Sage, basil, chives, yarrow, cilantro, and garlic are all 
great choices.
 3. Another way to bring in the predatory insects is to buy 
them. A great number of companies now breed and sell spe-
cies such as praying mantises, lacewings, and ladybugs, all 
of which help get rid of your pest problems.
 4. To help keep a pesticide-free lawn looking green, let the 
grass grow a little longer than usual. This way it will need 
less water and food. Select a mower that mulches grass and 
leaves; lawn clippings provide nitrogen, and fallen leaves are 
great for conditioning soil.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
 11. How does APHIS help control pests in the United States? 
What international regulations help control the movement 
of pests across borders?
 12. How does FIFRA attempt to control pesticides? What new 
perspective does the FQPA bring to the policy scene?
 13. Describe how the Stockholm Convention, Code of Conduct, 
and Rotterdam Convention help regulate international use 
of pesticides.
CReDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): Katja Heinemann/Aurora Photos/Alamy; (bottom left): Oxford Scientific/
Getty Images; (top left): Nigel Cattlin/Alamy; (top right): Richard T. Wright; (center 
left): Richard T. Wright; (center right): Arco Images GmbH/Alamy; (left): Nick 
Greaves/Alamy; (right): Allik Camazine/Alamy; (bottom left): Roger Eritja/Alamy; 
(bottom right): Photo Researchers, Inc.; (top left): Drake Fleege/Alamy; (top right): 
U.S. Customs and Border Protection; (top right): Ian Berry/Magnum Photos; (bot-
tom right): courtesy/everett collection inc/AGE Fotostock; (top right): John de la 
Bastide/Shutterstock; (top left): Nigel Cattlin / Photo Researchers, Inc.; (bottom 
right): Ronnie Howard/Shutterstock; (bottom left): James H. Robinson / Photo 
Researchers, Inc.; (bottom right): R Koenig/Blickwinkel/AGE Fotostock; (bottom 
right): Richard T. Wright; (center right): USDA/APHIS Animal And Plant Health 
Inspection Service; (bottom left): Harry Rogers/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (bottom 
left): juulijs/Fotolia; (bottom right): Louis Quitt/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (top left): 
Christopher M. Ranger, Penn State University; (top right): A3386 Uli Deck Deutsche 
Presse-Agentur/Newscom; (top right): Sonda Dawes/The Image Works; (top right): 
Nigel Cattlin/Holt Studios International/Photo Researchers, Inc.
Text Credits
“Definition of Pest” from Random House Webster’s College Dictionary, April 
27, 1999. Copyright © 1999 by Random House, Inc. Reprinted with permis-
sion; Table  1: Source: “Private Pesticide Applicator Training Manual” from 
Environmental Protection Agency; Page 325, Figure 4: Source: Environmental 
Protection Agency. 
363

bioaccumulation The accumulation of higher and higher 
concentrations of potentially toxic chemicals in organisms. 
Bioaccumulation occurs in the case of substances that are ingested 
but that cannot be excreted or broken down (nonbiodegradable 
substances).
biomagnification Bioaccumulation occurring through several 
levels of a food chain.
biopesticide Naturally occurring substances that are designed to 
control pests; such substances usually clear the EPA registration 
process quickly. See Bacillus thuringensis.
chemical treatment The use of pesticides and herbicides to control 
or eradicate agricultural pests.
cosmetic spraying The spraying of pesticides to control pests that 
damage only the surface appearance of fruits and vegetables.
cultural control A change in the practice of growing, harvesting, 
storing, handling, or disposing of wastes that reduces their 
susceptibility or exposure to pests. For example, spraying the 
house with insecticides to kill flies is a chemical control; putting 
screens on the windows to keep flies out is a cultural control.
Delaney clause A stipulation in the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act of 1938 that prohibited the use of any food additive 
that is found to induce cancer in humans or animals; this has been 
replaced by the negligible risk standard.
ecological pest control Natural control of pest populations through 
understanding various ecological factors and, so far as possible, 
utilizing those factors, as opposed to using synthetic chemicals.
economic threshold The level of pest damage that, to be reduced 
further, would require an application of pesticides that is more 
costly than the economic damage caused by the pests.
endocrine disrupters Any of a class of organic compounds, often 
pesticides, that are suspected of having the capacity to interfere 
with hormonal activities in animals.
field scouts Persons trained to survey crop fields and determine 
whether applications of pesticides or other pest management 
procedures are actually necessary to avert significant economic 
loss.
first-generation pesticides Toxic inorganic chemicals that were the 
first used to control insects, plant diseases, and other pests. These 
pesticides included mostly compounds of arsenic and cyanide and 
various heavy metals, such as mercury and copper.
Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA) Passed in 1996, this act 
amended existing laws governing pesticide use and residues on 
foods, including the Delaney clause.
genetic control The selective breeding of a desired plant or 
animal to make it resistant to attack by pests. Also, attempting 
to introduce harmful genes—for example, those that cause 
sterility—into the pest populations.
herbicide A chemical used to kill or inhibit the growth of 
undesired plants.
hormones Natural chemical substances that control the 
development, physiology, and behavior of an organism. 
Hormones are produced internally and affect only the individual 
organism. Hormones are coming into use in pest control. (See 
also pheromones.)
insurance spraying The spraying of pesticides when it is not really 
needed, in the belief that it will ensure against loss due to pests.
integrated pest management (IPM) A program consisting of 
two or more methods of pest control carefully integrated and 
designed to avoid economic loss from pests. The objective of IPM 
is to minimize the use of environmentally hazardous synthetic 
chemicals.
microbial Of or pertaining to microbes.
natural chemical control The use of one or more natural chemicals, 
such as hormones or pheromones, to control a pest.
natural enemies All the predators and parasites that may feed on a 
given organism. Organisms used to control a specific pest through 
predation or parasitism.
organic food/gardening/farming Gardening or farming without the 
use of inorganic fertilizers, synthetic pesticides, or other human-
made materials; food raised with organic farming techniques.
Organic Foods Protection Act A law passed in 1990 that 
established the National Organic Standards Board, the agency 
that certifies organic foods.
pest Any organism that is noxious, destructive, or troublesome; 
usually an agricultural pest.
pesticide A chemical used to kill pests. Pesticides are further 
categorized according to the pests they are designed to kill—for 
example, herbicides kill plants, insecticides kill insects, fungicides 
kill fungi, and so on.
pesticide treadmill The idea that use of chemical pesticides simply 
creates a vicious cycle of “needing more pesticides” to overcome 
developing resistance and secondary outbreaks caused by the 
pesticide applications.
pheromones Chemical substances secreted externally by certain 
members of a species that affect the behavior of other members of 
the same species. The most common examples are sex attractants, 
which female insects secrete to attract males. Pheromones are 
coming into use in pest control. (See also hormones.)
plant-incorporated protectants In genetically modified crops, 
substances that have been bioengineered to incorporate substances 
that would repel or kill pests.
prior informed consent (PIC) A UN-approved procedure 
whereby countries exporting pesticides must inform importing 
countries of actions the exporting countries have taken to restrict 
the use of the pesticides.
resurgence The rapid comeback of a population (especially of pests 
after a severe die-off, usually caused by pesticides) and the return 
to even higher levels than before the treatment.
scale insect Any of a group of minute insect pests that suck the 
juices from plant cells.
synergistic effects Where two or more factors interact to affect 
organisms in a way that makes the impact greater than from the 
two acting separately.
vector/vector control An agent, such as an insect or tick, that 
carries a parasite from one host to another; methods of controlling 
a parasite or disease by attacking the vector.
weed Any plant that competes with agricultural crops, forests, 
lawns, or forage grasses for light and nutrients.
glossaRy
Pests and Pest Control
364

A
pproximately 300 million years ago, the Gulf of Mexico was formed by 
a sinking of the sea floor. In subsequent geological eras, organic matter ac-
cumulated in sediments that were deposited in the Gulf, where it was buried 
and converted into oil and gas. Today, oil and gas deposits in the Gulf are thought to 
contain up to 45 billion barrels of oil equivalent (BOE), a way of combining oil and 
gas estimates, where 6,000 cubic feet of gas is equated with 1 barrel of oil. Petroleum 
exploration began in the Gulf in earnest after World War II, and 1947 marked the first 
offshore well drilled out of the sight of land, under 20 feet of water. Since then, some 
15,000 oil and gas wells have been drilled in the Gulf of Mexico, in depths of up to 
10,000 feet below the surface and a further 13,000 feet below 
the sea floor.
Oil and gas production in the Gulf has been 
prolific, currently accounting for 30% of 
U.S. yield. However, more than 45 bil-
lion BOE have already been withdrawn 
from the Gulf, and the industry has 
been forced to drill in deeper waters and 
deeper strata to find oil, as shallower wells 
have been exhausted. To get at the deep oil and gas, increas-
ingly expensive and elaborate rigs are required, platforms that float 
on the surface and support all the necessary equipment for drilling in 
deep water, housing a crew, and providing a helicopter pad. One such rig 
Learning Objectives
 1. Energy Sources and Uses: Explain 
how the three kinds of fossil fuel 
were developed over time and 
how they are coupled to major 
end uses today.
 2. Exploiting Crude Oil: Evaluate 
the changes in crude oil sources 
and prices and their impact on 
the U.S. economy, and examine 
the concept of peak oil and its 
consequences.
 3. Drilling for Natural Gas: Describe 
the versatility of natural gas, and 
explain the new source in shale 
and how it is extracted.
 4. Mining Coal: Discuss the advan-
tages and disadvantages of coal 
as a power source, and evaluate 
the methods used to mine coal.
 5. Energy Policy and Security: Com-
pare supply-side and demand-
side energy policies that have 
been developed in recent years, 
and explain their different 
impacts on the future.
Energy from 
Fossil Fuels
Explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig. On April 20, 2010, a cement seal on the 
Macondo well ruptured and sent oil and gas gushing up on the rig above, followed by an 
explosion and fire that killed 11 workers. Fire boats are shown spraying water the next day on 
the burning remnants of the oil rig.
From Chapter 14 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Energy from Fossil Fuels
was Deepwater Horizon; measuring 250 by 400 feet, the rig had 
a crew of 126 on April 20, 2010.
the bLOwOut at MacOndO. Drilling at the 
BP-owned Macondo Well was initially begun in October 2009 
by another rig, and subsequently BP moved the Deepwater 
Horizon to the site in February 2010. The new rig was success-
ful in completing the drilling and on April 20 had inserted a 
cement barrier over the well surface preliminary to abandoning 
the well for the time being. The barrier is essential and must 
withstand high pressures because the oil and gas accessed by 
the boring are themselves under high pressure. Suddenly, the 
well began blowing seawater and drilling mud up the string 
of connected drill casings to the rig platform, forming a geyser 
240 feet into the air. The drilling mud was followed by a slushy 
combination of mud, oil, and gas, which ignited and exploded 
on the rig. The explosion and subsequent fire on the rig killed 
11 workers and injured many more before they could be evacu-
ated. The rig continued to burn until, 36 hours later, it sank 
into the Gulf.
Under pressure from below, oil began to gush out of the 
well on the Gulf floor (Fig. 1) and continued to do so for 87 
days until the well was capped off. Close to 5 million bar-
rels of oil flowed up into the Gulf of Mexico, making an awful 
mess—forming a huge slick, contaminating some 625 miles of 
Gulf coastline, and killing countless sea turtles, birds, fish, and 
smaller marine organisms. It was the largest accidental oil spill 
in world history; the only spill greater than Deepwater Horizon 
was the intentional release of oil into the Persian Gulf by Iraqi 
forces during the first Gulf War in 1991. An intense cleanup 
began immediately; much oil on the surface was simply burned, 
sending tons of black soot into the atmosphere. Some oil was 
pumped up from the bottom in the vicinity of the well, some 
was siphoned by booms and boats on the surface, but the vast 
bulk of the spill either evaporated at the surface of the Gulf or 
was broken down by bacteria in the water column and along the 
shores. These natural forces were aided by the high volatility of 
the Gulf oil and the warm temperatures of Gulf water. Neverthe-
less, the Deepwater Horizon spill was an economic disaster for 
the Gulf Coast fishing and tourism industries during the spring 
and summer of 2010. Much of this loss is being covered by a 
$20 billion trust fund created by BP at the demand of President 
Barack Obama.
what went wrOng? The immediate cause of  
the blowout was a failure of the cement at the base of the  
well that was designed to contain the gas and oil within  
the well pipes. Two official government reports documented  
the numerous causes of the accident, ultimately putting  
the blame on BP and its subcontractors (Transocean,  
Halliburton).1 Why the cement failed is not known, but the 
responses of the crew on board the drilling rig suggested that 
human error as well as equipment failure both played roles 
in the sequence of events that followed failure of the cement 
barrier. In the end, BP and the subcontractors were blamed 
for allowing a culture of poor risk management in the drilling 
operation, made worse by shortcuts taken to complete the 
well in a hurry because it was behind schedule and millions 
of dollars over budget. The legal battles over the blowout and 
oil spill will last for years and will add to the billions of dollars 
already committed to the cleanup. The government reports rec-
ommended a number of new regulations that have since been 
put in place, designed to lower the risks of such a catastrophic 
failure.
Ultimately, the environmental consequences of oil spills, 
drilling operations, and such operations as mountaintop coal 
mining are some of the many costs of doing business in a fossil 
fuel–driven economy. Americans use almost 19 million barrels of 
oil every day. 
The objective in this chapter is to gain an overall un-
derstanding of the sources of fossil fuel energy that support 
transportation, homes, and industries. The consequences of our 
dependence on fossil fuels are discussed, and we close the chap-
ter with a serious look at public policy.
1Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement. Report 
Regarding the Causes of the April 20, 2010 Macondo Well Blowout. September 
14, 2011. www.boemre.gov/pdfs/maps/dwhfinal.pdf. October 5, 2010; National 
Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling. Deep 
Water: The Gulf Oil Disaster and the Future of Offshore Drilling. Report to the 
President, January 2011. www.fdlp.gov. October 5, 2011.
Figure 1 Oil on the Gulf floor. Oil gushed up from the ruptured 
Macondo oil well at a rate of 68,000 barrels per day and continued until the well 
was successfully capped 87 days later.
366

Energy from Fossil Fuels
there were many drawbacks. The smoke and fumes from the 
numerous coal fires made air pollution in cities far worse 
than anything seen today. Coal is also notoriously hazardous 
to mine and dirty to handle, and burning coal results in large 
quantities of ash that must be removed. As for steam en-
gines, because of the size and bulk of the boiler, the engines 
were heavy and awkward to operate (Fig. 2). Frequently, the 
fire had to be started several hours before the engine was put 
into operation in order to heat the boiler sufficiently.
In the late 1800s, the simultaneous development of three 
technologies—the internal combustion engine, oil-well drill-
ing, and the refinement of crude oil into gasoline and other 
liquid fuels—combined to provide an alternative to steam 
power. The replacement of coal-fired steam engines and fur-
naces with petroleum-fueled engines and oil furnaces was an 
immense step forward in convenience. Also, the air quality 
improved greatly as cities were gradually rid of the smoke 
and soot from burning coal. (It was only in the 1960s, with 
the tremendous proliferation of cars, that pollution from 
gasoline engines became a problem.) Further, the gasoline-
driven internal combustion engine provided a valuable 
power-to-weight advantage that allowed rapid advances in 
technology. A 100-horsepower gasoline engine weighs only 
a tiny fraction of what a 100-horsepower steam engine and 
its boiler weigh, and jet engines have an even greater power-
to-weight ratio. Automobiles and other forms of ground 
transportation would be cumbersome, to say the least, with-
out this power-to-weight advantage, and airplanes would be  
impossible.
Economic development throughout the world since the 
1940s has depended largely on technologies that consume 
fuels refined from crude oil. By 1951, crude oil became the 
dominant energy source for the nation. Since then, it has 
become the mainstay not only of the United States (mak-
ing up 37% of total U.S. energy consumption), but also of 
most other countries, both developed and developing. Crude 
1 Energy Sources and Uses
Throughout human history, the advance of technological civ-
ilization has been tied to the development of energy sources. 
In early times (and even today in less developed regions), the 
major energy source was muscle power. Some people lived 
in relative luxury by exploiting the labor of others—slaves, 
indentured servants, and minimally paid workers. Human 
labor was supplemented by the use of domestic animals for 
agriculture and transportation, by water or wind power for 
milling grain, and by the Sun.
By the early 1700s, inventors had already designed many 
kinds of machinery. The limiting factor was a continual 
power source to run them. The breakthrough that launched 
the Industrial Revolution was the development of the steam 
engine in the late 1700s. In a steam engine, water is boiled in 
a closed vessel to produce high-pressure steam, which pushes 
a piston back and forth in a cylinder. Through its connec-
tion to a crankshaft, the piston turns the drive wheel of the 
machinery. Steam engines rapidly became the power source 
for steamships, steam shovels, steam tractors, steam locomo-
tives, and stationary engines to run sawmills, textile mills, 
and virtually all other industrial plants.
The Three Fuels: Coal, Oil, and Gas
At first, the major fuel for steam engines was firewood. 
Then, as demands for energy increased and firewood around 
industrial centers became scarce, coal was substituted. By the 
end of the 1800s, coal had become the dominant fuel, and it 
remained so into the 1940s. In addition to being used as fuel 
for steam engines, coal was widely used for heating, cooking, 
and industrial processes. In the 1920s, coal provided 80% of 
all energy used in the United States.
Although coal and steam engines powered the Industrial 
Revolution, which greatly improved life for most people,  
Figure 2 Steam power. Steam-driven tractors 
like this 1915 Case marked the beginning of the indus-
trialization of agriculture. Today, tractors half the size 
do 10 times the work and are much easier and safer to 
operate.
367

Energy from Fossil Fuels
Generators. Electric generators were invented in the 19th 
century. In 1831, English scientist Michael Faraday discov-
ered that passing a coil of wire through a magnetic field 
causes a flow of electrons—an electrical current—in the wire. 
An electric generator is basically a coil of wire that rotates in 
a magnetic field or that remains stationary while a magnetic 
field is rotated around it. The process converts mechanical 
energy into electrical energy. Any time energy is converted 
from one form to another, some is lost through resistance 
and heat (in accordance with the Second Law of Thermody-
namics). Also, some energy is lost in transmitting the electric-
ity over wires from the generating plants to end users. In the 
end, it takes three units of primary energy to create one unit 
oil currently provides about 33% of the total annual glo-
bal energy consumption (Fig. 3). In the countries of eastern  
Europe and in China, coal is still the dominant fuel. Coal ranks 
second globally, at 30%, and provides 22% of U.S. demand.
Natural gas, the third primary fossil fuel, is often found 
in association with oil or during the search for oil. Natural gas 
is largely methane, which produces only carbon dioxide and 
water as it combusts; thus, it burns more cleanly than coal or 
oil. In terms of pollution, it is the most desirable fuel of the 
three. Despite the obvious fuel potential of natural gas, at first 
there was no practical way to transport it from wells to con-
sumers. Any gas released from oil fields was (and in many parts 
of the world still is) flared—that is, vented and burned in the 
atmosphere, a tremendous waste of valuable fuel. Gradually, 
the United States constructed a network of pipelines connect-
ing wells with consumers. With the completion of these pipe-
lines, the use of natural gas for heating, cooking, and industrial 
processes escalated rapidly because gas is clean, convenient (no 
storage bins or tanks are required on the premises), and rela-
tively inexpensive. Currently, natural gas satisfies about 28% 
of U.S. energy demand and 24% of the global demand.
Thus, three fossil fuels—crude oil, coal, and natural 
gas—provide 86% of U.S. energy consumption and 87% 
of the world’s consumption. The remaining percentages 
are furnished by nuclear power, hydropower, and renew-
able sources. The changing pattern of energy sources in the 
United States is shown in Figure 4. The picture is similar for 
other developed countries of the world, though the percent-
ages differ somewhat depending on the energy resources of 
the country. With the help of fossil fuel energy, people and 
goods have become so mobile that the human community 
has in fact become a global community. Adding to this link-
age in a powerful way is the explosion in information storage 
and flow, made possible by digital devices and the Internet—
all powered by electricity.
Electrical Power Production
A considerable portion of the energy we gain from fossil fuels 
is used to generate electrical power, defined as the amount 
of work done by an electric current over a given time. The 
electricity itself is an energy carrier—it transfers energy from 
a primary energy source (coal or waterpower, for instance) 
to its point of use. Electricity now defines our modern tech-
nological society, powering appliances and computers in our 
homes, lighting up the night, and enabling the global Internet 
and countless other vital processes in business and industry 
to operate. Approximately 33% of fossil fuel production is 
now used to generate electricity in the United States; in 1950, 
the figure was only 10%.
GLOBAL PRIMARY ENERGY SUPPLY
30.3%
Coal
33.1%
Oil
23.7%
Natural Gas
4.9%
Nuclear
6.4%
Hydro
1.6%
Combustables, Renewables
and Waste
Figure 3 Global primary energy supply. The world con-
sumed some 12,275 million tons of oil equivalent in 2011. The sources 
of the total primary energy supply are shown here. Note that 87% 
comes from fossil fuels. (Source: Data from BP Statistical Review of World 
Energy, 2012.)
Figure 4 Energy consumption in the United States. Total con-
sumption and major primary sources from 1860 to 2010 are shown here in quadril-
lion Btus (one Btu is the amount of heat required to raise one pound of water one 
degree Fahrenheit). Note how the mix of primary sources has changed over the 
years and how the total amount of energy consumed has continued to grow. Note 
also the skyrocketing increase in the use of oil after World War II (1945) as private 
cars and car-dependent commuting became common. (Source: Data from Energy Infor-
mation Administration, U.S. Department of Energy, Annual Energy Review 2010, October 2011.)
1900
1920
1940
1960
Year
1980
2000
2020
1880
1860
Total
Oil
Natural Gas
Coal
Nuclear Power
Wood and Renewables
Water Power
Energy consumption (quadrillion BTUs)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
368

Energy from Fossil Fuels
For hydroelectric power, water under high pressure—at the 
base of a dam or at the bottom of a pipe beginning at the 
top of a waterfall—is used to drive a hydroturbogenera-
tor (Fig. 5c–d ). Wind turbines are also coming into use. 
A utility company supplying electricity to its customers will 
employ a mix of power sources, depending on the cost and 
availability of each and the demand cycle.
There are currently more than 5,500 power plants 
in the United States producing 4.1 billion megawatt-hrs 
of electricity. Over time, remarkable shifts have occurred 
in the sources of electricity in the United States (Fig. 6). 
Although few new coal plants have been built in recent years, 
coal-burning power plants stay on line for decades; coal still 
provides more electrical power than any other source. Note, 
however, the exceptional rise in recent years of natural gas-
powered plants and, most recently, the appearance of renew-
able power sources.
of electrical power that can be put to use. This apparently 
inefficient proposition is justified because electrical power is 
so useful and indispensable.
In the most widely used technique for generating elec-
trical power, a primary energy source is employed to boil 
water, creating high-pressure steam that drives a turbine—
a sophisticated paddle wheel—coupled to the generator  
(Fig. 5a). The combined turbine and generator are called a 
turbogenerator. Any primary energy source can be harnessed 
for boiling the water. Coal, oil, and nuclear energy are most 
commonly used at present, but burning refuse, solar energy, 
and geothermal energy (heat from Earth’s interior) may be 
more widely used in the future.
In addition to steam-driven turbines, gas- and water- 
driven turbines are used. In a gas turbogenerator, the 
high-pressure gases produced by the combustion of a fuel 
(usually natural gas) drive the turbine directly (Fig. 5b).  
Figure 5 Electrical power generation. Most electricity is produced commercially by driving generators with  
(a) steam turbines, (b) gas turbines, and (c) water turbines. The percentage of the U.S. electricity supply derived from each source 
(as of 2010) is indicated. Smaller amounts of power (4.1%) are now also coming from wind energy, solar thermal energy, and 
photovoltaics (solar cells). (d) Each generator in this array in a hydroelectric plant is attached by a shaft to a turbine propelled by 
water. (Source: Data from Energy Information Administration, U.S. Department of Energy, Annual Energy Review 2010, October 2011.)
Condenser
Boiler
Turbine
Turbine
Turbine
Gas
Air
19.6%—Nuclear
              power
44.9%—Coal
Cool
water
Warm
water
Water
Heat
Heat
Dam
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
0.9%—Oil
Generator
Generator
Generator
-
+
-
+
-
+
STEAM TURBINES—65.4%
GAS TURBINES—23.8%
WATER TURBINES—6.2%
MAJOR METHODS OF GENERATING ELECTRICITY
369

Energy from Fossil Fuels
Figure 6 U.S. electric generating capacity by year in service, 1940–2008. Remarkable changes have occurred over the years in the construc-
tion of power plants, with many decades of coal plants to two decades of nuclear plants and, most recently, a huge increase in natural gas and the  
appearance of renewable sources. (Source: M. J. Bradley and Associates, Benchmarking Air Emissions of the 100 Largest Electric Power Producers in the United States. 2010).
Name plate capacity (megawatts)
Renewable
Hydro
Nuclear
Other
Oil
Natural gas
Coal
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
US ELECTRIC GENERATING CAPACITY BY YEAR IN SERVICE, 1940—2008
370

Energy from Fossil Fuels
that represent the utility’s reserve capacity. These are the 
utility’s gas turbines and diesel plants, or the utility may use 
pumped-storage hydroelectric power (water is pumped to a 
reservoir using off-peak power and is allowed to flow through 
turbines when needed). Occasionally, a deficiency in available 
power will prompt a brownout (a reduction in voltage) or a 
blackout (a total loss of power), temporarily disrupting whole 
regions. Such events occur most likely during times of peak 
power demand and may be precipitated by a sudden loss of 
power accompanying the shutdown of a baseload plant.
In our current economy, demand for electricity has 
been rising faster than supply, resulting in a decline in re-
serve capacity from 25% in the 1980s to the current level 
of 15%. Summer heat waves represent the greatest source 
of sudden pulses in demand, and as the climate continues to 
grow warmer in many parts of the United States, more and 
more regional utilities are being pushed to the edge of their  
ability to satisfy summer electricity demand. An even more 
serious problem is the antiquated system that controls the 
power transmission grid connecting power sources to users.
Blackout. Power brownouts and blackouts are a seri-
ous threat to an economy that is now highly dependent on 
computers and other electronic devices (brownouts are a 
cutback in power, blackouts are total power failures). On  
August 14, 2003, the largest blackout in U.S. history hit 
Fluctuations in Demand. Where does your electricity 
come from? It depends on what’s available. Most utility 
companies are linked together in what are called pools. In 
New England, for example, ISO New England ties together 
some 350 electric-power-generating plants through 8,000 
miles of transmission lines, called the power grid. The utility 
is responsible for balancing electricity supply and demand, 
regardless of daily or seasonal fluctuations. The generating 
capacity of the ISO New England utilities is currently 33,174 
megawatts (MW), produced by a variety of energy sources, 
as shown in Table 1. One MW is enough electricity to power 
800 homes, on average. The greatest demands on electri-
cal power in New England come in the summer months, 
when air conditioning use is at its highest. The all-time peak 
load (highest demand) record of 28,130 MW was set on  
August 2, 2006, a very hot day in New England. A power 
pool must accommodate daily and weekly electricity demand 
as well as seasonal fluctuations.
Demand Cycle. The typical pattern of daily and weekly 
electrical demand in the United States is shown in Figure 7. 
The baseload represents the constant supply of power pro-
vided by the large coal-burning and nuclear plants with ca-
pacities as high as 1,000 MW. As demand rises during the 
day, the utility draws on additional plants that can be turned 
on and off—the intermediate and peak-load power sources 
tabLe 1 Energy Sources for Generating Electrical Power (% of total)
Source
New England
United States
World
Nuclear power
15.4
19.6
13.5
Natural gas
52.5
23.8
21.2
Coal
8.3
44.9
40.8
Oil
10.6
0.9
5.4
Hydro
10.2
6.2
16.2
Wood, refuse, renewables
3.0
4.1
2.9
Sources: ISO New England, 2011; U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2011; International Energy Agency, 2011.
Figure 7 Weekly electrical demand 
cycle. Electrical demand fluctuates daily, weekly, 
and seasonally. A variety of generators must be  
employed to meet base, intermediate, and peak  
electricity needs.
Percentage of electrical energy capacity
100
80
60
40
20
0
Monday
Baseload
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Days of the week
Intermediate
Peakload
371

Energy from Fossil Fuels
nuclear energy. Coal-burning power plants are the major 
source of electricity in the United States but are heavily 
implicated in acid deposition and global climate change.  
Nuclear power is a much-mistrusted technology because of 
the potential for accidents and the problem of disposal of the 
nuclear waste products. Additional adverse effects of using 
electrical energy apply to other parts of the fuel cycle, such 
as mining coal and processing uranium ore. The pollution is 
simply transferred from one part of the environment to an-
other. The only relatively nonpolluting energy sources are the  
renewables—hydroelectricity, solar, wind, and biomass—
and these have their own limitations.
The problem of transferring pollution from one place 
to another becomes even more pronounced when you con-
sider efficiency; for example, the production of electricity 
from burning fossil fuels has an efficiency of only 30–35%. 
The energy loss is accounted for partly by some heat en-
ergy from the firebox going up the chimney and partly by 
a large amount of heat energy remaining in the spent steam 
as it comes out the end of the turbine. These unavoidable 
energy losses, called conversion losses, are a consequence 
of the need to maintain a high temperature difference be-
tween the incoming steam and the receiving turbine so as 
to maximize efficiency. Heat energy will go only toward a 
cooler place, so it cannot be recycled into the turbine. The 
most common practice is to dissipate it into the environ-
ment by means of a condenser (a device that turns turbine 
exhaust steam into water). In fact, the most conspicuous 
features of coal-burning and nuclear power plants are the 
huge cooling towers used for that purpose (Fig. 8). Another 
significant energy loss occurs as the electricity is transmit-
ted and distributed to end users by connecting wires.
An alternative to cooling towers is to pass water from 
a river, a lake, or an ocean over the condensing system  
(Fig. 5a ). With this approach, however, the waste heat energy 
is transferred to the body of water, with the result that all 
the small planktonic organisms drawn through the condens-
eight eastern states and parts of Canada, imposing a $30 bil-
lion cost on the economies of the two countries. The black-
out began when several power lines in Ohio brushed against 
trees and shut down. Alarm software failed, leaving control-
lers unaware of the problem. Transmission lines around the 
failure cut out, a local power plant shut down, more and 
more lines and plants dropped out, and within eight minutes, 
50 million people across eight states and two Canadian prov-
inces were without power. Blackouts and brownouts cost the 
United States an estimated $80 billion a year.
What is needed to prevent blackouts and brownouts is a 
self-healing smart grid, one that is able to monitor problems 
in real time, react to trouble quickly, and isolate trouble areas 
so that a cascading failure like the one in 2003 would be im-
possible. The technology for this fix is available, but fund-
ing is a huge problem, as the electric utility industry tends 
to run its business on very slim profit margins. However, the 
utilities are busy installing one component of a smart grid—
smart meters—by the millions. The meters give instant feed-
back on electricity use to homeowners and the utility control 
center. Another component would be smart sensors at many 
points on the grid; the sensors would provide feedback on 
transformers and power lines, allowing instant shunting of 
power away from breaks and between transformers. A pilot 
installation of smart grid technology in Boulder, Colorado, 
in 2008 was highly successful. The Obama administration 
has already invested $4.5 billion in smart grid projects, 
matched by $5.5 billion from private sources.
Clean Energy? There was a time when electrical power 
was promoted as being the ultimate clean, nonpolluting  
energy source. This is true at the point of its use: Using 
electricity creates essentially no pollution. For a time, it 
was also relatively inexpensive, and electric heating sys-
tems were installed in many new homes. This is no longer 
true. The public knows that electricity is (1) an expensive 
way to heat homes and (2) generated from fossil fuels and 
Figure 8 Cooling towers. A coal-fired power 
plant is equipped with cooling tower(s) to dissipate the 
heat from the spent steam after it has passed through the 
turbines.
372

Energy from Fossil Fuels
needed to support this transportation system. Nuclear power 
can do little to mitigate the demand for crude oil because it 
is suitable only for boiling water to drive turbogenerators, 
which will do essentially nothing for our transportation sys-
tem. The same can be said for coal. Although this situation 
might change with more widespread use of electric vehicles, 
their practicality for long distances still requires a technologi-
cal breakthrough in the form of a low-cost, lightweight bat-
tery that can store large amounts of power.
Primary energy use is commonly divided into four cat-
egories: (1) transportation, (2) industrial processes, (3) 
commercial and residential use (heating, cooling, lighting, 
and appliances), and (4) the generation of electrical power, 
which goes into categories (2) and (3) as a secondary energy 
use. The major pathways from the primary energy sources 
to the various end uses are shown in Figure 9. Transporta-
tion, which represents 28% of energy use, depends on pe-
troleum (and some ethanol), whereas nuclear power, coal, 
and water power are limited to the production of electricity. 
Natural gas and oil are more versatile energy sources, and 
significant shifts have occurred in the use of these sources in 
recent years. For example, today only 1% of U.S. electricity 
is generated by oil, whereas 35 years ago it was about 15%.
ing system with the water are cooked and the warm water 
added back to the waterway may have deleterious effects on 
the aquatic ecosystem. Thus, waste heat energy discharged 
into natural waterways is referred to as thermal pollution.
Electricity is a form of energy that is indispensable to 
modern societies as they are currently structured. World-
wide, the electrical power industry produces more than 
21,000 billion kilowatt-hours and revenues valued at more 
than $800 billion a year and, at the same time, generates a 
challenging array of environmental problems.
Matching Sources to Uses: Pathways  
of Energy Flow
In addressing whether energy resources are sufficient and 
where additional energy can be obtained, it is necessary to 
consider more than just the source of energy because some 
forms of energy lend themselves well to one use, but not to 
others. For example, the cars and trucks that travel the U.S. 
system of highways depend virtually 100% on liquid fuels. 
Almost all other machines used for moving, such as tractors, 
airplanes, locomotives, and ships, also depend on liquid fuels. 
Crude oil, together with much smaller amounts of biofuels, is 
Figure 9 Pathways from primary energy sources to end uses in the United States. Only 
major pathways are shown. Note that end uses are connected to primary sources in specific ways. Note also the large 
percentage of energy that is wasted as it is converted to heat and lost. All energy is expressed in quads, or quadrillion 
Btus (1015 Btus). (Source: Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Data from Energy Information Administration, U.S. Department of 
Energy, Annual Energy Review 2010, October 2011.)
Solar
0.11
0.01
2.49
0.10
0.04
0.02
5.06
3.28
0.02
0.06
1.62
19.13
7.52
8.44
12.71
26.78
0.09
4.95
0.42
1.22
2.36
4.54
0.71
3.28
8.11
8.01
25.65
0.03
2.23
0.11
1.10
1.74
4.65
20.59
Net electricity
imports
0.92
0.15
0.44
0.38
0.68
Electricity
generation
39.49
Rejected
energy
56.13
Energy
services
41.88
9.43
6.97
18.62
6.86
Residential
11.79
Commercial
8.71
Industrial
23.27
Transportation
27.45
Nuclear
8.44
Hydro
2.51
Wind
0.92
Geothermal
0.21
Biomass
4.29
Petroleum
35.97
Coal
20.82
Natural
gas
24.65
ESTIMATED U.S. ENERGY USE IN 2010: ~98.0 QUADS
373

Energy from Fossil Fuels
are in a temperature range that breaks down large organic 
molecules to smaller carbon molecules, producing crude oil. 
Below 15,000 feet, molecular breakdown leads to the one-
carbon compound methane, or natural gas.
Crude-Oil Reserves Versus Production
The total amount of crude oil remaining represents Earth’s 
oil resources. Finding and exploiting these resources is the 
problem. The science of geology provides information about 
the probable locations and extents of ancient shallow seas. 
On the basis of their knowledge and their field experience, 
geologists make educated guesses as to where oil or natu-
ral gas may be located and how much may be found. These 
estimates are termed undiscovered resources. The estimates 
may be far off the mark because there is no way to determine 
whether undiscovered resources actually exist except by ex-
ploratory drilling.
If exploratory drilling confirms the presence of oil, fur-
ther drilling is conducted to determine the extent and depth 
of the oil field. From that information, a fairly accurate es-
timate can be made of how much oil can be economically 
obtained from the field. That amount then becomes proved 
reserves. Amounts are given in barrels of oil (1 barrel 5 42 
gallons), and the content of each reserve field is expressed in 
probabilities. Thus, a 50% probability, or P50, of 700 million 
barrels for a field means that a total of 700 million barrels is 
just as likely as not to come from the field. The final step, the 
withdrawal of oil or gas from the field, is called production in 
the oil business. Production, as used here, is a euphemism. “It 
is production,” said ecologist Barry Commoner, “only in the 
sense that a boy robbing his mother’s pantry can be said to 
be producing the jam supply.”2 In reality, this step is extrac-
tion from Earth, or recovery.
Production from a given field cannot proceed at a constant 
rate because crude oil is a viscous fluid held in pore spaces in 
sedimentary rock, just as water is held in a sponge. Initially, 
the field may be under so much pressure that the first penetra-
tion produces a gusher. Gushers, however, are generally short 
lived, and the oil then seeps slowly from the sedimentary rock 
into a well from which it is pumped out. Ordinarily, conven-
tional pumping (primary recovery) can remove only 25% of 
the oil in an oil field. Further removal, of up to 50% of the oil 
in the field, is often possible, but it is more costly because it 
involves manipulating pressure in the oil reservoir by injecting 
brine or steam (secondary recovery), which forces the oil into 
the wells. In some fields, even greater recovery (enhanced re-
covery) is obtained by injecting carbon dioxide, which breaks 
up oil droplets and enables them to flow again.
Economics—the price of a barrel of oil—determines the 
extent to which reserves are exploited. No oil company will 
spend more money to extract oil than it expects to make sell-
ing the oil. At $13 per barrel of crude oil, the price in the late 
1990s, it was economical to extract no more than 25–35% 
of the oil in a given field. Thus, an increase in price makes 
more reserves available. In the 1970s and early 1980s, higher 
Figure 9 also indicates the high proportion of consumed 
energy that goes directly to waste heat (“rejected energy”) 
rather than being used for its intended purpose—some 57%. 
Some waste is inevitable, as dictated by the Second Law of 
Thermodynamics, but the current losses are much greater 
than necessary. The efficiency of energy use can be at least 
doubled for some uses, including cars that get twice as many 
miles per gallon and appliances that consume half as much 
power. For uses like electric power generation, however, 
somewhat smaller increases in efficiency can be expected. In 
general, increasing the efficiency of energy use would have 
the same effect as increasing the energy supply, at far less 
expense. Such increases in efficiency represent a largely un-
tapped “reserve” of energy that is saved, the conservation 
reserve discussed in more detail in Section 5.
In contemplating the energy future, we need to consider 
more than gross supplies and demands. That is, we must also 
examine how particular primary sources can be matched to 
particular end uses. Furthermore, what are the most cost-
effective ways of balancing supplies and demands—by in-
creasing supplies or by decreasing consumption through 
conservation, efficiency, and demand management?
2 Exploiting Crude Oil
The United States has abundant reserves of coal, adequate 
reserves of natural gas (at least for the time being), and 
the potential for the expansion of nuclear power. There-
fore, no shortages loom in these areas now. (Note that the 
environmental concerns regarding coal and nuclear power 
are being set aside for the moment.) Petroleum to fuel our 
transportation system, however, is another matter. The 
U.S. crude-oil supplies fall far short of meeting demand; we 
now depend on foreign sources for 68% of our crude oil, 
and this dependency has been growing as U.S. sources have 
diminished. Foreign sources come at increasing costs, such 
as trade imbalances, military actions, economic disruptions, 
and oil spills. Let us examine the situation, starting with 
where crude oil comes from and how it is exploited.
How Fossil Fuels Are Formed
The reason crude oil, coal, and natural gas are called fossil 
fuels is that all three are derived from the remains of living 
organisms (Fig. 10). In the Paleozoic and Mesozoic geologi-
cal eras, 100 million to 500 million years ago, freshwater 
swamps and shallow seas, which supported abundant veg-
etation and phytoplankton, covered vast areas of the globe. 
Anaerobic conditions in the lowest layers of these bodies of 
water impeded the breakdown of detritus by decomposers. 
As a result, massive quantities of dead organic matter ac-
cumulated. Over millions of years, this organic matter was 
gradually buried under layers of sediment and converted by 
microbial action, pressure, and heat to coal, crude oil, and 
natural gas. Coal is highly compressed organic matter—
mostly leafy material from swamp vegetation—that decom-
posed relatively little. Sediments buried 7,500 to 15,000 feet 
2Barry Commoner, “Toward a Sustainable Energy Future.” E Magazine. May/
June 1991, p. 55.
374

Energy from Fossil Fuels
Declining U.S. Reserves  
and Increasing Importation
Understanding the relationships among production, price, 
and the exploitation of reserves can help clarify the U.S. en-
ergy dilemma. Up to 1970, the United States was fairly oil in-
dependent, producing about two-thirds of oil consumed and 
keeping imported oil prices low (Fig. 11). In 1970, however, 
new discoveries fell short, so production decreased, while 
consumption continued to grow rapidly. This downturn  
oil prices justified reopening old oil fields and created an eco-
nomic boom in Texas and Louisiana. Then an economic re-
cession occurred in the late 1980s, and a drop in oil prices 
caused the fields to be shut down again. Following that, oil 
prices began to rise in 1998, reached a peak of $145 a barrel 
in mid-2008, and then began a sharp decline as global oil de-
mand dropped—a consequence of a severe global economic 
crisis. As the global economic picture began to improve, oil 
prices rose again, until by mid-2011 oil was once again more 
than $100 a barrel.
Figure 10 Energy flow through fossil fuels. Coal, oil, and natural gas are derived from biomass that 
was produced many millions of years ago. Deposits are finite, and because formative processes require  
millions of years, they are nonrenewable.
Millions of years
Natural gas
Removed in about 200 years
Oil
Coal
Millions of years
Photosynthesis exceeds
decomposition
Accumulation of detritus
Organic matter buried
under sediments
Time, heat, pressure
Millions of years
CO2
Energy
Heat
CO2
Solar
energy
(a)
(b)
(c)
375

Energy from Fossil Fuels
becoming dependent on oil imports. In a classic economic 
move, a group of predominantly Arab countries known as 
the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) 
formed a cartel and agreed to restrain production in order 
to get higher prices. Imported oil began to cost more in the 
early 1970s, and then, in conjunction with an Arab-Israeli 
war in 1973, OPEC initiated an embargo of oil sales to coun-
tries that gave military and economic support to Israel (such 
as the United States). Spot shortages quickly occurred, which 
escalated into widespread panic and long lines at gas sta-
tions. We were willing to pay almost anything to have oil 
shipments resumed—and pay we did: OPEC resumed ship-
ments at a price of $12 a barrel ($62 in 2012 dollars), four 
times the previous price.
Then, by continuing to limit oil production all through 
the 1970s, OPEC was able to keep supplies tight enough to 
force prices even higher. In the early 1980s, a barrel of oil 
delivered to the United States cost $36 ($91 in 2012 dollars), 
and the United States was paying accordingly. The high en-
ergy costs were devastating to the economy; inflation and 
vindicated the predictions of the late geologist M. King Hub-
bert, who proposed that oil exploitation in a region would 
follow a bell-shaped curve. Hubbert observed the pattern of 
U.S. exploitation and predicted that U.S. production would 
peak (now called the Hubbert peak) between 1965 and 
1970. At that point, about half of the available oil would 
have been withdrawn, and production would decline gradu-
ally as reserves were exploited. Figure 11 demonstrates that a 
Hubbert curve can be applied to U.S. oil production.
To fill the energy gap between rising consumption and 
falling production, the United States depended increasingly 
on imported oil, primarily from the Arab countries of the 
Middle East. European countries and Japan did likewise. Be-
cause imported oil cost only about $2.30 per barrel ($13.60 
in 2012 dollars) in the early 1970s and Middle Eastern re-
serves were more than adequate to meet the demand, this 
course seemed to present few problems.
The Oil Crisis of the 1970s. It was obvious that the United 
States and most other highly industrialized nations were 
1970
1980
1990
Year
1985
1973
2000
2010
1960
1950
Crude oil (millions of barrels per day)
Crude oil (billions of barrels per year)
4
8
12
16
20
21
18
2
1
Imported
oil
Production
from lower
48 states
Production
from  Alaska
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
2
3
4
Recession 
of 1974–'75
Consumption
Arab
embargo
1973
High oil
prices
Price
collapse
Low oil
prices
Recession 
of 1990–'92
6
10
14
Total
production
Figure 11 Oil production and consumption 
in the United States. Four stages can be seen: 
(1) Up to 1970, the discovery of new reserves allowed 
production to parallel increasing consumption. (2) From 
1970 to 1973, a lack of new oil discoveries caused 
production to decline while consumption continued to 
climb, resulting in a vast increase in oil imports. (3) In 
the late 1970s to early 1980s, high oil prices promoted 
both lowered consumption and increased production—
which included bringing the Alaskan oil field into pro-
duction. (4) From 1986, when oil prices declined sharply, 
until the present, consumption has again increased 
while production has resumed its decline, making us 
increasingly dependent on foreign oil. (Source: Data from 
Energy Information Administration, U.S. Department of Energy, 
Annual Energy Review 2010, October 2011.)
376

Energy from Fossil Fuels
Supply exceeded demand, with predictable results. In 
1986, world oil prices crashed from the high $20s to $14 per 
barrel. From that time until late 1999, oil prices fluctuated 
in the range from $10 to $20 per barrel, almost as low as 
they were in the early 1970s. The lower oil prices apparently 
benefited consumers, industry, and oil-dependent developing 
nations, but they hardly solved the underlying problem.
Back to Old Ways. Whereas high oil prices stimulated 
constructive responses, the collapse in oil prices undercut 
those responses:
 • Oil exploration was curtailed, and production from 
older fields was terminated.
 • Conservation efforts and incentives were abandoned. 
Government standards for automobile fuel efficiency 
were frozen at 27.5 mpg. Speed limits were raised to 65 
and even 75 mph.
 • Congress terminated tax incentives and other subsidies 
for the development or installation of alternative energy 
sources, destroying many new businesses engaged in 
solar and wind energy.
Production of crude oil in the United States continued 
to drop as proved reserves were drawn down. The area of 
declining production now includes Alaska, which reached 
its peak production in 1988. At the same time, consumption 
of crude oil rose again because of increases in the number 
of cars on the highways and the average number of miles 
per year that each car is driven. Adding to that consump-
tion, consumers began buying vehicles that were less fuel 
efficient. Minivans, four-wheel-drive sport-utility vehicles 
(SUVs), light trucks, and other less fuel-efficient models 
constituted more than 50% of the new-car market. Our 
dependence on foreign oil has grown steadily since the 
mid-1980s, and now 68% of crude oil we use comes from 
imports (Fig. 12).
Back to the Future. The collapse in oil prices set the stage 
for another developing crisis: a rise in oil prices that began 
in late 1998. OPEC was concerned about the continuing 
oil glut and its low prices, so it decided to cut production 
just as East Asia was coming out of a serious recession. The 
rapid rise in demand brought on a shortfall in the oil  supply, 
unemployment rose and the country experienced several re-
cessions. The purchase of foreign oil became, and remains, the 
single largest factor in our balance-of-trade deficit—where we 
buy more goods from other countries than we sell as exports.
Adjusting to Higher Prices. In response to the higher 
prices, the United States and other industrialized coun-
tries made a number of adjustments during the 1970s. The 
following are the most significant changes made by the 
United States:
 • We increased domestic production by stepping up oil ex-
ploration, building the Alaska pipeline, and reopening 
old oil fields.
 • Congress took steps to decrease consumption by set-
ting new standards for automobile fuel efficiency at 27.5 
miles per gallon or mpg (cars averaged 13 mpg in 1973), 
lowered speed limits to 55 miles per hour, promoted 
higher efficiencies for building insulation and appli-
ances, and began to develop alternative energy sources.
 • To protect against another OPEC boycott, we created 
a strategic oil reserve in underground caverns in Louisi-
ana. The current stockpile is 696 million barrels of oil, 
equivalent to about 37 days of consumption at 19 mil-
lion barrels per day.
 • We encouraged oil exploration and production in a 
number of non-OPEC countries, especially those in the 
Western hemisphere.
The results of the new actions were not immediate, nor 
could quick returns have been expected. For example, it 
takes at least three to five years to design a new car model 
and start production. Then another six to eight years pass 
before enough new models are sold and old ones retired to 
affect the overall highway “fleet.”
As we entered the 1980s, however, these efforts were 
definitely having an impact. The United States continued to 
depend substantially on foreign oil, but consumption was 
declining, and production, up after the Alaska pipeline was 
completed, was holding its own (see Figure 11 ). Elsewhere in 
the world, significant discoveries in Mexico, Africa, and the 
North Sea made the world less dependent on OPEC oil. As 
a result of all these factors, plus OPEC’s inability to restrain 
its own members’ production, world oil production exceeded 
consumption in the mid-1980s, and there was an oil “glut.”
Figure 12 Consumption, domestic production, and 
imports of petroleum products. After the oil crises of 
the 1970s, the United States became less reliant on foreign oil. 
Since the mid-1980s, however, consumption of foreign oil has for 
the most part been rising steadily. Note: Production figures include 
liquefied natural gas; net imports are imported crude oil minus ex-
ports of refined petroleum. (Source: Energy Information Administration, 
U.S. Department of Energy, Annual Energy Review 2010, October 2011.)
25
20
15
10
5
0
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Year
Million barrels per day
Consumption
Net imports
Production
377

Energy from Fossil Fuels
Then the bottom dropped out of the stock market in 
September 2008, a consequence of overpriced housing, mort-
gage excesses, and uncontrolled stock market speculation. 
A global economic meltdown followed, during which major 
financial institutions failed or were bought out by govern-
ments, credit suddenly became almost unavailable, and job 
losses accelerated. In short, the countries of the world slid 
into a recession that was called the worst in 75 years. The 
impact on oil prices was profound: Oil demand dropped, 
supply exceeded demand, and the price dropped back below 
$50 a barrel by December of the same year. Gasoline prices 
dropped down into the $2 a gallon range, and homeowners 
facing the winter could anticipate much lower fuel-oil prices. 
Oil-exporting countries suddenly faced a sharp decline in 
their revenues, and OPEC members began to consider cutting  
and the price of crude oil rose precipitously (Fig. 13a). With 
demand outpacing supply, oil prices kept rising, reaching 
a peak of $147 a barrel in mid-2008. Homeowners were 
strapped with high fuel-oil prices, commuters faced gaso-
line prices in the $4 range (Fig. 13b ), people cut back on 
driving, economic growth began to slacken, and only the oil 
industry prospered as record profits poured in. Internation-
ally, food prices rose to unprecedented levels, forcing many 
in the developing world into dependency and hunger. In the 
United States, shoppers purchased smaller vehicles, sales of 
hybrid vehicles blossomed, and the auto industry began clos-
ing factories that produced SUVs, vans, and trucks. Once 
again, Congress responded, raising the fuel efficiency stand-
ard, mandating the increasing use of renewable fuels, and  
establishing new standards for energy efficiency.
Figure 13 The cost of fossil fuel imports. (a) The cost in dollars per barrel (today’s dollars) and net 
imports; (b) gasoline prices in today’s dollars. (Source: zFacts.com, using data from U.S. Department of Energy sources.)
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
$120
$100
$80
$60
$40
$20
$0
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Year
Millions of barrels per day
NET OIL IMPORTS AND PRICE OF OIL
Net oil imports
Price of oil
(a)
REGULAR GASOLINE PRICE IN TODAY’S DOLLARS 
$4.00
$3.50
$4.50
$3.00
$2.50
$2.00
$1.50
$1.00
$0.50
$0.00
2000
2006
2012
1994
1988
1982
1976
OPEC
Oil 
Embargo
Iraq-Iran
war starts
Iraq invades
Kuwait
$3.53 March 1981
$4.26 August 2008
(b)
378

Energy from Fossil Fuels
Two More Wars. In response to 9/11, U.S. and Brit-
ish forces invaded Afghanistan, which had been harboring 
Osama bin Laden and elements of Al Qaeda. The purpose 
of the war was to capture bin Laden, destroy the Al Qaeda 
training camps, and overthrow the ruling Taliban regime. 
Although Afghanistan is not an oil-producing country, it 
can be argued that the Afghan war was a consequence of 
our presence in the Persian Gulf region. That war is still in 
progress, as the Taliban have sustained an insurgency that 
continues to destabilize the country, although bin Laden was 
finally killed in 2011 by a U.S. commando team while hiding 
out in Pakistan.
Then, in 2003, a U.S.–British coalition invaded Iraq in 
order to overthrow Saddam Hussein’s rule and eliminate 
suspected weapons of mass destruction (Fig. 14). Some ob-
servers suggest that oil was an important part of the picture. 
Although it is clear that the United States and Britain did not 
simply commandeer the Iraqi oil, they have spent billions to 
restore Iraq’s oil industry—and the United States and other 
oil-hungry Western countries are eager customers for the oil 
now that it is flowing again at a rate of 2.9 million barrels 
per day. Those countries rely on Persian Gulf oil for half of 
their oil imports. It is fair to say that military costs associ-
ated with maintaining access to Persian Gulf oil represent a 
substantial U.S. government subsidy of our oil consumption, 
one that has also been costly in human lives.
Other Sources. The United States has turned more and 
more to non–Middle Eastern oil suppliers. Canada is now the 
their output in order to stabilize prices. However, the low 
prices were short-lived. A combination of factors (heavy 
purchases by China, political unrest in several Arab oil- 
producing nations, partial recovery from the global recession) 
prompted oil prices to rise once again, climbing above $100 a 
barrel in the spring of 2011.
The Consequences of U.S. Dependency
What problems does this growing dependency on foreign 
oil present? As the U.S. dependency on foreign oil rises, we 
are faced with problems at three levels: (1) the costs of pur-
chasing oil, (2) the risk of supply disruptions due to political 
instability in the Middle East, and (3) ultimate resource limi-
tations in any case.
Costs of Purchase. The yearly cost to the United States of 
purchasing foreign oil dropped considerably from its high 
of $230 billion (corrected for inflation) in the early 1980s, 
due to falling prices and conservation efforts. It began a 
rapid rise in 2000, however, and reached $329 billion in 
2010. That year, the balance-of-trade deficit was $500 bil-
lion; thus, payments for imported crude oil amounted to 
two-thirds of our balance-of-trade deficit. These payments 
have significant consequences for our economy. The price 
we pay at the pump is basically the same whether the oil 
is produced here or abroad. If the oil is produced at home, 
however, the money we pay for it circulates within our 
own economy, providing jobs and producing other goods 
and services. When we buy oil from a foreign country, we 
are draining our own economy. And as we have seen, high 
costs for oil can have a severe damping effect on economic 
growth.
Finally, there are the environmental costs of oil spills 
such as the Deepwater Horizon accident and of other forms 
of pollution from the drilling, refining, and consumption of 
fuels—although estimating total damage in dollars is some-
times difficult.
Persian Gulf Oil. The Middle East is a politically unsta-
ble region of the world. As noted earlier, it was the unex-
pected Arab boycott that plunged us into the first oil crisis 
in 1973. Maintaining access to Middle Eastern oil is also 
a major reason for our efforts toward negotiating peace 
agreements between various parties in that region. Recog-
nizing this political instability, President Jimmy Carter in 
January 1980 stated that the United States would use mili-
tary force if needed to ensure our access to Persian Gulf 
oil (the so-called Carter Doctrine). This doctrine was tested 
in the fall of 1990 when Saddam Hussein of Iraq invaded  
Kuwait, then producing 6 million barrels of oil per day. 
The U.S.-led Persian Gulf War of early 1991 threw Hus-
sein’s armies out of Kuwait and gave the United States an 
established military presence in the Persian Gulf region. It 
was this presence, however, that angered the radical Islamic 
terrorist Al Qaeda organization and contributed to the 
terrible September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade 
Center and the Pentagon.
Figure 14 The U.S.-Iraqi war and oil. A soldier from the U.S. 173rd Air-
borne stands guard at a refinery near the Baba Gurgur oil field in Kirkuk, Iraq.
379

Energy from Fossil Fuels
fields. The Deepwater Horizon oil leak was a consequence 
of the need to develop wells in deeper water and deeper 
below the sea floor in order to keep production up. In spite 
of the high costs (and risks) of offshore oil, it accounts for 
30% of domestic production at present. Oil resources like 
deep Gulf oil and potential resources (undiscovered) below 
the Arctic Ocean will be exploited only if prices are high 
enough to pay for exploration and production (see Sound 
Science, “Energy Returned on Energy Invested”).
How much oil is still available for future generations? 
About 1,150 billion barrels (BBs) of oil have already been 
used, almost all in the 20th century. Currently, the na-
tions of the world are using about 88 million barrels per 
day, or some 32 BBs a year. Rising demand by the devel-
oping countries and the continued rise in oil demand by 
the developed countries point to an increase of about 2% 
per year, so that demand could reach 40 BBs a year by 
2020. How long can the existing oil reserves provide that  
much oil?
Hubbert’s Peak. As with many issues, it depends on 
whom you believe. Some years ago, oil geologists Colin 
Campbell and Jean Laherrère provided an analysis that put 
the world’s proved reserves at about 850 BBs.3 This is much 
lower than the 1,383 BBs claimed by more recent oil indus-
try reports (Table 14–2 ). On the basis of their estimates 
and the known amount already used, the two geologists 
calculated a Hubbert curve indicating that peak oil produc-
number-one exporter of oil to the United States, with about 
23% of the market. Mexico and Colombia are also major 
sources of oil. Western Hemisphere sources now provide about 
40% of our imports. The relative political stability and prox-
imity of these sources are good reasons for the United States to 
turn to them and away from the Middle East. Russia, a number 
of former Soviet republics, and several African countries (es-
pecially Nigeria) are important new sources of oil. However, 
most of these other sources, like the United States, are on the 
downside of the Hubbert curve and are seeing production de-
clining. The conclusion? We will continue to depend on OPEC 
and the Persian Gulf for a substantial share of our oil imports 
for the present and even more so in the future.
Oil Resource Limitations and Peak Oil
Crude-oil production in the United States is decreasing be-
cause of diminishing domestic reserves. Moreover, on the 
basis of the “Easter-egg hypothesis,” there is dim hope for 
major new U.S. finds. According to this hypothesis, as your 
searching turns up fewer and fewer eggs, you draw the logi-
cal conclusion that nearly all the eggs have been found. In 
terms of oil, North America is already the most intensively 
explored of any continental landmass. The last major find 
was the Alaskan oil field in 1968. Discoveries since then 
have been small in comparison, with increasing numbers of 
dry holes in between. Indeed, much of the “new” oil in the 
United States is coming from innovative computer mapping 
of geological structures and horizontal drilling technology 
that enable oil to be identified and withdrawn from small 
isolated pockets that were previously missed within old 
3Colin J. Campbell and Jean H. Laherrère, “The End of Cheap Oil.” Scientific 
American, March 1998.
tabLe 2 Proved World Reserves and Annual Use of Fossil Fuel Reserves, 2011
Reserves
Region
Petroleum (billion barrels)*
Natural Gas (trillion ft3)*
Coal (billion metric tons)*
North America
217
382
245
South and Central America
325
268
12.5
Europe and Eurasia
141
2,779
305
Middle East
795
2,826
1.2
Africa
132
513
32
Asia Pacific
41
592
266
Total
1,653
7,361
861
 
Use
Petroleum
Natural Gas
Coal
World use, 2011
32.1 billion barrels
113.8 trillion ft3
5.62 billion metric tons
World use, 2011 (quads)
183 quads
116 quads
99 quads
Source: BP Statistical Review of World Energy, 2012.
*The fuels may be compared by calculating their energy content in British thermal units (Btus) and then converting these figures to quadrillion Btus or quads, where 
1 quad 5 1015 Btus. One billion barrels of petroleum yield about 5.7 3 1015 Btus, or 5.7 quads. One trillion cubic feet of natural gas yield about 1.02 3 1015 Btus, 
or 1.02 quads. One billion metric tons of coal yield about 17.65 3 1015 Btus, or 17.65 quads.
380

Energy from Fossil Fuels
many of which are ready now; and (3) we can use the other 
fossil fuel resources we have to make fuel for vehicles. This 
leads us to some so-called non-conventional sources of oil—
oil sand and oil shale—which are abundant in the United 
States and Canada.
Oil Sand and Oil Shale
Oil sand is a sedimentary material containing bitumen, an 
extremely viscous, tarlike hydrocarbon. When oil sand is 
heated, the bitumen can be “melted out” and refined in the 
same way as crude oil can. Northern Alberta, in Canada, 
has the world’s largest oil-sand deposits (143 BBs as proved 
reserves), and Canada is commercially exploiting them be-
cause the cost has been competitive with oil prices. Cana-
dian oil sands currently yield 1.3 million barrels of oil per 
day (almost 500 million barrels per year). The environmen-
tal damage is substantial; 118,000 acres of boreal forest and 
wetlands have already been heavily disturbed. The extraction 
process generates enormous quantities of greenhouse gases. 
The United States is eager to buy the oil, which represents 
10% of our imported oil. It is transported via the Keystone 
pipelines from Alberta to southern Illinois and Oklahoma, 
where refineries are located. These pipelines have a limited 
capacity, however, and TransCanada Keystone has proposed 
a longer and larger pipeline, the Keystone XL, that would 
run 1,700 miles through seven U.S. states to Port Arthur, 
Texas, on the Gulf coast (Fig. 14–16). Objections to this 
project are many: leaks in the pipeline are bound to occur; 
the pipeline would cross ecologically sensitive lands; and it 
would also cross over major recharge areas of the Oglalla 
aquifer, an extremely important source of irrigation water to 
Midwestern states. Proponents cite the large number of jobs 
the pipeline construction would provide, property taxes to 
communities it passes through, and the energy security Ca-
nadian oil provides to the United States.
tion has already occurred. Princeton professor and former 
oil geologist Kenneth Deffeyes used the Hubbert technique 
in his book Beyond Oil: The View from Hubbert’s Peak4 
to draw the same conclusions. Even if these scientists are 
wrong and the oil industry estimates are right, it would 
delay the peak by only a decade at most. It is a fact that 
some 54 countries have passed their peak in oil production;  
put another way, 580 of the 651 largest oil fields have 
passed their peak production and are declining every year. 
The Association for the Study of Peak Oil (ASPO), founded 
by Colin Campbell, believes that the peak for conventional 
oil is already behind us (Fig. 14–15). If not, it is likely to be 
close, from all reports.
Downward Trajectory. At the current rate of use (which 
is expected to rise), the proved reserves can supply only  
43 years of oil demand. New discoveries continue to add to 
proved reserves, but they are only a fraction of our annual 
use. The remaining oil will be more costly to extract, and 
at some point, producers will close wells rather than sustain 
losses on their oil production. Thus, the 21st century will be-
come known as an era of declining oil use, just as the 20th 
century saw continuously rising use.
As oil becomes scarcer, the OPEC nations will once 
again dominate the world oil market. The Middle East pos-
sesses 48% of the world’s proved reserves, and the developed 
world—in particular, the United States—will have to rely 
more and more on that region for its oil imports. In light 
of this fact, it would seem wise to begin to prepare for that 
day by reducing our dependency on foreign oil now. We can 
become more independent in three ways: (1) We can increase 
the fuel efficiency of our transportation system, which uses 
most of the oil; (2) we can develop alternatives to fossil fuels, 
4Kenneth Deffeyes, Beyond Oil: The View from Hubbert’s Peak (New York: Hill 
and Wang, 2005).
Figure 15 Hubbert curve of oil and gas 
production. The Association for the Study of 
Peak Oil and Gas believes that combined oil and 
gas production has already peaked in 2008. (Source: 
ASPO Newsletter No. 100, April 2009. http://aspoireland.
files.wordpress.com/2009/12/newsletter100_200904.pdf. 
October 20, 2011.)
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
2030
204
2050
Year
Billions of barrels of oil equivalent per year (Gb/a)
GLOBAL OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION PROFILES
Regular oil
Heavy, etc.
Deepwater
Polar
Non-con gas
NGL
Gas
381

Energy from Fossil Fuels
Figure 17 Geology of natural gas resources. Until recently, most 
natural gas was accessed via vertical drilling into reservoirs associated with 
coal and oil. Shale gas has recently been developed using horizontal drilling and 
“fracking,” or injecting hydraulic fluid under high pressure to open up the shale 
and release the gas. (Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration.)
Conventional
non-associated
gas
Land surface
Coalbed methane
Conventional
associated gas
Oil
Gas-rich shale
Sandstone
Tight sand gas
Seal
Oil shale is a fine sedimentary rock containing a mixture 
of solid, waxlike hydrocarbons called kerogen. The United 
States has extensive deposits of oil shale in Colorado, Utah, 
Texas, and Wyoming. When shale is heated to about 1,100°F 
(600°C), the kerogen releases hydrocarbon vapors that can 
be recondensed to form a black, viscous substance similar to 
crude oil, which can then be refined into gasoline and other 
petroleum products. However, about a ton of oil shale yields 
little more than half a barrel of oil. The mining, transpor-
tation, and disposal of wastes necessitated by an operation 
producing, for instance, a million barrels a day (just 5% of 
U.S. demand) would be a Herculean task, to say nothing of 
its environmental impact. Nevertheless, because the depos-
its contain an estimated 800 BBs of oil, the rising costs of 
importing oil make it inevitable that every domestic source 
will be considered. In November 2008, the Interior Depart-
ment’s Bureau of Land Management (BLM) finalized rules 
for how commercial oil-shale leases will be regulated, open-
ing the way for oil companies to begin serious consideration 
of developing oil from the shale deposits. The process faces 
stiff opposition because of its potential to damage 
air quality and groundwater; any oil-shale develop-
ment is subject to National Environmental Protec-
tion Act analysis (environmental impact statements) 
and must get local and state approval.
Worldwide, the combination of oil shale and 
oil sand has been estimated to hold several trillion 
barrels of oil. Large-scale commercial development 
of oil sands has begun, but oil shale will remain 
undeveloped until oil prices rise dramatically—
something that may happen as conventional oil 
is further along the downward slope of the global 
Hubbert curve. However, shale has recently begun 
yielding natural gas.
3 Drilling for Natural Gas
In the United States, natural gas is gaining popu-
larity as a fossil fuel of choice. Almost equal quan-
tities go to industrial, residential, and commercial 
use and electrical power generation (Fig. 14–9 ). 
As with oil, the cost of natural gas is subject to 
market fluctuations in supply and demand, and 
prices often rise and fall with seasonal changes. 
At the 2011 rate of use (24.4 trillion cubic feet), 
proved reserves in the United States (300 trillion 
cubic feet) hold only a 12-year supply of gas. This 
is somewhat deceiving, however, because natural 
gas is continually emitted from oil- and gas-bear-
ing geological deposits and new drilling is opening 
up more deposits.
Shale Gas and Fracking. Until recently, most 
natural gas was mined from fields associated with 
oil and coal (Fig. 14–17). As a fossil fuel, gas pro-
duction in the United States peaked in 1970 and 
Figure 16 Keystone pipeline. The existing Keystone pipeline carries oil from Alberta tar 
sands to Oklahoma and Illinois. The proposed Keystone XL pipeline (Proposed Keystone Expansion on 
the map) is a larger line that can carry tar sands oil to Texas and the Gulf. (Source: U.S. State Department.)
Alberta
Saskatchewan
Manitoba
Ontario
Wisconsin
Minnesota
Illinois
Indiana
Missouri
Iowa
North Dakota
South Dakota
Wyoming
Montana
Nebraska
Colorado
Kansas
Arkansas
Louisiana
Texas
Oklahoma
Calgary
Edmonton
Regina
Helena
Cushing
Pierre
Lincoln
Hardisty
Bismark
Chicago
Steel City
Oklahoma City
Saint Louis
Patoka
Springfield
Austin
Keystone Pipeline
Proposed Keystone
Expansion
Port Arthur
Houston
Wood River
Topeka
Winnipeg
382

Energy from Fossil Fuels
pipe by huge pumps, fracturing the shale and releasing gas 
into spaces propped open by sand. The fluid, and then the 
gas, flows back up the well. The technique is called hydrau-
lic fracturing, or fracking; the amount of hydraulic fluids 
pumped into just one well can exceed a million gallons at a 
single stage, and a number of stages can be employed over 
time at the well.
This all sounds good because of the benefits of natural gas 
over other fossil fuels. Burning gas in power plants releases 
only half as much CO2 as coal for the same amount of elec-
tricity. The new shale sources have risen to 20% of U.S. gas 
production, and one consequence of this new abundance is 
lower prices. However, there are some serious environmental 
concerns with shale gas and fracking. Although the hydraulic 
fluids used are mostly water, other chemicals are added to 
the water, and much of the fluid comes back up to the sur-
face in the process, requiring holding ponds that over time 
could leak into groundwater. The injected water could also 
contaminate underground drinking water sources at other 
gradually declined. Proved reserves were not increasing 
as rapidly as domestic use. All this has changed, how-
ever. Using new techniques adapted from oil extraction,  
an abundant source of natural gas trapped in shale has 
dramatically changed the natural gas picture in the past 
few years. New shale gas resources provide an additional 
estimated supply of 827 trillion cubic feet, bringing the 
reserves to 1,111 trillion cubic feet, or a total of 45 years 
at today’s usage rate. This is a conservative estimate. The 
United States is blessed with an abundance of shale gas ba-
sins, the largest being the huge Marcellus basin extending 
from New York to Tennessee. Some natural gas has always 
been found around shale rock formations, tapped by con-
ventional vertical wells, but enormous quantities of gas re-
mained trapped in the shale itself. The new shale mining 
technique involves drilling a vertical well into the shale and 
then turning the drill horizontally for distances up to a mile 
(Fig. 14–17). Then, at regular intervals along the horizontal 
pipe, hydraulic fluids containing sand are forced into the 
SOUND SCIENCE
Energy Returned on Energy Invested
Consider an oil field 
where all you have to 
do is drill a hole and 
oil comes gushing up. 
This enterprise requires 
little energy invested (equipment manufacture, 
workers, transportation of oil) compared with 
energy returned in the form of the barrels of 
oil captured. The ratio of energy returned to 
energy invested (EROI) in this case could be 
100:1. That’s excellent. Over time, however, 
the oil flow diminishes and soon has to be 
coaxed out with secondary or tertiary recovery 
methods. The EROI declines, and after a while, 
it drops to 1:1; there is no more point in 
extracting oil from that well. This is a simple 
illustration of an important consideration, 
namely, that some forms of energy are more 
economical to capture than others.
Oil exploitation in the United States began 
with very high EROI values, perhaps 100:1. 
Then, over time, it became increasingly expen-
sive to coax up the oil or to import it (see illus-
tration). Now, the EROI ratio is closer to 5:1 in 
the United States and 10:1 in Saudi Arabia. Tar 
sands oil does even worse, at 2.9:1. Other fos-
sil fuels do better: coal at 80:1, natural gas at 
15:1. We continue to use oil, however, because 
it is the only energy source that supports trans-
portation. Natural gas may be favored over coal 
because of pipelines and of the much lower 
cost of gas turbines versus coal-fired power 
plants. So there are other considerations be-
sides EROI that factor into the choice of energy.
As the illustration shows, some renewable 
energy sources do well (hydroelectric, wind), 
and some do not (solar photovoltaic, biodiesel, 
and ethanol). If time is factored in (duration of 
the energy-capturing device in the case of wind 
and solar), these sources do better. And again, 
biodiesel and ethanol have a special appeal 
because they are liquid fuels for transporta-
tion. However, the EROI consideration helps 
to explain why the world isn’t just rushing to 
renewables, as the fossil fuels are presently a 
more efficient energy source. However, as with 
the choices of fossil fuels, there are other  
considerations besides EROI to factor in. For 
example, the fossil fuels all release the green-
house gas CO2 when burned to produce energy. 
A future where fossil fuels are consumed until 
they become economically impractical is an 
unthinkable future because of global climate 
change. We will need a renewable energy 
economy long before that happens. EROI does, 
however, provide some guidance for choosing 
renewable energy sources. Right now, wind 
energy looks like the best choice.
C
w
d
o
T
1930
Domestic oil
2005
Coal
Hydroelectric
1970
Imported oil
1970
Domestic oil
Firewood
2005
Imported oil
Wind
Natural gas
Nuclear
2000
Domestic oil
Solar photovoltaic
Tar sands
Biodiesel and ethanol
0:1
20:1
40:1
60:1
80:1
100:1
Maximum energy return on investment
Fossil fuels and renewable energy sources are plotted as ratios of maximum energy return to investment.  
(Source: Figure 10 in Charles A. S. Hall and John W. Day Jr. “Revisiting the Limits to Growth after Peak Oil.” American Scientist 97, 
May–June 2009, pp. 230–237.)
383

Energy from Fossil Fuels
and  researchers are seeking an appropriate catalyst that can 
 convert natural gas (methane) to methanol (methyl alcohol), 
a liquid. These options promise to make the abundant, but 
inaccessible, “stranded” natural gas deposits suddenly very 
valuable.
Applying natural gas to the transportation sector—
both directly as a fuel and indirectly as a synthetic oil—may 
 extend the oil phase of our economy, but it will not be a 
sustainable solution because the natural-gas reserves are also 
limited. What about coal, then, the most abundant fossil 
fuel?
4 Mining Coal
The world’s leading producer of coal is China (2.7 billion 
tons in 2011), where a booming economy has stimulated 
energy demand. Most of this is burned to produce electric-
ity, so much so that China has begun to import coal. Coal 
provides more than 70% of China’s electricity. In the United 
States, 45% of electricity comes from coal-fired power 
plants. In cost per British thermal unit (Btu), coal is much 
less expensive than natural gas or oil. Current U.S. reserves 
are calculated to be 237 billion tons, and at the 2011 rate of 
production (1.10 billion tons/year), the supply could last 215 
years. Unlike oil and natural gas, we produce more coal each 
year than we use, and we export about 8% of coal produc-
tion annually.
Mining coal can be hazardous, and injuries and fatali-
ties are not uncommon—in 2010, 48 fatal injuries occurred. 
More serious, however, is the occupational disease called 
black lung, or coal workers’ pneumoconiosis (CWP), ac-
quired by inhaling coal dust. Fatalities and hospitalizations 
from this disease have risen in recent years, prompting the 
stages in the process. Unfortunately, hydraulic fracturing  
was exempted from regulations in the Safe Drinking Water 
Act in 2005.
Because of the increasing fleet of natural gas power 
plants (Fig. 14–6 ), gas is expected to surpass coal if supplies  
continue to grow as expected and prices stay low. And 
because of its extensive use in residential and commercial 
heating, natural gas has been replacing oil as well. If the 
United States gets serious about moving to a low-carbon 
economy, natural gas is poised to ease the way by replacing 
these dirtier fuels.
Global Resources. Worldwide, the estimated natural-gas 
resource base is even more plentiful (Table 14–2 ) than in 
the United States. Almost four times as much equivalent gas 
(that is, equivalent in energy) is likely to be available as oil. 
Much of it, however, is relatively inaccessible. Gas must  
either be pumped through a pipeline (a process limited by 
the length of the line) or be subjected to high pressures so 
that it remains a liquid at room temperature (liquefied nat-
ural gas, or LNG). It can then be shipped in large tankers; 
currently, eight LNG terminals in the United States handle 
these ships. Thirteen more have been approved but are not 
yet built. Constructing new LNG terminals has proven to 
be difficult, as the public views the terminals and tankers as 
major security and safety hazards. With domestic gas sup-
plies now more abundant, new LNG terminals may not be 
needed.
Natural Gas–Run Cars. Natural gas can also meet some 
of the fuel needs for transportation. With the installation 
of a tank for compressed gas in the trunk and some modi-
fications of the engine fuel-intake system—costing several 
thousand dollars—a car will run perfectly well on natural 
gas. Natural gas is a clean-burning fuel, producing carbon 
dioxide and water but virtually no hydrocarbons or sulfur  
oxides. Natural gas is in use in the United States by many 
buses and a number of private and government car fleets, 
but use is restricted due to the limited number of natural-
gas service stations. Detroit automakers have stopped sell-
ing natural gas–powered cars, but they are abundant in 
Latin America and Asia-Pacific. Worldwide, some 13 mil-
lion natural gas vehicles were in operation in 2010, many 
of them buses. It will take stronger public-policy support 
for this option to grow in the United States; until that hap-
pens, the natural-gas option will likely stay on the back 
burner.
Synthetic Oil. With the aid of the Fischer-Tropsch proc-
ess, developed in the 1920s, natural gas can be chemically 
converted to a hydrocarbon that is liquid at room tempera-
ture and pressure—basically, a synthetic oil. Researchers are 
hotly pursuing ways to convert natural gas to synthetic oil 
more efficiently. Presently, the fuel produced is only about 
10% more expensive than oil. Several major oil compa-
nies are spending billions on gearing up refineries to con-
vert gas to liquid diesel and home-heating fuels (Fig. 14–18), 
Figure 18 Gas-to-liquid fuel plant. Sitting over a huge natural  
gas field, this Oryx Gas-to-Liquids plant near Doha in Qatar is one of several 
on the site that are expected to produce 450,000 barrels of liquid fuels per day 
by 2015.
384

Energy from Fossil Fuels
800 miles have been degraded by the waste products that 
leach from the mine waste.
Lawsuits in the late 1990s over the impact of mine waste 
held the practice down, but a rule by the Bush administra-
tion changed all that. In 2002, mining debris was reclassified 
from “waste” to “fill,” thus allowing companies free rein 
to dump the debris into stream valleys. A number of grass-
roots organizations, including the Ohio Valley Environmen-
tal Coalition, Mountain Justice, Appalachian Voices, and 
Christians for the Mountains, have been formed to combat 
mountaintop removal mining. They face a formidable array 
of politicians and coal industrialists who argue that the pro-
cedure is legal, generates thousands of jobs, and provides the 
country with coal it desperately needs. Indeed, West Virginia 
supplies about 15% of U.S. coal production.
The Obama administration has taken action to bring 
mountaintop removal mining under greater regulatory 
control. Citing the Clean Water Act, the EPA issued “final 
guidance” on the mining practices that strengthens and clari-
fies the permitting process by giving greater protection to 
waterways affected by mining operations. This action was 
prompted by a widespread failure of the mining companies 
to provide water discharge monitoring reports and use of 
a fast-track permitting process that led to violations of the 
Clean Water Act.
Coal Power
Virtually all of the coal the United States produces is used to 
generate electricity. Once it is mined, coal is transported to 
large power plants. A typical 1,000-MW plant burns 8,000 
tons of coal a day—a mile-long train’s worth. Combustion 
Obama administration to post new regulations designed to 
lower the risks posed by coal dust.
Coal can be obtained by surface mining (69%) or un-
derground mining (31%). Both methods have substantial 
environmental impacts. Land subsidence and underground 
fires often occur in conjunction with underground mines. 
The town of Centralia, Pennsylvania, for example, has been 
abandoned and bought by the government because of a coal 
fire that started 40 years ago and could burn for another 100 
years. Coal fires around the world produce almost as much 
carbon dioxide as do all the cars and trucks in the United 
States, contributing significantly to the world’s greenhouse 
gas emissions. In underground mining, at least 50% of the 
coal must be left in place to support the roof of the mine, 
which is one reason why mining companies have turned to 
surface mining.
Surface Mining
In the more common surface, or strip, mining process, dy-
namite is used to break overlying layers, and then gigantic 
power shovels turn aside the rock above the coal seam and 
remove the coal. For example, mountaintop removal mining 
began in the southern Appalachians in the late 1970s as a 
more economical way to get at the valuable low-sulfur coal 
found in seams up to 1,000 feet down. The Whitesville mine 
(Fig. 14–19) is only one of many that have devastated parts of 
West Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia. Roughly 
7%—more than 470 mountains—of the 12 million acres of 
mountainous land in these states has been or will soon be 
disturbed by mountaintop removal. Already, more than 700 
miles of streams have been completely buried, and another 
Figure 19 Aerial view of 
mountaintop coal removal.  
This coal mining operation in Whitesville, 
West Virginia, is managed by Massey 
Energy. The mountain tops are stripped 
away and dumped in valleys to get at 
the coal below.
385

Energy from Fossil Fuels
emissions are  reduced. Another technology developed under 
the program is the integrated gasification combined cycle 
(IGCC) plant, where coal is mixed with water and oxygen 
and heated under pressure to produce a synthetic gas (syn-
gas) that is burned in a gas turbine to produce electricity. 
Sulfur and other contaminants are removed before burn-
ing. The CO2 stream from the process is concentrated; one 
syngas plant in North Dakota pipes the CO2 to an oil field, 
where it is injected into oil wells to enhance recovery.
The CCPI is providing a new round of government- 
industry projects designed to meet the challenges of coal use in  
the 21st century. Clean coal technologies would be an im-
provement over the current ones. But unless they include 
carbon capture and sequestration (CO2 injected deep below 
ground) technology, they will still involve substantial green-
house gas emissions and all of the drawbacks of mining the 
coal. Until a change in policy requires carbon capture from 
coal-burning power plants, it will not happen on a commer-
cial scale because the technology will impose a significant 
cost (estimated at $30–$40 per ton).
5 Energy Policy
According to the Department of Energy, the period from 
1973 to 1995 saw an 18% reduction in energy growth, sav-
ing the economy $150 billion a year in total energy expen-
ditures. This was due to the steps taken in response to the 
oil crisis of the 1970s. Thus, public policy can bring about 
major improvements in energy use. Unfortunately, we also 
slipped back into old ways when the crisis faded into his-
tory. The state of affairs clearly demanded a new energy 
policy. After years of debate, Congress passed the Energy 
Policy Act of 2005, which intended to establish energy poli-
cies for the United States for years to come. It was a mixed 
bag. However, with the control of the 110th Congress pass-
ing to the Democratic Party, a sea change began in envi-
ronmental policy, producing the Energy Independence and 
Security Act of 2007 at the end of 2007. Then with the elec-
tion of Barack Obama as president in 2008, a new adminis-
tration had the opportunity to influence energy policy. The 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recov-
ery Act) directed $90 billion into clean energy; further, ad-
ministrative regulations have provided some major changes 
in energy policy.
Supply-Side Policies
Both supply-side and demand-side policy options are avail-
able. Because energy supply and demand are such a nation-
wide matter, only public policy has the sweeping power 
to effect changes that will make a difference. The Energy 
Policy Act (PA) acted on recommendations from the Bush 
administration to increase the energy supply. The Energy 
Independence and Security Act (EI), however, mainly ad-
dressed the demand side. Obama administration actions 
and the 2009 Recovery Act (O&R) provide the most 
of this much coal releases 20,000 tons of carbon dioxide and 
800 tons of sulfur dioxide (most of which is prevented from 
entering the atmosphere if the power plant is well provided 
with scrubbers). Then there is the waste: 800 tons of fly ash 
and 800 tons of boiler residue ash daily, requiring a special 
landfill.
Coal-burning power plants are responsible for more 
than generating electricity; each year pollution from them 
takes an estimated 13,200 lives and costs more than $100 
billion in health care expenditures. The main reason for these 
impacts is older power plants that lack pollution controls, 
exempted by grandfather clauses in older Clean Air Act leg-
islation. The EPA has recently invoked the Clean Air Act 
“good neighbor rule,” which prohibits downwind pollution, 
to issue its Cross-State Air Pollution Rule. This rule requires 
heavy reductions in sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides in 
older power plants, effective by 2014. The EPA has also is-
sued new disposal rules governing coal ash. The utility indus-
try is complaining bitterly about these new rules, claiming 
that hundreds of thousands of jobs will be lost as they are 
forced to shut down many older power plants (due to the 
cost of retrofitting the plants with pollution controls). The 
utilities challenged this rule in court, and in August, 2012, 
a US Court of Appeals overturned the rule, stating that the 
EPA had overstepped its authority. The Court reaffirmed the 
EPA’s authority to reduce downwind air pollution, but took 
issue with its methods.
Climate Issues
Coal combustion is the world’s largest source of CO2, 
which is the greenhouse gas most significantly forcing cli-
mate change. If progress is to be made in reducing CO-
2emissions, coal should be on the way out. In reality, new 
coal-burning power plants are coming on line as older ones 
are being phased out. The new plants are more efficient and 
are equipped with the latest pollution controls but lack-
ing any control of CO2 emissions. Eleven new plants were 
commissioned in 2010. Faced with this situation, the Sierra 
Club has launched its Beyond Coal campaign, designed to 
prevent the permitting and construction of new coal-fired 
power plants and close hundreds of existing ones. The cam-
paign has already blocked 153 proposed coal plants. Be-
yond Coal recently received a huge shot in the arm from 
Bloomberg Philanthropies—a $50 million grant over four 
years for the campaign. It turns out that there are actually 
ways to continue to use coal and, at the same time, greatly 
reduce CO2 emissions, but the technology is still being de-
veloped.
The government-and-industry-sponsored Clean Coal 
Power Initiative (CCPI) program is the successor to the 
Clean Coal Technology (CCT) program. The CCT sup-
ported a spectrum of experimental technologies applicable 
to existing power plants and to a new generation of coal-
fired power plants. The objectives of both programs have 
been to remove pollutants from coal before or after burn-
ing and to achieve higher efficiencies so that greenhouse gas 
386

Energy from Fossil Fuels
where we need to go, manufactured goods, computers that 
work, and so forth. As a result, many energy analysts argue 
that we should stop thinking in terms of where we can get 
additional supplies of the old fuels to keep things running 
as they are. Instead, we should be thinking in terms of how 
we can satisfy these needs with a minimum expenditure of 
energy and the least environmental impact.
Imagine discovering a new oil field having a production 
potential of at least 6 million barrels a day—three times the 
capacity of the Alaskan field even at its height. Furthermore, 
assume that this newfound field is inexhaustible and that ex-
ploiting it will not adversely affect the environment. The oil 
field does not exist, but saving energy through greater effi-
ciency is the equivalent of exploiting an untapped reserve—a 
conservation reserve.
Supply-side policies dealing with fossil fuel energy are 
“business-as-usual” solutions to our energy security is-
sues. They do little or nothing to reduce our vulnerability 
to oil price disruptions, terrorist actions, and global climate 
change. Demand-side policies, by contrast, have the ad-
vantage of reducing our energy needs and making it more 
possible to move to a future in which renewable energy can 
take over. At the same time, these policies will decrease our 
vulnerability to terrorists and to disruptions of the oil mar-
ket. They will also save money and reduce pollution from 
burning fossil fuels. The Energy Policy Act, the Energy Inde-
pendence and Security Act, and the Obama administration 
addressed ways to lower energy demand:
 • Increasing the mileage standards for motor vehicles
  PA: Authorized continued “study” of the corporate av-
erage fuel economy (CAFE) standards after the House 
and Senate overwhelmingly opposed their increase. 
The act did, however, grant consumer tax credits for 
 fuel-efficient hybrid and other advanced technology 
 vehicles.
  EI: Raised the CAFE standards for the combined fleet 
of cars and light trucks gradually, so as to meet a tar-
get of 35 mpg by model year 2020. This will save about  
1.1 million barrels of oil per day, half of what we import 
from the Persian Gulf.
  O&R: This goal has been superseded by rules from 
the Obama administration that mandate a CAFE tar-
get of 38 mpg for cars and 28 mpg for light trucks by 
2016, New standards have also been issued for heavy 
trucks and buses, designed to increase fuel economy 
by 25%.
As noted in Section 2, this conservation reserve has already 
been tapped to some extent, especially with the doubling of 
the average fuel efficiency of cars from 13 to 27.5 mpg. To 
put it bluntly, raising the CAFE requirements for all vehicles 
is the key to greater oil independence and  energy security.
 • Increasing the energy efficiency of lighting, appliances, 
and buildings
  PA: Provided tax breaks for manufacturers of energy-
efficient appliances; encouraged the EPA to continue 
 recent policy initiatives on energy supply and demand. The 
following list presents the major supply-side policies in 
these laws.
 • Exploring and developing domestic sources of oil and gas
  PA: Promoted taking an inventory of offshore oil and 
gas resources, but backed away from opening the Arctic 
National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) to drilling.
  O&R: Approved an oil pipeline into Minnesota and 
Wisconsin to transport oil from Alberta’s tar sands. 
Approval of the controversial Keystone XL line from 
Canada to Texas is pending. Approved drilling of ex-
ploratory wells in the Arctic Ocean. Took steps to in-
crease federal protection of an oil-rich region of ANWR.
 • Increasing the use of the vast coal reserves for energy
  PA: Promoted energy from coal via clean coal technolo-
gies, loan guarantees, and research incentives.
  O&R: Opened up new federal land area in Wyoming’s 
Powder River Basin to coal mining, potentially yielding 
2.35 billion tons of coal.
 • Continuing subsidies to oil and nuclear industries
  PA: Guaranteed $6.9 billion in tax incentives and bil-
lions more in loans for these industries.
  EI: Included a broad repeal of tax incentives for oil and 
gas in the original legislation, designed to offset the cost 
of many of the new elements of the law, but partisan op-
position to the repeal forced the removal of this option. 
A limited repeal was enacted, enough to offset some esti-
mated costs.
  O&R: Recommended cutting oil and gas subsidies 
in order to fund a proposed $467 billion job-creation 
package. This would bring in $41 billion over a decade. 
Partisan opposition is guaranteed, but some form of the 
jobs package might get approved.
 • Removing environmental and legal obstacles to energy 
development
  PA: Provided tax credits for hydropower plants and 
streamlined permitting for drilling.
 • Providing access to remote sources of natural gas
  CR: Recommended expediting the construction of a 
natural-gas pipeline to bring Alaskan natural gas to the 
lower 48 states.
  PA: Required periodic reporting of progress in develop-
ing a natural-gas pipeline to bring Alaskan natural gas 
to the lower 48 states. Construction depends on state 
and private monies, but established federal control over 
the siting and permitting of new LNG terminals.
Demand-Side Policies
In rethinking our energy strategies, we need to realize that 
energy has no real meaning or value by itself. Its only worth 
is in the work it can do. Thus, what we really want is not 
energy, but comfortable homes, transportation to and from 
387

Energy from Fossil Fuels
electricity and heats the building with the “waste” 
heat. Such systems can achieve an efficiency of 80%. 
In another energy-saving step, a new technology—the 
 combined-cycle natural-gas unit—has been increas-
ingly employed to generate electricity. Two turbines 
are employed in this unit: The first turbine burns natu-
ral gas in a conventional gas turbine (Fig. 14–6b); the 
second turbine is a steam turbine (Fig. 14–6a) that 
runs on the excess heat from the gas turbine. The use 
of this technology boosts the efficiency of the conver-
sion of fuel energy to electrical energy from around 
30% to as high as 50%. The cost of combined-cycle 
systems is half that of conventional coal-burning 
plants, and the pollution from such systems is much 
lower. A large proportion of new units being built  
or planned for the future consists of combined-cycle 
systems.
 • Promoting greater use of non-fossil fuel sources of en-
ergy (nuclear and renewable energy)
  PA: The act included a wide range of incentives to 
stimulate nuclear power: tax credits for generated 
electricity, insurance against regulatory delays, and 
federal loan guarantees. These incentives amount to 
$13 billion. The act also authorized $4.5 billion in 
support of renewable energy and efficiency, with tax 
credits for wind, solar, and biomass energy and major 
funding for research and development of renewable 
energy initiatives.
  EI: Established a renewable fuel standard, encourag-
ing the production of biofuels. However, a more ex-
tensive renewable energy portfolio standard, requiring 
the electric utilities to obtain 15% of their energy sup-
ply from renewable sources by 2020, was withdrawn 
in the end because of Republican opposition in the 
Senate.
  O&R: The Recovery Act poured some $90 billion 
into clean energy, including subsidies to home renew-
able energy systems and businesses, electric car de-
velopment, advanced biofuels, smart electric meters, 
factories to manufacture renewable energy compo-
nents, and many others. Unfortunately, many of these 
programs are under attack from conservatives in Con-
gress, who favor the oil and gas industries and the 
electric utilities.
Final Thoughts
Conserving energy is extremely important, but keep in 
mind that reducing our use of fossil fuels is not eliminat-
ing that use. There are two major pathways for develop-
ing a low-carbon energy future: pursuing nuclear power 
and promoting renewable-energy applications. Nuclear 
power has been in use for 50 years, and various renewa-
ble-energy systems have also been developed. Thus, both 
its Energy Star program, which also addresses energy-
efficient buildings; and provided tax breaks for those 
making energy efficiency improvements to their homes.
  EI: Required a 30% efficiency increase for lightbulbs. 
Compact fluorescent lightbulbs (CFLs) are between 
20% and 25% efficient (Fig. 14–20), whereas incandes-
cent lightbulbs are only 5% efficient. The act does not 
ban the incandescent bulb; however, the long-lasting 
CFLs already comply with the required efficiency in-
crease and will likely become the light standard of 
the future. This act also set new efficiency standards 
for appliances: refrigerators, freezers, washers, dish-
washers, dehumidifiers, and residential boilers. The 
act also addressed energy efficiency in buildings and 
industry, encouraging the development of energy- 
efficient “green” commercial buildings and supporting 
a weatherization program sponsored by the Department 
of Energy.
  O&R: The Recovery Act extended the Energy Star 
program to many more facilities; provided tax credits 
for improving energy efficiency in buildings; developed 
more efficiency standards for appliances; promoted 
plans for a smart grid; invested in weatherizing low-
income homes.
 • Encouraging industries to use combined heat and power 
(CHP) technologies
  PA: Took no significant positive action on CHP, but 
amended a previous act that required utilities to buy 
power from CHP plants.
  EI: Defined this technology as a suitable form of energy 
savings, making it eligible for energy efficiency grants 
and research proposals.
According to CHP technology, a factory or large 
building installs a small power plant that produces  
Figure 20 Energy-efficient lightbulbs. Replacing standard  
incandescent lightbulbs with screw-in fluorescent bulbs (shown here) can cut 
the energy demand for lighting by 75–80%. The higher cost of the fluorescent 
bulbs is more than offset by the greater efficiency and much longer lifetime of 
the bulb.
388

Energy from Fossil Fuels
REVISITING THE THEMES
sound science
Science and technology have flourished in the age of fossil 
fuels, not least because they have devoted much research 
toward developing new and often ingenious ways of 
extracting the energy from those fuels. The need today, however, is for 
scientists and engineers to point the way toward using fossil fuels with 
greater efficiency. Two examples are the CHP technology that is being 
increasingly employed by factories and institutions and the IGCC plants 
developed under the Clean Coal Technology Program. A key application 
of IT is the work on a smart grid and its capacity for managing electric-
ity, promoted by the Obama administration.
sustainability
The 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries have benefited im-
mensely from the fossil fuels buried in the Earth over 
past eons. These are, however, nonrenewable resources. 
They will not be available for very long, as human history goes. We are 
currently traveling on an unsustainable track, powered by fuels that are 
running out. Sustainable options are available, but we are not putting 
our best efforts there. The most serious consequence of our current track 
is that we continue to pump greenhouse gases, especially CO2, into the 
atmosphere, where they are already affecting the global climate and 
promise to do so at an accelerating rate as we burn ever more fossil 
fuels. Eventually, human civilization will have to make a transition to a 
low-carbon economy. The sooner this becomes a reality, the better off 
the entire planet will be.
stewardship
The fossil fuel business is costly in human health and 
welfare, but we are so deeply committed to using fos-
sil fuels that we simply chalk these concerns up to the 
cost of doing business. Further, what concern, if any, should we have 
for future generations? During the 20th century, we used half of the 
available oil, and our use is accelerating. A thoughtful stewardship 
of available resources should motivate us to refrain from pumping all 
the oil and natural gas to satisfy present demands and to plan for the 
future generations that will be facing far greater energy difficulties 
than we are as they struggle to complete the transition to renewable 
energy.
s
T
w
s
t f d i
b
s
T
m
p
Th
ill
t b
s
S
f
t
extracting the e
1. What happened in the Gulf of Mexico in April 2010, and 
what was the cause? The consequences?
 2. How have the fuels to power homes, industry, and transpor-
tation changed from the beginning of the Industrial Revolu-
tion to the present?
 3. What are the three primary fossil fuels, and what percentage 
does each contribute to the U.S. energy supply?
 4. Electricity is a secondary energy source. How is it generated, 
and how efficient is its generation?
 5. Name the four major categories of primary energy use in an 
industrial society, and match the energy sources that corre-
spond to each.
 6. What is the distinction between undiscovered resources and 
proved reserves of crude oil, and what factors cause the 
amounts of each to change?
 7. What did the United States do in the early 1970s to resolve 
the disparity between oil production and consumption? What 
events caused the sudden oil shortages of the mid-1970s and 
then the return to abundant, but more expensive, supplies?
Review Questions
8. What is the Carter Doctrine, and how does it relate to wars 
in the Persian Gulf?
 9. What is meant by Hubbert’s Peak, and how does it apply to 
the United States and the world?
 10. What is the impact of Canadian oil sands on oil reserves and 
supply to the United States?
 11. What new technology has revolutionized the natural gas 
scene in the United States?
 12. Describe surface mining as it is practiced in the southern 
 Appalachians.
 13. What phenomenon may restrict the consumption of fossil 
fuels, especially coal, before resources are depleted? 
 14. Compare the Energy Policy Act of 2005, the Energy Inde-
pendence and Security Act of 2007, and Obama admin-
istration initiatives relative to supply- and demand-side 
strategies.
 15. To what degree can energy conservation serve to mitigate 
energy dependency? What are some prime examples of en-
ergy conservation?
nuclear power and renewable alternatives are at a stage 
where they could be expanded to provide further energy 
needs if suitable technological solutions and public ac-
ceptance (in the case of nuclear power) or pressure and 
government support (in the case of renewable energy) are 
provided.
389

Energy from Fossil Fuels
Making a DiffeRence
 1. An easy first step for reducing your energy use is replacing 
your conventional lightbulbs with compact fluorescents. 
You’ve probably heard that before, but have you done it? 
Fluorescent bulbs do contain a small amount of mercury, so 
if you accidentally break one, it would be wise to open your 
windows; and when you clean up the glass, don’t use your 
bare hands. The mercury levels are low enough that the last 
traces will vaporize in a matter of hours.
 2. When you are in the market for transportation, choose a 
vehicle that gets high mileage per gallon in anticipation of 
the higher fuel costs that will certainly occur before the 
vehicle wears out. If you can afford it, purchase a hybrid 
vehicle.
 3. To further cut down on power, turn your thermostat down 
a few degrees in the winter and up a few degrees in the 
summer. Wear warm or light clothes to help make up for 
the temperature difference. One-sixth of power use in the 
United States is due to air conditioning.
 4. Buy a power strip. This makes it easy to turn things off with-
out having to go to the trouble of unplugging them. Some 
strips can even detect idle current and shut them off without 
you having to even flip any switches.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
thinking enviRonMentally
 1. Statistics show that many developed countries use far less 
energy per capita than we in the United States do. Explain 
why this is so.
 2. Predict what gasoline prices will do in the next 10 years, and 
rationalize your prediction.
 3. Suppose your region is facing power shortages (brownouts). 
How would you propose solving the problem? Defend your 
proposed solution on both economic and environmental 
grounds.
 4. List all the environmental impacts that occur during the “life 
span” of coal—that is, from mining to the electricity in your 
home or dorm.
 5. Explore the pros and cons of the Keystone XL pipeline, frack-
ing for shale gas, and mountaintop removal coal mining.
cReDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top right): Stock Connection/SuperStock; (bottom left): Elzbieta Sekowska/
Shutterstock; (top left): AP Photo/Anonymous; (bottom left): Jason Verschoor/
iStockphoto; Handout/Reuters; Douglas Lander/Alamy; (center right): Mark 
Jensen/iStockphoto; Martin Muránsky/Shutterstock; AP Photo/Kevin Frayer; AP 
Photo/Str; Jim West/PhotoEdit; iStockphoto
Text Credits
Table 2: Source: based on data from BP Statistical Review of World Energy; 
Figure 6: Figure from Benchmarking Air Emissions of the 100 Largest Electric Poser 
Producers in the United States, by M. J. Bradley & Associates, June 2010. Copyright 
© 2010 by Natural Resources Defense Council. Reprinted with permission; Figure 
9: Adaptation from “Estimated U.S. energy Use in 2010: ~98.0 Quads” from 
Lawrence Livermore National Library. Copyright © 2011 by Lawrence Livermore 
National Library. Reprinted with permission; Figure 12: Source: Annual Energy 
Review 2010, from the Department of Energy; Figure 13: Source: Department 
of Energy; Figure 15: Source: Based on ASPO Newsletter No. 100, April 2009; 
Figure 16: Source: U.S. State Department. 
390

Energy from Fossil Fuels
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery 
Act) Legislation that provided money for a variety of programs, 
intended to stimulate the economy during the recent recession. 
Some $90 billion was directed into clean energy programs.
balance-of-trade deficit A deficit in money flow resulting from 
purchasing more from other countries than is sold to other 
countries.
barrels of oil equivalent (BOE) A measurement that uses the 
energy content of a barrel of oil to compare different fossil fuel 
energy amounts.
Carter Doctrine As stated by President Jimmy Carter in 1980, the 
assertion that the United States would use military force to ensure 
our access to Persian Gulf oil. 
condenser A device that turns turbine exhaust steam into water in 
a power plant.
conservation reserve An imaginary source of energy that results 
from policies promoting greater efficiency of energy use, resulting 
in a reduced energy requirement.
conversion losses Unavoidable energy losses in energy production, 
usually due to the loss of heat energy.
corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) Fuel economy standards 
for vehicles set by the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration.
electrical power The amount of work done by an electric current 
over a given time.
electric generator A device that converts mechanical energy 
into electrical energy by way of wire coils that are rotated in a 
magnetic field.
energy carrier Something (e.g., electricity) that transfers energy 
from a primary energy source to its point of use.
Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 Legislation 
establishing energy policy by emphasizing demand-side policies 
such as conserving energy and using renewable energy sources.
Energy Policy Act of 2005 Legislation establishing U.S. energy 
policy for years to come, encouraging greater use of fossil fuels 
and nuclear power, and providing some support for energy 
conservation and renewable energy.
enhanced recovery In the removal of oil from an oil field, a process 
that increases recovery beyond secondary recovery by injecting 
carbon dioxide or hydraulic fluids into wells.
fracking Refers to hydraulic fracturing, a technique for extracting 
natural gas and oil involving pumping fluids into a well to open 
up spaces that release gas or oil to be pumped back up the well.
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) plant A coal-fired 
technology where coal is mixed with water and oxygen and 
heated under pressure to produce a synthetic gas.
mountaintop removal mining A form of strip mining for coal that 
takes off whole tops of mountains to get at the seams of coal that 
are buried as deeply as 1,000 feet below the surface.
oil field The underground area in which exploitable oil is found.
oil sand Sedimentary material containing bitumen, a tar-like 
hydrocarbon that is subject to exploitation under favorable 
economic conditions.
oil shale A natural sedimentary rock that contains kerogen, 
a material that can be extracted and refined into oil and oil 
products.
power grid The combination of central power plants, high-voltage 
transmission lines, poles, wires, and transformers that makes up 
an electrical power system.
primary energy sources Fossil fuels, radioactive material, and 
solar, wind, water, and other energy sources that exist as natural 
resources subject to exploitation.
primary recovery In an oil well or oil field, the oil that can be 
removed by conventional pumping. (See secondary recovery.)
proved reserves See reserves.
resources Biotic and abiotic factors that are consumed by 
organisms.
secondary recovery In an oil well or oil field, the oil that can be 
removed by manipulating pressure in the oil reservoir by injecting 
brine or other substances; more costly than primary recovery.
smart grid Control systems for power plants and electricity 
transmission lines with the ability to monitor problems, react to 
trouble quickly, and isolate trouble areas.
syngas A combustible gas produced in an integrated gasification 
combined cycle plant by burning coal; the syngas is then burned 
in a gas turbine to produce electricity.
thermal pollution The addition of abnormal and undesirable 
amounts of heat to air or water. Thermal pollution is most 
significant with respect to the discharging of waste heat from 
electric generating plants—especially nuclear power plants—into 
bodies of water.
turbine A rotary engine driven at a very high speed by steam, 
water, or exhaust gases from combustion, employed in generating 
electrical energy.
turbogenerator A turbine coupled to and driving an electric 
generator. Virtually all commercial electricity is produced by such 
devices.
undiscovered resources Estimates of oil and natural gas based on 
geological science but not explored to confirm their presence; the 
estimates may be way off the mark.
glossaRy
391

This page intentionally left blank 

Renewable 
Energy
From Chapter 16 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Learning Objectives
 1. Strategic Issues: Explain why it 
is essential to replace fossil fuels 
with renewable energy sources, 
and give some details of what 
has to be done.
 2. Putting Solar Energy to Work: 
Recall how much solar energy 
reaches Earth, and discuss how 
this energy is being turned into 
hot water and electricity.
 3. Indirect Solar Energy: Summarize 
what is being done to employ 
hydropower, wind power, and 
biomass energy to meet energy 
needs.
 4. Renewable Energy for Transpor-
tation: Discuss how renewable 
energy is beginning to meet the 
need to replace oil for transpor-
tation, and assess the technolo-
gies involved.
 5. Additional Renewable-Energy 
Options: Explore the potential for 
geothermal energy, tidal power, 
and wave power to meet current 
and future energy needs.
 6. Policies for a Sustainable-
Energy Future: Evaluate how our 
national energy policies encour-
age both renewable energy and 
energy conservation.
cape Wind. Nantucket Sound, a shallow body of water south of Cape Cod, rarely 
sees a windless day. Indeed, coastal locations are well known for their constant and often 
cooling winds, attracting vacationers and year-round residents, who also enjoy the beaches 
and scenery. Summer populations in Massachusetts towns on Cape Cod swell to many 
times their winter numbers, putting stress on the area’s energy infrastructure. So, in 2001, 
when Cape Wind Associates proposed an offshore wind farm in Nantucket Sound that 
could supply 75% of Cape Cod’s electricity needs, the company expected a warm welcome. 
Not so. Instead, its proposal ignited a firestorm of controversy. The proposed wind farm 
would not be small. Some 130 turbines, each 417 feet tall, would be spread 
over 24 square miles of Nantucket Sound and generate 470 megawatts 
(MW) of power. Concerns ranged from “visual pollution” to threats to 
the area’s tourism, navigation, fishing industry, and migrating birds. 
Organizations like the Alliance to Protect Nantucket Sound filed nu-
merous lawsuits since Cape Wind first proposed the wind farm, and 
all were eventually dismissed. Proponents of the project, however, view these 
concerns as a classic case of NIMBY (not in my backyard) and point out that New 
England desperately needs the renewable energy of offshore winds. Opinion polls 
on and off Cape Cod strongly support the project. The Bureau of Ocean Energy 
Management (BOEM), which has authority over all offshore developments 
in federal waters, issued a favorable environmental impact statement, and 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar signed a lease for Cape Wind to proceed. 
The Federal Aviation Administration recently declared the project free of 
interference with aeronautical operations, thus giving Cape Wind its final 
major permit.
During the time that Cape Wind has been trying to build the country’s 
first offshore wind farm, nine European countries have been busy erecting 
1,200 offshore turbines that have the capacity to generate some 3.2 gigawatts 
Renewable 
Energy
Offshore wind power. The Middlegrunden wind farm, some 2 miles off Copenhagen, 
 Denmark, consists of 20 turbines with a capacity of 40 MW. The wind farm produces about 
4% of Copenhagen’s power. A larger offshore wind farm for Nantucket Sound, off the southern 
Massachusetts coast, is soon to commence construction.
394

(GW, 5 1,000 megawatts) of electricity. More than 100 GW capacity 
is planned or under construction for offshore wind power in Europe 
alone. In the United States, offshore wind has gotten a boost from the 
Department of Interior, with its “Smart from the Start” accelerated 
leasing regulations and funding subsidies from the Department of 
Energy (DOE). This program focuses on the Atlantic Outer Continental 
Shelf, where 20 projects have already begun the planning and permit-
ting process.1 These would contribute hugely to the DOE’s goal of 
achieving 20% of our electricity from wind energy by 2030.
Meanwhile, land-based wind turbines are sprouting up 
everywhere. In the hills east of San Francisco, regiments of wind 
turbines standing in rows up the slopes and over the crests of the 
hills are producing electrical power equivalent to that produced 
by a large coal-fired power plant. At the end of 2011, wind power 
capacity in the United States reached 47 GW, enough to power 
13 million homes. Every year, installations of wind turbines set 
new records. Wind turbines are operating as well in India, Mexico, 
Argentina, New Zealand, and other countries around the world.
sOLar nOW. Imagine you’re in a strange environment, perhaps 
outdoors, out of range of any electrical outlets, and your iPad battery 
is running low. No problem. Just plug it in to your handy Eco Traveler 
Solar Power Bag and let its flexible solar panel charge up the device 
(Fig. 1). The bag works for GPS, cell phones, computers, any number 
of small devices. The solar power is captured by a thin sheet of plastic 
polymer, called Power Plastic, made by Konarka, the company that de-
veloped the product. Power Plastic has been built into building curtain 
walls and the roofs of transit shelters in San Francisco and promises 
to appear in many more products. Power Plastic captures solar energy 
with an efficiency of 8.3%, which is not as efficient as silicon photo-
voltaic (PV) cells at 15–20%, but efficient enough considering its flex-
ibility and adaptability.
Panels of traditional silicon-based PV cells are providing 
electricity in both developed and developing countries around the 
world. Throughout Israel and other countries in warm climates, 
it is now commonplace to have water heated by the Sun. Even 
in temperate climates, many people have discovered that proper 
building design, insulation, and simple solar collection devices 
can reduce energy bills by 75% or more. In the desert northeast 
of Los Angeles are “farms” with rows of trough-shaped mirrors 
tipped toward the Sun (Fig. 2). These reflectors are focusing the 
Sun’s rays to boil water or synthetic oil and drive turbogenerators.
As these examples demonstrate, the use of energy from the 
Sun and wind has been making remarkable progress, to the point 
where renewable sources of energy are becoming cost competi-
tive with traditional energy sources—and are far more practical 
in many situations. But can they replace fossil fuels as the founda-
tional energy sources of modern societies? Given the unsustain-
ability of our present course—due to the limited supplies of fossil 
fuels and their polluting impacts on global climate and the air we 
breathe—is it possible that renewable energy will gain the lion’s 
share of energy in the future? Indeed, do we have any choice?
1U.S. Department of Energy. A National Offshore Wind Strategy: Creating an Off-
shore Wind Energy Industry in the United States. U.S. Department of Energy and 
U.S. Department of the Interior. February, 2011. www1.eere.energy.gov/wind/pdfs/
national_offshore_wind_strategy.pdf. August 3, 2012.
Figure 1 Solar power bag. Konarka has developed a flexible, thin-film 
plastic PV system called Power Plastic that shows great promise for many solar 
applications.
Figure 2 Solar thermal power in Southern California. 
A solar-trough power plant. Sunlight striking the parabolic-shaped mirrors is 
reflected onto the central pipe, where it heats a fluid that is used in turn to boil 
water and drive turbogenerators.
1 Strategic Issues
The objective of this chapter is to give you a greater under-
standing of the potential for capturing energy from sunlight, 
wind, biomass, flowing water, and other sources. In 2011, 
renewable energy provided 9.4% of U.S. primary energy 
(Fig. 3) and 12.6% of electrical power generation; Presi-
dent Barak Obama has called for 80% of the nation’s elec-
tricity to be generated from clean energy (non-fossil fuel) 
sources by 2035. Worldwide, renewable-energy supplies 
Renewable Energy
395

Renewable Energy
ciety “has been built around, by and for fossil fuels,”2 as one 
commentator put it. It took 70 to 100 years to build the in-
frastructure of our fossil fuel economy, and we only have a 
few decades to rebuild much of this infrastructure around 
clean energy sources (by clean energy, Obama and others 
are including nuclear power, which does not generate CO2). 
This is nothing short of a revolution, possibly on the order 
of the response of the United States to the onset of World 
War II, where factory after factory shifted its production 
from peacetime to wartime goods. Clearly, the manufacture 
of wind turbines, PV panels, transmission lines, concentrated 
solar power plants, electric vehicles, recharging stations, and 
so on would have to take place in a relatively short period 
of time, and this would require massive government support.
Another barrier to accomplishing this transition is the 
way in which government subsidies, at least in the United 
States, have strongly favored fossil fuels. For the years 2002–
2010, government subsidies to fossil fuels were $98 billion 
versus $45 billion for renewables. Globally, subsidies en-
couraging fossil fuel consumption rose to $409 billion (ver-
sus $66 billion to renewables). This would have to change, 
and the fossil fuel, automotive, and utility industries pose an 
enormous obstacle to change, as they do everything they can 
to maintain their subsidies.
However, the global shift from fossil fuels to renewable 
or clean energy sources is starting to happen, so the question 
is, will it happen fast enough? There are some encouraging 
developments to suggest that it is possible, but much more 
has to be done:
 • Venture capitalists are sinking a lot of money into green 
technologies; globally, a record $257 billion was invested 
in 2011 into wind farms, solar power, electric cars, and 
so on.
16% of energy use and 20% of electricity supply (Table 1).  
The UN has targeted a reduction in fossil fuel energy of 80% 
by 2050, meaning that other sources would have to supply 
that much. These are ambitious and serious goals, and they 
raise some significant questions.
Why?
First, why should we want to replace fossil fuels with re-
newable sources in global energy use, in a matter of dec-
ades? The most salient reason is global climate change.  
It is the use of fossil fuels that has loaded the atmosphere 
with the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO2), raising the 
concentration of that one gas by more than 40% to its 
present concentration of 400 parts per million (ppm). As a 
result, global temperatures and sea level have already risen, 
with serious environmental consequences. If we were to 
continue to increase our use of fossil fuels at the present 
rate, atmospheric CO2 would be over 600 ppm by mid-
century and well over 1000 ppm by 2100, with global tem-
perature and sea level increases that would be catastrophic. 
Most international agencies have agreed that to avoid cat-
astrophic climate change it will be necessary to achieve a 
stable CO2 level of 450 ppm by mid-century. This is why 
there is a call to reduce our use of fossil fuels by 80% be-
fore 2050.
There are other reasons. Oil and gas reserves will only 
last a matter of decades, so we are going to have to find new 
energy sources anyway, and in this century. Also, there are 
1.4 billion people who currently do not have access to elec-
tricity and many more whose access is intermittent at best. 
Renewable energy sources are well suited to supplying power 
in areas not served by a central electrical grid. And there is 
the matter of other pollutants, such as sulfur dioxide, mer-
cury and nitrogen oxides, all of which are given off as we 
burn fossil fuels and all of which contribute significantly to 
poor health and fatalities.
Getting It Done
Second, is it even possible to accomplish a shift to renewa-
bles in so short a time span? Here we encounter some signifi-
cant problems. Fossil fuels are great sources of concentrated 
energy, and we access them, distribute them, and employ 
them in a massive infrastructure. Our modern industrial so-
tabLe 1 Renewable Electric Power at End 
of 2011, GW Power Capacity
World Total
United States
Technology
Hydropower
970
79
Wind power
238
47
Biomass power
 72
14
Solar PV
70
4
Geothermal power
11
3.1
Solar thermal power
1.8
0.5
Ocean (tidal) power
0.5
0
Total renewable 
power capacity
1,360
147
(Source: REN21. Global Status Report. 2012.)
Figure 3 Renewable-energy use in the United States. A mix of 
sources of renewable energy provided 9.4% of the nation’s energy used in 2011. 
(Source: Data from Department of Energy, Energy Information Agency, August, 2012.)
48.3%
34.7%
12.8%
2.5%
1.7%
Biomass energy
Hydropower
Wind
Geothermal
Solar
Total = 9.14 quadrillion btu units
(= 9.4% of U.S. energy use in 2011)
PERCENT OF U.S. ENERGY USE IN 2011
2Roberts, David. “Direct subsidies to fossil fuels are the tip of the (melting) iceberg.”
Grist, October 26, 2011.
396

2  Putting Solar Energy 
to Work
Before turning our attention to the practical ways that solar 
energy is captured and used, let us consider some general 
concepts of solar energy.
Solar energy originates with thermonuclear fusion in 
the Sun. (Importantly, all the chemical and radioactive by- 
products of the reactions remain behind on the Sun.) The solar 
energy reaching Earth is radiant energy, entering at the  top 
of the  atmosphere at 1,366 watts per square meter, the solar 
 constant. This energy ranges from ultraviolet light to visible 
light and infrared light (heat energy) (Fig. 4). About half of this 
energy actually makes it to Earth’s surface, 30% is reflected, 
and 20% is absorbed by the atmosphere. Thus, full sunlight 
can deliver about 700 watts per square meter to Earth’s sur-
face when the Sun is directly overhead. At that rate, the Sun 
can  deliver 700 MW of power (the output of a large power 
plant) to an area of 390 square miles (1,000 km2). The total 
amount of solar energy reaching Earth is vast— almost beyond 
belief. Just 40 minutes of sunlight striking the land surface of 
the United States yields the equivalent energy of a year’s ex-
penditure of fossil fuel. The Sun delivers 10,000 times the en-
ergy used by humans.
Moreover, using some of this solar energy will not 
change the basic energy balance of the biosphere. Solar en-
ergy absorbed by water or land surfaces is converted to heat 
energy and eventually lost to outer space. Even the fraction 
that is absorbed by vegetation and used in photosynthesis is 
ultimately given off again in the form of heat energy as vari-
ous consumers break down food. Similarly, 
if humans were to capture and obtain use-
ful work from solar energy, it would still 
ultimately be converted to heat and lost in 
accordance with the Second Law of Ther-
modynamics. The overall energy balance 
would not change.
Although solar energy is an abun-
dant source, it is also diffuse (widely scat-
tered), varying with the season, latitude, 
and atmospheric conditions. The main 
problem with using solar energy is one of 
taking a diffuse and intermittent source 
and concentrating it into an amount and 
form, such as fuel or electricity, that can 
be used to provide heat and run vehicles, 
 • Thirty-nine states now have some form of a renewable 
portfolio standard (RPS) or alternative energy portfolio 
standard (AEPS), which requires electric utilities to gen-
erate a certain amount of electricity from sources other 
than fossil fuels; for example, California must generate 
33% of its electricity from renewable sources by 2021.
 • Natural gas is becoming more available and can fill a 
“bridge energy” role to substitute for coal (because coal 
generates twice as much CO2 as natural gas per kW 
of electricity) and to work in tandem with renewable 
sources that are intermittent in their delivery, to smooth 
out gaps in electricity generation.
 • It may be possible to continue to use coal if, and only if, 
the CO2 generated in the coal power plant is captured 
from the waste stream and sequestered, known as car-
bon capture and sequestration (CCS). The technology 
is known, but the process adds a significant cost to the 
electricity generated.
 • It is possible to hold greenhouse gas emissions to a limit 
of 450 ppm CO2— if we stop building more fossil fuel 
infrastructure and allow the present infrastructure to live 
out normal lifespans. In other words, it is the future coal 
power plants and gasoline-powered automobile manu-
facturing plants that will commit the world to exceeding 
safe limits of greenhouse gas emissions.
We can now turn our attention to the different forms of 
renewable energy.
Figure 4 The solar-energy spectrum. 
Equal amounts of energy are found in the visible-light 
and the infrared regions of the spectrum. In the Sun,  
the nuclear fusion of hydrogen to form helium emits a 
spectrum of radiant energy that reaches Earth.
15
10
5
0
0.25
1
2
3
2.5
Wavelength (micrometers)
Energy emitted from sun (103 cal/cm2/min)
Visible
Infrared
Ultraviolet
Radiant
energy
Nuclear
fusion
Hydrogen
Helium
Renewable Energy
397

Renewable Energy
water from the tank descends into the collector (Fig. 6). The 
tank will usually have a source of auxiliary heat (electric or 
gas) in order to get the temperature to a desired level or to 
provide heat when solar energy is insufficient.
In temperate climates, where water in the system 
might freeze, the system may be adapted to include a heat-
exchange coil within the hot-water tank. Then antifreeze 
fluid is circulated between the collector and the tank. In the 
United States, approximately 2.5 million solar hot-water 
systems have been installed, but this is still only a small frac-
tion of the total number of hot-water heaters. The reason is 
the initial cost, which is five to 10 times as much as gas or 
electric heaters. However, over time, the solar system costs 
less to operate than an electric or a gas system. In China, 
more than 18 million households are getting their hot water 
from solar thermal systems; China leads the world in this 
application of solar energy.
Solar Space Heating
The same concept for heating water with the Sun can be 
applied to heat spaces. Flat-plate collectors such as those 
used in water heating can be used for space heating. Indeed, 
the collectors for space heating may even be less expensive, 
homemade devices, because it is necessary only to have 
air circulate through the collector box. Again, efficiency 
is gained if the collectors are mounted, to allow natural 
convection to circulate the heated air into the space to be 
heated (Fig. 7).
Building = Collector. The greatest efficiency in solar space 
heating, however, is gained by designing a building to act 
as its own collector. The basic principle is to have windows 
facing the Sun. In the winter, because of the Sun’s angle of 
incidence, sunlight can come in and heat the interior of the 
building (Fig. 8a). At night, insulated drapes or shades can 
be pulled down to trap the heat inside. The well-insulated 
 appliances, and other machinery. These problems involve 
the collection, conversion, and storage of solar energy. Also, 
in the final analysis, overcoming such hurdles must be cost 
effective. In the sections that follow, you will see how we 
can overcome or, even better, sidestep these three problems 
in various ways to meet our energy needs in a cost-effective 
manner.
Solar Heating of Water
Solar hot-water heating is already popular in warm, sunny 
climates. A solar collector for heating water consists of a 
thin, broad box with a glass or clear plastic top and a black 
bottom in which water tubes are embedded (Fig. 5). Such 
collectors are called flat-plate collectors. Faced 
toward the Sun, the black bottom gets hot as 
it absorbs sunlight—similar to how black pave-
ment heats up in sunlight—and the clear cover 
prevents the heat from escaping, as in a green-
house. Water circulating through the tubes 
is heated and conveyed to a tank, where it is 
stored.
In an active system, the heated water is 
moved by means of a pump. In a passive solar 
water-heating system, the system must be 
mounted so that the collector is lower than the 
tank. Thus, heated water from the collector rises 
by natural convection into the tank, while cooler 
Tubes through
which water
circulates
Sunlight
Heat
Black surface
Insulation
Glass or plastic window
Figure 5 The principle of a flat-plate solar collector. As sunlight 
is absorbed by a black surface, it is converted to heat. A clear glass or plastic 
window over the surface allows the sunlight to enter the collector, which traps 
the heat. Air or water is heated as it passes over and through tubes embedded in 
the black surface.
Figure 6 Solar water heaters. In nonfreezing 
climates, simple water-convection systems may suffice. In 
freezing climates, an antifreeze fluid is circulated. Solar heat is 
augmented by an auxiliary heat source in the hot-water tank.
Hot-water
tank
Water
circulates
by convection
Cold water in
Hot water out
Auxiliary heat
(electric or gas)
Collector
Element
Cool water
Hot water
398

Renewable Energy
When backup is needed, a woodstove or gas heater may 
be enough. In any case, the criticism concerning the need 
for backup heating misses the point: The objective of solar 
heating is to reduce our dependency on conventional fuels. 
Even if solar heating and improved insulation reduced the 
demand for conventional fuels by a mere 20%, that would 
still represent sustainable savings of 20% of the traditional 
fuel and its economic and environmental costs.
Solar Production of Electricity
Solar energy can also be used to produce electrical power, 
providing an alternative to coal and nuclear power. There are 
two distinct approaches: photovoltaic systems and concen-
trated solar power (CSP).
Photovoltaic Cells. A solar cell—more properly called 
a photovoltaic, or PV, cell—looks like a simple wafer of 
material with one wire attached to the top and one to the 
bottom (Fig. 9). As sunlight shines on the wafer, it puts out 
an amount of electrical current roughly equivalent to that 
emitted by a flashlight battery. Thus, PV cells collect light 
and convert it to electrical power in one step. The cells, 
 building, with appropriately made doors and windows, 
acts as its own best heat-storage unit. Beyond good insula-
tion, other systems for storing heat, such as tanks of water 
or masses of rocks, have not proved to be cost effective. 
Excessive heat load in the summer can be avoided by using 
an awning or overhang to shield the window from the high 
summer Sun (Fig. 8b).
Along with design, positioning, and improved insula-
tion, appropriate landscaping can contribute to the heating 
and cooling efficiency of both solar and nonsolar space-
heating designs, thereby conserving energy. In particular, 
deciduous trees or vines on the sunny side of a building can 
block much of the excessive summer heat while letting the 
desired winter sunlight pass through. An evergreen hedge 
on the shady side can provide protection from the cold.
Energy Stars. In almost any climate, a well-designed 
passive solar-energy building can reduce energy bills sub-
stantially, with an added construction cost of only 5–10%. 
Because about 25% of our primary energy is used for space 
and water heating, proper solar design, broadly adopted, 
would create enormous savings on oil, natural gas, and 
electrical power. In 2001, the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) extended its Energy Star Program to build-
ings and began awarding the Energy Star label to public and 
corporate edifices. Buildings awarded the label use at least 
40% less energy than others in their class and must meet 
a number of other criteria to qualify. By 2012, more than 
17,000 buildings had earned the label, representing more 
than 2.5 billion square feet of space—a major contribution 
to energy conservation.
A common criticism of solar heating is that a backup 
heating system is still required for periods of inclement 
weather. Good insulation is a major part of the answer 
to this criticism. People with well-insulated solar homes 
find that they have minimal need for backup heating. 
Figure 7 Passive hot-air solar heating. Many homeowners could save 
on fuel bills by adding homemade solar collectors like the one shown here. Air 
heated in the collector moves into the room by passive convection.
Warm air
Insulation
Cool air
Figure 8 Solar building siting. 
In contrast to utilizing expensive and complex active solar systems, solar heating 
can be achieved by suitable architecture and orientation of the home at little or 
no additional cost. (a) The fundamental feature is large, Sun-facing windows that 
permit sunlight to enter during the winter months. Insulating drapes or shades 
are drawn to hold in the heat when the Sun is not shining. (b) Suitable overhangs, 
awnings, and deciduous plantings prevent excessive heating in the summer.
Insulation
(a)
December 21
N
(b)
June 21
399

Renewable Energy
Cost. The cost of PV power (cents per kilowatt-hour) 
is the cost of the installed PV systems divided by the total 
amount of power they may be expected to produce over 
their lifetime (currently as low as 12 cents per kilowatt-
hour). This cost is quite comparable to that of other power 
alternatives (8–16 cents per kilowatt-hour for residential 
electricity in the United States). The first PV cells had a cost 
factor several hundred times that of electricity from con-
ventional power stations transmitted through the power 
grid, so those cells were used mainly in areas far from the 
grid. PV power had its first significant application in the 
1950s, in the solar panels of space satellites. This applica-
tion started the development cycle rolling. As more efficient 
cells and less expensive production techniques evolved, 
costs came down dramatically. In turn, applications, sales, 
and potential markets expanded, creating the incentive for 
further development. In response to this, it is the fastest-
growing energy technology industry in the world. In 2011, 
the industry shipped solar panels with a total capacity of 
24 GW; existing solar PV panels now have the capacity to 
turn sunlight into more than 70 GW of electricity (Fig. 10).
Inverters. The most complicated (and yet necessary)
component of a PV system is the inverter. The inverter 
(Fig. 11) acts as an interface between the solar PV modules 
and the electric grid or batteries. It must change the incom-
ing direct current (DC) from the PV modules to alternating 
measuring about four inches square, produce about one 
watt of power. Some 40 such cells can be linked to form a 
module that generates enough energy to light a lightbulb. 
Varying amounts of power can be produced by wiring 
modules together in panels.
How They Work.  The simple appearance of PV cells be-
lies a highly sophisticated level of science and technology. Each 
cell consists of two very thin layers of semiconductor material 
separated by a junction layer. The lower layer has atoms with 
single electrons in their outer orbital that are easily lost. The 
upper layer has atoms lacking electrons in their outer orbital; 
these atoms readily gain electrons. The kinetic energy of light 
photons striking the two-layer “sandwich” dislodges electrons 
from the lower layer, creating a current that can flow through 
a motor or some other electrical device and back to the upper 
side. Thus, with no moving parts, solar cells convert light en-
ergy directly to electrical power, with an efficiency of 15–20%.
Because they have no moving parts, solar cells do not 
wear out. However, deterioration due to exposure to the 
weather limits their life span to about 30 years. The major 
material used in PV cells is silicon, one of the most abundant 
elements on Earth, so there is little danger that the produc-
tion of PV cells will ever suffer because of limited resources. 
The cost of these cells lies mainly in their sophisticated de-
sign and construction.
Uses. PV cells are already in common use in pocket 
calculators, watches, and numerous toys. Panels of PV cells 
provide power for rural homes, irrigation pumps, traffic 
signals, radio transmitters, lighthouses, offshore oil-drilling 
platforms, Earth-orbiting satellites, and other installations 
that are distant from power lines. It is not hard to imagine a 
future in which every home and building has its own source 
of pollution-free, sustainable electrical power from an array 
of PV panels on the roof. Current installations in many coun-
tries and in some 43 states in the United States employ net 
metering, where the rooftop electrical output is subtracted 
from the customer’s use of power from the power grid.
Figure 9 Photovoltaic cell. Converting light to electrical energy, this cell 
provides enough energy to run the small electric motor needed to turn the fan 
blades.
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
0
25
35
45
55
65
15
5
2000
2005
2010 2011
1995
Gigawatts
SOLAR PV, EXISTING WORLD CAPACITY, 1995–2011
Year
Figure 10 The market for PV  panels. Global sales of PV panels have 
 increased dramatically, exceeding 70,000 MW by 2011. More than three-fourths 
of the PV  panels are connected to the electric grid. (Source: Renewables 2012 Global 
Status Report.)
400

Renewable Energy
ones under construction. In some cases, PV is getting the 
nod over Concentrated Solar Power, or CSP, facilities (dis-
cussed later), because it can be added in smaller increments, 
allowing limited transmission lines to handle the voltages.
However, the most promising future for PV power is 
in the installation of PV panels on rooftops, where a huge 
amount of unused space is readily available. California’s 
Edison International is busy installing 150 solar projects on 
warehouse and factory roofs; the company anticipates spend-
ing $875 million to provide 250 MW of electricity on com-
mercial rooftops. For residential use, utilities in many states 
have established programs that provide incentives to custom-
ers to install 2- to 4-kilowatt (kW) PV systems on their roofs. 
A 2 kW system provides about half of the annual energy 
needs of a residence, and in case the homeowner is generat-
ing more than needed, the utility buys the excess electricity 
at the retail rate. Even though the rooftop systems represent 
a loss in power purchases, the utilities benefit because they 
avoid the need to build expensive new power plants. A fed-
eral investment tax credit of 30% of the system cost was en-
acted in the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, 
providing incentives to homeowners to go solar. Sunny Cali-
fornia experienced a 47% increase in rooftop solar in 2010 
and passed the 1,000 MW (1 GW) mark in late 2011. The 
world leader in installed rooftop PV is  Germany, with more 
than 12 GW installed capacity.
New PV Technologies.  To compete with electricity 
from conventional sources, the cost of solar cells needs to be 
low. At least four new technologies may drive the cost even 
lower: (1) thin-film PV cells, in which cheap amorphous sili-
con or cadmium telluride is used instead of expensive silicon 
crystals, and the film can be applied as a coating on roof-
ing tiles or glass; (2) a 3-D silicon solar cell that captures up 
to 25% of the incoming light energy; (3) glass coated with 
light-absorbing dyes that transmit energy to solar cells on the 
edge of the glass, while allowing much of the light to pass 
through to conventional solar panels; (4) the flexible plastic 
polymer cells illustrated in Figure 1. All of these techniques 
are either in production or close to it.
current (AC) compatible with the electricity coming from the 
grid and/or the devices that will be powered by the PV sys-
tem. It must also act as a control, able to detect and respond 
to fluctuations in voltage or current on either DC or AC, and 
it must be robust enough to withstand the high temperatures 
of an attic (where rooftop PV systems are involved). An in-
verter for a rooftop system will cost several thousand dollars, 
but in most cases, these are also eligible for local and na-
tional subsidies. Like the cost of PV cells, the cost of inverters 
has also come down over time.
Utilities. The utility companies are moving toward 
large-scale PV installations. At the end of 2011, there were 
40 plants worldwide with capacities greater than 20 MW, 
with 31 more planned or under construction. The largest 
one in the United States is the 48 MW Copper Mountain 
Solar Facility in Nevada (Fig. 12), providing electricity for 
14,000 homes. The world’s largest solar PV power plant is 
in Canada—the Sarnia PV Power Plant, with a 97 MW ca-
pacity. This record won’t last long, as there are much larger 
Figure 11 PV system inverter. Inverter (on right) and controllers for a 
PV system at Channel Islands National Park, California. The inverter is a device 
that connects the PV panels of a rooftop system to the electric grid or devices 
powered by PV electricity. It converts the direct current coming from PV panels to 
alternating current and also acts as a control for the system.
Figure 12 PV power plant. The Copper Mountain Solar Facility in Nevada 
consists of 775,000 solar panels and has an installed capacity of 48 MW. It is the 
largest PV plant in the United States. The plant was built in 11 months at a cost of 
$141 million.
401

Renewable Energy
Concentrated Solar Power (CSP). If you have ever focused 
sunlight through a magnifying glass to burn a hole in a leaf, 
you have used CSP. Several technologies have been developed 
that convert solar energy into electricity by using reflectors 
(or concentrators) such as mirrors to focus concentrated sun-
light onto a receiver that transfers the heat to a conventional 
turbogenerator. These devices work well only in regions with 
abundant sunlight and plenty of space, and they are producing 
power in the U.S. Southwest and in Spain. A major drawback 
to this technology is the need for a lot of water to cool the 
steam generated. Nevertheless, CSP is growing rapidly, now at 
1.8 GW generating capacity globally, with a number of projects 
under construction. The two methods currently in the lead for 
CSP are the solar (or parabolic) trough and the power tower.
Solar Trough. One method that is proving to be cost 
effective is the solar-trough collector system, so named be-
cause the collectors are long, trough-shaped reflectors tilted 
toward the Sun (Fig. 2). The curvature of the trough is such 
that all of the sunlight hitting the collector is reflected onto 
a pipe running down the center of the system. Oil or some 
other heat-absorbing fluid circulating through the pipe is 
thus heated to very high temperatures. The heated fluid is 
passed through a heat exchanger to boil water and produce 
steam for driving a turbogenerator.
Nine solar-trough facilities in the Mojave Desert of 
 California have been connected to the Southern  California 
Edison utility grid since the early 1990s. Solar-trough is the 
most developed of CSP technologies, and most new CSP plants 
are solar-trough. Soon to be largest in the world, Solana, a 
new 250 MW solar trough plant, is under construction in the 
Arizona desert. One advantage of this technology is the ca-
pability of storing some of the thermal energy for release at 
night; the Solana plant will store energy for many hours.
Power Tower. A power tower is an array of Sun- tracking 
mirrors that focuses the sunlight falling on several acres of land 
onto a receiver mounted on a tower in the center of the area 
(Fig. 13). The receiver transfers the heat energy collected to a 
molten-salt liquid, which then flows either to a heat exchanger 
to drive a conventional turbogenerator or to a tank at the 
 bottom of the tower to store the heat for later use. Presently, 
the Sierra SunTower is the only power tower operating in the 
United States, generating 5 MW of electricity.
Spain has CSP projects under construction for some 1,300 
MW, both solar-trough and power tower systems. A royal de-
cree and government subsidies have paved the way for Spain to 
become a world leader in commercial CSP development (adding 
substantially to its rising investment in PV power plants).
The Future of Solar Energy
Solar electricity is growing at a phenomenal rate—the solar 
PV business is a $30 billion industry, and sales continue to 
grow exponentially (see Figure 10). The industry is hard-
pressed to keep up with current demand. Solar energy does 
have certain disadvantages, however. First, the available tech-
nologies are still more expensive than conventional energy 
sources, though solar sources are getting close to parity with 
conventional ones. Second, solar energy works only during 
the day, so it requires a backup energy source, a storage bat-
tery, or thermal storage for nighttime power. Also, the cli-
mate is not sunny enough to use solar energy in the winter 
in many parts of the world. Against these drawbacks should 
be weighed the hidden costs that are not included in the cost 
of power from traditional sources: air pollution, strip min-
ing, greenhouse gas emissions, and nuclear waste disposal, 
among others.
Matching Demand. The Sun provides power only during 
the day, but 70% of electrical demand occurs during day-
time hours, when industries, offices, and stores are in opera-
tion. Thus, considerable savings still can be achieved by using 
solar panels just for daytime needs and continuing to rely 
on conventional sources at night. In particular, the demand 
for air-conditioning, which, after refrigeration, is the second 
largest power consumer, is well matched to energy from PV 
cells. In the long run, the nighttime load might be carried by 
forms of indirect solar energy, such as wind power and hy-
dropower (discussed later in the chapter).
It is a fact that about 61% of our electrical power (54% 
worldwide) is currently generated by coal-burning and nu-
clear power plants. Therefore, the development of solar and 
wind electrical power can be seen as gradually reducing the 
need for coal and nuclear power. Unlike new nuclear or 
coal power plants, which take years to plan and build, solar 
or wind facilities can become operational within months 
of the decision to build them. The utility does not have 
to guess what power demands will be in 10 or 15 years. 
With solar or wind power, a utility can add capacity as it 
is needed, make relatively small investments at any given 
time, and have those investments start paying back almost 
immediately. Thus, this approach involves much less finan-
cial risk both for the utility and for its consumers.
One further advantage of solar and wind facilities is 
their relative invulnerability to terrorist attack compared 
with oil and gas pipelines and large power plants, especially 
Figure 13 Sierra SunTower. Sun-tracking mirrors are used to focus a 
broad area of sunlight onto a molten-salt receiver mounted on the two towers.  
The hot salt is stored or pumped through a steam generator, which drives a 
 conventional turbogenerator.
402

Renewable Energy
3 Indirect Solar Energy
Water, fire, and wind have provided energy for humans 
throughout history. Dams, firewood, windmills, and sails 
represent indirect solar energy because energy from the Sun 
is the driving force behind each. What is the potential for 
expanding these options from the past into major sources of 
sustainable energy for the future?
Hydropower
Early in technological history, it was discovered that the force 
of falling water could be used to turn paddle wheels, which 
in turn would drive machinery to grind grain, saw logs into 
lumber, and run simple machines. The modern culmination 
of this use of waterpower, or hydropower, is huge hydroelec-
tric dams, where water under high pressure flows through 
channels, driving turbogenerators (Fig. 14). The amount of 
power generated is proportional to both the height of the 
water behind the dam—that is what provides the pressure—
and the volume of water that flows through.
About 7.9% of the electrical power generated in the 
United States currently comes from hydroelectric dams, most 
of it from about 300 large dams concentrated in the North-
west and Southeast. Worldwide, hydroelectric dams have a 
generating capacity of 970 GW, with more very large projects 
in the construction or planning stage. Hydropower generates 
19% of electrical power throughout the world and is by far 
the most abundant form of renewable energy in use.
nuclear facilities. Further, renewables produce no hazardous 
wastes and are geographically dispersed.
Solar power has also proved suitable for meeting the 
needs of electrifying villages and towns in the developing 
world, where, because centralized power is unavailable, 
rural electrification projects based on PV cells are already 
beginning to spread throughout the land (see Sustainability, 
“Transfer of Energy Technology to the Developing World”). 
The cost of the alternative—putting roughly 1.4 billion peo-
ple who are still without electricity on the power grid (and 
thus requiring central power plants, high-voltage transmis-
sion lines, poles, wires, and  transformers)—is unimaginable.
Solar electric power has a bright future. Costs of solar 
PV systems are declining by about 5% per year, as efficien-
cies of PV cells improve and manufacturers achieve econo-
mies of scale with the rising demand. Homeowners are ready 
to spend $10,000 or more to install rooftop PV systems, es-
pecially when subsidies are now available from the federal 
government and many states. The technology is now ma-
ture, and many small installation companies are competing 
for home solar PV installations. Finally, the solar energy re-
source is huge in comparison with all of the finite fossil and 
nuclear fuel resources, which will last only a few generations 
at most. We need only exploit a small fraction of solar poten-
tial to meet all of our energy needs. Undoubtedly, the future 
planetary energy source is going to be solar-based.
Of course, solar power is only one of a number of renew-
able forms of energy. Some of these other sources are derived 
from solar energy and have been around for a long time.
SUSTaInaBIlITy
Transfer of Energy Technology to the 
Developing World
The nations of the 
industrialized North-
ern Hemisphere have 
achieved their level of 
development by using 
energy technologies based largely on fossil 
fuels (and, to a lesser extent, nuclear energy). 
These nations’ development took place during 
a time when fossil fuels were inexpensive. Only 
as those fuels became more expensive did the 
nations of the North begin to get serious about 
technologies that would make energy use more 
efficient. The specter of global climate change 
has brought a new perspective to the need to 
wean the industrialized North away from fossil 
fuel energy in the 21st century.
The same traditional fossil fuel–based tech-
nologies have been adopted by the developing 
nations of the Southern Hemisphere, except that 
these nations are lagging behind in their ability 
to implement the technology on a large scale. As 
discussed earlier in the chapter, however, the fos-
sil fuel–based energy pattern of the 20th century 
will have to be replaced largely with renewable-
energy systems in the 21st century. We have only 
one or two generations remaining for the domi-
nance of fossil fuel energy. If the United States 
and other developed nations are willing to play a 
significant role in helping the developing nations, 
it is questionable whether the same develop-
mental path the North took should be promoted. 
Instead, there is the opportunity to engage in 
some “leapfrogging” technology transfer: The 
North can put its development dollars into such 
technologies as photovoltaics, wind turbines, and 
efficient public transport systems for the cities.
The solar route is especially attractive for 
many of the climates in the developing world, 
where an estimated 1.4 billion people lack 
electricity. For example, more than 200,000 PV 
systems installed in Kenya over a 20-year period 
now provide power to 5% of the rural Kenyan 
population. The systems, with costs ranging from 
$300 to $1,500, are successfully marketed to 
people with incomes averaging less than $100 per 
month. Only the solar panels are imported; local 
companies provide the batteries and other system 
components. People use the energy for lighting, 
television, and radio. Annual sales in Kenya ex-
ceed 30,000 systems, a sign that the technology 
is in great demand and is fostering appropriate 
development in the area. Credit and financing 
extended to both companies and users have been 
key to this success. Some of the financing origi-
nates with development agencies from the North, 
but the majority is Kenyan. Building the infrastruc-
ture to market and service the PV systems has 
also been an essential part of the success story, 
and that can be accomplished by a relatively small 
number of organizations and individuals. These 
solar home systems are being added in many 
other developing countries, especially China, 
Bangladesh, India, Mexico, and Morocco.
T
i
e
a
d
403

Renewable Energy
 • Dams and the large reservoirs created behind them often 
displace rural populations. In the past 50 years, some 
40  million to 80 million people have been forced to 
move to accommodate the rising waters of reservoirs.
 • Dams impede or prevent the migration of fish, even 
when fish ladders are provided. Federal surveys show 
that fish habitats are suffering in the majority of the 
 nation’s rivers because of damming.
 • Because the flow of water is regulated according to the 
need for power, dams wreak havoc downstream. Water 
may go from near flood levels to virtual dryness and 
back to flood levels in a single day. Other ecological fac-
tors are also affected because sediments with nutrients 
settle in the reservoir, meaning that smaller-than-normal 
amounts reach the river’s mouth.
More Dams? Even if such trade-offs were not enough, 
thoughts of greatly expanding waterpower in the United 
States are nullified by the fact that few sites conducive to 
large dams remain. Already, 75,000 dams six feet high or 
more dot U.S. rivers, with an estimated 2 million smaller 
structures. As a result, only 2% of the nation’s rivers remain 
free flowing, and many of these are now protected by the 
Wild and Scenic Rivers Act of 1968, a law that effectively 
gives certain scenic rivers the status of national parks. The 
United States and most developed countries have already 
brought their hydropower to capacity, and the trend is in 
the direction of removing many of the dams that impede the 
natural flow of rivers.
Proposals for new dams outside of the United States 
are embroiled in controversy over whether the projected 
benefits justify the ecological and sociological trade-offs. 
For example, the 39-meter-high Nam Theun 2 Dam, a 
1,075 MW project on a tributary of the Mekong River in 
Laos, is expected to help that country begin a process of 
economic development. The project received final approval 
in 2005 from the World Bank and Asian Development Bank 
for guarantees and loans, and construction was completed 
in 2010. The project has displaced 6,200 people and has 
inundated 175 square miles (450 km2) of the Nakai Pla-
teau. In addition, it is basically being built to sell power 
to Thailand (only 75 MW are to be channeled to Laos at 
first). International Rivers (IR) is monitoring implementa-
tion of the project. Charges and countercharges have flown 
back and forth between the World Bank and IR concerning 
the impacts of the dam, especially on downstream commu-
nities; it is likely too soon to issue a verdict on the dam’s 
overall effects.
Another huge dam, completed in 2006, is the 
Three Gorges Dam on the Yangtze River in China  
The largest dam ever built (1.4 miles long), Three Gorges 
has displaced some 1.2 million people in order to generate 
22,000 MW of electricity and control the flood-prone river. 
Offsetting the human and economic costs is the fact that it 
would take more than a dozen large coal-fired power plants 
to produce the same amount of  electricity.
Trade-offs. Dams—in particular, the larger ones—are often 
controversial; they provide important benefits but also in-
volve some serious consequences. The most obvious advan-
tages are these:
 • Hydropower eliminates the cost and environmental ef-
fects of fossil fuels and nuclear power. Hydroelectric 
plants have longer lives than fuel-fired ones; some plants 
have been in service for 100 years.
 • The dams provide flood control on many rivers that 
have taken huge tolls in human lives, and they also pro-
vide irrigation water for agriculture. Some 40% of the 
world’s food is generated from the irrigation facilitated 
by the reservoirs behind dams.
 • Reservoirs behind the dams often provide recreational 
and tourist opportunities.
 • Dams can be employed in pumped-storage power 
plants; during the night, when electricity demand is 
low, the dam’s hydrogenerator pumps water up to an 
elevated reservoir through a tunnel. At times of high 
demand, the water is returned to the lower reservoir 
through the tunnel, where it spins turbines and gener-
ates electricity.
There are also some serious disadvantages, however:
 • The reservoir created behind the dam inevitably drowns 
farmland or wildlife habitats and perhaps towns or 
land of historical, archaeological, or cultural value. 
Glen Canyon Dam (on the border between Arizona and 
Utah), for example, drowned one of the world’s most 
spectacular canyons.
Figure 14 Hoover Dam. About 7.9% of the electrical power used in the 
United States in 2011 came from large hydroelectric dams such as this one on the 
Colorado River in Nevada.
404

Renewable Energy
prevent wind power from supplying at least 12% of the 
world’s electricity by 2020, with a generating capacity of 
1.2 thousand GW. In Denmark, which is hard pressed by 
a lack of fossil fuel energy, wind now supplies more than 
22% of the electricity.
China is the world leader in wind energy (65 GW), with 
the United States close behind (47 GW capacity in 2011). In 
the past five years, global wind power capacity has increased 
at a rate of 26% per year, to 239 GW at the start of 2012 
(Fig. 15). Wind is the second-largest component of renewable 
electricity in the world (behind hydropower), because it has 
become economically competitive with conventional energy 
sources, and countries all over the world are encouraging the 
installation of wind turbines by setting targets and providing 
subsidies.
A new feature of the American landscape is the “wind 
farm,” a collection of wind turbines in the same location 
whose power generation can occur while the land beneath 
the turbines can be used for traditional agricultural purposes. 
These are getting huge: The Horse Hollow Wind Farm near 
Abilene, Texas, consists of 421 turbines with a capacity of 
735 MW (Fig. 16); the Shepherd’s Flat Wind Farm in eastern 
Oregon is under construction and when finished will occupy 
30 square miles, house 338 turbines, have an installed capac-
ity of 845 MW, and be the world’s largest land-based wind 
farm (for a while!).
Design. Many different designs of wind machines have 
been proposed and tested, but the one that has proved most 
practical is the age-old concept of wind-driven propeller 
blades. The propeller shaft is geared directly to a generator. 
(A wind-driven generator is more properly called a wind 
turbine than a windmill.) As the reliability and efficiency of 
wind turbines have improved, the cost of wind-generated 
electricity has decreased. Wind farms are now producing 
A special World Commission on Dams, convened to 
examine the impacts and controversies surrounding large 
dams, reported its findings in 2000. The commission began 
with the assertion that dams are only a means to an end, 
the end being “the sustainable improvement of human wel-
fare.” The report found dams to be a mixed blessing, con-
cluding that large dams should be built only if no other 
options exist.3 Many guidelines were presented for assess-
ing costs and benefits of specific projects—in particular, for 
finding ways to incorporate participatory decision making, 
sustainability, and accountability in the planning and im-
plementation of projects. Following up the World Com-
mission work, the United Nations Environment Program 
(UNEP) established the Dams and Development Forum, 
which meets annually to participate in debate and deci-
sion making over dam development in various countries. 
Many more dams will be built, largely in the developing 
countries (especially China, Brazil, Turkey, and India), and 
these will certainly play a role in the energy future of those 
countries.
Wind Power
Once a standard farm fixture, windmills fell into disuse 
as transmission lines brought abundant lower-cost power 
from central generating plants. Not until the energy crisis 
and rising energy costs of the 1970s did wind begin to be 
seriously considered again as a potential source of sustain-
able energy. Growing rapidly, wind power now supplies 
around 2.5% of global electricity demand, but there are 
no technical, economic, or resource limitations that would 
3Dams and Development: A New Framework for Decision-Making. The Report of 
the World Commission on Dams. Earthscan Publications. 2000.
Global cumulative capacity (GW)
2010
Year
0
50
100
150
200
250
194.4
2011
2008
2009
2006
2007
2004
2005
2002
2003
2000
2001
1998
1999
1996
1997
239.0
158.7
120.3
93.8
74.1
59
47.6
39.4
31.1
23.9
17.4
13.6
10.2
7.6
6.1
Figure 15 Global development 
of wind energy. As the cost of wind 
 energy has dropped to the level of being very 
competitive with conventional energy sources, 
wind turbine capacity has risen dramatically. 
(Source: Data from Global Wind Energy Council.)
405

Renewable Energy
ity that is emission free; in fact, the 43,000 MW of new wind 
turbines installed in 2011 displaced 125 million tons of carbon 
dioxide, or emissions from 65 coal-fired power plants.
Wind power and hydropower are two forms of indirect 
solar energy; another highly important form is biomass energy.
Biomass Energy
Burning firewood for heat is the oldest form of energy that 
humans have used throughout history. However, there is 
nothing like a new name to put life into an old concept. 
Thus, “burning firewood” has become “utilizing bio-
mass energy.” Biomass energy means energy derived from 
present-day photosynthesis. As Figure 3 indicates, biomass 
energy leads hydropower in renewable-energy production 
in the United States. (Most uses of biomass energy are for 
heat.)
In addition to burning wood in a stove, major means of 
producing biomass energy include burning municipal waste-
paper and other organic waste, generating methane from the 
anaerobic digestion of manure and sewage sludges, running 
power plants on wastes from timber operations, and produc-
ing alcohol from fermenting grains and other starchy materials.
Burning Firewood. Wherever forests are ample relative 
to the human population, firewood—or fuelwood, as it is 
called—can be a sustainable energy resource; and, indeed, 
wood has been a main energy resource over much of human 
history. Fuelwood is the primary source of energy for heating 
and cooking for some 2.6 billion people, amounting to about 
9% of total energy use from all sources.
In the United States, woodstoves have enjoyed a tre-
mendous resurgence in recent years: About 5 million homes 
rely entirely on wood for heating, and another 20 million 
use wood for some heating. The most recent development 
in woodstoves is the pellet stove, a device that burns com-
pressed wood pellets made from wood wastes (Fig. 17). The 
pollution-free, sustainable power for around five cents per 
kilowatt-hour, a rate that is competitive with the rates of 
traditional sources. Moreover, the amount of wind that can 
be tapped is immense. The American Wind Energy Asso-
ciation calculates that wind farms located throughout the  
Midwest could meet the electrical needs of the entire coun-
try, while the land beneath the turbines could still be used for 
farming. Hundreds of new turbines are sprouting from mid-
western farms, and the farmers are paid royalties ($3,000 
to $5,000 per turbine per year) for leasing their land to 
wind developers. The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is 
promoting a scenario where wind energy will provide 20% 
of U.S. electricity needs by 2030—an ambitious, but by no 
means impossible, target.
Drawbacks. Still, wind power does have some drawbacks. 
First, it is an intermittent source, so problems of backup or 
storage must be considered. Second is an aesthetic consid-
eration: One or two wind turbines can be charming, but a 
landscape covered with them can be visually unappealing 
(to some). Third, wind turbines can be a hazard to birds and 
bats. Locating wind farms on migratory routes or near criti-
cal habitats for endangered species such as condors could 
be a problem for soaring birds in particular. Mortality from 
wind turbines may be upward of 40,000 per year, but this 
number pales in comparison to the hundreds of millions of 
birds killed annually by cats, automotive traffic, and glass 
windows.
As discussed earlier, plans for offshore wind farms are 
putting a new spin on wind energy. Denmark already has many 
offshore turbines, as do the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, 
and Sweden. Belgium, France, and Germany are also in the 
development stage. The primary lure of offshore wind is the 
dependability and strength of the maritime winds. Siting is per-
haps easier, too, as the turbines will be far enough offshore to 
have much less of a visual impact than onshore sites and land 
does not have to be purchased. Whether offshore or onshore, 
the global drive to install wind power is generating electric-
Figure 16 Horse Hollow Wind Farm. Located near Abilene, Texas, this 
wind farm consists of 421 turbines with a capacity of 735 MW.
Figure 17 Pellet stove. Pellet stoves use pelletized wood waste to achieve 
an efficient burn that requires much less care than burns from conventional 
woodstoves.
406

Renewable Energy
4  Renewable Energy for 
Transportation
Declining oil reserves and the enormous impact of trans-
portation’s demands for oil on our economy and on global 
climate suggest that the most critical need for a sustainable 
energy future is a new way to fuel our vehicles. Renewable 
energy is already answering a small but growing part of this 
need in the form of biofuels and may have the answer for the 
long term in the form of hydrogen and fuel cells.
Biofuels
Complex organic matter (primarily plants, but also animal 
wastes) can be processed to make fuels for vehicles. Cur-
rently, two fuels are seeing rapid expansion globally: ethyl al-
cohol (ethanol) and biodiesel. High oil prices, strong farmer 
support, government subsidies, and environmental concerns 
have led to a major expansion of global ethanol and biodie-
sel production since 2000. Although these two biofuels cur-
rently provide only 2.7% of global transportation fuels, this 
is just the beginning, as new technologies and government 
support promise to make biofuels a major competitor for 
fossil fuels. The current sources of biofuels are agricultural 
and food commodities.
Ethanol. Ethanol is produced by the fermentation of 
starches or sugars. The usual starting material is corn, sug-
arcane, sugar beets, or other grains. Fermentation is the 
process used in the production of alcoholic beverages. The 
only new part of the concept is that, instead of drinking the 
brew, we distill it and put it in our cars. However, production 
costs make ethanol more expensive than gasoline unless oil 
sells for more than $55 a barrel. To stimulate the industry in 
the United States, federal tax credits have been extended to 
pellets are loaded into a hopper (controlled by computer 
chips) that feeds fuel when it is needed. The stove requires 
very little attention and burns efficiently, relying on one fan 
to draw air into it and another fan to distribute heated air to 
the room.
Fuelwood Crisis? Two patterns of use determine how for-
est resources will be exploited: consumptive use and produc-
tive use. Most fuelwood use in developing countries fits the 
consumptive pattern: People simply forage for their daily 
needs in local woodlands and forests. However, gathering 
wood, converting wood into charcoal, and selling the wood 
products in urban areas translates into important productive 
use activities for many in developing countries. All these ac-
tivities have the potential to degrade local forests and wood-
lands. There was serious concern in the later decades of the 
20th century about deforestation due to wood gathering, but 
though there are local shortages, it appears that global use 
of fuelwood peaked in the late 1990s and is now declining. 
As development progresses, people have more disposable in-
come and shift up the “energy ladder” from wood to char-
coal to fossil fuels. The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
judged that fuelwood demand has not become a significant 
cause of deforestation, though there are local areas of con-
cern. This could change if the cost of fossil fuels continues 
to rise.
Burning Wastes.  Many sawmills and woodworking 
companies are now burning wood wastes, and a number of 
sugar refineries are burning cane wastes to supply all or most 
of their power. In Virginia, three 63 MW coal-fired power 
plants are being converted to biomass power, primarily wood 
waste from timber operations. Power from these sources may 
not meet more than a small percentage of a country’s total 
electrical needs, but it represents a productive and relatively 
inexpensive way to dispose of biological wastes as well as to 
prevent more fossil fuel combustion.
Producing Methane. The anaerobic digestion of sew-
age sludge yields biogas, which is two-thirds methane, 
plus a nutrient-rich treated sludge that is a good organic 
fertilizer. Animal manure can be digested likewise. When 
the disposal of manure, the production of energy, and the 
creation of fertilizer can be combined in an efficient cycle, 
great economic benefit can be achieved. In China and India, 
millions of small farmers maintain a simple digester in 
the form of an underground brick masonry fermentation 
chamber with a fixed dome on top for storing gas (Fig. 18). 
Agricultural wastes, such as pig manure and cattle dung, are 
put into the chamber and diluted 1:1 with water, and the 
anaerobic digestion produces the biogas, which is used for 
cooking, heating, and lighting. The residue slurry makes an 
excellent fertilizer. The concept has been expanded through-
out the developing world to provide an alternative to fuel-
wood. Currently, some 25 million households employ these 
devices. Both India and China provide subsidies for these 
family-scale biogas plants.
Figure 18 Biogas power. Animal wastes are introduced to this unit in 
rural India and mixed with water. The wastes then decompose under anaerobic 
conditions, producing biogas.
407

Renewable Energy
With the use of enzymes to break down the cellulose to 
sugars, demonstration facilities have shown that cellulosic 
feedstock technology can be a cheaper and more energy- 
efficient process than corn-based production. The technology 
is challenging, however, and the output of 6.6 million gallons 
in 2011 is way below the RFS target of 250 million gallons. 
However, several industrial-scale cellulosic plants are under 
construction, and production should increase dramatically 
once these are on line. Recall that the RFS requires that all of 
the increase in the target biofuel after 2015 be derived from 
second-generation biofuel sources. An available tax credit of 
$1.01 per gallon of cellulosic biofuel is moving this industry 
forward rapidly.
Brazil has also invested heavily in fuel ethanol; there 
the feedstock is sugarcane, which is much less costly to farm 
than corn. Brazil used to lead the world in ethanol produc-
tion but has been surpassed by the United States. For years, 
ethanol has been added at a level of 25% of fuel in Brazil, 
but recently, the country mandated the production of flex-
fuel vehicles that can run on any mixture of alcohol and 
gasoline. With the lower production costs and the capacity 
to shift all sugarcane acreage to ethanol production, Brazil is 
on the road to meeting all of its domestic fuel demand with 
biofuels.
Biodiesel. Imagine a truck exhaust that smells like french 
fries. That is not only an improvement over diesel exhaust, 
but also an indication that the truck is burning biodiesel, 
made largely from soybean oil. Sales have reached 800 mil-
lion gallons of the fuel, which is very competitive with petro-
leum diesel fuel because of a hefty $1-per-gallon production 
tax credit. Still, this is only 1% of diesel fuel transportation 
use in the United States. Standard biodiesel is a 20% mix of 
soybean oil in normal diesel fuel, but practically any natural 
oil or fat can be mixed with an alcohol to make the fuel; one 
excellent source is recycled vegetable oil from frying. How-
ever, like corn-based ethanol, there are competing uses for 
the vegetable oils.
There are some offbeat technologies surfacing to pro-
duce biodiesel, such as the factory in Missouri that takes in 
 biofuels, which make them even more competitive. Gasohol, 
10% ethanol and 90% gasoline, is now marketed in most 
parts of the country.
Farm Products.  In 2011, 13.9 billion gallons (334 mil-
lion barrels) of ethanol for fuel, the equivalent of 221 million 
barrels of oil, were produced in the United States (ethanol 
contains about two-thirds the energy of regular gasoline, gal-
lon for gallon). One-third of the nation’s corn crop is dedi-
cated to this use; however, an ethanol factory also produces 
corn oil and livestock feed. A tax credit of 45 cents a gallon 
helps ethanol compete with gasoline, and a renewable fuel 
standard (or RFS, which requires a minimum volume of re-
newable fuel in gasoline) mandated a level of 9 billion gal-
lons of renewable fuel in 2008 (all corn-based ethanol), to 
rise to a limit of 15 billion gallons of corn-based ethanol by 
2015. The RFS target rises to 36 billion gallons in 2022, but 
the increase beyond 2015 must be met by using sources other 
than corn.
Can we expect ethanol production from corn to make 
serious inroads on the oil import and greenhouse gas emis-
sions problems? Currently, biofuels represent about 8% of 
U.S. fuel consumption. This could rise to 20% if the coun-
try’s entire corn crop were devoted to ethanol production—
an impossible assumption, given the importance of corn for 
animal feed and export. With some 84 million acres devoted 
to corn harvest in the United States, there is little suitable 
farmland for significant expansion. There are serious con-
cerns that biofuel production has contributed significantly to 
recent rising prices of food grain, diverting corn from hungry 
people to ethanol production.
Another issue is the energy efficiency of corn-based eth-
anol. For corn-based ethanol, fossil fuel energy is required 
to produce the corn (fertilizer, pesticides, farm machinery), 
to transport it, and to operate the ethanol plant. A recent 
 analysis4 has calculated that using ethanol instead of gaso-
line reduces greenhouse gas emissions, mile for mile, by 
only 12–18%. However, some biofuel critics argue that if 
new land is cleared of its forests or grasslands, the carbon 
emissions from the land-use change should be added to the 
debit from fossil fuel greenhouse gas emissions. When this 
is done, corn-based ethanol is a net loser in its impact on 
climate change. Thus, it could be reasoned that the primary 
strategy in using corn-based ethanol is to reduce our reli-
ance on imported oil.
Second-Generation Biofuel. A more likely long-run 
technology for producing ethanol is the use of cellulosic 
feedstocks such as agricultural crop residues, grasses (such 
as switchgrass), logging residues, fast-growing trees, and 
fuelwoods from forests. Ethanol produced this way is called 
second-generation biofuel (current starch-based processes 
produce first-generation biofuel). One crop with exceptional 
potential is Miscanthus (Fig. 19), a giant perennial grass that 
can be grown in poor soils and that outproduces corn and 
other grasses.
Figure 19 Miscanthus x giganteus. This hardy perennial grass grows 
to a height of four meters and is a prime candidate for a second-generation cel-
lulosic biofuel.
4Earley, Jane, and Alice McKeown. Red, White and Green: Transforming U.S. 
Biofuels. Worldwatch Report 180. Worldwatch Institute, Washington, DC. 2009.
408

Renewable Energy
sachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) described a proc-
ess that employs a water-oxidizing electrolyzer catalyst made 
from cobalt and a heavy metal alloy, all common chemicals.5 
The process uses light energy captured by a silicon solar cell 
and generates hydrogen and oxygen in either a wired or a 
wireless cell. It operates in neutral water and ambient tem-
perature and pressure and achieves a solar-to-fuels efficiency 
of 4.7% (wired) and 2.5% (wireless). This may be the key 
step needed to get to that holy grail.
Electrolysis. The second approach is simply to pass an 
electrical current through water and cause the water mole-
cules to dissociate. Hydrogen bubbles come off at the nega-
tive electrode (the cathode), while oxygen bubbles come off 
at the positive electrode (the anode). (You can demonstrate 
this process for yourself with a battery, some wire, and a dish 
of water. A small amount of salt placed in the water will fa-
cilitate the conduction of electricity and the release of hydro-
gen.) The hydrogen gas is collected, compressed, and stored 
in cylinders, which can then be transported or incorporated 
into a vehicle’s chassis. One important drawback to this tech-
nology is that it is difficult to store enough hydrogen in a 
vehicle to allow it to operate over long distances. Also, com-
pressing the hydrogen requires energy, thus reducing the en-
ergy efficiency involved. As an alternative, the hydrogen can 
be combined with metal hydrides, which can absorb the gas 
and release it when needed; but finding a hydride that is not 
too heavy has been a challenge. Another pathway that holds 
promise is to convert the hydrogen into liquid formic acid 
(HCOOH) by combining it with carbon dioxide. The hydro-
gen is then released by use of a catalyst.
Solar Energy to Hydrogen.  A rather elaborate plan 
has been suggested for taking solar energy–produced hy-
drogen for vehicles to its logical conclusion. The plan would 
start by building arrays of solar-trough or photovoltaic gen-
erating facilities in the deserts of the southwestern United 
States, where land is cheap and sunlight plentiful. The electri-
cal power produced by these methods would then be used 
to produce hydrogen gas by electrolysis. The most efficient 
way to move the hydrogen is through underground pipe-
lines; hundreds of miles of such pipelines already exist where 
hydrogen is transported for use in chemical industries. Al-
though this would be an expensive part of a hydrogen infra-
structure, the technology for it is already well known.
Model U.  The Ford Motor Company unveiled in the 
United States a “concept car” it has dubbed the Model U. The 
Model U sports a 2.3-liter internal combustion engine that 
runs on hydrogen and is equipped with a hybrid electric drive. 
The car uses four 10,000 psi tanks to store hydrogen, enough 
to range 300 miles before a fill-up. And there’s the problem: 
Before such cars can become feasible, there must be a hydro-
gen-fueling infrastructure. Once that infrastructure is in place, 
cars like the Model U would likely be replaced by a com-
pletely new way of moving a vehicle: by means of fuel cells.
truckloads of turkey wastes from a Butterball turkey-process-
ing plant and turns them into biofuels. The patented process 
belongs to Changing World Technologies, and its founder, 
Brian Appel, says that it can handle almost any organic waste 
imaginable and turn it into useful oil. Currently, the Missouri 
plant turns a profit, converting 250 tons of turkey waste per 
day into 20,000 gallons of oil and also selling a fertilizer 
product from the rendered wastes. In another technology, 
genetic engineering is being applied to algae to induce them 
to produce oils and complex alcohols. Some serious money 
is being invested in these enterprises, and commercial-scale 
production is only a few years away.
Hydrogen: Highway to the Future? Over the past dec-
ade, there has been increasing interest in powering cars with 
hydrogen. Conventional cars with internal combustion en-
gines can be adapted to run on hydrogen gas in the same 
manner as they can be adapted to run on natural gas. (Hy-
drogen is not really a fuel, but an energy carrier, like electric-
ity; it must be generated using some other energy source.) 
Neither carbon dioxide nor hydrocarbon pollutants are 
produced during the burning of hydrogen. Indeed, the only 
major by-product of H2 combustion is water vapor:
2H2 1 O2 
 2H2O 1 energy
(Some nitrogen oxides will be produced because the burning 
still uses air, which is nearly four-fifths nitrogen.)
A Good Idea, But . . . If hydrogen gas is so great, why 
aren’t we using it? The answer is that there is virtually no 
hydrogen gas on Earth. Any hydrogen gas in the atmosphere 
has long since been ignited by lightning and burned to form 
water. And although many bacteria in the soil produce hy-
drogen in fermentation reactions, other bacteria are quick to 
use the hydrogen because it is an excellent source of energy. 
Thus, there are abundant amounts of the element hydro-
gen, but it is all combined with oxygen in the form of water 
(H2O) or other compounds.
Although hydrogen can be extracted from water via 
electrolysis (the reverse of the preceding reaction), electrol-
ysis requires an input of energy. Hydrogen can also be de-
rived chemically from hydrocarbon fuels such as methane, 
petroleum oil, and methyl alcohol, but these processes are 
also energy losers; that is, more energy is put into the proc-
ess than is contained in the hydrogen. Moreover, because 
these compounds contain carbon, it would be better to use 
them directly than to obtain hydrogen from them and use it. 
Therefore, the use of hydrogen as a truly clean energy car-
rier must await an energy source that is itself suitably cheap, 
abundant, and nonpolluting—like solar energy.
Plants Do It.  The “holy grail” of research and even-
tual commercialization is to accomplish what plant cells do: 
produce fuel from water, using solar energy. To date, two 
ways have been proposed for mimicking this process. The 
first is to employ a catalyst to do what the photosynthetic 
pathway does. Two elements are required: (1) a collector that 
converts photons into electrical energy (electrons), and (2) an 
electrolyzer that uses the electron energy into split water to 
hydrogen and oxygen. Recently, researchers from the Mas-
5Reece, Steven Y. et al. “Wireless Solar Water Splitting Using Silicon-Based Semicon-
ductors and Earth-Abundant Catalysts.” Science 334: 645–648. November 4, 2011.
409

Renewable Energy
than conventional engines do, energy is transferred more ef-
ficiently from the hydrogen to the vehicle—at a rate of 45–
60% versus the 20% for current combustion-engine vehicles. 
To power a vehicle, hundreds of fuel cells are combined 
into a fuel-cell stack. The vehicle must also include a hydro-
gen storage device, a cooling system (fuel cells also gener-
ate heat), and a device to force oxygen into the fuel cells. 
Fuel cells are now powering 150 buses in many cities in the 
Fuel Cells. An alternative to burning hydrogen in conven-
tional internal combustion engines uses hydrogen in fuel cells 
to produce electricity and power the vehicle with an elec-
tric motor. Fuel cells are devices in which hydrogen or some 
other fuel is chemically combined with oxygen in a manner 
that produces an electrical potential rather than initiating 
burning (Fig. 20a). Emissions from fuel cells consist solely of 
water and heat. Because fuel cells create much less waste heat 
Cathode
Anode
e−
+
−
O2
(Oxygen)
H2O
(Water)
Platinum catalyst electrodes
H2
(Hydrogen)
+
e−
+
H2O
H2O
Proton
exchange
membrane
H2
H +
H +
H +
e−
+
e−
+
H2
H +
H +
H +
e−
+
e−
+
H2
H +
H +
H +
e−
+
e−
+
H2
H +
H +
H +
O2
O2
O2
O2
Electric
Motor
Work
(a)
(b)
Figure 20 Hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell. (a) Hydrogen gas flows 
into the cell and meets a catalytic electrode, where electrons are stripped 
from the hydrogen, leaving protons (hydrogen ions) behind. The protons 
diffuse through a proton exchange membrane, while electrons flow from 
the anode to the motor. As the electrons then flow from the motor to the 
cathode of the fuel cell, they combine with the protons and oxygen to 
produce water. Thus, the chemical reaction pulls electrons through the 
circuit, producing electricity that runs the motor. Hydrogen is continuously 
supplied from an external tank, oxygen is drawn from the air, and the 
only by-product is water. (b) Powered by a compact fuel cell stack, the 
Honda FCX Clarity has a range of 270 miles on a charge of hydrogen (4 
kg), delivering the equivalent of 68 miles per gallon. The vehicle also has a 
battery for extra assist, similar to the battery in today’s hybrid gas-electric 
vehicles. It will be available for lease at $600 per month.
410

Renewable Energy
United States and around the world. The fuel-cell stack de-
velops more than 200 kW of power, from hydrogen in tanks 
mounted on the roof of the bus.
“Concept” vehicles operating on fuel cells have been de-
veloped by all the major car manufacturers. Honda, however, 
is the first manufacturer to commit to a dedicated fuel-cell 
vehicle assembly line. The Honda FCX Clarity (Fig. 20b) is 
rolling off the assembly lines, but at a pace of several dozen 
a year, it will be a long time before it makes an impact on the 
market. The Clarity is available for lease ($600 a month!) in 
California regions that are supported by hydrogen refueling 
stations.
If a hydrogen infrastructure is put in place and vehicles 
powered by fuel cells are available, we will have entered a hy-
drogen economy—one in which hydrogen becomes a major 
energy carrier. With solar- and wind-powered electricity also 
in place, we would no longer be tied to nonrenewable, pol-
luting energy sources and would have made the transition 
to a sustainable-energy system. Still, the obstacles in the way 
of the hydrogen economy are formidable, and many believe 
it will be decades before it even has a chance of happening. 
Global climate concerns and the costs of importing oil con-
vey an urgency to resolving this issue; reducing our use of 
oil in the near term is crucial, and many believe that the best 
pathway is greater use of hybrid vehicles and other technolo-
gies already available.
5  additional Renewable-Energy 
Options
Aside from water, wind, biomass, and hydrogen energy, there 
are other renewable-energy options that have been developed 
or are in the concept stage.
Geothermal Energy
In various locations in the world, such as the northwestern 
corner of Wyoming (Yellowstone National Park), there are 
springs that yield hot, almost boiling, water. Natural steam 
vents and other thermal features are also found in such areas. 
They occur where the hot, molten rock of Earth’s interior 
is close enough to the surface to heat groundwater, par-
ticularly in volcanic regions. Using such naturally heated 
water or steam to heat buildings or drive turbogenerators 
is the basis of geothermal energy. In 2011, geothermal en-
ergy had more than 11,200 MW of electrical power capacity 
(equivalent to the output of 11 large nuclear or coal-fired 
power stations), in countries as diverse as Nicaragua, the  
Philippines, Kenya, Iceland, and New Zealand. Today, the 
largest single facility is in the United States at a location known 
as The Geysers, 70 miles (110 km) north of San Francisco  
(Fig. 21). With more than 3,000 MW from geothermal energy, 
the United States is the world leader in the use of this energy 
source; new projects in the development stage will increase 
this to more than 4,500 MW. As impressive as this applica-
tion of geothermal energy is, nearly double the amount is 
being used to directly heat homes and buildings, largely in 
Japan and China.
A recent study6 by MIT suggested that the United 
States employ an emerging technology called enhanced ge-
othermal systems (EGS). EGS involves drilling holes several 
miles deep into granite that holds temperatures of 400 de-
grees or more and injecting water under pressure into one 
hole (where it absorbs heat from the rock) and, as steam, 
flows up another shaft to a power plant (where it gener-
ates electricity). Such plants already exist in Australia, Eu-
rope, and Japan. This underground heat is widespread in 
the United States, unlike the present limited geothermal 
sources. The MIT team proposed a $1 billion investment 
to exploit the EGS potential, predicting that by 2050 some 
100 gigawatts (GW) of electrical power could be devel-
oped in this way.
Heat Pumps. A less spectacular, but far more abundant, 
energy source than the large geothermal power plants ex-
ists anywhere pipes can be drilled into the Earth. Because the 
ground temperature below six feet or so remains constant, 
the Earth can be used as part of a heat exchange system that 
extracts heat in the winter and uses the ground as a heat sink 
in the summer. Thus, the system can be used for heating and 
cooling and does away with the need for separate furnace 
and air-conditioning systems. As Figure 22 shows, a geother-
mal heat pump (GHP) system involves loops of buried pipes 
filled with an antifreeze solution or a refrigerant, circulated 
by a pump connected to the air handler (a box containing 
a blower and a filter). The blower moves house air through 
the heat pump and distributes it throughout the house via 
ductwork. In most cases, the up-front costs of the heat pump 
system are repaid in six to eight years, and then the savings 
really begin.
Figure 21 Geothermal energy. One of the 11 geothermal units oper-
ated by the Pacific Gas & Electric Company at The Geysers in Sonoma and Lake 
Counties, California. California geothermal energy produces 1,800 MW of power, 
roughly 4.3% of California’s electricity needs.
6Tester, Jefferson et al. The Future of Geothermal Energy: Impact of Enhanced 
Geothermal Systems (EGS) on the United States in the 21st Century. Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology and the Department of Energy. 2006.
411

Renewable Energy
Other techniques are being explored that harness the 
currents that flow with the tides. For example, in 2006, Ver-
dant Power began a project to harness the tidal energy of the 
East River in New York City. The project has passed its first 
demonstration phase, connecting six turbines to local electric 
customers. Verdant plans to install 30 turbines that will con-
nect to the grid and generate 1 MW of power. San Francisco 
is eyeing a similar scheme to tap the energy of the 400 bil-
lion gallons of water that flow under the Golden Gate Bridge 
with every tide.
Standing on the shore of any ocean, an observer would 
have to be impressed with the energy arriving with each 
wave, generated by offshore winds. It might be possible to 
harness some of this energy, but the technological challenge 
is daunting. The ideal location is one that receives the wave’s 
force before it hits the shoaling seafloor, is close enough to 
shore to facilitate hookup with transmission cables, and is 
deep enough so that the equipment will not crash on the sea-
floor during storm turbulence. There are a number of pro-
posed mechanisms for capturing wave energy, and it is fair 
to say that this technology is in the early research-and-devel-
opment stage. The U.S. DOE is supporting research on ocean 
energy on a 50% cost-share basis.
Ocean Thermal-Energy Conversion
Over much of the world’s oceans, a thermal gradient of 
about 20°C (36°F) exists between surface water heated by 
the Sun and the colder deep water. Ocean thermal-energy 
conversion (OTEC) is the name of an experimental technol-
ogy that uses this temperature difference to produce power. 
The technology involves using the warm surface water to 
heat and vaporize a low-boiling-point liquid such as ammo-
nia. The increased pressure of the vaporized ammonia would 
drive turbogenerators. The ammonia vapor leaving the tur-
bines would then be recondensed by cold water pumped up 
from as much as 300 feet (100 m) deep and returned to the 
start of the cycle.
Various studies indicate that OTEC power plants show 
little economic promise—unless, perhaps, they can be cou-
pled with other, cost-effective operations. For example, in 
Hawaii, a shore-based OTEC plant uses the cold, nutrient-
rich water pumped from the ocean bottom to cool build-
ings and supply nutrients for vegetables in an aquaculture 
operation, in addition to cooling the condensers in the power 
cycle. Even so, interest in duplicating such operations is mini-
mal at present.
6  Policies for Renewable Energy
We have examined our planet’s energy resources, require-
ments, and management options. The global issues are clear: 
Fossil fuels, especially oil and natural gas, will not last long 
at the current (and increasing) rate at which they are being 
consumed. Even more important, every use of fossil fuels 
produces unhealthy pollutants and increases the atmospheric 
Four elementary schools in Lincoln, Nebraska, installed 
GHP systems for their heating and cooling. Their energy 
cost savings were 57% compared with the cost of conven-
tional heating and cooling systems installed in two similar 
schools. Taxpayers will save an estimated $3.8 million over 
the next 20 years with the GHP systems. According to the 
EPA, GHP systems are by far the most cost-effective, energy-
saving systems available. Although they are significantly 
more expensive to install than conventional heating and air-
conditioning systems, they are trouble-free and save money 
over the long run. New heat pump installations in the United 
States are growing rapidly, with more than 1 million in  
operation by 2010.
Tidal and Wave Power
A phenomenal amount of energy is inherent in the twice-
daily rise and fall of the ocean tides, brought about by the 
gravitational pull of the Moon and the Sun. Many imagina-
tive schemes have been proposed for capturing this limitless, 
pollution-free source of energy. The most straightforward 
idea is the tidal barrage, in which a dam is built across the 
mouth of a bay and turbines are mounted in the structure. 
The incoming tide flowing through the turbines would gen-
erate power. As the tide shifted, the blades would be reversed 
so that the outflowing water would continue to generate 
power.
In about 30 locations in the world, the shoreline topog-
raphy generates tides high enough—20 feet (6 m) or more—
for this kind of use. Large tidal power plants already exist in 
two of those places: France and Canada. The only suitable 
location in North America is the Bay of Fundy, where the 
Annapolis Tidal Generating Station has operated since 1984, 
at 20 MW capacity. Thus, this application of tidal power has 
potential only in certain localities, and even there, it would 
not be without adverse environmental impacts. The barrage 
would trap sediments, impede the migration of fish and other 
organisms, prevent navigation, alter the circulation and mix-
ing of saltwater and freshwater in estuaries, and perhaps 
have other, unforeseen ecological effects.
Air handler, with 
indoor coil and fan 
connected to air 
ducts
Heat exchange 
pipes
Figure 22 Geothermal heat pump system. The pipes buried under-
ground facilitate heat exchange between the house and the Earth. This system 
can either cool or heat a house and can be installed almost anywhere, though at 
a higher initial cost than a conventional heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning 
system.
412

Renewable Energy
 • Continued funding for research and development on re-
newable energy, including major funding increases for 
solar energy and biomass programs.
 • Extended the production tax credit for electricity gen-
erated with wind, hydropower, geothermal, and bio-
mass energy.
 • Provided investment tax credits for geothermal heat 
pumps, solar water heating, biofuel, and PV systems.
 • Contained provisions aimed at enabling geother-
mal energy to compete with fossil fuels in generating 
 electricity.
With their focus on energy conservation and efficiency, 
demand-side provisions enacted into law:
 • Raised the Corporate Average Fuel Economy stand-
ards for the combined fleet of cars and light trucks 
gradually, to meet a target of 38 miles per gallon for 
cars and 28 miles per gallon for light trucks by model 
year 2016.
 • Extended the Energy Star energy-efficiency program for 
buildings, to include schools, retail establishments, pri-
vate homes, and health care facilities.
 • Provided tax credits for many types of improvements to 
homes and commercial buildings that enhance energy 
efficiency.
 • Required a 30% increase in efficiency for incandes-
cent lightbulbs, which is already met by current com-
pact fluorescent lightbulbs (CFLs). This guarantees 
that the CFLs will become the light standard of the 
future.
 • Directed EPA to inventory waste-energy potential and 
establish a grant program to encourage waste-energy  
recovery.
 • Developed efficiency standards for most appliances and 
provided tax credits for manufacturers of energy-saving 
appliances.
 • Continued funding for development of plug-in hybrid 
electric vehicles (PHEVs).
 • Provided an income tax credit applicable to the purchase 
of new hybrid vehicles, PHEVs, or fuel cell–powered  
vehicles.
These recent policies did not establish a federal renew-
able portfolio standard (RPS). This would have required 
utilities to provide an increasing percentage of power from 
nonhydroelectric renewable sources (wind, solar, biomass). 
However, the states are setting the bar for the RPS: 37 states 
and the District of Columbia have implemented RPS re-
quirements. Most states have adopted target percentages of 
10–20%, with deadlines ranging from 2010 to 2025. Glo-
bally, at least 64 countries have a national target for renew-
able energy.
These policies also did not take any direct action on 
global warming, though they expanded DOE’s research pro-
gram for carbon capture and sequestration. Also, it can be 
burden of carbon dioxide, accelerating the already-serious 
climate changes brought on by rising levels of greenhouse 
gases. Renewable energy means sustainable energy, and 
a sustainable-energy future does not include significant 
fossil fuel energy. Global targets, therefore, are (1) stable 
atmospheric levels of greenhouse gases, especially carbon 
dioxide, and (2) a sustainable-energy development- and-
consumption pattern that is based on renewable energy. 
Our main focus in this chapter has been on sustainable 
energy development, but there is another energy strat-
egy that focuses on energy consumption—namely, energy 
conservation and efficiency. Energy saved is energy that 
does not have to be developed or paid for. These were in-
creasing the mileage standards for motor vehicles and in-
creasing the energy efficiency of lighting, appliances, and 
buildings. Earlier in this chapter, we stressed the Energy 
Star program, as it encourages municipalities and busi-
nesses to achieve energy savings. We turn now to public 
policy in the United States and the recent and very signifi-
cant changes that have encouraged renewable energy and 
energy conservation.
national Energy Policy
Nationally, the United States has a serious oil-transportation 
problem: We import two-thirds of our oil, much of which 
is consumed in transportation. This problem is an enormous 
drag on our economy. In fact, more than $600,000 leaves the 
United States every minute to pay for imported oil. We also 
have an energy security problem: Not only are we subject 
to the whims of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC) and other oil producers, but also we are 
vulnerable to terrorist attacks on various facets of our energy 
infrastructure.
These national issues, as well as other, global ones, 
prompted a policy response from the Bush and Obama 
administrations and Congress. We examined the poli-
cies pertaining to fossil fuels and nuclear power as 
they emerged in the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and 
the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007. 
These laws have become the major expression of federal 
energy policy, though many other laws promoting renewa-
ble energy and conservation have been enacted. The Ameri-
can Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 gave a huge 
boost ($43 billion) to renewable energy and energy conser-
vation, with the intent of doubling the energy from renew-
able sources by 2012.
For renewable energy, supply-side policy provisions en-
acted into law:
 • Established a renewable fuel standard (RFS) for ethanol 
and biodiesel that rises from 9 billion gallons in 2008 to 
15 billion gallons by 2015.
 • Extended the RFS to 36 billion gallons by 2022, but 
all the increase over 15 billion gallons must be met 
by feedstocks other than corn (i.e., second-generation 
sources).
413

Renewable Energy
the rising number of gasoline-electric hybrid cars appearing 
on the lots of many car manufacturers. This supports the sug-
gestion of a number of economists and environmental groups 
that we should be paying more—much more—for gasoline 
(and other fossil fuels). To accomplish this, we would need a 
policy change: a carbon tax—that is, a tax levied on all fuels 
according to the amount of carbon dioxide that they produce 
when consumed. Such a tax, proponents believe, would pro-
vide both incentives to use renewable sources, which would 
not be taxed, and disincentives to consume fossil fuels. It is 
hard to imagine any step that would be more effective (or 
more controversial!) in reducing greenhouse gas emissions in 
the United States. A number of European countries have al-
ready adopted such a tax.
Are the preceding developments, even the suggested car-
bon tax, enough to enable us to achieve a sustainable-energy 
system and to mitigate global climate change? Very likely, 
no. Yet many of them are moving us in the sustainable direc-
tion that is vital to the future of the global environment.
argued that every provision that promotes greater energy ef-
ficiency and the use of renewable-energy sources is going to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the United States.
Final Thoughts
Our look at current energy policy indicates that the United 
States is making a serious effort to address the need to 
develop renewable-energy sources and to improve the ef-
ficiency of current energy use. One development that has 
caught everyone’s attention in recent years is the rising price 
of gasoline. Until recently, the United States was the only in-
dustrialized country that has seen fit to keep gasoline prices 
remarkably low. Fuel in all other highly developed countries 
is so heavily taxed that it costs consumers upward of $6 per 
gallon—unlike U.S. prices, which were below $1.50 for 12 of 
the past 20 years. When gasoline rose to $3 a gallon in 2005, 
consumers began to turn away from gas-guzzling sport-
utility vehicles and muscle cars and have been opting for 
REvISITInG THE THEMES
sound science
Some elegant technologies have been discussed in this 
chapter, developed by scientists in research laboratories 
and then applied to solving some very practical problems. 
PV devices, for example, are being intensely researched in order to bring 
down the costs and make solar energy competitive with conventional 
energy sources. Research at MIT has produced a real breakthrough in 
the discovery of a catalyst that can split water, imitating photosynthesis. 
The National Renewable Energy Laboratory in Golden, Colorado, was 
established by Congress in 1977 and has developed into a cutting-edge 
research institute that produced the solar-trough and solar-dish systems. 
It is now exploring hydrogen technologies and improved PV devices, as 
well as a number of biomass technologies and low-wind-speed turbines 
and other renewable-energy options. This is science at its best, with pub-
lic funding put to work to develop new ideas that may revolutionize the 
energy scene.
sustainability
At the risk of repetition, global civilization is on an unsus-
tainable energy course. Our intensive use of fossil fuels 
has created a remarkable chapter in human history, but 
we are still terribly dependent on maintaining and increasing our use 
of oil, gas, and coal. The results have already been seen in rising atmos-
pheric greenhouse gases and the climate changes they are producing. 
Future use of fossil fuel will bring on more-intense climate changes, and 
long before we burn all the available oil, gas, and coal, we will have 
been forced to turn to other energy sources. Renewable-energy sources 
derived from the Sun can provide a sustainable, inexhaustible supply 
of energy that is virtually free from harmful environmental impacts. It 
is imperative that the United States, as well as other countries, embark 
on a course to bring about a transition to a renewable-energy economy, 
most likely based on hydrogen and electricity as energy carriers, to be 
produced from renewable sources.
stewardship
Stewardship of energy means doing more with less and 
turning away from the fossil fuels that are generating the 
greenhouse gases that are responsible for global climate 
change. Government policies are rapidly moving forward in encouraging 
renewable energy by providing subsidies for homeowners and busi-
nesses to embrace renewable-energy options. Policies are also improving 
the energy efficiency and conservation picture. After all, energy saved 
is energy that does not have to be developed. Picture solar panels on 
every home, church, hospital, and school roof as well as wind turbines 
on college campuses, grazing lands, and offshore wind farms. Many non-
governmental organizations are involved with programs that distribute 
PV and biogas systems to people in poor, rural, developing-country com-
munities. The impact is literally being felt around the globe.
s
S
t
g
change Govern
s
A
t
h
we are still terr
s
S
c
a
PV devices for
1. Why is it important for renewable energy sources to replace 
fossil fuels? What are the prospects for getting it done?
2. How much solar energy is available, and what happens 
when it is used? What are some problems with harnessing 
solar energy?
REviEw QuEstions
3. How do active and passive solar hot-water heaters work?
4. How can a building best be designed to become a passive 
solar collector for heat?
 5. How does a PV system work, and what are some present ap-
plications of such cells?
414

Renewable Energy
 6. What has been happening in recent years in the PV market? 
How are utilities encouraging PV power?
 7. Describe two concentrated solar power systems, how they 
work, and their potential for providing power.
 8. What is the potential for developing more hydroelectric 
power in North America versus developing countries, and 
what are the impacts of such development?
 9. Where is wind power being harvested, and what is the future 
potential for wind farms?
 10. What are some ways of converting biomass to useful 
energy, and what is the potential environmental impact of 
each?
 11. Which biofuels are used for transportation, and what is the 
potential for increasing biofuels in the United States?
 12. How can hydrogen gas be produced via the use of solar en-
ergy? How might hydrogen be collected and stored to meet 
the need for fuel for transportation in the future?
 13. How do fuel cells work, and what is being done to adapt 
them to power vehicles?
 14. What is geothermal energy, and what are two ways it is 
being harnessed?
 15. Describe current policy for renewable energy and energy 
efficiency as an outcome of recent government programs.
tHinKinG EnviRonMEntALLY
 1. What do you believe needs to happen before solar power be-
comes a thoroughly mainstream form of energy production? 
Defend your answer.
 2. What do you think could be a viable solution for backup 
power systems for solar heaters in the event of bad weather?
 3. How much promise does hydrogen power hold? Is its even-
tual sustainability just a myth or something to be pursued?
 4. Imagine you are charged with building a facility run en-
tirely by renewable resources (with the possible exception 
of backup power). How would you evaluate which sources 
have the most potential?
 5. Audit all of the energy needs in your daily life. How much 
energy do you consume? Describe how each need might be 
satisfied by a renewable-energy option. (Check the Internet 
for tools for this exercise.)
MAKinG A DiffEREncE
 1. Many everyday electrical products can now be powered by 
photovoltaic (PV) cells. You can find solar-powered charg-
ers for MP3 players, cell phones, digital cameras, and even 
laptops. While this power may not be as dependable as that 
from a wall charger, it certainly provides a sustainable alter-
native while the Sun shines (especially useful on road and 
camping trips, where conventional power isn’t available).
 2. If you live close to work, consider not driving there at all 
and instead taking a bicycle. The benefits are endless; great 
exercise, low emissions, and no money toward gas are just 
the beginning.
 3. Take advantage of the following services from your electric 
company: energy conservation, home-energy audits, and 
subsidized compact fluorescent lighting.
 4. Consult the free Greentips newsletter of the Union of Con-
cerned Scientists on its Web site (www.ucsusa.org), and fol-
low the advice given in this publication for reducing your 
energy footprint.
 5. Adopt ways to use less fuel and electricity both at home and 
where you work. (Turn thermostats up in the summer and 
down in the winter, turn off lights when you leave a room, 
wear sweaters, use energy-efficient lightbulbs, and so on.)
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cREDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top right): Meyerbroeker/Caro/Alamy; (bottom right): Sebastien Burel/Shutterstock; 
(top left): Armen Gharibyan/Alamy; (top right): MaxFX/Shutterstock; (top left): 
Bernard J. Nebel; (top left): National Renewable Energy Laboratory; (top right): 
Ethan Miller/Getty Images; (bottom left): Robyn Beck/Afp/Getty Images/Newscom; 
Iofoto/Shutterstock; (top left): Planetpix/Alamy; (bottom right): Creative Energy 
Corporation; (top right): Joerg Boethling / Alamy; Ideeone/iStockphoto; (bottom 
right): Transtock Inc. / Alamy; Courtesy of Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Text Credits
Table 1: Source: REN21. Global Status Report 2011; Figure 10: Renewables Global 
Status Report, 2009 Update, REn 21, Secretariat, United Nations Environment 
Programme; Figure 11: National Renewable Energy Laboratory; Figure 15: Data 
from GWEC.
415

American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery 
Act) Legislation that provided money for a variety of programs, 
intended to stimulate the economy during the recent recession. 
Some $90 billion was directed into clean energy programs.
biodiesel Diesel fuel made from a mixture of vegetable oil (largely 
soybean oil) and regular diesel oil.
biomass energy Energy produced by burning plant-related 
materials such as firewood.
carbon tax A tax levied on all fossil fuels in proportion to the 
amount of carbon dioxide that is released as they burn.
electrolysis The use of electrical energy to split water molecules 
into their constituent hydrogen and oxygen atoms. Hydrogen gas 
and oxygen gas result.
electrolyzer In a solar receptor that is designed to produce fuel 
from water using solar energy, a catalyst that uses the electron 
energy to split water into hydrogen and oxygen.
energy conservation and efficiency All of those steps that are taken 
to avoid or reduce the use of energy, such as raising the Corporate 
Average Fuel Economy standards for cars and trucks.
Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 Legislation 
establishing energy policy by emphasizing demand-side policies 
such as conserving energy and using renewable energy sources.
Energy Policy Act of 2005 Legislation establishing U.S. energy 
policy for years to come, encouraging greater use of fossil fuels 
and nuclear power, and providing some support for energy 
conservation and renewable energy.
Energy Star Program The EPA’s program focusing on energy 
conservation in buildings and in appliances. An Energy Star tag 
signals that the device or building incorporates energy-saving 
technology.
ethyl alcohol The main product of fermentation of sugars or 
starches, also called ethanol. It is a 2-carbon compound that can 
be burned in combustion engines as a substitute for gasoline.
flat-plate collector A solar collector that consists of a stationary, 
flat, black surface oriented perpendicular to the average angle of 
the sun. Heat absorbed by the surface is removed and transported 
by air or water (or some other liquid) flowing over or through 
the surface.
fuel cell A device that produces electrical energy by combining 
hydrogen and oxygen, used to power vehicles and other electrical 
machines.
gasohol A blend of 90% gasoline and 10% ethanol that can 
be substituted for straight gasoline. Gasohol serves to stretch 
gasoline supplies and enable gasoline to burn more cleanly.
geothermal energy Useful energy derived from water heated by the 
naturally hot interior of Earth.
geothermal heat pump An energy system whereby heat can be 
obtained or deposited via pipes buried in the ground and an 
exchange process that allows heated or cooled air to be circulated 
via ductwork.
hydrogen economy A future economy where renewable energy via 
hydrogen as a major energy carrier prevails.
inverter In a photovoltaic (PV) system, the device that acts as an 
interface between the solar PV modules and the electric grid or 
batteries.
ocean thermal-energy conversion (OTEC) The concept of 
harnessing the difference in temperature between surface water 
heated by the Sun and colder deep water to produce power.
power grid The combination of central power plants, high-voltage 
transmission lines, poles, wires, and transformers that makes up 
an electrical power system.
power tower A solar energy converter that collects solar energy 
with an array of Sun-tracking mirrors and focuses the energy onto 
a receiver on a tower in the center of the array, where the heat 
energy drives a conventional turbogenerator.
pumped-storage power plant A hydroelectric plant component 
that pumps water up to an elevated reservoir when power 
demand is low and allows it to return to a lower reservoir and 
generate electricity when demand is higher.
renewable fuel standard (RFS) A policy that requires a minimum 
volume of renewable fuel in gasoline.
solar constant The radiant energy reaching the top of Earth’s 
atmosphere from the Sun, measured at 1,366 watts per square 
meter.
supply-side policies Those energy policies that emphasize providing 
greater amounts of energy through more development of oil, coal, 
and gas resources.
tidal barrage A form of renewable energy where barriers are 
placed across the mouth of a coastal bay and turbines are able to 
convert tidal water flow to power.
GLossARY
Renewable Energy
416

Learning Objectives
 1. Nuclear Energy in Perspective: 
Explain how nuclear power was 
born in the United States, and 
outline the role of nuclear energy 
in the United States and the 
world.
 2. How Nuclear Power Works: 
Review the basics of nuclear 
power, and compare the benefits 
and disadvantages of nuclear 
power compared with coal 
power.
 3. The Hazards and Costs of Nuclear 
Power Facilities: Summarize the 
essentials of radioactivity and 
nuclear wastes; evaluate nuclear 
power in the light of high-level 
wastes, nuclear accidents, and 
economic considerations.
 4. More Advanced Reactors: 
Describe how fast-neutron reac-
tors are used to reprocess spent 
nuclear fuel, and assess the 
potential for fusion as a source 
of energy.
 5. The Future of Nuclear Power: 
Examine the impact of global 
climate change on the nuclear 
energy option, and assess the 
future prospects for nuclear 
power.
Nuclear Power
E
arthquakes are common events in Japan, which sits on the Pacific Rim, an 
area well known for its seismic activity. On March 11, 2011, at 2:46 PM local 
time, the Pacific tectonic plate slipped under the Okhotsk plate that lies under 
northern Japan, 42 miles offshore and 15 miles below the surface. The upthrust of 
16–26 feet (5–8 meters) along a 111-mile (180-km) seabed triggered an earthquake 
of magnitude 9.0, the most severe in Japan’s recorded history, and a tsunami that hit 
the northern Japanese coast with a wall of water 10–50 feet high. The earthquake 
was damaging, but the Japanese infrastructure was built with earthquakes in mind 
and the damage was not devastating. The tsunami, however, hit the coast within 
10–30 minutes of the earthquake and swept over tsunami seawalls meant to pro-
tect cities and towns, pushing buildings, vehicles, and debris inland at a frightening 
speed. People had little time to escape the incoming waves; the death toll was close 
to 20,000. More than 1 million buildings were damaged or destroyed, and the eco-
nomic losses from the disaster were estimated to be more than $300 billion.
Japan’s 55 nuclear power plants are located on the coastline where cool-
ing water is available, and when the March 11 
earthquake struck, eleven of Japan’s 55 operat-
ing nuclear power plants shut down automati-
cally. However, several of the plants were on the 
east coast, and those closest to the epicenter 
of the earthquake suffered damage first from 
the earthquake and then from the tsunami. The 
Fukushima Daiichi power station, with six nu-
clear reactors, took a direct hit. Seawater swept 
by the reactors, cut off all electrical power, and 
demolished the backup generators and diesel 
fuel tanks. All of the reactors automatically shut 
down when the quake hit, but even with the nu-
clear fission halted, radioactive decay in the fuel 
rods generated heat and needed to be kept cool. 
Tsunami from offshore earthquake. This photo shows a huge tsunami wave 
coming on shore at Miyako City, Japan, on March 11, 2011.
From Chapter 15 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Nuclear Power
cOnsequences. Fallout from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear 
disaster was not all radioactive. Shortly after the disaster, Japan’s 
Prime Minister, Naoto Kan, announced that his government would 
cancel plans to build 14 more nuclear power plants, which aimed to 
bring Japan from its current 30% of electricity generated by nuclear 
power to 50%. Other countries have responded in divergent ways: 
China is moving full speed ahead with its plans to increase its reliance 
on nuclear power but, like virtually every country with nuclear power 
plants, is assessing safety conditions at all of its existing plants and 
those under construction. Germany and Switzerland announced plans 
to phase out nuclear energy, and Italy has put its plans to build new 
reactors on hold. The United States, like China, has ordered a safety 
review of all existing nuclear power plants. Japan’s nuclear disaster 
is a reminder that nuclear power carries with it risks of events that 
have low probabilities of occurring but huge consequences if they do. 
Swedish Nobel physicist Hannes Alfvén said it well, in reference to 
nuclear power: “No acts of God can be permitted.”1
The 2011 nuclear disaster in Japan is only one of many in the 
troubled history of nuclear power. In this chapter, we will delve 
into that history through the lenses of science and public policy as 
the many concerns about nuclear power are raised and discussed.
With no cooling water available, three of the reactors suffered 
meltdown of the nuclear fuel in the reactor vessels, and several 
units were rocked by explosions set off by hydrogen gas gener-
ated by extreme temperatures in the fuel rods stripping the 
hydrogen from surrounding water (Fig. 1). All of these events 
released radioactive fission products into the air, estimated 
at about one-tenth of the total radioactivity release from the 
Chernobyl nuclear accident of 1986. Authorities proclaimed a 
mandatory evacuation zone for a 12-mile (20-km) radius from 
the stricken plant; 75,000 people were moved to emergency 
housing.
cOntainment. Plant workers began the next day to 
inject seawater via fire extinguisher lines into the reactor 
vessels to cool them down. Another problem became evident 
when pools holding spent fuel rods also lost water and began 
releasing radiation. These too eventually received cooling 
from seawater. Within days, electrical power was restored to 
the facility, but conditions in the vicinity of the reactors and 
pools were so radioactive that workers could not get near 
enough to make repairs. Some 800 workers were involved 
in efforts to bring the reactors under control, working short 
periods in order to limit their exposure to the considerable 
radiation. The 12-mile exclusion zone received significant 
radioactive fallout from the stricken plant; there is the likeli-
hood that this will become a “dead zone,” much like that 
around Chernobyl. Workers erected a fabric cover over the 
stricken units to contain airborne radiation emanating from 
the reactors; meanwhile, new cooling systems for the reactors 
have been established, but temperature levels in the reactors 
and fuel pools were not brought down below the boiling point 
until six months after the disaster. Ultimately, the objective 
of this phase of containment was to achieve cold shutdown—
where the temperature at the base of the reactor vessels 
(and the containment vessels below them in case meltdown 
penetrated the reactor vessels) is below 200°F and pressure is 
at 1 atmosphere. At this point, heat from radioactive decay in 
the fuel and vessels is under control and no more radioactive 
vapors are escaping. This was finally achieved at the end of 
2011. Radiation releases have diminished greatly since the ini-
tial meltdown in March. On a positive note, there have been 
no deaths from radiation exposure either to the plant workers 
or to citizens at large, though a number of workers at the site 
received significant radiation doses. This is in huge contrast to 
the death toll from the tsunami.
1“Energy and Environment,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists (May 1972), 6.
Figure 1 Fukushima Daiichi power plant. The power plant has six 
reactors, four of which were damaged by nuclear meltdowns and/or hydrogen 
explosions. This photo shows the wrecked building housing the No. 4 reactor. 
1  Nuclear Energy in Perspective
Rising oil and natural gas prices, continued emissions 
of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides from coal, and the 
long-term threat of climate change all suggest that an en-
ergy future based on fossil fuels is not an option. In light 
of these serious energy-related problems, it seems pru-
dent to do everything possible to develop non-fossil-fuel 
sources of energy. Nuclear power is an alternative that 
contributes few emissions to global warming, and there 
is sufficient uranium to fuel nuclear reactors well into 
the 21st century, with the possibility of extending the nu-
418

Nuclear Power
of planning or construction. Officials estimated that by 
1990 several hundred plants would be online and by the 
turn of the century as many as a thousand would be op-
erating. A number of other industrialized countries got in 
step with their own programs, and some less developed 
nations were going nuclear by purchasing plants from in-
dustrialized nations.
Curtailed. After 1975, however, the picture changed dra-
matically. Utilities stopped ordering nuclear plants, and 
numerous existing orders were canceled. In some cases, con-
struction was terminated even after billions of dollars had 
already been invested. Most strikingly, the Shoreham Nu-
clear Power Plant on Long Island, New York, after being 
completed and licensed at a cost of $5.5 billion, was turned 
over to the state in the summer of 1989, to be dismantled 
after generating electricity for only 32 hours. The reason 
was that citizens and the state deemed that there was no way 
to evacuate people from the area should an accident occur. 
Similarly, just a few weeks earlier, California citizens voted 
to shut down the Rancho Seco Nuclear Power Plant, located 
near Sacramento, after a 15-year history of troubled opera-
tion. In the United States, 28 units (separate reactors) have 
been shut down permanently for a variety of reasons.
Currently . . . At the end of 2011, 104 nuclear power 
plants were operating in the United States. The Watts Bar 
Unit 1 reactor in Tennessee was the last unit to come online, 
 beginning operations in February 1996; Unit 2—partially 
completed, but halted in 1988—is again under construction 
and will be the first reactor to be completed in the 21st cen-
tury in the United States (Fig. 3). The 104 existing plants (the 
most in any country) generate 20% of U.S. electrical power. 
However, in looking ahead, the U.S. Energy Information 
Administration projected an increase in nuclear generating 
capacity from the present level of 100 gigawatts (GW) to 
115 GW in 2030 from new power plants expected to open 
as a result of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, which provides 
many incentives to stimulate the nuclear power industry.
clear fuel supply indefinitely through reprocessing tech-
nologies. Thirty-one countries now have nuclear power 
plants either in place or under construction, and in some 
of these countries, nuclear power generates more electric-
ity than any other source. Is nuclear energy the key to the 
future of global energy—the best route to a sustainable 
relationship with our environment?
The History of Nuclear Power
Geologists have known for years that fossil fuels would not 
last forever. Sooner or later, other energy sources would be 
needed. It was anticipated that nuclear power could pro-
duce electricity in such large amounts and so cheaply that 
we would phase into an economy in which electricity would 
take over virtually all functions, including the generation of 
other fuels, at nominal costs. Following World War II, deter-
mined to show the world that the power of the atom could 
benefit humankind, the U.S. government embarked on a 
course to lead the world into the Nuclear Age.
The Nuclear Age. And so the government moved into 
the research, development, and promotion of commercial 
nuclear power plants (along with the continuing develop-
ment of  nuclear weaponry). Using this research, companies 
such as General Electric and Westinghouse constructed 
nuclear power plants that were ordered and paid for by 
utility companies, with assurances from the federal gov-
ernment, via the Price-Anderson Act of 1957, that these 
corporations and utilities would be covered by insurance 
for any legal liabilities incurred. The Atomic Energy Com-
mission, now the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), 
an agency in the U.S. Department of  Energy (DOE), set 
and enforced safety standards for the operation and main-
tenance of the new plants, as it does today.
In the 1960s and early 1970s, utility companies 
moved ahead with plans for numerous nuclear power 
plants (Fig. 2). By 1975, 53 plants were operating in the 
United States, producing about 9% of the nation’s elec-
tricity, and another 170 plants were in various stages 
Figure 2 Nuclear power in the United States. Since the early 1970s, when orders for plants reached 
a peak, few utilities called for new plants, and many have canceled earlier orders. Nevertheless, the number of 
plants in service increased steadily as plants under construction were completed. The number of  operating plants 
peaked at 112 and is holding steady at 104. (Source: Data from U.S. Department of Energy.)
225
200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
1964
'66 '68 '70 '72 '74 '76 '78 '80 '82 '84 '86 '88 '90 '92 '94 '96
'00
'98
Year
In service
Number of plants
'02 '04 '06 '08 '10
Total on order 
and in operation
419

Nuclear Power
Global Picture. After a catastrophic nuclear power plant ac-
cident at Chernobyl in the Soviet Union in April 1986, nuclear 
power was rethought in many countries (see Section 3). Yet the 
demand for electricity is more robust than ever, and the other 
means of generating electricity have their own problems. Coal-
powered electricity produces more greenhouse gases and other 
pollutants than does any other form of energy. Oil and natural-
gas supplies are more limited, and oil is vital to transportation 
and home heating. Hydroelectric power is already heavily devel-
oped. Wind and solar power, though increasing rapidly, is still 
only a small fraction of the total electricity generated.
Therefore, nuclear power plants continue to be built. In-
cluding those in the United States, the world has a total of 441 
operating nuclear plants, with an additional 65 under construc-
tion. Globally, electricity generated from nuclear power has in-
creased at a rate of 3.2% per year for the past decade. Nuclear 
power now generates about 13.5% of the world’s electricity, but 
dependence on nuclear energy varies greatly among the 31 coun-
tries operating nuclear power plants (Fig. 4). France now pro-
duces 74% of its electricity with nuclear power and has plans to 
go to more than 80%. China and India, the world’s population 
giants, also are investing heavily into nuclear energy, China with 
Figure 3 The Watts Bar Nuclear Generating Station. 
Located in Spring City, Tennessee, Unit 1 of this power plant was the last reactor 
to come on line in the United States (in 1996). Unit 2 construction was halted in 
1988 but has since resumed, with completion expected in 2013.
30
40
50
60
70
80
20
10
0
France
Slovakia
Belgium
Ukraine
Hungary
Armenia
Switzerland
Sweden
Slovenia
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Republic of Korea
Japan
Germany
Finland
Spain
USA
Romania
Russian Federation
UK
Canada
Argentina
South Africa
Mexico
Netherlands
Brazil
India
Pakistan
China
Nuclear share of electricity (%)
Figure 4 Nuclear share of electrical power generation. In 2011, those countries lacking fossil fuel re-
serves tended to be the most eager to use nuclear power. (Source: Data from International Atomic Energy Agency.)
420

Nuclear Power
28 and India with six new units under construction. If the safety 
and economic issues can be resolved, can nuclear power supply 
future energy needs? In order to react intelligently to this issue, 
we must start with a clear understanding of what nuclear power 
is and what its pros and cons are.
2 How Nuclear Power Works
The objective of nuclear power technology is to control nuclear 
reactions so that energy is released gradually as heat. As with 
plants powered by fossil fuels, the heat energy  produced by a nu-
clear plant is used to boil water and produce steam, which then 
drives conventional turbogenerators. Nuclear power plants are 
baseload plants ; they are always operating unless they are being 
refueled, and they are large plants, generating up to 1,400 MW.
From Mass to Energy
The release of nuclear energy is completely different 
from the burning of fuels or any other chemical reac-
tions discussed so far. To begin with, materials involved 
in chemical reactions remain unchanged at the atomic 
level, though the visible forms of these materials undergo 
great transformation as atoms are rearranged to form 
different compounds. For example, the organic carbon 
in gasoline is still carbon after it is burned and comes 
out of the tailpipe as carbon dioxide. Nuclear energy, 
however, involves changes at the atomic level through 
one of two basic processes: fission and fusion. In fis-
sion, a large atom of one element is split to produce two 
smaller atoms of different elements (Fig. 5a). In fusion, 
two small atoms combine to form a larger atom of a different  
element (Fig. 5b). In both fission and fusion, the mass of 
the product(s) is less than the mass of the starting mate-
rial, and the lost mass is converted to energy in accord-
ance with the law of mass-energy equivalence (E5mc2), 
first described by Albert Einstein. Because the small loss 
of mass is  multiplied by the speed of light squared, the 
amount of energy released by this mass-to-energy conver-
sion is tremendous: The sudden fission or fusion of just 
one kilogram of material, for example, releases the devas-
tatingly explosive energy of a nuclear bomb.
The Fuel for Nuclear Power Plants. All current nu-
clear power plants employ the fission (splitting) of ura-
nium-235 (no technology has been devised yet to harness 
a fusion reaction). The element uranium, which occurs 
naturally in various minerals in Earth’s crust, exists in 
two primary forms, or isotopes: uranium-238 (238U) and 
uranium-235 (235U). Isotopes of a given element contain 
different numbers of neutrons but the same number of 
protons and electrons.
The number 238 or 235 that accompanies the chemi-
cal name or symbol for uranium is called the mass number 
of the element. It is the sum of the number of neutrons 
and the number of protons in the nucleus of the atom. 
All atoms of any given element must contain the same 
number of protons, so variations in mass number repre-
sent variations in numbers of neutrons. 238U contains 
92 protons and 146 neutrons; 235U contains 92 pro-
tons and 143 neutrons. Although all isotopes of a given  
element behave the same chemically, their other charac-
teristics may differ profoundly. In the case of uranium, 
235U atoms will readily undergo fission, but 238U atoms 
will not. Like uranium, many other elements exist in more 
than one isotopic form.
Because 235U is an unstable isotope, a small but pre-
dictable number of the 235U atoms in any sample of the 
element undergo radioactive decay and release neutrons, 
among other things. If one released neutron moving at 
just the right speed hits another 235U atom, the latter be-
comes 236U, which is highly unstable and undergoes fis-
sion immediately into lighter atoms (fission products). 
The fission reaction gives off several more neutrons and 
releases a great deal of energy (Fig. 5a). Ordinarily, these 
neutrons are traveling too fast to cause fission, but if they 
are slowed down and then strike another 235U atom, they 
can cause fission to occur again. In this way, more neutrons 
and more energy are released, with the potential to repeat 
Figure 5 Nuclear fission and fusion. Nuclear energy is released from 
either (a) fission, the splitting of certain large atoms into smaller atoms, or (b) 
fusion, the fusing together of small atoms to form a larger atom. In both cases, 
some of the mass of the starting atom(s) is converted to energy.
(a) FISSION
(b) FUSION
Free
neutron
Neutrons
Protons
Uranium-235
Helium
Hydrogen-3
Hydrogen-2
Radioactive
by-products
(mostly wastes)
+ ENERGY
Free
neutrons
+ ENERGY
421

Nuclear Power
Because 99.3% of all uranium found in nature is 238U (thus, 
only 0.7% is 235U), enrichment involves separating 235U from 
238U to produce a  material containing from 3% to 5% of 235U 
(and the rest 238U). Since these two isotopes are chemically iden-
tical, enrichment is based on their slight difference in mass. The 
technical difficulty of enrichment is the major hurdle that pre-
vents less-developed countries from advancing their own nuclear 
capabilities.
An Atomic Bomb. When 235U is highly enriched, the 
spontaneous fission of an atom can trigger a self-amplifying 
the process. A domino effect, known as a chain reaction, 
may thus occur (Fig. 6a).
Nuclear Fuel. To make nuclear fuel, uranium ore is mined, 
purified into uranium dioxide (UO2), and enriched. Significant 
uranium deposits in the United States are found in Wyoming 
and New Mexico and are mined underground or in open pits. 
The ore is then subjected to milling, where it is crushed, treated 
chemically, and rendered into yellowcake, so called because of 
its yellowish color. The yellowcake, about 80% UO2, is then de-
livered to a conversion facility for purification and enrichment. 
Figure 6 Fission reactions. (a) 
A simple chain reaction. When a 235U 
atom fissions, it releases two or three 
high-energy neutrons, in addition to 
energy and split “halves.” If another 
235U atom is struck by a high-energy 
neutron, it fissions, and the process is 
repeated, causing a chain reaction. (b) 
A self-amplifying chain  reaction leading 
to a nuclear explosion. Because two or 
three high-energy neutrons are produced 
by each fission, each may cause the fis-
sion of two or three additional atoms. (c) 
In a sustaining chain reaction, the extra 
neutrons are absorbed in control rods, so 
that amplification does not occur.
(a) Chain Reaction
Neutrons
Uranium-235
(b) Self-Amplifying
     Chain Reaction
(c) Sustaining Chain Reaction
Uranium-235
422

Nuclear Power
chain reaction. In nuclear weapons, small masses of virtually 
pure 235U or other fissionable material are forced together 
so that the two or three neutrons from a spontaneous fission 
cause two or three more atoms to undergo fission; each of 
these in turn triggers two or three more fissions, and so on. 
The whole mass undergoes fission in a fraction of a second, 
releasing all the energy in one huge explosion (Fig. 6b).
The Nuclear Reactor. A nuclear reactor for a power plant is 
designed to sustain a continuous chain reaction (Fig. 6c). Con-
trol is achieved by enriching the uranium to 3–5% 235U. The 
modest 3–5% enrichment will not support the amplification of 
a chain reaction into a nuclear explosion. However, in the proc-
ess of fission, some of the faster neutrons are absorbed by 238U 
atoms, converting them into 239Pu (plutonium), which then also 
undergoes fission when hit by another neutron. So much pluto-
nium is produced in this way that at least one-third of the energy 
of a nuclear reactor comes from plutonium fission.
Moderator. A chain reaction can be sustained in a nu-
clear reactor only if a sufficient mass of enriched uranium is 
arranged in a suitable geometric pattern and is surrounded 
by a material called a moderator. The moderator slows down 
the neutrons that produce fission so that they are traveling at 
the right speed to trigger another fission. In slowing down 
the neutrons, the moderator gains heat. In nuclear plants in 
the United States, the moderator is near-pure water, and the 
reactors are called light-water reactors (LWRs). (The term 
light water denotes ordinary water (H2O), as opposed to the 
substance known as heavy water, or deuterium oxide (D2O). 
Deuterium is an isotope of hydrogen.)
Fuel Rods. To achieve the geometric pattern necessary for 
fission, the enriched uranium dioxide is made into pellets that 
are loaded into long metal tubes. The loaded tubes are called 
fuel elements or fuel rods (Fig. 7a). Many fuel rods are placed 
close together to form a reactor core inside a strong reactor ves-
sel that holds the water, which serves as both moderator and 
Control
rods
(b)
(a)
Fuel
elements
H2O moderator
Uranium-235
Neutron-absorbing
material
Figure 7 A nuclear reactor. (a) In the core of a nuclear reactor, 
a large mass of uranium is created by placing uranium in adjacent tubes, 
called fuel elements. The rate of the chain reaction is moderated by inserting 
or removing rods of neutron-absorbing material (control rods) between the 
fuel elements. (b) The fuel and rods are surrounded by the moderator fluid, 
near-pure water. (c) Technicians ready the core housing to receive uranium 
fuel elements in this nuclear reactor.
(c)
423

Nuclear Power
power plant. However, both reactor types have one se-
rious drawback: If the reactor vessel should crack, the 
sudden loss of cooling water from around the reactor, 
called a loss-of-coolant  accident (LOCA), could result in 
the core’s overheating. The sudden loss of the modera-
tor-coolant water would cause fission to cease, because 
the moderator would no longer be present. Nevertheless, 
the fuel core could still overheat, because 7% of the re-
actor’s heat comes from radioactive decay in the newly 
formed fission products. In time, the uncontrolled decay 
would release enough heat energy to melt the materials in 
the core, a situation called a meltdown. Then the molten 
material falling into the remaining water could cause a 
steam explosion. To guard against all this, backup cool-
ing systems keep the reactor immersed in water should 
leaks occur, and the entire assembly is housed in a thick 
concrete containment building (Fig. 8). In the Fukushima 
Daiichi nuclear plants, cooling water was no longer 
being circulated because the pumping mechanism had no 
power. A meltdown occurred in three of the units, and 
explosions resulted as hydrogen was separated from the 
superheated water (a chemical reaction where the water is 
split into its constituent hydrogen and oxygen).
Comparing Nuclear Power with Coal Power
Because nuclear plants are baseload plants that provide 
the foundation for meeting the daily and weekly electrical 
demand cycle, they must be replaced with other baseload 
plants. If nuclear power plants are phased out, one option 
is replacing such large plants with coal-burning plants. 
coolant (Fig. 7b). Over time, fission products that also absorb 
neutrons accumulate in the fuel rods and slow down the rate 
of fission and heat production. The highly radioactive spent-fuel 
elements are then removed and replaced with new ones.
Control Rods. The chain reaction in the reactor core 
is controlled by rods of neutron-absorbing material, re-
ferred to as control rods, inserted between the fuel elements. 
The chain reaction is started and controlled by withdrawing 
and inserting the control rods as necessary. Consequently, a  
nuclear reactor is simply an assembly of fuel elements,  
moderator-coolant, and movable control rods (Fig. 7). As the 
control rods are removed and a chain reaction is initiated, the 
fuel rods and the moderator become intensely hot.
The Nuclear Power Plant. In a nuclear power plant, 
heat from the reactor is used to boil water to provide steam 
for driving conventional turbogenerators. One way to boil 
the water is to circulate it through the reactor, as in the 
boiling-water reactor. Two-thirds of the power plants in 
the United States, however, are pressurized-water reactors 
(Fig. 8) employing a double loop. In these, the moderator-
coolant water is heated to more than 600°F by circulat-
ing it through the reactor, but it does not boil because the 
system is under very high pressure (155 atmospheres). The 
superheated water is circulated through a heat exchanger, 
boiling other, unpressurized water that flows past the heat 
exchanger tubes. This action produces the steam used to 
drive the turbogenerator.
Loss-of-Coolant Accident (LOCA). The double-
loop design of the pressurized-water reactor isolates 
hazardous materials in the reactor from the rest of the 
Containment
building
Backup
cooling
water
Pump
Pump
Pump
Pump
Pump
Pressurizing
system
Control
rods
Fuel
elements
Heat
Reactor
vessel
Steam
generator/
Heat
exchanger
Turbine
Generator
Hot water
Cool water
Cooling
towers
Heat
Condenser
Electricity
Water
Figure 8 Pressurized nuclear 
power plant. The double-loop design 
isolates the pressurized water from the 
steam-generating loop that drives the turbo-
generator. One loop is completely contained 
within the containment building (left). This 
loop, under high pressure so that the water 
does not boil, absorbs the heat from the  
nuclear reactions and transfers it to the 
steam generator/heat exchanger. There, 
water in the second loop is heated to boiling 
and circulated to the turbogenerator (right), 
where the steam turns a turbine to generate 
electricity. The steam is condensed by cool 
water, and the hot water is circulated to  
cooling towers.
424

Nuclear Power
The United States has abundant coal reserves, but is burn-
ing coal the course of action we wish to pursue? Nuclear 
power has some decided environmental advantages over 
coal-fired power (Fig. 9). Comparing a 1,000 MW nuclear 
plant with a coal-fired plant of the same capacity, each 
operating for one year, we find the following character-
istics:
 • Fuel needed. The coal plant consumes 2–3 million tons 
of coal. If this amount is obtained by strip mining, sig-
nificant environmental destruction and acid leaching 
will result. If the coal comes from deep mines, there 
will be human costs in the form of accidental deaths 
and impaired health. The nuclear plant requires about 
30 tons of enriched uranium, obtained from mining 
75,000 tons of ore, with much less harm to humans 
and the environment. The fission of about 1 pound (0.5 
kg) of uranium fuel releases energy equivalent to burn-
ing 50 tons of coal.
 • Carbon dioxide emissions. The coal plant emits more 
than 7 million tons of carbon dioxide into the at-
mosphere, contributing to global climate change. 
The nuclear plant emits none while it is producing 
energy, but fossil fuel energy is used in the mining 
and enriching of uranium, the construction of the nu-
clear plant, the decommissioning of the plant after 
it is shut down, and the transportation and storage 
of nuclear waste. Because a coal plant also needs to 
be constructed and the coal and waste ash must be 
transported, much the same can be said for the coal 
plant.
 • Sulfur dioxide and other emissions. The coal plant emits 
more than 300,000 tons of sulfur dioxide, particulates, 
mercury, and other pollutants, leading to acid rain and 
health-threatening air pollution (if it is a new plant, 
most of these pollutants will be captured by scrubbers). 
The nuclear power plant produces no acid-forming pol-
lutants or particulates.
 • Radioactivity. A coal plant releases 100 times more radi-
oactivity than does a nuclear power plant because of the 
natural presence of radioactive compounds (uranium, 
thorium) in the coal. The nuclear plant releases low lev-
els of radioactive waste gases.
 • Solid wastes. The coal plant produces about 600,000 
tons of ash that require disposal. (Much of it is reused in 
cement production.) The nuclear plant produces about 
250 tons of highly radioactive wastes that require stor-
age and ultimate safe disposal. (Safe disposal is an unre-
solved problem.)
 • Accidents. A worst-case accident in the coal plant could re-
sult in fatalities to workers and a destructive fire, a situation 
common to many industries. Accidents in a nuclear plant 
can range from minor emissions of radioactivity to cata-
strophic releases that can lead to widespread radiation sick-
ness, scores of human deaths, untold numbers of cancers, 
and widespread, long-lasting environmental contamination.
Figure 9 Nuclear power versus coal-fired power. Both methods 
of generating electricity have their environmental advantages and disadvantages. 
The nuclear power option assumes perfect containment of radioactivity and the 
availability of some method for waste storage and disposal.
Global
warming
Ash
Strip-mining
Land destruction
Acid leaching
Uranium
mining
No
smokestacks
Thermal
pollution
Radioactive
wastes
Coal
Nuclear
Acid rain
CO2
Other
pollutants
It is the disposal of radioactive wastes and the po-
tential for accidents that have led to public concern over 
nuclear power. Can these problems be overcome, or are 
other energy options—natural-gas-powered boilers or 
renewable energy—less problematic and less costly than 
nuclear power?
3  The Hazards and Costs of 
Nuclear Power Facilities
Assessing the hazards of nuclear power requires an under-
standing of radioactive substances and their danger.
Radioactive Emissions
When uranium or any other element undergoes fission, 
the split “halves” are atoms of lighter elements, such 
as iodine, cesium, strontium, cobalt, or any of some 30 
other elements. These newly formed atoms—the direct 
products of the fission—are generally unstable isotopes 
of their respective elements. Unstable isotopes (called 
radio isotopes) become stable by spontaneously eject-
ing subatomic particles (alpha particles, beta particles, 
and neutrons), high-energy radiation (gamma rays and 
X-rays), or both. Radioactivity is measured in curies 
(after Marie Curie, the scientist who first coined the term 
 radioactivity); one gram of pure radium-226 gives off 
one curie per second, which is approximately 37 billion  
425

Nuclear Power
High Dose. In high doses, radiation may cause enough 
damage to prevent cell division. This is why, in medical ap-
plications, radiation can be focused on a cancerous tumor 
to destroy it. However, if the whole body is exposed to such 
levels of radiation (over 1 Sievert is considered a high dose), 
a generalized blockage of cell division occurs that prevents 
the normal replacement or repair of blood, skin, and other 
tissues. This result is called radiation sickness and may lead 
to death a few days or months after exposure. Very high 
levels of radiation may totally destroy cells, causing imme-
diate death.
Low Dose. In lower doses, radiation may dam-
age DNA, the genetic material inside cells. Cells with 
damaged (mutated) DNA may then begin dividing and 
growing out of control, forming malignant tumors or 
leukemia. If the damaged DNA is in an egg or a sperm 
cell, the result may be birth defects (mutations) in off-
spring. The effects of exposure to radiation may go un-
seen until many years after the event (10 to 40 years is 
typical). Other effects include the weakening of the im-
mune system, mental retardation, and the development 
of cataracts.
Exposure. Health effects are directly related to the 
level of exposure. There is broad agreement that doses be-
tween 100 and 500 milliSieverts (1 milliSievert, or mSv = 
1/1,000 of a Sievert) result in an increased risk of develop-
ing cancer. Evidence for this hypothesis comes from stud-
ies of patients with various illnesses who were exposed 
to high levels of X-rays in the 1930s, before the potential 
harm of such radiation was understood. People in these 
groups subsequently developed higher-than-normal rates 
of cancer and leukemia. It is noteworthy that the Japanese 
Health Ministry has raised the legal limit for workers at 
 spontaneous  disintegrations into particles and radiation. 
The particles and radiation are collectively referred to as 
radioactive emissions. Materials in the reactor may also 
be converted to unstable isotopes and become radioactive 
by absorbing neutrons from the fission process (Fig. 10). 
These indirect products of fission, along with the direct 
products, are the radio active wastes of nuclear power. 
The direct products of fission generate high-level wastes, 
so called because they are highly radioactive. The indi-
rect products of fission, such as the reactor materials, 
are much less radioactive and are classified as low-level 
wastes, a category that also includes materials from hos-
pitals and industry.
Biological Effects. A major concern of the public re-
garding nuclear power is that large numbers of people 
may be exposed to low levels of radiation, thus elevating 
their risk of cancer and other disorders. Is this a valid 
concern?
Radioactive emissions can penetrate biological tissue, re-
sulting in radiation exposure. This exposure is measured as 
absorbed dose, using joules per kilogram (J/kg)—energy im-
parted (J) per mass of body tissue (kg). Doses are reported in 
Sieverts (Sv); the old unit rem, still in use by some agencies, is 
the equivalent of 0.01 Sv.
As radiation penetrates tissue, it displaces electrons from 
molecules, leaving behind charged particles, or ions, so the 
emissions are called ionizing radiation. The process of ioni-
zation may involve breaking chemical bonds or changing the 
structure of molecules in ways that impair their normal func-
tions. Ordinarily, the radiation is not felt and leaves no vis-
ible mark unless the dose is high.
Uranium-235
fissions
235U
Direct fission
products
Nonradioactive
components
of the reactor
Indirect
fission
products
Neutrons
Radioactive
radiations
Radioactive
radiations
Radioisotopes
Radioisotopes
Stable isotopes,
nonradioactive
Figure 10 Radioactive wastes and ra-
dioactive emissions. Nuclear fission results 
in the production of numerous unstable isotopes, 
designated radioactive waste. These isotopes give 
off potentially damaging radiation until they regain 
a stable structure.
426

Nuclear Power
The main concern about nuclear power, therefore, 
should not focus on a plant’s normal operation. Instead, the 
real problems arise from the storage and disposal of radioac-
tive wastes and the potential for accidents.
Radioactive Wastes and Their Disposal
To understand the problems surrounding nuclear waste 
disposal, you must understand radioactive decay, a proc-
ess in which, as unstable isotopes eject particles and ra-
diation, they become stable and cease to be radioactive. 
As long as radioactive materials are kept isolated from 
humans and other organisms, the decay proceeds harm-
lessly.
Half-Life. The rate of radioactive decay is such that half of 
the starting amount of a given isotope will decay within a 
certain period. In the next equal period, half of the remain-
der (half of a half, which equals one-fourth of the original) 
decays, and so on. The time for half of the amount of a ra-
dioactive isotope to decay is known as the isotope’s half-life. 
The half-life of an isotope is always the same, regardless of 
the starting amount.
Each particular radioactive isotope has a characteristic 
half-life. The half-lives of various isotopes range from a 
fraction of a second to many thousands of years. Uranium 
fission results in a heterogeneous mixture of radioisotopes, 
the Fukushima power plant from 100 to 250 milliSieverts, 
making it possible for them to spend more time work-
ing at the stricken plant, but also increasing their risk of  
developing cancer.
Is radiation dangerous even at doses below 100 milli-
Sieverts? Some scientists point to the ability of living cells 
to repair small amounts of damage to DNA and believe 
that there is a threshold of radiation below which no bio-
logical effects occur. A study by the National Research 
Council (NRC)2 found that there is no safe level of radia-
tion, dismissing the idea of a threshold. Federal agencies 
employ the concept of no threshold and assume a direct 
relationship between the amount of radiation and the in-
cidence of cancer. The NRC report predicted that 1 in 
1,000 individuals would develop cancer from an exposure 
to 10 mSv; a tenfold increase in exposure would increase 
the risk to 1 in 100. Federal standards set 1.7 mSv/yr as 
the maximum exposure permitted for the general popu-
lace per year, except for medical X-rays.
Sources of Radiation. Nuclear power is by no means 
the only source of radiation. There is also normal back-
ground radiation from radioactive materials, such as ura-
nium and radon gas that occur naturally in the Earth’s 
crust and cosmic rays from outer space. For most people, 
background radiation is the major source of radiation 
exposure. In addition, we deliberately expose ourselves 
to radiation from medical and dental X-rays and, more 
and more frequently, from CT scans, by far the largest 
source of human-induced exposure. For the average per-
son, these deliberate exposures equal one-fifth the expo-
sure from background sources. The average person in the 
United States receives a dose of about 3.6 mSv per year 
(Table 1). Thus, the argument becomes one of relative 
hazards. That is, does or will the radiation from nuclear 
power significantly raise radiation levels and elevate the 
risk of developing cancer?
During normal operation of a nuclear power plant, 
the direct fission products remain within the fuel ele-
ments and the indirect products are maintained within 
the containment building, which houses the reactor. No 
routine discharges of radioactive materials (other than 
permissible minor stack emissions) into the environment 
occur. Even very close to an operating nuclear power 
plant, radiation levels from the plant are lower than nor-
mal background levels. A radiation detector will pick up 
more radiation from the ground or the concrete of a base-
ment floor than it will when held within 150 yards of a 
nuclear power plant. Careful measurements have shown 
that public exposure to radiation from normal operations 
of a power plant is less than 1% of natural background 
radiation.
tabLe 1  Relative Doses from Radiation Sources
Source
Dose
All sources (avg.)
3.6 mSv/year
Cosmic radiation at sea level*
0.26 mSv/year
Terrestrial radiation (elements in soil)
0.26 mSv/year
Radon in average house
2 mSv/year
X-rays and nuclear medicine (avg.)
0.50 mSv/year
Consumer products
0.11 mSv/year
Natural radioactivity in the body
0.39 mSv/year
Mammogram
0.30 mSv
Chest X-ray
0.10 mSv
CT scan of abdomen
10 mSv
Continued fallout from nuclear testing
0.01 mSv/year
Living near a nuclear power station  
(assuming perfect containment)
,0.01 mSv/year
Federal standards for the general populace
1.7 mSv/year
Source: Data from U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
*Increases 0.005 mSv for every 100 feet of elevation.
2National Research Council, Health Risks from Exposure to Low Levels of Ioniz-
ing Radiation: Beir VII-Phase 2 (Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, 
2005). Available at fermat.nap.edu/execsumm_pdf/11340.
427

Nuclear Power
geologic burial is the safest option for disposing of the highly 
radioactive spent fuel, but no nation has developed plans to 
the point of actually carrying out the burial. Most nuclear na-
tions have not even been able to find a site that may be suitable 
for receiving wastes. Where sites have been selected, questions 
about their safety have surfaced. The basic problem is that no 
rock formation can be guaranteed to remain stable and dry for 
tens of thousands (let alone millions) of years. Everywhere sci-
entists look, there is evidence of volcanic or earthquake activ-
ity or groundwater leaching within the past 10,000 years or so, 
which is to say that it may occur again in a similar period. If 
such events did occur, the still-radioactive wastes could escape 
into the environment and contaminate water, air, or soil, with 
consequent effects on humans and wildlife.
Yucca Mountain. In the United States, efforts to locate 
a long-term containment facility have been hampered by a se-
vere “not in my backyard” (NIMBY) syndrome. A number of 
states, under pressure from citizens, have passed legislation cat-
egorically prohibiting the disposal of nuclear wastes within their 
boundaries. In the meantime, the need to select and develop a 
the most common of which are listed in Table 2. Much 
of this material—in particular, the remaining 235U and the 
plutonium (239Pu) that has been created by the neutron 
bombardment of 238U—can be recovered and recycled for 
use as nuclear fuel in an operation called reprocessing. 
Although Britain and France have a large reprocessing 
operation, U.S. policy prohibits the practice because of 
concerns over plutonium and atomic weapons (plutonium 
can be more easily fabricated into nuclear weapons than 
can uranium).
The development of nuclear power went ahead without 
ever fully addressing the issue of what would be done with 
the radioactive wastes. Proponents of nuclear power gener-
ally assumed that the long-lived high-level wastes could be 
solidified, placed in sealed containers, and buried in deep, 
stable rock formations (geologic burial) as the need for such 
containment became necessary. However, this has not yet 
happened, anywhere. Thus, the current problem of nuclear 
waste disposal is twofold:
 • Short-term containment. Storage during this period 
allows the radioactive decay of short-lived isotopes 
(Table 2). In 10 years, fission wastes lose more than 
97% of their radioactivity. Wastes can be handled 
much more easily and safely after this loss occurs.
 • Long-term containment. The Environmental Protec-
tion Agency (EPA) had recommended a 10,000-year 
minimum to provide protection from the long-lived iso-
topes. However, some isotopes will remain radioactive 
for hundreds of thousands of years. Recognizing this, 
Congress extended the protection planning horizon to  
1 million years.
Tanks and Casks. For short-term containment, spent fuel 
is first stored in deep swimming pool–like tanks on the sites of 
nuclear power plants. The water in these tanks dissipates waste 
heat (which is still generated to some degree) and acts as a shield 
against the escape of radiation. The storage pools can typically 
accommodate 10 to 20 years of spent fuel. However, the storage 
pools at U.S. nuclear plants had been filled to 50% of their ca-
pacity by 2004 and will be at 100% by 2015. After a few years 
of decay, the spent fuel may be placed in air-cooled dry casks 
for interim storage until long-term storage becomes available 
(Fig. 11). The casks are engineered to resist floods, tornadoes, 
and extremes of temperature. Currently, 63 facilities (mostly 
nuclear plants) in the United States are licensed to employ dry 
storage, with the prospect of many more being licensed as pool 
storage capacity is exhausted.
In the meantime, the wastes from the world’s commercial 
reactors have been accumulating at a rate of 10,000 tons a year, 
reaching 260,000 tons at the end of 2011, almost all stored on-
site at the power plants. Of these wastes, 65,000 tons are in the 
United States. Furthermore, because of neutron bombardment 
of the reactor walls, all nuclear power plants will eventually add 
to the stockpile of radioactive wastes.
High-Level Nuclear Waste Disposal. The United States and 
most other countries that use nuclear power have decided that 
tabLe 2  Common Radioactive Isotopes 
Resulting from Uranium Fission  
and Their Half-Lives
Short-Lived Fission Products
Half-Life (days)
Strontium-89
50.5
Yttrium-91
58.5
Zirconium-95
64.0
Niobium-95
35.0
Molybdenum-99
2.8
Ruthenium-103
39.4
Iodine-131
8.1
Xenon-133
5.3
Barium-140
12.8
Cerium-141
32.5
Praseodymium-143
13.6
Neodymium-147
11.1
Long-Lived Fission Products
Half-Life (years)
Krypton-85
10.7
Strontium-90
28.0
Ruthenium-106
1.0
Cesium-137
30.0
Cerium-144
0.8
Promethium-147
2.6
Additional Product of Neutron 
Bombardment
Half-Life (years)
Plutonium-239
24,000
428

Nuclear Power
nuclear power plant waste dilemma. The commission issued its 
report3 early in 2012, with the following key recommendations:
 • There needs to be a new approach to selecting future 
nuclear waste management facilities, a transparent one 
based on consent of the states and communities involved 
in the selection.
 • A new federal corporation should plan and manage the 
waste disposal program, independent of the NRC.
 • There must be a prompt effort to develop a new perma-
nent geologic disposal facility. Even if the politics change 
and Yucca Mountain is given new life, the inventory 
of spent nuclear fuel will soon exceed the amount that 
could be stored at Yucca Mountain.
 • Prompt efforts are needed to develop one or more con-
solidated interim storage facilities; after cooling in con-
tainment pools for a decade or so, the spent fuel would 
be transferred to dry casks at interim sites in one or sev-
eral central locations.
It is interesting that one radioactive waste repository has 
already been constructed and is operating to receive defense-
related wastes—the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) near 
Carlsbad, New Mexico. The site is above a huge salt deposit, and 
the wastes are conveyed to salt caves 2,150 feet underground. In 
this case, the city of Carlsbad was happy to have the depository, 
which is accompanied by significant economic benefits. The site 
was opened in 1999, and by 2011, it had received more than 
10,000 shipments of wastes totaling 105,000 cubic yards. These 
wastes are largely plutonium-contaminated by-products of nu-
clear weapons plants and laboratories around the country. Ra-
dioactive wastes from weapons manufacture in the United States 
and Russia are discussed in Sound Science, “Radioactivity and 
the Military” ; except for the Megatons to Megawatts program 
long-term repository has become increasingly critical, given the 
buildup of spent fuel in every nuclear power plant. The Nuclear 
Waste Policy Act of 1982 committed the federal government to 
begin receiving nuclear waste from commercial power plants in 
1998. At the end of 1987, Congress called a halt to the debate 
and selected a remote site, Yucca Mountain, in southwestern 
Nevada (Fig. 12), to be the nation’s civilian nuclear waste dis-
posal site. Two other sites being considered were rejected.
Not surprisingly, Nevadans fought this selection, passing 
a law in 1989 that prohibits any storage of high-level radioac-
tive waste in the state. The federal government has the power 
to override state prohibitions, though, and the Nevada site has 
undergone intensive study and exploratory construction over the 
past 25 years, at a cost of $10 billion. In July 2002, President 
George W. Bush signed a resolution (passed by Congress) void-
ing a move by Nevada’s governor to block further development 
of the site. The Yucca Mountain facility was officially designated 
to be the nation’s nuclear waste repository. The DOE submitted 
a license application for operation of the Yucca Mountain repos-
itory to the NRC in June 2008, and NRC staff recommended 
that the agency adopt DOE’s environmental impact statement  
for the project.
Critics of the site and DOE’s plans for disposal question if 
any degree of safety can be guaranteed, given the possibilities of 
earthquakes, volcanic activity, or other changes in geologic time. 
Indeed, studies began to suggest that water would leak through 
the mountain into the repository, corrode the fuel assemblies 
stored there, and then release radioisotopes into groundwater. 
When it was ruled that the site would have to be guaranteed 
safe for a million years, things began to look bad for the NRC’s 
plans for long-term storage at Yucca Mountain.
Yucca Rejected. The Obama administration decided to 
terminate the Yucca Mountain program, citing health and safety 
concerns as the reason. Instead, the administration appointed a 
Blue Ribbon Commission to recommend a new strategy for the 
Figure 11 Dry cask storage. 
These dry storage casks contain spent fuel assemblies generated at the James 
A. Fitzpatrick nuclear power plant in Scriba, New York. The assemblies had been 
stored for more than 30 years in the spent fuel pool on the plant site. Each dry 
cask has a 3½-inch steel liner surrounded by 21 inches of reinforced concrete and 
weighs 126 tons.
Figure 12 Yucca Mountain, Nevada. This remote ridgeline in Nevada 
was chosen as the nation’s sole high-level nuclear waste depository. The site is 
on federally protected land, approximately 100 miles northwest of Las Vegas, 
Nevada.
3Lee H. Hamilton and Brent Scowcroft, chairmen. Draft Report of the Blue 
Ribbon Commission on America’s Nuclear Future. July 2011. www.brc.gov. 
Nov. 1, 2011.
429

Nuclear Power
was a split-second power surge to 100 times the maximum al-
lowed level. Steam explosions then blew the 2,000-ton top off 
the reactor, the reactor melted down, and a fire was ignited in 
the graphite that was being used as a moderator, burning for 
days. At least 50 tons of dust and debris bearing 100–200 mil-
lion curies of radioactivity in the form of fission products were 
released in a plume that rained radioactive particles over thou-
sands of square miles, 400 times the radiation fallout from the 
atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945.
Consequences. As the radioactive fallout settled, 
135,000 people were evacuated and relocated. The reactor 
was eventually sealed in a sarcophagus of concrete and steel. 
A barbed-wire fence now surrounds a 1,000-square-mile ex-
clusion zone around the reactor site. The soil remains con-
taminated with radioactive compounds, yet for years 2,000 
Ukrainian workers were bused in daily to work at the re-
maining reactor in the Chernobyl complex. In December 
2000, the last reactor was permanently shut down.
Only two engineers were directly killed by the explosion, 
but 28 of the personnel brought in to contain the reactor in 
the aftermath of the explosion died of radiation within a few 
months. Over a broad area downwind of the disaster, build-
ings and roadways were washed down to flush away radioac-
tive dust. Even with these precautions, many people in or near 
the evacuation zone were exposed to high levels of radiation, 
especially the short-lived radioisotope iodine-131. Predictions of 
hundreds of thousands of cancer deaths among those exposed 
followed shortly after the accident.
A report by a team of experts convened by United Na-
tions agencies4 has provided the most reliable assessment of 
the impacts of the accident on the surrounding populations. 
converting Russian weapons uranium to power-plant fuel, it is 
not a pretty picture.
Nuclear Power Accidents
Although the waste issues are a serious concern, it is the po-
tential for accidents that generates the greatest concern over 
nuclear power.
Three Mile Island. On March 28, 1979, the Three Mile Is-
land Nuclear Power Plant near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, 
suffered a partial meltdown as a result of a series of human 
and equipment failures and a flawed design. The steam gen-
erator (Fig. 8) shut down automatically because of a lack 
of power in its feedwater pumps, and eventually, a valve 
on top of the generator opened in response to the gradual 
buildup of pressure. Unfortunately, the valve remained stuck 
in the open position and drained coolant water from the  
reactor vessel. There were no sensors to indicate that this pres-
sure-operated relief valve was open. Operators responded poorly 
to the emergency, shutting down the emergency cooling system 
at one point and shutting down the pumps in the reactor vessel. 
One instrument error compounded the problem: Gauges told 
operators that the reactor was full of water when, actually, it 
needed water badly. The core was uncovered for a time and suf-
fered a partial meltdown. Ten million curies of radioactive gas 
were released into the atmosphere.
The drama held the whole nation—particularly the 300,000 
residents of metropolitan Harrisburg, who were poised for evac-
uation—in suspense for several days. The situation was eventu-
ally brought under control, and no injuries or deaths occurred, 
but it would have been much worse if the meltdown had been 
complete. The reactor was so badly damaged and so much radi-
oactive contamination occurred inside the containment building 
that the continuing cleanup proved to be as costly as building a 
new power plant. There are no plans to restart the reactor. GPU 
Nuclear, operator of the plant, has since paid out $30 million to 
settle claims from the accident, although the company has never 
admitted the existence of any radiation-caused illnesses.
Chernobyl. Prior to 1986, the scenario for a worst-case nu-
clear power plant disaster was a matter of speculation. Then, at 
1:24 AM local time on April 26, 1986, events at a nuclear power 
plant in Ukraine (then a part of the Soviet Union) made such 
speculation irrelevant (Fig. 13). Since that day, Chernobyl has 
served as a horrible example of nuclear energy gone awry.
Here’s how it happened: While conducting a test of standby 
diesel generators, engineers disabled the power plant’s safety sys-
tems, withdrew the control rods, shut off the flow of steam to 
the generators, and decreased the flow of coolant water in the 
reactor. However, they did not allow for the radioactive heat 
energy generated by the fuel core, and lacking coolant, the reac-
tor began to heat up. The extra steam that was produced could 
not escape and had the effect of rapidly boosting the energy pro-
duction of the reaction. In an attempt to quell the reactor, the 
engineers quickly inserted the carbon-tipped control rods. The 
carbon tips acted as moderators, slowing down the neutrons that 
were produced in the reaction. The neutrons, however, were still 
speedy enough to trigger more fission reactions, and the  result 
Figure 13 Chernobyl. An aerial view of the Chernobyl reactor disaster. This 
disaster was a serious nuclear power accident, directly killing at least 31 people 
and putting countless others in the surrounding countryside at risk for future 
cancer deaths.
4The Chernobyl Forum: 2003–2005, Chernobyl’s Legacy: Health, Environmen-
tal and Socio-Economic Impacts, and Recommendations to the Governments of 
Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine, 2nd rev. version (Vienna, Austria: 
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005). Available at www.iaea.org 
/Publications/Booklets/Chernobyl/chernobyl.pdf.
430

Nuclear Power
television’s Health program reported increases in thyroid can-
cer some 20 to 70 times above normal in many regions of the 
country and recommended that people between the ages of 
20 and 40 from regions around the Ukraine seek ultrasound 
 thyroid examinations.
The hastily constructed shelter over the damaged power 
plant is in a state of decay, prompting a plan for construction 
of a safe structure for the long-term entombment of the reactor 
The main health impact has been an outbreak of thyroid 
cancer among children who drank milk contaminated with 
radioactive iodine. Thousands of cases have been diagnosed 
in this group, with numerous deaths. Several thousand ad-
ditional deaths due to cancer are expected, but the increase 
will be hard to detect because of the hundreds of thousands of 
cancer deaths from other causes to be expected in the affected 
populations. However, 22 years after the accident,  Russian 
SoUND SCIENCE
Radioactivity and the Military
Some of the worst 
failures in handling 
radioactivity have 
occurred at military 
facilities in the United 
States and in the former Soviet Union. A 
recent calculation taken from government 
figures indicated that the U.S. nuclear 
program has, over the years, sickened 36,500 
Americans and killed more than 4,000, most 
of these in connection with the manufacture 
and testing of nuclear weapons (most of 
the sickness and death is due to cancer). 
Further, liquid high-level wastes stored at 
many U.S. facilities have leaked into the 
environment and contaminated wildlife, 
sediments, groundwater, and soil. Activities 
at these sites have been shrouded in secrecy; 
only recently have documents revealing past 
accidents and radioactive releases been 
declassified and made available to the public. 
Deliberate releases of uranium dust, xenon-
133, iodine-131, and tritium gas have been 
documented at Hanford, Washington; Fernald, 
Ohio; Oak Ridge, Tennessee; and Savannah 
River, South Carolina. Cleaning up these sites 
is now the responsibility of the DOE, which 
has already spent $50 billion on this problem 
and estimates that the final cost could run as 
high as $250 billion—probably the largest 
environmental project the country will ever 
undertake.
From Russia, with Curies
USSR military weapons facilities have been even 
more irresponsible. The worst is a giant complex 
called Chelyabinsk-65, located in the Ural Moun-
tains. For at least 20 years, nuclear wastes were 
discharged into the Techa River and then into 
Lake Karachay. At least 1,000 cases of leukemia 
have been traced to radioactive contamination 
from the Chelyabinsk facility. Even today, stand-
ing for one hour (thus receiving 6 Sv of radia-
tion) on the shore of Lake Karachay will cause 
radiation poisoning and death within a week. 
The lake dried up in the summer of 1967, and 
winds blew radioactive dust with 5 million curies 
across the countryside, contaminating hundreds 
of thousands of people. This lake is considered 
to be the most polluted spot on Earth, a legacy 
of the Cold War and an enormous continuing 
source of radioactive contamination. Recogniz-
ing the dangers of spreading contamination, 
Russian authorities have filled the lake with hol-
low concrete blocks, rocks, and soil, and plants 
now spread their greenery over this permanently 
contaminated site.
Megatons to Megawatts
The end of the Cold War has brought the wel-
come dismantling of nuclear weapons by the 
United States and the nations of the former 
Soviet Union. Thousands of nuclear weapons 
are being dismantled, many as a result of earlier 
agreements between U.S. President Bill Clinton 
and Russian President Boris Yeltsin. The agree-
ments include a joint closure of all remaining 
plutonium weapons production reactors, funds 
to aid Russia in destroying missile silos and 
dismantling nuclear submarines and bombs, 
and vast cuts in the nuclear arsenals of the two 
former enemies. The radioactive components of 
the weapons must be handled with great care 
and disposed of where they are safe from illegal 
access and where they will pose no danger to 
human health for centuries to come—a daunt-
ing task.
One element of the U.S.–Russian agree-
ments, the Megatons to Megawatts 
Program, involves a government-industry part-
nership wherein a private U.S. company oversees 
the dilution of weapons-grade uranium to the 
much lower enrichment of power-plant uranium, 
sells it to United States nuclear power plants, 
and pays the Russian government a market price 
(more than $7 billion to date). As a result, by 
November 2011, 17,000 nuclear warheads had 
been eliminated, and 433 tons of highly enriched 
uranium had been diluted to some 12,500 tons 
of power-plant fuel (see illustration). Fully half 
of the uranium fuel currently used by U.S. power 
plants comes from this program.
The closing down of much of the nuclear 
warfare enterprise is certainly a welcome devel-
opment, but the problems of security and of dis-
posal of the wastes will remain as a long-term 
legacy of the Cold War.
S
f
r
o
f
An explosion at Soviet Russia’s military weapons facility at Chelyabinsk so heavily contaminated 
the region that many local villages had to be abandoned and the residents resettled. This was 
the village of Metlino.
431

Nuclear Power
Safety and Nuclear Power
As a result of Three Mile Island and other, lesser incidents in 
the United States, the NRC has upgraded safety standards not 
only in the technical design of nuclear power plants, but also in 
maintenance procedures and in the training of operators. Thus, 
proponents contend, nuclear plants were designed to be safe in 
the beginning, and now they are safer than ever. Some propo-
nents of nuclear power claim that we now have the technology 
to build inherently safe nuclear reactors, designed in such a way 
that any accident would result in an automatic quenching of 
the chain reaction and suppression of heat from nuclear decay. 
In reality, however, there is no such thing as an inherently safe 
reactor, because that concept implies no release of radioactivity 
under any circumstances—an impossible expectation.
Passive Safety. Instead, nuclear scientists have designed a 
new generation of nuclear reactors with built-in passive safety 
features rather than the active safety features found in current 
reactors. Active safety relies on operator-controlled actions, ex-
ternal power, electrical signals, and so forth. As accidents have 
shown, operators may override such safety factors, and electric-
ity, valves, and meters can fail or give false information. Passive 
safety, by contrast, involves engineering devices and structures 
that make it virtually impossible for the reactor to go beyond 
acceptable levels of power, temperature, and radioactive emis-
sions; their operation depends only on standard physical phe-
nomena, such as gravity and resistance to high temperatures.
New Generations of Reactors. Nuclear scientists distin-
guish four generations of nuclear reactors. Generation I reactors 
are the earliest, developed in the 1950s and 1960s; few are still 
operating. The majority of today’s reactors are Generation II 
vintage, the large baseline power plants, of several designs. Gen-
eration III refers to newer designs with passive safety features 
and much simpler power plants—among them the so-called 
 Advanced Boiling-Water Reactors (ABWRs) (Fig. 14). General 
Electric (GE) has submitted the Economic Simplified Boiling 
Water Reactor (ESBWR) design for NRC approval. Compared 
with GE’s current ABWR, this new design has many more pas-
sive safety features. In the event of a LOCA, two separate pas-
sive systems would allow water to drain by gravity to the reactor 
vessel. In the United States, four utility companies have applied 
for a federal construction and operating license based on this 
new reactor; of the 26 new U.S. license applications, the major-
ity are for the Westinghouse AP1000 Advanced Passive Reactor, 
a pressurized-water reactor with new passive safety features. In 
2012, the NRC awarded a license for two AP1000 reactors to 
be built at a site near Augusta, Georgia, the first license to be 
given in 34 years.
In East Asia, the nuclear reactor design of choice is 
now the ABWR, which produces 1,400 MW of electric-
ity. Japan, with 55 nuclear plants, has four of these in 
operation; several more are under construction in Japan 
and Taiwan, and there are plans for many more. The new 
plants are designed to last for 60 years, can be constructed 
within five years, and are simple enough that a single op-
erator can control them under normal conditions. They 
complex. A $2.1 billion “New Safe Confinement,” funded by 
some 29 governments and coordinated by the European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development, will consist of a steel 
structure large enough to house the Statue of Liberty; construc-
tion was begun in 2008 and will take six years to complete.
Could It Happen Here? Are we in the United States in 
danger of such an explosion occurring at a nuclear power plant? 
Nuclear scientists argue that the answer is no because U.S. 
power plants have a number of design features that should make 
a repeat of Chernobyl impossible. For one thing, the Chernobyl 
reactor used graphite as a moderator rather than the water used 
in LWRs. Further, LWRs are incapable of developing a power 
surge more than twice their normal power, well within the de-
signed containment capacity of the reactor vessel. Finally, LWRs 
have more backup systems to prevent the core from overheating, 
and these reactors are housed in thick, concrete-walled contain-
ment buildings designed to withstand explosions such as the one 
that occurred in the Chernobyl reactor, which had no contain-
ment building. LWRs are not immune to accidents, however, 
the most serious being a core meltdown as a result of a total 
loss of coolant. This is what happened at three of the reactors at 
the Fukushima Daiichi power plant as a result of the earthquake 
and tsunami off the coast of Japan on March 11, 2011.
Fukushima Daiichi. The opening story of this chapter de-
scribes what can go wrong with nuclear power in the face of 
unexpected natural disaster. There was no anticipation of such 
an intense earthquake accompanied by a strong tsunami and, as 
a result, no way to accurately protect the power plant. Power 
was lost from the electrical grid and backup diesel generators, 
leaving only eight hours of batteries to provide power for cool-
ing the reactors. There was no way to provide cooling to spent 
fuel once the water drained out of their pools. There was no 
way to vent dangerous gases from the containment buildings. 
Again, could such an accident happen in the United States? The 
Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS), an NGO that has spent 
years evaluating nuclear power plant safety, believes that it 
could.5 A task force organized by the NRC disagrees.6
The real cost of the accidents at Three Mile Island, Cherno-
byl, and Fukushima must be reckoned in terms of public trust. 
Public confidence in nuclear energy plummeted after the first 
two accidents, which pointed to human error as a highly sig-
nificant factor in nuclear safety—and human error is something 
the public understands well. Fukushima wrote a new chapter 
in nuclear power vulnerability to disasters, and the public also 
understands natural disasters. Nuclear proponents suffered a se-
rious loss of credibility with Three Mile Island, but Chernobyl 
and Fukushima were their worst nightmares come true—full ca-
tastrophes, just what the antinuclear movement had predicted 
might someday occur. Given that there will soon be 500 nuclear 
power plants in operation globally, the future safety of nuclear 
power must be a major concern.
5Union of Concerned Scientists. “Can It Happen Here?” Catalyst, Summer 2011: 7–9.
6Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Recommendations for Enhancing Reactor 
Safety in the 21st Century. Near-Term Task Force. July 12, 2011. www.psr.org. 
Nov. 3, 2011.
432

Nuclear Power
power plant instead of the World Trade Center? This ques-
tion has raised great concern in many venues, from the NRC, 
to Congress, to local hearings in municipalities that host nu-
clear plants. After some uncertainty following September 11, 
the general consensus is that a jetliner could not penetrate 
the very thick walls of the containment vessel protecting the 
reactor. After September 11, the NRC immediately beefed 
up the requirements for security around every power plant—
adding more guards, more physical barriers, and vehicle 
checks at greater distances from the plant—as well as keep-
ing the shoreline near the plants off limits. A recent National 
Academy of Sciences (NAS) report7 concluded that the most 
vulnerable locations for terrorist attack are the spent-fuel 
pools. The NAS recommended policy decisions that would 
protect the pools from a loss-of-coolant-pool-water event 
brought on by terrorist activity.
New Safety Issues. The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disas-
ter has generated new concerns about the safety of both cur-
rent and possible future nuclear power reactors. In the United 
States, the NRC has deployed a defense-in-depth philosophy 
generate electricity at a cost competitive with the costs of 
fossil fuel options.
Generation IV plants are now being designed and will likely 
be built within the next 20 years. One example of a Generation 
IV reactor is the pebble-bed modular reactor (PBMR), which 
will feed spherical carbon-coated uranium fuel pebbles gradually 
through the reactor vessel, like a gumball machine. The PBMR 
will be cooled with fluidized helium, an inert gas, which will 
also spin the turbines. These reactors will be small, will produce 
about 160 MW of power, and are expected to be cheap to build 
and inexpensive to operate. The modules can be built in a fac-
tory and shipped to the location of the power plant.
One motive behind the new designs is to restore the pub-
lic’s confidence in nuclear energy. Previously, nuclear propo-
nents had emphasized the very low probabilities of accidents. 
As we have seen, though, improbable events can happen, and 
when they happen to nuclear power plants, the consequences 
can be dreadful. It may be that the public was on the way to 
a renewed appreciation of nuclear power, but this was set 
back on September 11, 2001.
Terrorism and Nuclear Power. What would have hap-
pened if one of the terrorist suicide groups that took over 
four airliners on September 11, 2001, had targeted a nuclear 
Figure 14 Advanced Boiling-
Water Reactor. The core is surrounded 
by three concentric structures: a reactor pres-
sure vessel, in which heat from the reactor 
boils water directly into steam; a concrete 
chamber (outlined with heavy black line) and 
a water pool, which together contain and 
quench steam vented from the reactor in an 
emergency; and a concrete building, which 
acts as a secondary containment vessel and 
shield. Any excessive pressure in the reactor 
will automatically open valves that release 
steam into a quenching pool, reducing the 
pressure. Water from the quenching pool 
can, if necessary, flow downward to cool the 
core. (Source: “Advanced Light-Water Reactors,” 
by M. W. Golay and N. E. Todreas. Copyright 1990 
by Scientific American. All rights reserved.)
Steam condenser
Control rods
Steam
Feedwater
Reactor
pressure
vessel
Cooling pool
Quenching
pool
Safety
relief
line
Concrete
containment
boundary
Vent
Steam to power
turbine
Cooled water return
7National Research Council, Safety and Security of Commercial Spent Nuclear 
Fuel Storage: Public Report (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006). 
Available at www.nap.edu/catalog/11263.html.
433

Nuclear Power
billion-dollar liability in a matter of minutes, as Three Mile 
Island demonstrated. Thus, nuclear power involves a finan-
cial risk that utility executives have been hesitant to take.
Longevity? Originally, it was thought that nuclear plants 
would have a lifetime of about 40 years. It now appears that life-
times will be considerably less for many of the older plants. For 
example, the government of Ontario decided in 2005 to shut 
down two 540-MW CANDU nuclear reactors more than a dec-
ade before their scheduled retirement. The reactors had been idle 
since 1997 because of corrosion in the pipes carrying heavy cool-
ant water from the reactor core. The repair bill was estimated to 
be $1.6 billion, approximately the cost of a new reactor.
Worldwide, more than 119 nuclear plants have been shut 
down after an average operating lifetime of 20 years. This 
shorter lifetime substantially increases the cost of the power 
produced because the cost of the plant must be repaid over a 
shorter period. The lifetimes of nuclear power plants are shorter 
than originally expected due to embrittlement and corrosion. 
Embrittlement occurs as neutrons from fission bombard the re-
actor vessel and other hardware. Gradually, this neutron bom-
bardment causes the metals to become brittle enough that they 
may crack under thermal stress—for example, when emergency 
coolant waters are introduced in the event of a LOCA. When the 
reactor vessel becomes too brittle to be considered safe, the plant 
must either be shut down or be repaired at great cost.
Corrosion is a normal consequence of steam generation. 
Very hot, pressurized water flows from the core into the steam 
generator through thousands of 3/4-inch-diameter pipes im-
mersed in water (Fig. 8). The water inside and outside these pipes 
contains corrosive chemicals that, over time, cause cracks to de-
velop in some of the pipes. If the main line conveying steam from 
the generator to the turbine were to rupture, the sudden increase 
in pressure in the generator could cause several cracked pipes to 
break at once. In that case, radioactive moderator-coolant water 
would be released and would overload safety systems, forcing 
the plant to vent radioactive gas to the outside. Cracked pipes 
are “repaired” basically by plugging them, cutting the overall 
plant power. In March 1995, using a new high-tech probe, of-
ficials discovered that up to half of the steam generator pipes 
in the Maine Yankee plant in Wiscasset, Maine, had developed 
cracks, some penetrating 80% of the pipes’ thickness. As a re-
sult, the plant was shut down after only 24 years of operation. 
Recent problems of corrosion in reactor vessels have both sur-
prised and alarmed NRC officials; apparently, the cooling water 
can be far more corrosive than originally expected.
Decommissioning. Closing down, or decommissioning, a 
power plant can be extremely costly. Decommissioning Maine 
Yankee (Fig. 15), now complete, cost $635 million. (By com-
parison, the plant cost just $231 million to build in the late 
1960s.) The site now houses some 64 dry casks containing the 
spent-fuel assemblies, which await disposal at their final rest-
ing place, wherever that happens to be. The owners of the plant 
are allowed to bill former customers to recover some costs—a 
“stranded cost” nobody likes. Faced with these costs, some utili-
ties are opting to repair older plants in spite of the high costs 
of such repairs. Other closed reactors are on sites currently 
that covers everything from design and operation, to precau-
tions against failures and mistakes, containment against the 
release of radioisotopes in case of accidents, and emergency 
plans to protect citizens. Nevertheless, the Near-Term Task 
Force8 felt that the NRC’s approach could be strengthened by:
 • Clarifying and solidifying the regulatory framework 
that governs power plants. This would correct the 
current patchwork of regulations and voluntary in-
dustry initiatives.
 • Upgrading where necessary the units that might be af-
fected by earthquakes and flooding events and consid-
ering responses to events that are highly unlikely but 
would have catastrophic repercussions if they happen.
 • Improving the venting and prevention against potential 
hydrogen gas release.
 • Strengthening the on-site emergency capabilities against 
failures of electrical power to the plants.
The UCS analysis9 agreed with these recommendations 
and added a further one:
 • Require plant owners to move spent fuel after five years 
to dry cask storage; this lowers the risk of overheating in 
the pools in case of lost cooling water (as in Fukushima).
The potential for accidents and terrorist acts certainly 
raises questions about a more widespread promotion of 
nuclear power. However, as Figure 2 shows, utilities in the 
United States were already turning away from nuclear power 
before Three Mile Island and Chernobyl. The reasons were 
mainly economic.
Economics of Nuclear Power
What was behind so many canceled nuclear power plants 
(more than 100)? First, projected future energy demands 
were overly ambitious, so a slower growth rate in the demand 
for electricity postponed orders for all types of power plants. 
Second, increasing safety standards for the construction and 
operation of nuclear power plants caused the costs of plants 
to increase at least fivefold, even after inflation is considered. 
Current nuclear power plants cost twice as much to build per 
megawatt compared with a coal plant and five times as much 
as a natural-gas plant. Adding to the rise in costs was the 
withdrawal of government subsidies to the nuclear industry. 
Third, public protests frequently delayed the construction or 
start-up of a new power plant. Such delays increased costs 
still more because the utility was paying interest on its invest-
ment of several billion dollars even when the plant was not 
producing power. As these costs were passed on, consumers 
became yet more disillusioned with nuclear power. Finally, 
safety systems may protect the public, but they do not pre-
vent an accident from financially ruining the utility. Because 
radioactivity prevents straightforward cleanup and repair, an 
accident can convert a multibillion-dollar asset into a multi-
8Task Force, p. ix.
9UCS, p. 8.
434

Nuclear Power
Breeder (Fast-Neutron) Reactors
Recall from Section 2 that when a 235U atom fissions, two or 
three neutrons are ejected. Only one of these neutrons needs to 
hit another 235U atom to sustain a chain reaction; the others are 
absorbed by something else. The breeder reactor is designed so 
that (nonfissionable) 238U absorbs the extra neutrons, which 
are allowed to maintain their high speed. (Such reactors are 
now called fast-neutron reactors.) When this occurs, the 238U 
is converted to plutonium (239Pu), which can then be purified 
and used as a nuclear fuel, just like 235U. Thus, the fast-neutron 
reactor converts nonfissionable 238U into fissionable 239Pu, and 
because the fission of 235U generally produces two neutrons in 
addition to the one needed to sustain the chain reaction, the fast-
neutron reactor may produce more fuel than it consumes. Fur-
thermore, 99.3% of all uranium is 238U, so converting that to 
239Pu through fast-neutron reactors effectively increases nuclear 
fuel reserves more than a hundredfold.
In the United States and elsewhere, small fast-neutron re-
actors are operated for military purposes. France, Russia, and 
Japan are currently the only nations with commercial fast-neu-
tron reactors, and these have not been in continuous use. Fast-
neutron reactors present most of the problems and hazards of 
standard fission reactors, plus a few more. The consequences of 
a meltdown in a fast-neutron reactor would be much more seri-
ous than those of a meltdown in an ordinary fission reactor, due 
to the large amounts of 239Pu, with its half-life of 24,000 years. 
In addition, because plutonium can be purified and fabricated 
into nuclear weapons more easily than can 235U, the potential 
for the diversion of fast-neutron reactor fuel to illicit weapons 
production is greater. Hence, the safety and security precautions 
needed for fast-neutron reactors are greater. Also, fast-neutron 
reactors are more expensive to build and operate. However, they 
have the ability to extract much more energy from recycled nu-
clear fuel, and they produce much less high-level waste than do 
conventional nuclear plants.
Reprocessing
The United States has enough uranium stockpiled to satisfy cur-
rent industry needs. Although the global supply of uranium is 
not a problem right now, a number of countries are reprocess-
ing spent fuel through chemical processes, recovering plutonium 
and mixing it with 238U to produce mixed-oxide (MOX) fuel 
that is about 5% plutonium and suitable for further use in many 
nuclear power plants. In this way, some of the high-level waste is 
reused and does not add to the stockpile of waste.
The Bush administration DOE established a program called 
the Advance Fuel Cycle Initiative (AFCI), moving toward estab-
lishing reprocessing in the United States as a way of reducing 
our growing inventory of spent fuel. However, the Obama DOE 
has canceled this initiative because of concerns about security 
and has redirected AFCI into a program that simply provides 
funding for academic research—on fuel separation and trans-
mutation of plutonium to useful fuels, among other topics. One 
outcome of AFCI is the International Framework for Nuclear 
Energy Cooperation (IFNEC), a partnership of 25 countries 
aiming to improve the proliferation-resistance of the nuclear fuel 
cycle and work toward cooperative reprocessing of used fuel in 
 occupied by active units. The old, closed-down reactors are sim-
ply defueled and allowed to sit until the day when all the reac-
tors are closed and the entire site must be decommissioned. In 
one closed reactor (Humboldt Bay, California), only the nuclear 
components were removed, and the plant was converted to a 
conventional natural-gas plant.
New Life? Until the Fukushima disaster, nuclear power was 
being viewed more favorably by policy makers, as well as by 
many in the environmental community, in spite of the economic 
issues. Most of the operating nuclear power plants in the United 
States were built before global climate change was recognized 
as a serious problem, but concerns about the greenhouse gas 
emissions of conventional coal-fired power plants have brought 
many to reconsider the advantages of nuclear power. This has 
come into sharp focus as the time has been drawing near for the 
retirement of a number of older nuclear plants, most of which 
will reach the end of their operating licenses within the next 10 
years. As plants reach the end of their operating licenses (after 
30 years or so), owners are routinely applying for license ex-
tensions. After an NRC review, these are awarded, and many 
plants now are licensed to operate for 60 years. With 28 license 
applications for new plants received and three site permits and 
one license issued, the NRC has a renewed set of responsibilities 
after years of status quo. Most of the new reactors planned are 
to be built on the sites of existing nuclear power plants. In the 
United States at least, nuclear power has a good track record, 
and the global warming imperative plus our growing need for 
electricity suggest that nuclear power will continue its revival.
4 More Advanced Reactors
Uranium—especially 235U—is not a highly abundant mineral 
on Earth. At the height of optimism about nuclear energy in 
the 1960s, when as many as 1,000 plants were envisioned by 
the turn of the century, it was forecast that shortages of 235U 
would develop. Breeder reactors, which utilize chain reac-
tions, were seen as the solution to this problem.
Figure 15 Maine Yankee. The Maine Yankee Nuclear Power Plant in the 
process of being decommissioned, in 2003. The decommissioning is now complete, 
involving the removal of 200,000 tons of solid waste by rail, truck, and barge.
435

Nuclear Power
heated to the necessary temperature. Some controlled fusion 
has been achieved in the Tokamak devices, and in late 1994, a 
Tokamak facility at the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory 
in Princeton, New Jersey, achieved 10.7 MW of fusion power 
in 0.27 seconds of reaction. As yet, however, the break-even 
point has not been reached: More energy is required to run the 
magnets than is obtained by fusion. For example, it took 39.5 
MW of energy to sustain the reaction at Princeton.
An international research team from seven countries is 
working on a design for an International Thermonuclear 
Experimental Reactor (ITER), a prototype fusion reactor of 
the Tokamak variety. The facility, under construction in Ca-
darache, France, is expected to cost more than $20 billion, 
and the reactor is expected to produce 10 times as much en-
ergy as it consumes. Recently, the United States rejoined the 
project some 10 years after withdrawing because of concerns 
about costs and the science itself. The most optimistic view 
sees the ITER coming on line by 2019. As this plan indicates, 
developing, building, and testing a fusion power plant will 
require many more years and many billions of dollars. This 
assumes that the engineering difficulties will be overcome, 
which is by no means a given. Thus, fusion is, at best, a very 
long-term and uncertain option. Many scientists believe that 
fusion power will always be the elusive pot of gold at the 
end of the rainbow. The standard joke about fusion power is 
this: It is the energy source of the future and always will be!
5 The Future of Nuclear Power
With fossil fuels contributing to global climate change and with 
alternatives such as solar and wind power in their early stages, 
the long-term outlook for energy is discouraging. Using nuclear 
power seems to be an obvious choice; however, there contin-
ues to be organized opposition to nuclear energy, and it is still 
a costly technology, highly dependent on government patron-
age. After the Fukushima Daiichi power-plant disaster, most 
countries are examining their nuclear options, as we have seen. 
However, a total of 65 nuclear reactors are currently under con-
struction (Fig. 17) and 441 are still operating, generating 13.5% 
of the world’s electricity. Russia and other eastern European 
countries are holding onto their nuclear power and building  
fast reactors. It remains to be seen if this partnership develops 
into something more substantial than just consulting and re-
search, however.
Fusion Reactors
The vast energy emitted by the Sun and other stars comes 
from fusion (Fig. 5b). The Sun, as well as other stars, is com-
posed mostly of hydrogen. Solar energy is the result of the 
fusion of hydrogen nuclei (protons) into larger atoms, such as 
helium. Scientists have duplicated the process in the hydrogen 
bomb, but hydrogen bombs hardly constitute a useful release 
of energy. The aim of fusion technology is to carry out fusion 
in a controlled manner in order to provide a practical source 
of heat for boiling water to power steam turbogenerators.
The d–t Reaction. Because hydrogen is an abundant element 
on Earth (there are two atoms of it in every molecule of water) 
and helium is an inert, nonpolluting, nonradioactive gas, hydro-
gen fusion is promoted as the ultimate solution to all our energy 
problems; that is, fusion affords pollution-free energy from a 
virtually inexhaustible resource: water. However, most current 
designs do not use regular hydrogen (1H), but rather employ the 
isotopes deuterium (2H) and tritium (3H) in what is called the 
d–t reaction. Deuterium is a naturally occurring, nonradioactive 
isotope that can be extracted in almost any desired amount from 
the hydrogen in seawater. Tritium, by contrast, is an unstable 
gaseous radioactive isotope that must be produced artificially. 
Radioactive and difficult to contain, tritium is a hazardous sub-
stance. As a result, fusion reactors could easily become a source 
of radioactive tritium leaking into the environment unless effec-
tive (and costly) designs are used to prevent that.
In the present state of the art, fusion power is still an en-
ergy consumer rather than an energy producer. The problem is 
that it takes an extremely high temperature—some 100 million 
degrees Celsius—and high pressure to get hydrogen atoms to 
fuse. In the hydrogen bomb, the temperature and pressure are 
achieved by using a fission bomb as an igniter. Getting to the 
high temperature is only one part of the problem; extracting 
the heat from the reacting region is also a daunting task, given 
the large amount of energy released from the fusion reactions.
NIF vs. ITER. Efforts are well under way to demonstrate that 
controlled fusion is possible. One method is to focus an array of 
powerful laser beams on a pellet containing hydrogen isotopes 
(d–t). The laser beams would crush the core of the pellet with 
such energy that the hydrogen atoms inside would fuse together 
(ignite) and release energy. This method is employed at the 
U.S. National Ignition Facility (NIF) in Livermore, California 
(Fig. 16), a $3.5 billion facility completed in 2009 and getting 
close to achieving better than break-even results—releasing more 
energy than the energy of the laser beams. This is a demonstra-
tion project, however, and even if it works, it would only gener-
ate about 3.5 kilowatts of heat, which would only be enough 
to power one home. The scale-up needed to accomplish laser-
driven fusion power is intimidating, but the Japanese and Euro-
peans also have plans to work on this basic method.
A second process is the Tokamak design, in which ion-
ized hydrogen is contained within a magnetic field while being 
Figure 16 National Ignition Facility. The exterior of the National Igni-
tion Facility, a 10-story building the size of three football fields, is pictured here. 
NIF is the world’s largest and highest-energy fusion laser system and the nation’s 
largest scientific project.
436

Nuclear Power
Opponents of nuclear power also cite the basic mismatch 
between nuclear power and the energy problem. The main 
energy problem for the United States is an eventual shortage 
of crude oil for transportation purposes, yet nuclear power 
produces electricity, which is not yet used much for trans-
portation. Consequently, nuclear power simply competes 
with coal-fired power in meeting the demands for baseload 
electrical power. Given the high costs and additional finan-
cial risks of nuclear power plants, coal is cheaper, and the 
United States does have abundant coal reserves.
Nonetheless, there are still the environmental problems 
of mining and burning coal, especially global climate change. 
Burning coal emits more CO2 per unit of energy produced 
than any other form of energy does. If the long-term environ-
mental costs were factored into the price of coal, that price 
would be considerably higher than it is now.
In the final analysis, nuclear power may be a unique en-
ergy option, but it is also controversial. Interestingly, public 
opinion about nuclear power has been shifting. For a time, 
polls indicated that Americans viewed nuclear power as increas-
ingly important, in the light of surging prices for oil and gas. 
Some leaders in the environmental field are viewing nuclear en-
ergy more favorably, given the serious consequences for global 
 climate change of continued use of fossil fuels. However, shortly 
after Fukushima, an ABC News/Washington Post poll indicated 
that 64% of Americans oppose any new nuclear construction. 
Opposition continues because of the perceived risks to both 
human health and the environment and because of the mismatch 
to our most critical energy problem—an impending shortage of 
fuel for transportation. Opponents don’t believe that the benefits 
are worth the risks.
Rebirth of Nuclear Power
If nuclear energy is to have a brighter future, it will be be-
cause we have found the continued use of fossil fuels to be 
so damaging to the atmosphere that we have placed limits 
on their use but have not been able to develop adequate 
 alternative energy sources. Nuclear supporters point out 
more. A new plant is being built in Finland, and the United 
Kingdom is planning a new generation of reactors to replace its 
aging fleet. Asian countries are welcoming nuclear power, with 
China, South Korea, and India seemingly intent on using it to 
fulfill a major share of their energy needs. The International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) predicts that the  Fukushima dis-
aster will slow growth in nuclear energy but not reverse it. The 
agency also predicts that nuclear power will double its produc-
tion of energy by 2030.
opposition
Opposition to nuclear power is based on several premises:
 • People have a general distrust of technology they do not 
understand, especially when that technology carries with 
it the potential for catastrophic accidents or the hidden, 
but real, capacity to induce cancer.
 • Problems involving lax safety, operator failures, and cover-
ups by nuclear plants and their regulatory agencies have oc-
curred in the United States, Canada, and Japan.
 • The problems of high construction costs and unexpect-
edly short operational lifetimes have already been men-
tioned. Thus, the economic argument can also be used to 
oppose nuclear power.
 • The nuclear industry has repeatedly presented nuclear 
energy as extremely safe, arguing that the probabilities 
of accidents occurring are very low. However, when ac-
cidents do occur, probabilities become realities, and the 
arguments are moot.
 • Nuclear power plants are viewed as prime targets for 
terrorist attacks. Critics argue that, therefore, it only 
makes sense to reduce the number of such targets, not 
add more of them.
 • There remains the crucial problem of disposing of nu-
clear waste. Siting a long-term nuclear waste repository 
has been a difficult political as well as technological 
problem in country after country.
27
11
6
5
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
30
5
10
15
20
25
0
China
Russian Federation
India
Republic of Korea 
Bulgaria
Japan
Slovak Republic
Taiwan
Ukraine
Argentina
Brazil
Finland
France
Pakistan
USA
Number of reactors under construction
Figure 17 Nuclear power re-
actors under construction, 
2010. Worldwide, 65 reactors are under 
active construction, with an electrical 
capacity of 63 Gigawatts. (Source: Data from 
International Atomic Energy Agency.)
437

Nuclear Power
mendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission should be 
adopted.
Nuclear Energy Policies. President George W. Bush made 
expanding nuclear energy a major component of his energy 
policy by signing into law the Energy Policy Act of 2005, 
which included a tax credit for the first 6,000 MW of new 
nuclear capacity for the first eight years of operation, insur-
ance to protect companies building new reactors from the 
risk of regulatory delays, and federal loan guarantees for up 
to 80% of construction costs of new power plants. The act 
also authorized funds for the planning and construction of a 
nuclear plant that would produce hydrogen from water (the 
Next Generation Nuclear Plant), a key part of a coming fuel-
cell technology for automobiles.
The newer Energy Independence and Security Act of 
2007 addressed nuclear power only tangentially; the legis-
lation had a provision to promote American-built nuclear 
power plants in overseas markets.
The current Energy Secretary, Steven Chu, is a Nobel laure-
ate atomic physicist who considers nuclear energy to be “safe 
and reliable.” The 2012 DOE budget reflects continued funding 
for nuclear research and development. In his 2011 State of the 
Union address, President Obama included nuclear energy as one 
of the components of a national goal of generating 80% of U.S. 
electricity from “clean energy sources” by 2035. Accordingly, 
the 2012 budget requests included substantial increases for the 
loan guarantees for nuclear power plants. Although there have 
been some setbacks recently, it looks like nuclear power in the 
United States may experience a renaissance.
that U.S. nuclear power plants prevent the annual release 
of 164 million tons of carbon, 5.1 million tons of sulfur di-
oxide, and 2.4 million tons of nitrogen oxides. Also, elec-
tric cars and plug-in hybrids are now available from major 
car manufacturers. If this catches on, nuclear-generated 
electricity can indeed be substituted for oil-based fuels.
Observers agree that if the rebirth of nuclear power is to 
come, a number of changes will have to be made:
 • The public must be convinced that every possible pre-
ventative measure has been taken to prevent terrorist at-
tacks and sabotage.
 • The industry’s manufacturing philosophy will have to 
change to favor standard designs and factory produc-
tion of the smaller reactors instead of the custom-built 
reactors presently in use in the United States. Recently, 
the DOE selected three designs for development, one of 
which—the Westinghouse advanced pressurized-water 
reactor—is a 600 MW unit similar to the one pictured in 
Figure 14. The unit, designed for modular construction, 
is based primarily on passive safety.
 • The framework for licensing and monitoring reactors 
must be streamlined, but without sacrificing safety meas-
ures. This has largely been accomplished with the Energy 
Policy Act of 2005. The rules allow the NRC to approve 
a plant design prior to the selection of a specific site.
 • The waste dilemma must be resolved. With the Yucca 
Mountain waste repository now in limbo, resolving 
the dilemma is becoming more difficult. The recom-
REvISITING THE THEMES
sound science
The science behind nuclear power was developed during 
World War II and was used to produce the two atomic 
bombs that ended the war with Japan in 1945. Nuclear 
physicists were eager to show that atomic energy could be put to beneficial 
uses, however, and with that in mind, the technology for nuclear power 
plants was developed. Sound science was, and continues to be, essential 
for this enterprise, especially in regard to improvements in safety and ef-
ficiency. Nevertheless, scientific uncertainties remain: For example, what is 
a safe level of exposure to radioactivity? How can nuclear wastes be stored 
safely for thousands of years to come? Can nuclear reactors be designed to 
be accident proof? Can fusion energy ever become a commercial reality? 
Answers to these questions will challenge scientists for years to come.
sustainability
Looking toward a sustainable energy future, many believe 
that nuclear power has a role to play in getting us there. 
Because uranium must be mined and is not an abundant 
mineral, supplies will not last indefinitely. Reprocessing fuel can extend the 
life of nuclear power, but it carries risks that may be unacceptable. Still, 
nuclear fission may be a way of bridging the gap between fossil fuel energy 
and renewable energy. The most important aspect of fission is that nuclear 
energy does not release greenhouse gases and would be capable of provid-
ing most of our electrical power, thus enabling us to avoid relying on coal.
The current dilemma is how to deal with the buildup of the highly 
radioactive spent-fuel wastes. Storing them in pools and casks on the 
grounds of the power plants is unsustainable. Consequently, countries 
using nuclear power must find ways to dispose of the wastes safely, 
which means making sure that they are contained for thousands of years.
stewardship
It was a major political decision to develop nuclear power 
for generating electricity. The technology is so expensive 
and fraught with risk that only government-level agencies 
can manage the development and ongoing regulation of nuclear power. 
The roles of the NRC and the EPA are crucial in protecting the U.S. public 
from the hazards and risks of keeping nuclear power in operation and 
safely handling its wastes. New reports from the Blue Ribbon Commis-
sion on America’s Nuclear Future and the Near-Term Task Force provide 
useful recommendations for handling nuclear wastes and protecting 
against accidents like the Fukushima Daiichi disaster in Japan.
Government subsidies and guarantees remain in place for this enter-
prise, and given its potential for massive consequences if things go wrong, 
that may continue to be necessary. International agreements, such as 
those between the United States and Russia to dismantle nuclear war-
heads, point to the importance of maintaining close political ties among 
all countries with nuclear weapons capabilities or even with nuclear power 
plants (because these can be a source of weapons-grade nuclear material).
s
I
f
a
can manage the
s
L
t
B
mineral supplie
s
T
W
b
physicists were
438

Nuclear Power
 1. Describe the impacts of the earthquake and tsunami that 
rocked Japan on March 11, 2011, on the Fukushima Daiichi 
nuclear power plants, and on the Japanese people.
 2. Compare the outlook regarding the use of nuclear power in 
the United States and globally in each of the following time 
periods: 1960s, 1980s, and early 21st century.
 3. Describe how energy is produced in a nuclear reaction. 
Distinguish between fission and fusion.
 4. How do nuclear reactors and nuclear power plants generate 
electrical power?
 5. What are radioactive emissions, and how are most humans 
exposed to them?
 6. How are radioactive wastes produced, and what are the 
associated hazards?
 7. Describe the current practices for dealing with spent fuel 
rods.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 8. What problems are associated with the long-term contain-
ment of nuclear waste? What is the current status of the dis-
posal situation?
 9. Describe what went wrong at Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, 
and Fukushima.
 10. What features might make nuclear power plants safer?
 11. What are the four generations of nuclear reactors? Describe 
the advantages of Generations III and IV.
 12. Discuss economic reasons that have caused many utilities 
to opt for coal-burning plants rather than nuclear-powered 
plants.
 13. How do fast-neutron and fusion reactors work? Does either 
one offer promise for alleviating our energy shortage?
 14. Explain why nuclear power does little to address our largest 
energy shortfall.
 15. Discuss changes in nuclear power that might brighten its future.
MakINg a DIffERENcE
 1. Pay a visit to a nuclear power plant, and explore the ways 
the facility (a) is protected against terrorist attack, (b) con-
tinually trains the plant’s operators, (c) keeps the public in-
formed in the event of a nuclear accident, and (d) handles its 
high-level wastes.
 2. Visit the radiology department of your local hospital, and 
ask a radiologist to explain the different ways radiation 
is used in the hospital’s medical procedures and how (or 
whether) the hospital tries to limit the radiation exposure of 
patients. Ask the radiologist what the hospital does with its 
low-level radioactive waste.
THINkINg ENVIRONMENTaLLY
 1. Evaluate the risks of nuclear power. Are we overly con-
cerned or not concerned enough about nuclear accidents? 
Could an accident like Chernobyl or Fukushima happen in 
the United States?
 2. Would you rather live next door to a coal-burning plant or a 
nuclear power plant? Defend your choice.
 3. Global climate change has been cited by nuclear power 
proponents as one of the most important justifications for 
further development of the nuclear power option. Give rea-
sons for their belief, and then cite some reasons that would 
counter their argument.
 4. Go to the Web site www.ap1000.westinghousenuclear.com 
to investigate the reactor described there. Where is it being 
designed, and where will it likely be used in the United 
States? What are its features?
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cREDITS
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): Aflo/Mainichi Newspaper/epa/Newscom; (bottom left): Dalibor Zivotic/
iStockphoto; Kyodo/Newscom; AP Photo/Tennessee Valley Authority; (center left): 
Erich Hartmann/Magnum Photos; (top left): AP Photo/Holtec International; (bot-
tom right): Everett Collection Historical / Alamy; AP Photo; (top right): ITAR-TASS 
Photo Agency / Alamy; AP Photo/Robert F. Bukaty, File; The National Ignition 
Facility
Text Credits
Table 1: Source: based on data from NRC; Page 375, Figure 2: Source: Data from 
U.S. Department of Energy; Figure 4: Source: Data from International Atomic 
Energy Agency; Figure 17: Source: Data from International Atomic Energy Agency. 
439

Nuclear Power
active safety features Those safety features of nuclear reactors that 
rely on operator-controlled reactions, external power sources, 
and other features that are capable of failing. (See passive safety 
features.)
Advanced Boiling-Water Reactor (ABWR) A third generation 
nuclear reactor design for power plants that incorporates many 
passive safety features. It is the design of choice for most new and 
planned reactors.
AP1000 Advanced Passive Reactor A third generation nuclear 
power reactor manufactured by Westinghouse, the choice of most 
of the recent license applications in the United States.
boiling-water reactor A nuclear reactor that employs boiling 
water  to create steam, which is circulated to turbines that 
generate  electricity; the water is cooled and returned to the 
reactor tank.
breeder reactor A nuclear reactor that, in the course of producing 
energy, also converts nonfissionable uranium-238 into fissionable 
plutonium-239, which can be used as fuel. Hence, a reactor that 
produces at least as much nuclear fuel as it consumes. Also called 
a fast-neutron reactor.
chain reaction A nuclear reaction wherein each atom that fissions 
(splits) causes one or more additional atoms to fission.
control rods A part of the core of a nuclear reactor; the rods 
of neutron-absorbing material that are inserted or removed as 
necessary to control the rate of nuclear fissioning.
corrosion In a nuclear power plant, the deterioration of pipes 
receiving hot, pressurized water in a circulation system that 
conveys heat from one part of the unit to another.
curie The unit of measurement of radioactivity; one gram of 
pure radium 226 gives off one curie per second, or 37 billion 
spontaneous disintegrations into particles and radiation.
d–t reaction A nuclear fusion reaction employing the hydrogen 
isotopes deuterium and tritium; the reaction takes extremely high 
temperatures and is very difficult to contain.
Economic Simplified Boiling Water Reactor (ESBWR) A 
Generation III nuclear power reactor proposed by General 
Electric; it has many more passive safety feataures than current 
Advanced Boiling Water Reactors.
embrittlement Becoming brittle. Pertains especially to the reactor 
vessel of nuclear power plants gradually becoming prone to 
breakage or snapping as a result of continuous bombardment by 
radiation.
Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 Legislation 
establishing energy policy by emphasizing demand-side policies 
such as conserving energy and using renewable energy sources.
Energy Policy Act of 2005 Legislation establishing U.S. energy 
policy for years to come, encouraging greater use of fossil fuels 
and nuclear power, and providing some support for energy 
conservation and renewable energy.
enrichment With reference to nuclear power, the separation and 
concentration of uranium-235 so that, in suitable quantities, it 
will sustain a chain reaction.
fission The splitting of a large atom into two atoms of lighter 
elements. When large atoms such as uranium or plutonium 
fission, tremendous amounts of energy are released.
fission products Any and all atoms and subatomic particles 
resulting from splitting atoms in nuclear reactors or  
nuclear explosions. Practically all such products are highly 
radioactive.
fuel elements (fuel rods) The pellets of uranium or other fissionable 
material that are placed in tubes, or fuel rods, and that, together 
with the control rods, form the core of the nuclear reactor.
fusion The joining together of two atoms to form a single atom of 
a heavier element. When light atoms such as hydrogen are fused, 
tremendous amounts of energy are released.
half-life The length of time it takes for half of an unstable isotope 
to decay. The length of time is the same regardless of the starting 
amount. Also refers to the amount of time it takes compounds to 
break down in the environment.
high-level wastes In a nuclear reactor, the direct products of fission 
produce highly radioactive isotopes that make the management of 
reactor wastes difficult and hazardous.
isotope A form of an element in which the atoms have more 
(or less) than the usual number of neutrons. Isotopes of a 
given element have identical chemical properties but differ 
in mass (weight) as a result of the superfluity (or deficiency) 
of neutrons. Many isotopes are unstable and radioactive. 
(See radioactive decay, radioactive emissions, and radioactive 
materials.)
loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) A situation in a nuclear reactor 
where an accident causes the loss of the water from around the 
reactor, resulting in overheating and a possible meltdown of the 
nuclear core.
low-level wastes Radioactive wastes from nuclear power plants 
and other facilities that employ radioisotopes; they are easier to 
manage than the high-level wastes.
mass number The number that accompanies the chemical 
name or symbol of an element or isotope. The mass number  
represents the number of neutrons and protons in the nucleus of 
the atom.
Megatons to Megawatts Program An exchange program between 
the United States and Russia whereby weapons-grade uranium 
from Russia is diluted to produce power-plant uranium that is 
used in U.S. power plants.
meltdown The event of a nuclear reactor’s getting out of 
control or losing its cooling water so that it melts from its 
own production of heat. The melted reactor would continue 
to produce heat and could melt its way out of its containment 
vessel and eventually down into groundwater, where it 
would cause a violent eruption of steam that could spread 
radioactive materials over a wide area. (See loss-of-coolant 
accident (LOCA).)
moderator In a nuclear reactor, any material that slows down 
neutrons from fission reactions so that they are traveling at the 
right speed to trigger another fission. Water and graphite are two 
types of moderators.
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 A law that committed the 
federal government to begin receiving nuclear wastes from 
commercial power plants by 1998. This has not happened yet, as 
the nation debates where to take the wastes.
passive safety features Those safety features of nuclear facilities 
that involve processes that are not vulnerable to operator 
intrusion or electrical power failures. Passive safety features 
enhance the degree of safety of nuclear reactors. (See active safety 
features.)
pressurized-water reactor A nuclear power plant where two loops 
are employed; one where water is heated in the reactor but does 
not boil because it is under high pressure, and a second where the 
pressurized water is circulated through a heat exchanger, where it 
boils other unpressurized water that then produces steam to drive 
the turbogenerator.
radioactive decay The reduction in radioactivity that occurs as 
an unstable isotope (radioactive substance) gives off radiation, 
ultimately becoming stable.
gLOSSaRY
440

Nuclear Power
radioisotope An isotope of an element that is unstable and that 
gives off radioactive emissions. (See isotope and radioactive decay.)
reprocessing The recovery of radioactive materials from nuclear 
reactors and the conversion of those materials into useful nuclear 
fuel.
yellowcake So called because of its yellowish color, uranium 
ore that has been partially purified and is ready for further 
purification and enrichment.
radioactive emissions Any of various forms of radiation or 
particles that may be given off by unstable isotopes. Many such 
emissions have very high energy and can destroy biological tissues 
or cause mutations leading to cancer or birth defects.
radioactive wastes Waste materials that contain, are contaminated 
with, or are radioactive substances. Many materials used in the 
nuclear industry become radioactive wastes because of such 
contamination.
441

This page intentionally left blank 

Learning Objectives
 1. Links between Human Health and 
the Environment: Examine four 
classes of environmental hazards 
that bring on human  misery, 
 disease, and death: cultural, 
 biological, physical, and chemical.
 2. Pathways of Risk: Describe path-
ways whereby risk factors of 
poverty, tobacco use, disease 
transmission, toxic chemicals, 
and natural disasters lead to 
human mortality.
 3. Risk Assessment: Evaluate the 
process of risk assessment and 
management as it is applied to 
human health by the EPA and the 
World Health Organization.
Environmental 
Hazards and 
Human Health
2http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1598778
3Berns, Kenneth I. et al. “Adaptations of Avian Flu Virus Are a Cause for Concern.” Science 335: 660–661. 
February 10, 2012.
A young doctor manipulates biological agents while employing protective gear.
Y
ou may have seen the movie. Contagion2 opens with a woman developing 
 flu-like symptoms after visiting Hong Kong. Within days, she is dead, 
but not before contaminating many people. Because it is so contagious, 
the virus quickly spreads globally—a pandemic—bringing death and chaos in 
its train. The film makes it clear that only the scientists can save the day, and 
they do so by isolating the virus, finding a cell line that will grow it, and finally 
getting a vaccine that can be quickly manufactured in quantity. The basic plot 
of the film is entirely too close to reality for comfort: in 1918, a flu pandemic 
killed more than 50 million people around the world. To make matters worse, 
the threat of a similar pandemic has recently been raised as a result of some 
controversial research3 on a familiar virus, the H5N1 strain that causes avian 
influenza.
Avian influenza, or bird flu, appeared in 2003 in poultry and eventually 
spread to 63 countries, killing or leading to the culling of 400 million domestic 
poultry and countless wild birds and causing some $20 billion in losses. The dis-
ease also spread to humans through contact with infected birds, with 582 cases 
and 343 deaths. Like all influenza viruses, 
H5N1 contains eight genetic particles 
that often reshuffle when the virus 
reproduces in animal cells. Pigs are 
another source of influenza viruses. 
The H1N1 strain of swine influ-
enza that initiated a pandemic in 
humans in 2009 was a relatively 
mild disease but still caused more 
than 16,000 deaths (Fig. 1); the 
deadly 1918 flu pandemic was 
Model of the H1N1 virus particle
From Chapter 17 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
also caused by an H1N1 virus that likely originated in pigs. 
 Recently, flu viruses containing genes from three sources—
pigs, birds, and humans—have been found in pigs, demon-
strating the ability of these viruses to mix genes.
The controversial H5N1 research4 was carried out by two 
teams that set out to answer the question: Is it possible for H5N1 
viruses to trigger a pandemic? The scientists genetically altered 
the virus to make it easily transmissible between ferrets, animals 
that are often used in such research because they respond to dis-
eases much like humans do. In doing so, the scientists found that 
they had produced a very dangerous pathogen. The human-made 
virus passed from one ferret to another simply via air exchange 
between cages. Making matters worse, any influenza virus infect-
ing ferrets has also been infectious to humans as well. Critics of 
the work pressed for it to remain unpublished, reasoning that 
there may be terrorists out there who could follow the proce-
dures used and put the results to lethal use. The recombined virus 
could have what it takes to initiate a lethal pandemic: virulence, 
transmission by aerosols, and susceptibility in the human popula-
tion. The research, referred to as dual-use research because 
of its potential positive and negative applications, was reviewed 
by the U.S. National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity. The 
board recommended that the research be published because 
of its public health importance, but at the same time initiated 
publication of a new government policy designed to give more 
oversight to federally-funded dual-use research. Commenting on 
the published research, one molecular biologist stated that these 
are studies that should never have been done.
The fictitious Contagion virus (called MEV-1) was based on 
a real-world disease, the Nipah virus, which was first observed in 
Malaysia in 1999 and has since been seen in India and Bangladesh. 
Recent work has shown that the Nipah virus is endemic in fruit bats 
and that people and pigs become infected by contact with fruit 
contaminated with bat urine and feces. The virus has killed more 
than 200 people and has shown signs of human-to-human trans-
mission in some cases. The Nipah virus and avian and swine influ-
enzas are examples of a number of emerging new diseases that 
continually remind us that we are not always able to control the 
hazards posed by our inevitable contacts with the natural environ-
ment and, particularly, with the animal world. A recent study found 
that out of 1,415 pathogens able to infect humans, 61% were 
zoonotic (transmitted between animals and humans).5 In recent 
Figure 1 Countries with confirmed deaths from H1N1 influenza pandemic. The World 
Health Organization states that the disease is in the post-pandemic phase, with only scattered reports of deaths. 
Total worldwide deaths from the outset in 2009 to date have mounted to more than 16,000.
(Source: World Health Organization http://gamapserver.who.int/h1n1/cases-deaths/h1n1_casesdeaths.html. January 10, 2012.)
1–10
Cumulative deaths
11–50
51–100
101 and more
Area with confirmed cases
4Herfts, Sander, et al. “Airborne Transmission of Influenza A/H5N1 Virus Between 
Ferrets.” Science 336: 1534–1541. June 22, 2012.
Imai, M. et al. “Experimental Adaptation of an Influenza H5 HA Confers Res-
piratory Droplet Transmission to a Reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 Virus in Ferrets.” 
Nature 486: 420–428. May 2, 2012.
5Taylor et al. 2001. Risk factors for human disease emergence. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B 356: 983–989.
444

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
us with questions about the chemicals we are exposed to on a 
daily basis.
The study of the connections between hazards in the 
 environment and human disease and death is often called 
 environmental health; but it is human health that is the 
issue here, not the health of the natural environment. In this 
chapter, we will examine the nature of environmental hazards 
and the consequences of exposure to those hazards. Then we 
will consider some pathways whereby humans encounter the 
 hazards, interventions that can alleviate the risks to health, and 
how public policy can address the need for continued surveil-
lance and improvement in our management of environmental 
 hazards. We begin with some basics as we examine what 
 pollution is.
years, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), Lassa fever, Rift 
Valley fever, Ebola, hantavirus, Marburg fever, and the West Nile 
virus have all taken human lives, and there is every reason to ex-
pect more new diseases to appear as we continue to manipulate 
the natural environment and change ecological relationships.
the OLd enemies. To put these diseases in perspective, 
however, it is not the new, emerging diseases that do the great-
est damage; rather, it is the common, familiar ones that take the 
greatest toll of human life and health—diseases such as malaria, 
diarrhea, respiratory viruses, and worm infestations, which have 
been kept at bay in the developed countries but continue to rav-
age the developing countries. In the developed countries, cancer 
is the killer that is most closely linked to the environment, leaving 
1  Links Between Human Health 
and the Environment
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) defines 
pollution as “the presence of a substance in the environ-
ment that, because of its chemical composition or quantity, 
prevents the functioning of natural processes and produces 
undesirable environmental and health effects.” Any material 
that causes the pollution is called a pollutant.
Pollution is not usually the result of deliberate mistreat-
ment of the environment. The pollutants are almost always 
the by-products of otherwise worthy and essential activities—
producing crops, creating comfortable homes, providing en-
ergy and transportation, and manufacturing products—and 
of our basic biological functions. Pollution problems have 
become more pressing over the years because both grow-
ing population and expanding per capita use of materials 
and energy have increased the number and amounts of by- 
products that go into the environment. Also, many materials 
now widely used, such as aluminum cans, plastic packaging, 
and synthetic organic chemicals, are nonbiodegradable. That 
is, they resist attack and breakdown by detritus feeders and 
decomposers and consequently accumulate in the environ-
ment. An overview of the categories of pollutants that result 
from various activities is shown in Figure 2.
It is important to note the breadth and diversity of pol-
lution. Any part of the environment may be affected, and 
 almost anything may be a pollutant. The only criterion is that 
the addition of a pollutant results in undesirable changes. The 
impact of an undesirable change may be largely  aesthetic—
hazy air obscuring a distant view, or the unsightliness of 
roadside litter, for instance. The impact may be on ecosystems 
as a whole—the die-off of fish or forests, for example. Or the 
impact may be on human health—such as human wastes con-
taminating water supplies. The impact also may range from 
very local (the contamination of an individual well) to global 
(adding ozone-depleting chemicals to the atmosphere). We 
tend to think of pollution as the introduction of human-made 
materials into the environment, but undesirable changes may 
be caused by the introduction of too much of what are oth-
erwise natural compounds, such as fertilizer nutrients intro-
duced into waterways and carbon dioxide introduced into 
the atmosphere.
Thus, the slogan “Don’t pollute” is a gross oversimpli-
fication. The very nature of our existence necessitates the 
production of wastes. Our job in remediating present and 
future pollution problems is like the concept of sustainable 
development itself. We need to adapt the means of meeting: 
our present needs so that by-products are managed in ways 
that will not jeopardize present and future generations. The 
general strategy in each case must be to:
1. Identify the material or materials that are causing the 
pollution—the undesirable change;
2. Identify the sources of the pollutants;
3. Clean up the environment already affected by pollution;
4. Develop and implement pollution-control strategies to 
prevent the pollutants from entering the environment; 
and
5. Develop and implement alternative means of meeting 
the need that do not produce the polluting by-product—
in other words, avoid the pollution altogether.
Basically, the strategy for addressing pollution ac-
complishes one of the transitions to a sustainable society: 
“A technology transition from pollution-intensive economic 
production to environmentally friendly processes”.
Environmental Health
With our focus in this chapter on human health, a more precise 
definition of environment is the whole context of human life—
the physical, chemical, and biological setting of where and how 
people live. Thus, the home, air, water, food, neighborhood, 
445

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
also important; some people, especially the poor, are more 
vulnerable to certain risks than are others. Therefore, an ap-
propriate notation of risk should be
Risk 5 Hazard 3 Vulnerability
The presence of avian flu in poultry is a hazard that 
presents the risk of humans contracting the disease and 
dying. People working with poultry are much more vulner-
able than are others. Because risks are expressed as probabil-
ities, the analysis of the probability of suffering some harm 
from a hazard becomes a problem for scientists or other ex-
perts to address, and we will deal with the assessment of risk 
as it becomes the basis of policy decisions.
workplace, and even climate constitute elements of the human 
environment. Within the human environment, there are hazards 
that can make us sick, cut our lives short, or contribute in other 
ways to human misfortune. In the context of environmental 
health, a hazard is anything that can cause (1) injury, disease, or 
death to humans; (2) damage to personal or public property; or 
(3) deterioration or destruction of environmental components.
The existence of a hazard does not mean that undesir-
able consequences inevitably follow. Instead, we speak of the 
connection between a hazard and something happening be-
cause of that hazard as a risk, defined here as the probabil-
ity of suffering injury, disease, death, or some other loss as a 
result of exposure to a hazard. The notion of vulnerability is 
Agriculture
Mining
sites
Forest
cutting
Construction
sites
Erosion
from:
Refuse
burning Coal
burning
power
plants
Smelters
Air conditioners/Refrigerators
Leaching from
lawns, gardens,
agricultural fields
Sewage-treatment
plants
Ocean
Pond
Lake
River
Leaching from
disposal sites
Direct
discharges
from certain
industries 
Combustion
facility
Landfills
Highway
litter
Spills
PA
RT
IC
UL
AT
ES
 
CO
MP
OU
ND
S 
AC
ID
- F
OR
MI
NG
 
CH
EM
IC
AL
 
CO
2 
PH
OT
O- 
CF
Cs 
WA
ST
E 
NU
CL
EA
R 
PE
ST
ICI
DE
S/H
ER
BIC
ID
ES
 
SO
LID
 W
AS
TE
 
TO
XIC
 C
HE
MI
CA
LS
 
NU
TR
IE
NT
 O
VE
RS
UP
PL
Y 
WA
TE
R A
ND
 LA
ND
 P
OL
LU
TIO
N 
SM
OG
 
glo
bal 
Pot
enti
al 
ozo
ne 
war
min
g 
AIR
 P
OL
LU
TIO
N 
SE
DI
ME
NT
S 
Glo
bal
 ch
an
ges
 
Fertilizer runoff from
lawns, gardens,
agriculture
Dep
leti
on 
of  
shi
eld 
Figure 2 Categories of pollution. Pollution is an outcome of otherwise worthy human endeavors. Major 
categories of pollution and some  activities that cause them are shown here.
446

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
regional offices around the world. The agency is staffed by 
health professionals and other experts and is governed by the 
UN member states through the World Health Assembly.
Life Expectancy. One universal indicator of health is 
human life expectancy. In 1955, average life expectancy glo-
bally was 48 years. Today it is 70 years and continuing to 
rise; it is expected to reach 73 years by 2025. This progress 
is the result of social, medical, and economic advances in the 
past 60 years that have increased the well-being of larger 
and larger segments of the human population. Recall the 
epidemiologic transition: the trend of decreasing death rates 
that is seen in countries as they modernize. As this transi-
tion occurred in the now-developed countries, it involved a 
shift from high mortality (due to infectious diseases) toward 
the present low mortality rates (due primarily to diseases of 
aging, such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases).
Two Worlds. The countries of the world have under-
gone the epidemiologic transition to different degrees, with 
very different consequences. Despite the progress indicated 
by the general rise in life expectancy, one-sixth (almost 9 mil-
lion) of the annual deaths in the world are those of children 
under the age of five in the developing world. In fact, a high 
proportion (36%) of the mortality in the low-income coun-
tries is caused by common infectious diseases (as opposed to 
6% in the high-income countries).
An entirely different perspective is brought into focus as 
we consider some of the environmental hazards that accom-
pany industrial growth and intensive agriculture. In addition, 
some of the most lethal hazards in the developed world are 
the outcome of purely voluntary behavior—in particular, 
smoking tobacco, using drugs, and engaging in risky sexual 
activity. We will look at four classes of environmental haz-
ards: cultural, biological, physical, and chemical.
Environmental Hazards
There are two fundamental ways to consider hazards to human 
health. One is to regard the lack of access to necessary resources 
as a hazard. For example, lack of access to clean water and 
nourishing food is likely to result in harm to a person. Investi-
gating hazards from this perspective means considering the so-
cial, economic, and political factors that prevent a person from 
having access to such basic needs. Although this is a fundamen-
tally important perspective, much of it is outside the scope of 
this chapter. Instead, the focus will be primarily on the exposure 
to hazards in the environment. What is it in the environment 
that brings the risk of injury, disease, or death to people?
Cultural Hazards. Many of the factors that contribute to 
mortality and disability are a matter of choice or at least can 
be influenced by choice. People engage in risky behavior and 
subject themselves to hazards. Thus, they may smoke ciga-
rettes, eat too much, drive too fast, use addictive and harm-
ful drugs, consume alcoholic beverages, sunbathe, engage in  
risky sexual practices, get too little exercise, or choose haz-
ardous occupations. People generally subject themselves to 
these hazards because they derive some pleasure or other 
The Picture of Health. Health has many dimensions—physi-
cal, mental, spiritual, and emotional. The World Health Organi-
zation (WHO) defines health as “a state of complete physical, 
social, and mental well-being, and not merely the absence of 
disease or infirmity.”6 Unfortunately, measuring all these di-
mensions of health for a society is virtually impossible. Thus, to 
study environmental health, we will focus on disease and con-
sider health to be simply the absence of disease. Two measures 
are used in studies of disease in societies: morbidity and mortal-
ity. Morbidity is the incidence of disease in a population and 
is commonly used to trace the presence of a particular type of 
illness, such as influenza or diarrheal disease. Mortality is the 
incidence of death in a population. Records are usually kept 
of the cause of death, making it possible to analyze the relative 
roles played by infectious diseases and factors such as cancer 
and heart disease. Epidemiology is the study of the presence, 
distribution, and prevention of disease in populations.
Public Health. Protecting the health of its people has be-
come one of the most important facets of government in mod-
ern societies. In the United States, the lead federal agency for 
protecting the health and safety of the public is the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), an agency within the 
Department of Health and Human Services. The CDC’s mission 
is “to create the expertise, information, and tools that people 
and communities need to protect their health—through health 
promotion, prevention of disease, injury and disability, and pre-
paredness for new health threats.”7 Each state also has a health 
department, and most municipalities have health agents. In ad-
dition, there is a huge health care industry in the United States, 
with federal programs such as Medicare, Medicaid, and the 
Affordable Care Act; hospitals; health maintenance organiza-
tions; and local physicians and other health professionals. The 
delivery of health care is spread around all of these entities, but 
the primary responsibility for health risk management and pre-
vention resides with the CDC and the state public-health agen-
cies. These agencies, for example, may require public-health 
measures such as immunizations and quarantines, and they are 
responsible for monitoring certain diseases and environmental 
hazards and for controlling epidemics. Indeed, it was the CDC 
that first reported the H1N1 swine flu cases. The CDC also 
gathers data and provides information on health issues to state 
and local health care providers.
Other Countries. Virtually every country has a similar 
ministry of health that acts on behalf of its people to man-
age and minimize health risks. The health policies that are 
put into place, however, are subject to limitations of infor-
mation and funding. Ideally, a health ministry should direct 
its limited resources toward strategies that will accomplish 
the greatest risk prevention. Fortunately, all countries have 
access to the programs and information of the WHO, a UN 
agency established in 1948 with the mission of “enabling all 
peoples to attain the highest possible level of health.” The 
WHO is centered in Geneva, Switzerland, and maintains six 
7Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, from www.cdc.gov/about
/organization/mission.htm.
6World Health Organization Glossary. Available at www.who.int/health
- systemsperformance/docs/glossary.htm.
447

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
taking a terrible toll in the developing world, where more than 
90% of HIV-infected people live. Wherever it  occurs, AIDS 
is largely the consequence of high-risk sexual behavior. At 
present, there is no cure or vaccine for HIV.
Biological Hazards. Human history can be told from the 
perspective of the battle with pathogenic bacteria and vi-
ruses. It is a story of epidemics such as the black plague and 
typhus, which ravaged Europe in the Middle Ages, killing 
millions in every city, and of smallpox, which swept through 
the New World. The story takes a positive turn in the 19th 
century with the first vaccinations and the “golden age” of 
bacteriology (a span of only 30 years), when bacteriologists 
discovered most of the major bacterial diseases and brought 
bacteria into laboratory culture. The 20th century saw the 
advent of virology (the study of viruses and the treatment 
of the diseases they cause), the great discovery of antibiotics, 
immunizations that led to the global eradication of smallpox 
and the victory over polio and many other childhood dis-
eases, and the growing influence of molecular biology as a 
powerful tool in the battle against disease.
The battle is not over, however, and never will be. Patho-
genic bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoans, and worms continue 
to plague every society and, indeed, every person. They are 
inevitable components of our environment. Many are there 
regardless of our human presence, and others are uniquely 
human pathogens whose access to new, susceptible hosts is 
mediated by the environment. Table 1 shows the leading glo-
bal diseases and the annual number of deaths they cause.
benefit from them. Wanting the benefit, they are willing to 
take the risk that the hazard will not harm them. Factors 
such as living in inner cities, engaging in criminal activities, 
and so on are cultural sources of mortality, too. As Figure 3 in-
dicates, 35% of all deaths in the United States can be traced 
to cultural hazards, and in most cases, deaths from cultural 
hazards are preventable (if people refrain from their risky be-
haviors). In particular, obesity in adults has reached epidemic 
levels in the United States: currently, one-third of all adults 
are obese and another third are overweight. These conditions 
are estimated by calculating a person’s body mass index: the 
ratio of weight in kilograms divided by the square of height 
in meters (Fig. 4). Aside from the estimated 160,000 deaths a 
year caused by obesity, an obese person costs society some 
$7,000 a year in social and medical costs.
The connection between behavior and risk is especially 
lethal in the case of acquired immune deficiency syndrome 
(AIDS), caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
AIDS is one of a group of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) 
that includes gonorrhea, syphilis, and chlamydia. AIDS is 
Accidents
80,422
Motor vehicle accidents
37,793
Smoking
443,000
Obesity
160,000
Drug use
37,792
Suicide
Total 2010 deaths = 2,465,936
Total 2010 deaths from cultural hazards = 856,525
Alcohol use
Homocide
37,661
25,440
16,065
AIDS
8,352
Figure 3 Deaths from various cultural hazards in the United 
States, 2010. Many hazards in the environment are a matter of personal 
choice and lifestyle. Other hazards are due to accidents and the lethal behavior of 
other people.
(Sources: Data from the National Vital Statistics Reports, January 11, 2012; smoking deaths 
and obesity deaths from the Centers for Disease Control and Journal of the American Medical 
Association.)
Figure 4 Body mass index. Body mass index is a ratio of height to weight 
used to measure obesity and overweight conditions. A person with a BMI of 30 
and above is considered obese, while a person with a BMI of 25–29 is considered 
overweight.
(www.surgeongeneral.gov)
Height (feet and inches)
4’8”
120
14
15
15
16
17
18
19
21
22
25
25
27
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
24
25
27
29
16
17
18
19
20
21
23
24
26
27
29
31
17
18
19
20
22
23
24
26
27
29
31
34
19
20
21
22
23
24
26
28
29
31
34
36
20
21
22
23
24
26
27
29
31
33
36
38
21
22
23
24
26
27
29
31
33
35
38
40
22
23
24
26
27
29
31
33
35
37
40
43
23
24
26
27
29
30
32
34
37
39
42
45
24
26
27
29
30
32
34
36
38
41
44
47
25
27
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
43
46
49
27
28
30
31
33
35
37
40
42
45
48
52
28
29
31
33
35
37
39
41
45
47
50
54
29
30
32
34
36
38
40
43
46
49
52
56
130 140 150 160 170 180
Weight (pounds)
190 200 210 220 230 240 250
4’10”
5’0”
5’2”
5’4”
5’6”
5’8”
5’10”
6’0”
6’2”
6’4”
6’6”
tabLe 1  Global Mortality from Major Infectious 
Diseases, 2008
Cause of Death
Estimated Yearly Deaths*
Acute respiratory infections
3,816,000
HIV/AIDS
2,243,000
Diarrheal diseases
1,687,000
Tuberculosis
1,250,000
Malaria
655,000
Measles
328,000
Meningitis
270,000
Pertussis (whooping cough)
194,000
Hepatitis
136,000
Tetanus
128,000
Syphilis
81,000
Trypanosomiasis (sleeping 
sickness)
44,000
Schistosomiasis
37,000
Leishmaniasis
36,000
Dengue
13,000
Intestinal roundworms
5,000
*Total deaths from infectious diseases in 2008 are estimated at 16.0 million 
by the WHO.
Source: Data from World Health Organization, The Global Burden of 
Disease: 2008 (January 2012).
448

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
bacterial pathogens, such as Salmonella, Campylobacter, 
Shigella, and E. coli, from human wastes.
Tuberculosis. Although AIDS has overtaken tuber-
culosis as the disease that causes the most adult deaths 
worldwide, tuberculosis continues to be a major killer. 
Close to one-third of the world’s people are infected with 
the microbe Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Fig. 5), and per-
haps 10% of these will develop a life-threatening case 
during their lifetime. Complacency about treatment and 
prevention in recent years has led to a resurgence of tu-
berculosis, even though the bacterial pathogen that causes 
it has been known for more than 100 years and its ge-
nome has been sequenced. Some of the resurgence can be 
traced to the AIDS epidemic because HIV infection even-
tually leads to a compromised immune system, which al-
lows diseases like tuberculosis to flourish. Much of the 
disease’s comeback, however, is the result of multi-drug-
resistant strains of the microbe.
Malaria. Of the infectious diseases present in the 
tropics, malaria is by far the most serious, account-
ing for an estimated 216 million cases each year and 
655,000 deaths. Caused by protozoan parasites of the 
genus Plasmodium, malaria is propagated by mosqui-
toes of the genus Anopheles. The disease begins with an 
infected mosquito biting a person (Fig. 6). From there, 
the parasites invade the liver and then the red blood 
cells. After multiplying in the red blood cells, the para-
sites are released, destroying the cells. The parasites 
then invade other red blood cells. While in the liver and 
the red blood cells (most of the time), the parasites are  
Approximately one-fifth of global deaths are due 
to infectious and parasitic diseases. The leading causes 
of death in this category are the acute respiratory infec-
tions (for example, pneumonia, diphtheria, influenza, and 
streptococcal infections), both bacterial and viral. Pneu-
monia is by far the most deadly of these. Other bacterial 
and viral respiratory infections represent the most com-
mon reasons for visits to the pediatrician in the developed 
countries, but it is primarily in the developing countries 
that the respiratory infections lead to death, mostly in 
children who are already weakened by malnourishment 
or other diseases.
Diarrheal diseases were responsible for more than 
1.2 million deaths in children under age five in 2008. 
One-third of these deaths are traced to a little-known 
virus— rotavirus—that infects virtually every child be-
tween the ages of three months and five years. Rotavirus 
is rarely diagnosed, yet it causes most cases of severe di-
arrhea in young children in developed countries and many 
childhood deaths due to diarrhea in developing countries. 
The difference is treatment; the infection often leads to 
dehydration, which is quickly life threatening, but can 
be reversed with rehydration therapy (the replacement 
of lost fluids with balanced saline solutions). The virus is 
as contagious as a cold virus, and fortunately, one infec-
tion usually induces lifetime immunity. Effective vaccines 
are now able to prevent most severe rotavirus infections; 
the vaccine is given to infants in three doses, starting at 
age 2 months. Many other cases of diarrhea are the con-
sequence of ingesting food or water contaminated with 
0 – 24
25 – 49
50 – 99
100 – 299
≥ 300
No estimate
Estimated new TB cases (all forms) per 100,000 population
Nigeria
DR Congo
Zimbabwe
South Africa
Mozambique
UR Tanzania
Kenya
Uganda
Ethiopia
Afghanistan
Pakistan
India
Brazil
China
Russian Federation
Myanmar
Bangladesh
Vietnam
Cambodia
Phillipines
Thailand
Indonesia
Figure 5 Global map of tuberculosis, 2010. This disease, caused by the bacterium Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, is far from controlled. Close to one-third of the world’s people are likely infected by the pathogen. 
Tuberculosis (TB) incidence rates refer to numbers per 100,000 in the population.
(Source: World Health Organization, Global Tuberculosis Control 2011.)
449

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
MALARIA PARASITE needs both humans
and mosquitoes to propagate itself. This
complex life cycle has hindered efforts
to engineer a vaccine that can crush
the parasite.
      Within 30 to 60
       minutes, the
sporozoites enter
the victim’s liver
cells, where they
reproduce asexually,
forming thousands
of merozoites, most
of which are later
released into the
bloodstream
2
     While feeding,
     an infected female
Anopheles mosquito passes
sporozoites of the malaria
parasite Plasmodium into
the victim’s bloodstream
1
      The merozoites
       invade red blood
cells and multiply,
causing the cells to
rupture, releasing yet
more merozoites. The
cycle repeats
3
      Eventually some
      of the merozoites
develop into male and
female gametocytes,
which can be ingested
by a previously
uninfected mosquito
taking a blood meal
The rupture of infected blood cells
causes malaria’s fever, chills and
progressive anemia. Death may occur
from severe anemia as well as clogging
of blood vessels in the brain, lungs, and
other organs by parasitized red blood
cells. In pregnancy, malaria-laden
placentas rob babies of growth
before they are even born
The Disease
HOW MALARIA SPREADS
4
      In the mosquito’s
      gut, the gametocytes
develop into gametes
and fuse to eventually
produce an oocyst that
releases sporozoites.
These travel to the
mosquito’s salivary
glands, ready to
be transferred
into another
victim
5
Sporozoite
Sporozoite
Oocyst
Anopheles
gambiae
Fertilization
c
a
b
Male
gamete
Female
gamete
Host’s liver
Host’s
red
blood
cell
Liver cell
Female gametocyte
Male gametocyte
Merozoites
INSIDE 
MO
SQ
UIT
O
INSIDE 
HU
MA
N
Figure 6 Life cycle of malarial parasite. The life cycle of the protozoan parasite Plasmodium, which 
causes malaria in humans, involves the Anopheles mosquito and a human host.
(Source: Dunavan, Claire Panosian. “Tackling Malaria.” Scientific American 293 (December 2005): 74–83. Used with permission.)
hidden from immune system cells and antibodies. This en-
tire chain of events occurs in synchronized cycles, leading 
to the periodic episodes of fever, chills, and malaise that 
are typical of malaria. With the most virulent parasite, P. 
falciparum, 60% of the red blood cells may be destroyed 
in one episode, producing rapid and severe anemia. The 
waste products of the parasites, when they break out of 
the cells, produce high fever, headaches, and vomiting in 
the victim.
Chronic effects. Most of the diseases responsible 
for mortality are also leading causes of debilitation in hu-
mans of all ages. More than 4 billion episodes of diarrhea 
occur in the human population over the course of a year, 
and at any given time, more than 3.5 billion people suffer 
from the chronic effects of parasitic worms such as hook-
worms and schistosomes.
Physical Hazards. Natural disasters—including hurri-
canes, tornadoes, floods, forest fires, earthquakes, landslides, 
and volcanic eruptions (Fig. 7)—take a toll on human life 
and property every year. They are the outcome of hydro-
logical, meteorological, or geological forces. The years 2010 
and 2011 were record-setting. In 2010, a new record was 
set for lives lost and infrastructure destroyed due to physi-
cal hazards. Heat waves, earthquakes, floods, and snow-
storms led the 950 natural disasters, killing 295,000 and 
causing $130 billion in losses. Key events were the January 
12 magnitude 7.0 earthquake in Haiti, which claimed more 
450

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7 Dangerous physical hazards. Natural disasters bring death and destruction in their wake. 
(a) A huge offshore earthquake triggered a devastating tsunami in Japan, March 1, 2011, killing over 20,000. 
(b) Heavy winter storms in the Pacific Northwest caused this tributary of the Columbia River to rampage.  
(c) A magnitude 7.0 earthquake destroyed the Haitian capital, Port-au-Prince.on January 12, 2010; more than 
220,000 lives were lost. (d) Joplin, Missouri, was almost leveled by a EF-5 tornado on May 22, 2011, that killed 160.
than 220,000 lives, huge floods that covered one-quarter of 
Pakistan, and an unprecedented heat wave in Russia that 
caused 55,000 deaths. The year 2011 was a record year for 
insurance loss ($105 billion), when 820 disasters caused a 
total loss of $380 billion. That year, there were major floods 
in Thailand and Australia, a record flood in the Mississippi 
River basin, and a major tornado outbreak in the Midwest 
and Southern states. In both years, 90% of the natural catas-
trophes were climate related. Table 2 records the mortality 
from major natural disasters for 2010 and 2011.
Looking at the recent record, there are two patterns that 
emerge: hazards like tsunamis, tornadoes, and earthquakes 
that are impossible to anticipate and hazards that are largely 
a consequence of choices people make about where to live.
Out of Nowhere. Each year in the United States, 780 tor-
nadoes strike on average, spawned from the severe weather ac-
companying thunderstorms. Because of the tendency for cold, 
dry air masses from the north to mix with warm, humid air 
from the Gulf of Mexico, the central United States generates 
more tornadoes than anywhere else on Earth. Of short du-
ration, they develop into some of the most destructive forces 
known in nature, with winds reaching as high as 300 miles per 
hour. The most intense tornadoes have killed hundreds of peo-
ple. Two deadly tornadic outbreaks occurred in the spring of 
2011, one in April across the Southeastern United States that 
killed 322 (see Fig. 7d) and another that almost leveled Joplin, 
Missouri, on May 22, killing 160. That year was a record for 
tornadoes in the United States—a reported 1,897.
451

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
more people in the world to be affected. But as one clima-
tologist put it, if natural disasters are having an increasingly 
greater impact, the culprit is not Mother Nature but human 
nature. At issue is the question of whether global climate 
change is behind the rising tide of natural disasters, especially 
intense hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, and droughts. Whether 
it is or not, all the evidence suggests that climate change will 
definitely intensify future natural disasters as temperatures 
and sea levels rise. This is a problem we are bringing on our-
selves.
Chemical Hazards. Industrialization has brought with it 
a host of technologies that employ chemicals such as clean-
ing agents, pesticides, fuels, paints, medicines, and those 
used directly in industrial processes (Fig. 8). The manufac-
ture, use, and disposal of these chemicals often bring hu-
mans into contact with them. Exposure is either through 
the ingestion of contaminated food and drink, the breathing 
of contaminated air, absorption through the skin, or direct 
or accidental use. Toxicity (the condition of being harmful, 
deadly, or poisonous) depends not only on exposure, but 
also on the dose of the toxic substance—the amount actu-
ally absorbed by a sensitive organ. Further, for most sub-
stances, there is a threshold below which no toxicity can be 
detected. 
Making things even more difficult, different people 
have different thresholds of toxicity for given substances. 
For example, children are often at greater risk than adults 
because children are growing rapidly and are incorporat-
ing more of their food (and any contaminants that are in 
it) into new tissue. Embryos are even more sensitive. Sub-
stances transmitted across the mother’s placenta can have 
grave impacts on the embryo’s development, especially in 
the early stages.
Many developing countries are in double jeopardy 
because of both their high level of infectious disease and 
their rising exposure to toxic chemicals through industrial 
The Japanese tsunami of March 11, 2011, and the 
 Haitian earthquake were completely unavoidable. There is 
still no way to forecast earthquakes, but there are ways to 
mitigate their impacts. Tsunami warning systems have existed 
for the Pacific Ocean since 1965, but not until 2006 for the 
Indian Ocean. Many thousands of lives were saved by the 
“Large Tsunami Warning” broadcast widely on Japan’s east 
coast immediately following the offshore earthquake. Earth-
quake-resistant buildings can be constructed (but were not for 
the city of Port-au-Prince, Haiti). This illustrates the fact that 
the most devastating consequences of natural hazards usually 
are experienced by those who are least capable of anticipating 
them and dealing with their effects—the poor. Most of the 
20,000 fatalities brought on by the magnitude 9.0 Japanese 
earthquake were due to the tsunami (Japan’s buildings have 
long been designed to withstand earthquake impact).
In Harm’s Way. Much of the loss brought on by natu-
ral disasters is a consequence of poor environmental stew-
ardship. Hillsides and mountains are deforested, leaving the 
soil unprotected; people build homes and towns on flood-
plains; villages are nestled up to volcanic mountains; cities 
are constructed on known geological fault lines; and coastal 
marshes and mangrove forests are replaced by house lots. A 
general human tendency is to assume that disasters happen 
only to other people in other places, and even if there is a 
risk, say, of a hurricane striking a coastal island, many people 
are willing to take that calculated risk in order to enjoy life 
on the water’s edge. Trends on the U.S. “hurricane coasts” 
(Gulf of Mexico and southern Atlantic) are a case in point: 
Coastal populations continue to rise, in spite of the many 
hurricane strikes. One writer suggested that town zoning 
boards should create a stupid zone for such locations. Other 
“stupid zone” locations would be in the middle of 25-year 
floodplains, in highly flammable coniferous forests, on top of 
earthquake faults, and in valleys below dormant volcanoes.
Certainly, part of the reason for the rising human and 
economic costs of natural disasters is the fact that there are 
tabLe 2 Mortality from Major Natural Disasters, 2010–2011
Country
Type of Disaster
Date
Deaths
Haiti
Earthquake
January 12, 2010
222,570
Russia
Heat wave
June 2010
55,736
Japan
Earthquake/tsunami
March 11, 2011
20,319
China (P. Republic)
Flood
April 14, 2010
2,968
Pakistan
Flash flood
July 28–August 10, 2010
1,985
China (P. Republic)
Landslide
August 8, 2010
1,765
China (P. Republic)
Flood
May 29–Aug. 31, 2011
1,691
Source: EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database, www.emdat.be, Université Catholique 
de Louvain, Brussels (Belgium).
452

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
partment of Health and Human Services lists 51 chemicals 
(and three biological agents) now known to be human car-
cinogens and 186 more that are “reasonably anticipated to 
be human carcinogens” because of animal tests. Many are 
substances used in both developed and developing countries. 
Other potential effects of toxic chemicals are impairment of 
the immune system, brain impairment, infertility, and birth 
defects.
Cancer and Carcinogenesis. In the United States, 23% 
of all deaths in 2010—573,900—were traced to cancer, and 
even though it is largely a disease of older adults, cancer can 
strike people of all ages. How is it that a simple chemical 
like benzene can cause leukemia? How can aflatoxin cause 
liver cancer? To answer these questions, we must understand 
processes and home use. In both cases, the risks are largely 
preventable. In places where industrial growth is especially 
rapid, insufficient attention is often given to the pollutants 
that accompany that growth. For example, nine of the 10 cit-
ies with the worst air pollution are found in Asia, where eco-
nomic growth has risen rapidly.
Carcinogens. Many chemicals, such as heavy metals, 
organic solvents, and pesticides, are hazardous to human 
health even at very low concentrations. Episodes of acute 
poisoning are easy to understand and are clearly prevent-
able, but the long-term exposure to low levels of many of 
these substances presents the greatest challenge to our un-
derstanding. Some chemical hazards are known carcinogens 
(cancer-causing agents). Cancer takes a very large toll in the 
developed countries, accounting for one-fourth of mortal-
ity. Because cancer often develops over a period of 10 to 40 
years, it is frequently hard to connect the cause with the ef-
fect. The twelfth  Report on  Carcinogens8 from the U.S. De-
Figure 8 Industrial processes and hazards. Many industries produce chemicals and pollutants that 
contribute to the impact of toxic substances on human health. Some examples of hazardous workshops are (a) a 
paper mill in Port Angeles, Washington; (b) a tannery in Fez, Morocco; (c) an oil refinery; and (d) a plastics  factory 
in China.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
8Report on Carcinogens, Twelfth Edition, June 10, 2011. U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, National Toxicology Program.
453

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
The top five factors (Fig. 9) are responsible for one-fourth of 
all deaths and much of the global disease burden. We will 
consider only a few examples of these risk factors, because a 
thorough examination of this topic would take up volumes.
The Risks of Being Poor
One major pathway for hazards is poverty: The WHO has 
stated that poverty is the world’s biggest killer. Environmen-
tal risks are borne more often by the poor, not only in the de-
veloping countries, but also in the developed countries of the 
world. The people who are dying from infectious diseases are 
those who lack access to adequate health care, clean water, 
nutritious food, healthy air, sanitation, and shelter.  Because 
of this, they are exposed to more environmental hazards and 
thus encounter greater risks. The world’s number one risk 
factor (Fig. 9) is called underweight, a problem of malnutri-
tion that strikes primarily children less than five years of age. 
This factor is strongly related to poverty: Those households 
living on less than $1.25 per day (one-fifth of the world’s 
population) show the highest prevalence of underweight chil-
dren. A 2008 report in The  Lancet10 found that more than 
one-third of childhood deaths under age five are caused by 
malnutrition.
cellular growth and metabolism. During normal growth, 
cells develop into a variety of specific types that perform 
unique functions in the body: blood cells, heart muscle cells, 
liver cells, absorptive cells that line the small intestine, and 
so forth. Some cells, like the stem cells that form the cells of 
blood, keep on dividing until death. Other cells, however, are 
programmed to stop dividing and simply perform their func-
tions, often throughout life. A cancer is a cell line that has 
lost its normal control over growth. Recent research has re-
vealed the presence of as many as three dozen genes that can 
bring about a malignant (out-of-control) cancer; these genes 
are like ticking time bombs that may or may not go off.
Carcinogenesis (the development of a cancer) is now 
known to be a process with several steps, often with long 
periods of time in between. In most cases, a sequence of five 
or more mutations must occur in order to initiate a cancer. 
(A mutation is a change in the informational content of the 
DNA that controls processes in the cell.) Environmental car-
cinogens are either chemicals that are able to bind to DNA 
and prevent it from functioning properly or agents, such as 
radiation, that can strike the DNA and disrupt it. When such 
an agent initiates a mutation in a cell, the cell may go for 
years before the next step—another mutation—occurs. Thus, 
it can take upward of 40 years for some cells to accumulate 
the sequence of mutations that leads to a malignancy. In a 
malignancy, the cells grow out of control and form tumors 
that may spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body. 
Early detection of cancers has improved greatly over the 
years, and many people survive cancer who would have suc-
cumbed to it a decade ago. The best strategy, however, is pre-
vention, so great attention is now given to the environmental 
carcinogens and habits, like tobacco use, that are clearly re-
lated to cancer development.
2 Pathways of Risk
The environmental hazards identified in Section 1 are re-
sponsible for untold human misery and death, but if many 
of the consequences of exposure to the different hazards are 
preventable, how is it that the hazards turn into mortality 
statistics? In other words, what are the pathways that lead to 
human deaths from risks of infection, exposure to chemicals, 
and vulnerability to physical hazards? If prevention is the 
goal—and it should be—this knowledge is crucial. In 2009, 
the WHO, building on an earlier report on health risks, pub-
lished an update: Global Health Risks: Mortality and Bur-
den of Disease Attributable to Selected Major Risks.9 The 
document is a thoroughly researched presentation of the 
major risks as factors “that raise the probability of adverse 
health outcomes,” as the report puts it. The report shows 
that a remarkably small number of risk factors are respon-
sible for a vast proportion of premature deaths and disease. 
Percent of global DALYs (total: 1.53 billion) 
Childhood underweight
Unsafe sex
Alcohol use
Unsafe water, sanitation, hygiene
High blood pressure
Tobacco use
Suboptimal breastfeeding
High blood glucose
Indoor smoke from solid fuels
Overweight and obesity
Physical inactivity
High cholesterol
Occupational risks
Vitamin A deficiency
Iron deficiency
Low fruit and vegetable intake
Zinc deficiency
Illicit drugs
Unmet contraceptive need
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
High income
Middle income
Low income
Figure 9 The 19 leading global risk factors. The top five of these 
19 factors are responsible for more than one-fourth of all deaths and much of 
the global burden of disease. They are reported as a percentage of global DALYs 
(disability-adjusted life years); one DALY equals the loss of one healthy life year.
(Source: World Health Organization. Global Health Risks: Mortality and Burden of Disease 
 Attributable to Selected Major Risks. WHO, 2009.)
9World Health Organization. Global Health Risks: Mortality and Burden of 
Disease Attributable to Selected Major Risks. World Health Organization, 2009. 
Available at www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/GlobalHealthRisks 
_report_full.pdf.
10Robert E. Black et al. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Global and Regional 
Exposures and Health Consequences.” The Lancet 371: 243–260. Jan. 19, 2008.
454

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
so forth carry with them a significant risk of accident and 
death. However, one cultural hazard, tobacco use, is the lead-
ing cause of death in the United States (Fig. 11) and ranks 
sixth in the global tally of risk factors (Fig. 9). Although to-
bacco use is declining in some developed countries, it is on 
the increase in most developing countries and remains high 
in the former socialist countries of Eastern Europe. Smoking 
often begins in childhood. Lured by the image of smoking 
as “cool” or by peer pressure, youngsters are very quickly 
addicted by the nicotine in cigarettes, an addiction that can 
last a (shortened) lifetime. According to the CDC, some 
45 million adults (19.3%) in the United States smoke ciga-
rettes, and half of these will die or become disabled because 
of their habit if they don’t quit.
Marlboro Country? Tobacco is the only known product 
on the market that kills half of its users. Cigarette smoking 
has been clearly and indisputably correlated with cancer and 
other lung diseases. Smoking has been shown to be responsi-
ble for 29% of cancer deaths in the United States. The WHO 
puts the number of smokers worldwide at more than 1 bil-
lion, with 6 million deaths per year due to cigarette smoking. 
Eighty percent of smokers are in the developing world, where 
the habit is increasing at a rate of 2% per year. In China, 
almost 60% of men are smokers. The WHO reported that 
smoking is a growing epidemic in the developing countries, 
where its full impact is yet to come because tobacco-related 
disease and death don’t begin until decades after the start of 
tobacco use.
Studies have shown that smokers living in polluted air 
experience a much higher incidence of lung disease than do 
smokers living in clean air—a synergistic effect. Certain dis-
eases typically associated with occupational air pollution 
show the same synergistic relationship with smoking. For ex-
ample, black lung disease is seen almost exclusively among 
coal miners who are also smokers, and lung disease predomi-
nates in smokers who are exposed to asbestos. Smoking is 
linked to half of the tuberculosis deaths in India, which leads 
the world in that category. Smoking also kills by impairing 
respiratory and cardiovascular functioning. The CDC esti-
mates that smoking costs the United States $193 billion a 
year in health care costs and lost job productivity because of 
premature death and disability (obesity-related medical costs 
come in second, at $147 billion per year).
In the United States, several measures have been taken 
to regulate this cultural hazard. Tobacco products are highly 
taxed, for example, providing substantial revenues to the 
Wealth. Overall, the wealthier a country becomes, the 
healthier is its population. However, in virtually all countries, 
those with wealth are able to protect themselves from many 
environmental hazards. People in developed countries tend 
to live longer, and when they die, the chief causes of death 
are diseases of old age—the so-called degenerative diseases, 
such as cancers and diseases of the circulatory system (heart 
disease, strokes, and so forth). By contrast, only one-third of 
the deaths in the low-income countries are indicative of peo-
ple who are living out their life span.
There are many reasons for this discrepancy between de-
veloped and developing nations. One is education. Advances 
in socioeconomic development and advances in education 
are strongly correlated. As people—and especially women— 
become more educated, they act on their knowledge to secure 
relief from hazards to health. They may, for example, improve 
their hygiene, immunize their children (Fig. 10), or recognize 
dangerous symptoms such as dehydration and seek oral re-
hydration therapy. Other reasons for the discrepancy between 
health in the developed world and that in the developing world 
are the lack of safe drinking water and sanitation and the high 
indoor air pollution associated with the use of solid fuels such 
as wood, dung, and coal in simple cooking stoves.
Priorities. Education, nutrition, and the general level of 
wealth in a society do not tell the whole story, however. A na-
tion may make a deliberate policy choice to put its resources 
into improving the health of its population rather than, say, 
militarization or the development of modern power sources. 
Countries such as Costa Rica, China, and Sri Lanka have a 
much longer life expectancy and lower infant mortality than 
their gross domestic product would predict. They have ac-
complished this enviable record by focusing public resources 
on such concerns as immunization, the upgrading of sewer 
and water systems, and land reform.
The Cultural Risk of Tobacco Use
Lifestyle choices such as refraining from exercise, overeat-
ing, driving fast, imbibing alcohol, climbing mountains, and 
Figure 10 Public health clinic. This clinic on the island of Zanzibar, Tan-
zania, provides families with health checks to improve the health of mothers and 
children.
Figure 11 Deaths caused by smoking. Approximately 443,000 deaths 
in the United States are attributed to smoking each year.
(Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 
January 12, 2012.)
COPD
92,900
Other diagnoses
44,000
Lung cancer
128,900
Heart disease
126,000
Other cancers
35,300
Strokes, etc.
15,900
455

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
2005, and has been signed by 173 countries. Many countries 
have already taken the action called for in the treaty; Ireland, 
Spain, Norway, and Italy have banned smoking in indoor 
public places, and other countries have begun banning adver-
tising and requiring printed warnings on cigarette packages.
The WHO, with funding of $500 million from Bill Gates 
and New York City’s Mayor Michael Bloomberg, initiated a 
campaign in 2008 to combat the global smoking epidemic. 
Given the acronym MPOWER, the campaign has six compo-
nents with proven strategies to reduce tobacco use:
 • Monitor tobacco use and prevention policies.
 • Protect people from tobacco smoke.
 • Offer help to quit tobacco use.
 • Warn about the dangers of tobacco.
 • Enforce bans on tobacco advertising, promotion, and 
sponsorship.
 • Raise taxes on tobacco.
The MPOWER campaign is well under way, carried out by 
the WHO FCTC agencies and partners. Antismoking cam-
paigns in developed and developing countries have employed 
states ($17 billion in 2009) and the federal government 
($11.5 billion in 2009). These revenues are sure to rise, as a 
result of the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthor-
ization Act of 2009. This new law raised the federal excise 
tax on cigarettes from $.24 to $1.01 a pack and the aver-
age state tax from $.33 to $1.20. Raising cigarette taxes has 
been shown to be one of the most effective ways to reduce 
smoking, especially in young people. Surgeons General of the 
United States have issued repeated warnings against smok-
ing since 1964, and public policy has taken them seriously 
by requiring warning labels on smoking materials, banning 
cigarette advertising on television, promoting smoke-free 
workplaces, requiring nonsmokers’ areas in restaurants, and 
banning smoking on all domestic airline flights. Since the 
warnings began, the U.S. adult smoking population has grad-
ually dropped from 42% to 19.8%.
Secondhand Smoke. In January 1993, the EPA clas-
sified environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), meaning sec-
ondhand smoke, as a Class A (known human) carcinogen. 
In the words of then EPA Administrator Carol Browner, 
“Widespread exposure to secondhand smoke in the United 
States presents a serious and substantial public health risk.” 
The EPA’s action was unanimously supported by its science 
advisory board. The consequences of this action have been 
substantial: Outright bans in public areas such as shopping 
malls, bars, restaurants, and workplaces are now the na-
tional norm. In particular, the EPA has taken specific steps 
to protect children from ETS in all public places, and the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration is promot-
ing policies to protect workers from involuntary exposure to 
ETS in the workplace. The impact of these actions on public 
health should be significant.
FDA Authority. Responding to efforts by the Food and 
Drug Administration to curb tobacco sales to young people, 
tobacco companies brought a challenge to the Supreme Court. 
In March 2000, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the FDA 
did not have the authority to regulate tobacco. That authority, 
said the Court, belonged to Congress. Until 2009, the many 
bills filed in Congress to extend that authority to the FDA 
did not make it into law. However, in June 2009, the House 
and Senate voted overwhelmingly to give the FDA sweeping 
authority to regulate tobacco products, with the Tobacco 
 Control Act, finally overcoming the efforts of a powerful to-
bacco lobby. One recent impact of the act is a requirement for 
new, graphic labels on cigarette packs showing some of the 
worst effects of smoking (Fig. 12).
FCTC and MPOWER. The battle against smoking is rap-
idly spreading worldwide. After several years of efforts, the 
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) 
was adopted in May 2003 by the World Health Assembly. 
This convention is a treaty that aims to reduce the spread 
of smoking by requiring signatory countries to raise taxes, 
restrict advertising, require larger health warnings on to-
bacco materials, and reduce ETS (steps already taken in the 
United States). The treaty went into effect on February 27, 
Figure 12 New warnings on cigarettes. The FDA has required that 
prominent messages be placed on packs of cigarettes to warn users of  possible 
consequences of smoking. This photo shows one of the nine graphic warnings ap-
proved by the FDA.
(Source: FDA. http://www.fda.gov/TobaccoProducts/Labeling/CigaretteWarningLabels/default.htm. 
January 16, 2012.)
456

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
geographic locations as well as tracing the mode of transmis-
sion and consequences of the disease in the field. Epidemi-
ologists point to many reasons why infectious diseases and 
parasites are more prevalent in the developing countries. 
One major pathway of risk is contamination of food and 
water due to inadequate hygiene and inferior sewage treat-
ment. Some of the risk can be traced to the failure to edu-
cate people about diseases and how they can be prevented. 
Much, however, is simply a consequence of the general lack 
of resources needed to build effective public health–related 
infrastructure in cities, towns, and villages of the develop-
ing world. According to the UN’s 2011 report on the Mil-
lennium Development Goals, an estimated 2.6 billion people 
are still without adequate sanitation, and 884 million lack 
access to safe drinking water. Many microbial diseases are 
transmitted in this way, and some of these—such as cholera 
and typhoid fever—are deadly and capable of spreading to 
epidemic proportions. Any diarrheal infection in small chil-
dren can be fatal if it is accompanied by malnutrition or 
the use of mass media and health warnings on tobacco prod-
uct packaging, reaching a growing proportion of countries.11
Smoke-free laws covering public places and workplaces have 
been newly established in 16 countries, and complete bans 
on tobacco advertising now cover some 6% of the world’s 
population. Still, as the WHO report points out, governments 
collect some $133 billion in tobacco excise tax revenues but 
spend less than $1 billion on tobacco control. Given the huge 
health care expenditures on tobacco-related illnesses and 
death, there is clearly much to be gained by MPOWER’s ef-
forts to make tobacco use history.
Risk and Infectious Diseases
Epidemiology has been described as “medical ecology” be-
cause the epidemiologist traces a disease as it occurs in 
SOUND SCIENCE
The Grisly Seven
In a world dominated by 
air travel, mobile phones, 
and the Internet, it is a 
stretch of the imagination 
to picture a billion people 
still infected with chronic and quite treatable 
tropical diseases. These are not malaria, tubercu-
losis, or HIV, the big three that are often equated 
with “tropical diseases” and which are addressed 
with major treatment programs and funding 
agencies. These diseases are, collectively, the 
 Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs). Seven stand 
out as particularly nasty, exacting a toll of anemia, 
malnutrition, weakness, disfigurement, and blind-
ness. Virtually every person experiencing grinding 
poverty in sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and 
Southeast Asia is infected by one or more of the 
“grisly seven.” Not only do they accompany pov-
erty, they also help to perpetuate it. Here are the 
seven, plus one more that also deserves notice.
Roundworm (Ascariasis). These large 
worms (5–14 inches) live in the small intestine 
and afflict some 800 million people. They are 
transmitted by contact with eggs in the soil 
and cause malnutrition, stunting, and bowel 
obstruction, sometimes shocking a victim by 
crawling out of the nose and mouth.
Whipworms (Trichuriasis) are one- to 
two-inch roundworms preferring the large in-
testine, spread by contaminated soil and found 
in 600 million people. They cause colitis and 
also stunted growth in children.
Hookworm. These roundworms, one 
half-inch long, latch on to the small intestine 
and, because they feed on blood, cause severe 
iron deficiency and anemia, also stunting child 
growth. They infest 600 million victims and are 
also transmitted by contaminated soil. Many vic-
tims are parasitized by combinations of all three 
of these roundworm species.
Schistosomiasis. These are half- to one-
inch flukes (flatworms) that live in veins of the 
intestine and bladder. They are acquired by 
contact with freshwater; the infective agents 
(cercaria) are released by freshwater snails and 
penetrate the skin. Adult flukes lay spiny eggs 
that damage internal organs. These parasites 
infest 200 million people, causing chronic pain, 
anemia, stunting, and malnutrition.
Lymphatic Filariasis. Spread by mosqui-
toes, these 2- to 4-inch worms live in lymphatic 
tissues, often blocking lymph flow and causing 
severe leg swelling and disfigurement in severe 
cases, known as elephantiasis. Some 120 million 
are infested by these worms.
Onchocerciasis. Another roundworm 
disease, acquired by the bite of black flies, 
 onchocerciasis produces worms that live in 
nodules under the skin, growing up to 20 inches 
long. Their larvae migrate to the eyes and cause 
blindness, and the adults cause itching and 
disfigurement in the skin. Most of the 30–40 
million cases occur in Africa.
Trachoma. This is a bacterial infection 
spread by poor hygiene and houseflies. Between 
60 million and 80 million people are infected 
by this Chlamydia species, different from the 
Chlamydia that causes the sexually transmitted 
genital infection. It is the most common form of 
blindness caused by infection.
Guinea Worm Disease. Two decades ago, 
some 3.5 million people in 21 countries were 
infested with this roundworm, acquired by drink-
ing water infested with larvae. The 3-foot-long 
worm causes a lesion in the leg or foot and re-
leases eggs when the victim wades in the water. 
The Carter Center has carried out a successful 
campaign to eradicate this disease, now down to 
some 1,000 cases in four African countries.
Every one of these neglected diseases can 
be treated, sometimes with a single pill, and 
prevented. The treatment drugs are inexpensive 
and effective, but perhaps because the NTDs 
infect people who are poor and do not often 
result in death, governments have not given 
them the attention they deserve. The WHO es-
timates that only 10% of people suffering from 
the NTDs are being reached. There are treatment 
programs, and treatment is focusing now on a 
single program of drugs that could cost as little 
as 50 cents. The Global Network of NTDs has 
been formed as a partnership between donors 
and public agencies and is beginning to receive 
funding. It is estimated that $2 billion to $3 bil-
lion would be needed for the next seven years 
to make a serious impact on these diseases. The 
Carter Center wisely selected one disease, work-
ing tirelessly to eradicate it country by country. 
Something like this paradigm could be applied to 
the grisly seven; it is believed that the NTD drugs 
are the most cost-effective way to improve the 
health and well-being of the world’s poor.
Source: Peter Jay Hotez. “A Plan to Defeat Neglected Tropical 
Diseases.” Scientific American 302: 90–96. January 2010.
I
a
a
s
t
11World Health Organization. WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 
2011: Warning About the Dangers of Tobacco. Executive Summary. WHO, 2011. 
www.who.int/tobacco.
457

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
Figure 13 Plasmodium falciparum incidence in 2010. P. falciparum is the most deadly and 
 widespread of the three major species of malaria parasites. This map shows the global distribution in 2010 of the 
rate of infection in 2- to 10-year-olds. There were an estimated 216 million cases of malaria and 655,000 deaths in 
2010, most of which were in sub-Saharan Africa.
(Source: Malaria Atlas Project. Used with permission. http://www.map.ox.ac.uk/about-map/open-access. January 16, 2012.)
Water
P. falciparum free
PfAPI < 0.1%
PfPR2–10
70%
0%
dehydration. By making oral rehydration therapy kits readily 
available throughout the country, Mexico reduced mortality 
rates in children by 70% in less than a decade.
Even Here? These problems are not unique to the devel-
oping world. Inadequate surveillance in developed countries 
sometimes leads to major outbreaks of diseases, with fatal 
outcomes. American consumers spend more than $1 tril-
lion on food each year, two-thirds of which is from domestic 
(farm) production. At the same time, the CDC estimates that 
every year 48 million Americans are sickened by contami-
nated food, and 128,000 cases require hospitalization, 3,000 
result in death. The factory-like conditions under which food 
processing in the developed countries takes place often give 
pathogens an opportunity to contaminate food on a wide 
scale, resulting in diarrheal outbreaks and major recalls of 
food products. Peanut butter, that staple food for kids of all 
ages, was implicated in an outbreak of Salmonella typhimu-
rium in 2008–2009. (This bacterium infects the intestinal 
tract and brings on diarrhea, fever, and cramps.) More than 
700 cases (and nine deaths) were recorded, and the source 
was traced to a factory in Georgia. Another Salmonella spe-
cies brought on a nationwide recall of 500 million eggs in the 
summer of 2010, following the emergence of cases of infec-
tion. It was occurrences like these that brought about pas-
sage of the FDA Food Safety Modernization Act of 2010, 
expanding the FDA’s authority over the food processing in-
dustry. The occurrence of such outbreaks, the resurgence of 
known diseases, and the emergence of new ones like SARS, 
AIDS, avian flu, swine flu, and the Ebola virus are also the 
concern of public-health agents and epidemiologists in or-
ganizations such as the WHO and the CDC.
Tropical Diseases. The tropics, where most of the devel-
oping countries are found, have climates ideally suited for 
the year-round spread of disease by insects. Mosquitoes are 
 vectors (organisms that transmit infectious agents) for several 
deadly diseases, such as yellow fever, dengue fever, Japanese 
encephalitis, West Nile virus, and malaria. However, there 
are other tropical diseases that afflict a billion people, and 
although they seldom kill, they are debilitating and make life 
miserable; these are the subject of the Sound Science essay 
“The Grisly Seven”.
Malaria is by far the most serious tropical disease 
(Fig. 13). Public-health attempts to control malaria have been 
aimed at vector control (e.g., attacking the Anopheles mos-
quito with the use of insecticides) and treatment  strategies 
(e.g., curing people once they have been infected). Malaria 
was once prevalent in the southern United States, but an ag-
gressive campaign in the 1950s to eliminate the Anopheles 
mosquito and identify and treat all human cases of malaria 
led to the complete eradication of the disease there.
Unfortunately, in the tropics the mosquitoes have de-
veloped resistance to all of the pesticides employed, and 
eradication has remained an elusive goal. DDT is still used 
in some developing countries to spray the walls of huts and 
458

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
and is being met with a containment plan to eliminate 
malaria from regions where the resistance has been 
found.
Good News. In 2002, molecular biologists suc-
cessfully sequenced the genomes of the Anopheles 
mosquito and the most lethal malaria parasite, P. 
falciparum. Armed with this information, research-
ers are now able to target potential weak points in 
both organisms in the search for new vaccines and 
drugs. Research continues on the development of 
new, more effective antimalarial drugs and on the 
development of an effective vaccine. Although the 
parasite’s complicated life cycle and the fact that 
malaria does not readily induce long-term immu-
nity have made a vaccine an elusive goal, a vaccine 
recently developed by GlaxoSmithKline—labeled 
RTS,S—has been field-tested and has shown modest (55% 
prevention) efficacy.
A number of plans have been developed over the years 
aimed at conquering malaria, the latest of which is the Glo-
bal Malaria Action Plan (GMAP). Unlike the others, this plan 
has an extremely ambitious goal: reduce malaria deaths to 
near zero by 2015 and then gradually eliminate malaria eve-
rywhere until it is eradicated. International funding for the 
plan is now at $2 billion per year; one-third of that comes 
from the United States. Even if GMAP is not completely 
successful, it very likely will meet the Millennium Develop-
ment Goal target to halt and begin to reverse the incidence 
of  malaria.
Toxic Risk Pathways
How is it that people are exposed to chemical substances 
that can bring them harm? Airborne pollutants represent a 
particularly difficult set of chemical hazards to control, as 
they are difficult to measure and difficult to avoid. Humans 
breathe 30 pounds (14 kg) of air into their lungs each day. 
Although some of the symptoms of pollution that people suf-
fer involve the moist surfaces of the eyes, nose, and throat, 
the major site of impact is the respiratory system. Three cat-
egories of impact can be distinguished:
1. Chronic. Pollutants cause the gradual deterioration of a 
variety of physiological functions over a period of years.
2. Acute. Pollutants bring on life-threatening reactions 
within a period of hours or days.
3. Carcinogenic. Pollutants initiate changes within cells 
that lead to uncontrolled growth and division (cancer), 
which is frequently fatal.
Indoor Air Pollution. Much attention is given to air pol-
lutants released to the atmosphere—and rightly so. How-
ever, indoor air pollution can pose an even greater risk 
to health. The air inside the home and workplace often 
contains much higher levels of hazardous pollutants than 
houses, but its use in this manner is highly controversial 
because of the pesticide’s well-known harmful environmen-
tal and health impacts. However, this limited spraying has 
proven to be highly effective. Resuming their use of DDT 
after several years with another pesticide, South Africa and 
Zambia were able to dramatically reduce their malaria 
caseloads.
Net Results. One highly promising effort funded by the 
WHO’s Tropical Disease Research Program found that chil-
dren provided with insecticide-treated nets over their beds 
(bed nets) experienced a substantial reduction in mortality 
from all causes (Fig. 14). In Vietnam, a combination of bed 
nets and more effective drugs reduced malaria deaths by 98% 
in seven years. This strategy is the basis of a cost- effective, 
large-scale intervention throughout Africa to reduce the high 
mortality from malaria, and it is working. Using a combina-
tion of long-lasting insecticide-treated bed nets, indoor DDT 
spraying, and quick access to drug treatment, the southern 
Africa nation of Namibia has seen a huge decline in cases 
(83%), hospital admissions (92%), and deaths (96%) in just 
10 years. Already, hundreds of millions of bed nets have been 
distributed, and huge declines in malaria incidence have been 
seen.
Complicating control of the disease in victims, the Plas-
modium protozoans have developed resistance to one treat-
ment drug after another. Until recently, chloroquine was 
quite effective against malaria in Africa. Now it is ineffec-
tive, and health workers have turned to artemisinin, a drug 
derived from the common Chinese weed Artemisia annua. 
This drug works quickly and effectively, but the WHO 
says it should be used only in combination with several 
other antimalarials, called artemisinin combination therapy 
(ACT), because of the danger of creating artemisinin-resist-
ant strains of the malarial parasite when used alone. Indeed, 
ACT resistance has begun to crop up in western Cambodia 
Figure 14 Insecticide-treated bed net.  A home health worker installs 
a bed net in a home in Kampala, Uganda.
459

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
Developing Countries. The most serious indoor air 
pollution threat is found in the developing world, where 
at least 3 billion people continue to rely on biofuels like 
wood and animal dung for cooking and heat. This threat 
was  identified as one of the top 10 health risks by the WHO  
(Fig. 9) and ranked by the WHO as the leading environmen-
tal cause of death, contributing to nearly 2 million deaths 
annually. Fireplaces, cooking fires, and stoves are often 
improperly ventilated (if at all), exposing the inhabitants 
to very high levels of pollutants, such as carbon monox-
ide, nitrogen and sulfur oxides, soot, and benzene (the last 
two being known carcinogens). Four major problems have 
been associated with indoor air pollutants in the develop-
ing world: acute respiratory infections in children; chronic 
lung diseases, including asthma and bronchitis; lung cancer; 
and birth-related problems. One study in Mexico showed 
that women who were continually exposed to indoor smoke 
had 75 times the risk of developing a chronic lung disease 
as women who weren’t exposed. Solutions to this problem 
outdoor air does. In the developed countries, the overall 
indoor air pollution problem is threefold. First, increas-
ing numbers and types of products and equipment used in 
homes and offices give off hazardous fumes. Second, build-
ings have become increasingly well insulated and sealed; 
hence, pollutants are trapped inside, where they may ac-
cumulate to dangerous levels. Third, people are exposed 
more to indoor pollution than to outdoor pollution. The 
average person spends 90% of his or her time indoors, and 
the  people who spend the most time inside are those most 
 vulnerable to the harmful effects of pollution—namely, 
small children, pregnant women, the elderly, and the 
chronically ill.
The sources of indoor air pollution are quite varied, as 
evidenced in Figure 15. One of the least excusable of these is 
smoking, which carries a much higher health risk than any of 
the other sources shown in Figure 15. ETS contains 40 sub-
stances that are known carcinogens and many others that are 
potent respiratory irritants.
Figure 15 Indoor air 
 pollution. Pollutants originate from 
many sources and can accumulate to 
unhealthy levels, leading to asthma and 
“sick-building syndrome” (characterized 
by eye, nose, and throat irritations;  
nausea; irritability; and fatigue) as well 
as other serious problems.
Plywood
(formaldehyde)
Radon
(radiation)
Fireplace
(soot, carbon
monoxide)
Dust (mites)
Ashtray (smoking)
Pets
(animal dander)
Moisture
(molds)
Cleansers, sprays
(volatile organic compounds)
Pesticides, paint, solvents
(volatile organic compounds)
460

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
weather-related disasters have increased dramatically in re-
cent years, from $9 billion per year in the 1980s to $120 
billion in the late 2000s. Enormous resources are devoted to 
these efforts, and societies need to maintain their capacity to 
respond swiftly and effectively to natural disasters. They re-
ceive help with this from the UN Disaster Assessment and 
Coordination (UNDAC) system; in 2010, the UNDAC sent 
teams to 12 areas.
However, much of the human death and misery brought 
on by natural hazards could be prevented through rigorous 
disaster risk reduction strategies. Two resources have recently 
become available to assist societies to move in this direction. 
One is the publication Living with Risk: A Global Review 
of Disaster Reduction Initiatives,13 produced in 2004 by the 
Inter-Agency Secretariat of the International Strategy for Dis-
aster Reduction. This publication, available on the Internet, 
applies the concepts of hazards, risks, and risk assessment to 
natural disasters and goes on to recommend policies and a 
framework for guiding and monitoring disaster risk reduction.
A second resource was created in January 2005, when 
168 country delegations met in Kobe, Japan, for the UN 
World Conference on Disaster Reduction. At that confer-
ence, delegates adopted the Hyogo Framework for Action 
(HFA), a global blueprint for disaster risk reduction efforts 
for the coming decade. The framework identified five priori-
ties for action:
1. Make disaster risk reduction a priority: Ensure that dis-
aster risk reduction is a national and a local priority 
with a strong institutional basis for implementation.
2. Know the risks and take action: Identify, assess, and 
monitor disaster risks—and enhance early warning.
3. Build understanding and awareness: Use knowledge, in-
novation, and education to build a culture of safety and 
resilience at all levels.
4. Reduce risk: Reduce the underlying risk factors. For ex-
ample, in earthquakes, it is usually houses and buildings 
that kill people. Building standards in earthquake-prone 
areas can greatly reduce the death toll of an earthquake.
5. Be prepared and ready to act: Strengthen disaster pre-
paredness for effective response at all levels.
A midterm review of the HFA indicated that although 
significant progress has been made, it is uneven across the 
world; the more vulnerable segments of society still lack the 
resilience to hazards called for by the plan.
We now turn our attention to risk assessment, one of 
the most important tools of the toxicologist in the developed 
countries. Risk assessment is an approach to the problems of 
environmental health and is now a major element of public 
policy.
include the use of ventilated stoves that burn more efficiently 
and the conversion from biofuels to bottled gas or liquid 
fuels such as kerosene.
Asthma. One common consequence of indoor air pol-
lution is asthma, which is currently at epidemic proportions 
in the United States, afflicting 25 million people each year. 
Asthma attacks the respiratory system so that air passages 
tighten and constrict, causing wheezing, tightness in the 
chest, coughing, and shortness of breath. In acute attacks, the 
onset is sudden and sometimes life threatening. Substances 
that can trigger asthma attacks include dust, animal dan-
der, mold, secondhand smoke, swimming pool chlorine, and 
various gases and particles. About half of asthma is traced 
to allergies, but the remainder has other, unknown causes. 
Asthma is expensive, too, with direct and indirect costs esti-
mated at more than $56 billion a year in the United States, 
where more than 3,400 die from the condition annually. 
Through its Indoor Environments Division Web site, the EPA 
provides helpful guidelines for controlling many of the sub-
stances that trigger asthma in schools, homes, and other in-
door environments.
The Hygiene Hypothesis. Oddly, asthma is much more 
common in developed countries, in spite of the greater ex-
posure to indoor air pollution in developing countries. Re-
cent research has suggested that frequent parasitic worm 
infections stimulate a well-regulated anti-inflammatory net-
work in the immune systems of most people in the develop-
ing countries, protecting them against many allergic diseases 
like asthma. In the developed countries, where such parasitic 
infections are uncommon, this protection is lacking, so al-
lergic disorders are much more common. It is interesting that 
children who grow up on farms in developed countries also 
experience much lower frequency of asthma and allergies. 
These observations have led to what is called the hygiene hy-
pothesis: immune systems need to encounter microbes (and 
worms?) when we are young in order to keep inflammatory 
responses like asthma under control. Apparently, too much 
cleanliness can make you sick!12
Toxicology. Even though the substances found in in-
door air are hazardous, the link between their presence in 
the air and the development of a health problem is harder to 
establish than with infectious diseases. As with cancer, often 
the best that can be done is to establish a statistical corre-
lation between exposure levels and the development of an 
adverse effect. The science of toxicology studies the impacts 
of toxic substances on human health and investigates the re-
lationships between the presence of such substances in the 
environment and health problems like cancer.
Disaster Risk
Each year, more than 100 million people are affected by 
natural disasters. These disasters inevitably trigger emer-
gency relief efforts and subsequent humanitarian assistance 
and reconstruction—all good things. The global costs of 
12Leslie, Mitch. “Gut Microbes Keep Rare Immune Cells in Line.” Science 335: 
1428. March 23, 2012.
13Inter-Agency Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, 
Living with Risk: A Global Review of Disaster Reduction Initiatives (Geneva: 
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN/ISDR), 2004). 
https://unp.un.org.
461

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
Risk assessment is the process of evaluating the risks 
associated with a particular hazard before taking some ac-
tion in a situation in which the hazard is present. Figure 16 
shows a number of risks, expressed as years of lost life 
expectancy, for men and women in Denmark. Alternatively, 
risks may be expressed as the probability of dying from a 
given hazard (Table 3). According to the table, the annual 
risk of dying from smoking is 1.5 per 1,000. That is, in the 
course of a year, 1.5 people out of every 1,000 who smoke 
will die as a result of their habit. Figure 16 suggests that this 
is equivalent to about three and a half years (for men) of lost 
life expectancy. In other words, men who never smoke will 
live an average of three and a half years longer than those 
who do.
Truthfully, not very many people actually make choices 
about the hazards in their lives on the basis of such risk as-
sessments. However, risk assessment has become an impor-
tant process in the development of public policy and has long 
been a major way of applying science to the hard problems 
of environmental regulation. The WHO now recommends 
risk assessment as an ideal way to promote the health of peo-
ple everywhere. In the United States, risk assessment is now a 
major public-policy tool used by many agencies to address a 
wide variety of hazards, but it is especially employed by the 
Environmental Protection Agency.
3 Risk Assessment
In the developed countries, our lives are freer of hazards and 
risks than ever before. Despite that, our society still faces 
hazards and the risks that they present to our health. For 
our own self-interest, we should know about and evaluate 
the risks to which we are subjected. Such knowledge ena-
bles us to make informed choices as we consider the ben-
efits and risks of the hazards around us. In the developing 
countries, the heavy burden of disease so common in many 
of the poorer regions calls for a medical response out of 
humanitarian concern. But treating the sick, as helpful and 
appropriate as it is, will go on indefinitely if prevention is 
ignored. As the WHO 2009 report puts it, “Most scientific 
and health resources go towards treatment. However, under-
standing the risks to health is key to preventing disease and 
injuries.”14 When the risks are thoroughly understood, strat-
egies for reducing disease and death are far easier to identify 
and prioritize. If governments are to act as stewards of the 
health of their people, they desperately need the kind of in-
formation a thorough evaluation of health risks can bring 
them.
14World Health Organization, Global Health Risks, 2009, op. cit.
Figure 16 Loss of life expectancy from vari-
ous risks. One way to illustrate the relative risks posed 
by different hazards is to rank them in terms of years of 
lost life associated with each risk. The data show loss of life 
expectancy in Denmark for men and women.
(Source: Knud Juel, Jan Sorensen, and Henrik Bronnum-Hansen. Risk 
Factors and Public Health in Denmark, Summary Report. National 
Institute of Public Health and University of Southern Denmark, 
Copenhagen, 2007)
Smoking
Short education
Alcohol
Physical inactivity
Hypertension
Psychological factors at work
Occupational diseases
Overweight
Passive smoking
Drug abuse
Low intake of fruits and vegetables
Home and leisure accidents
Too much saturated fat
Rarely meets family
Traffic accidents
Men
Women
No help from others
Unsafe sex
Accidents at work
Loss of Life Expectancy (years)
4
0
1
2
3
462

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
In other cases, the link is not so clear because there is a 
time delay between the first exposure and the final outcome. 
For example, establishing a link between exposure to certain 
chemicals and the development of cancer some years later 
is often very difficult. In cases where the linkage is not ob-
vious, data may be needed from epidemiological studies or 
animal tests. An epidemiological study tracks how a sickness 
spreads through a community. Thus, to find a link between 
cancer and exposure to some chemical, an epidemiological 
study would examine all the people especially exposed to the 
chemical and determine whether that population has more 
cancer than the general population. These findings are con-
sidered to be the best data for risk assessment and have re-
sulted in scores of chemicals being labeled as known human 
carcinogens.
Ask the Rats. We do not want to wait 20 years to find 
out that a new food additive causes cancer, so we turn to ani-
mal testing to find out now what might happen in the future. 
A test involving several hundred animals (usually mice or 
rats) takes about three years and costs more than $250,000. 
If a significant number of the animals develop tumors after 
having been fed the substance being tested, then the sub-
stance is either a possible or a probable human carcinogen, 
depending on the strength of the results.
Three objections to animal testing have been raised: (1) 
rodents and humans may have very different responses to a 
given chemical; (2) the doses used on the animals are often 
much higher than those to which humans may be exposed; 
and (3) some people are opposed on ethical grounds to the 
use of animals for such purposes. Although there are obvi-
ous differences between rodents and humans, all chemicals 
tabLe 3  Some Common Hazards Ranked 
According to Their Degree of Risk
Hazard
Annual Risk*
Cancer
1.8 
per 
1,000
Smoking
1.5 
per 
1,000
Motor vehicle accidents
1.2 
per 
10,000
Drug use
1.2 
per 
10,000
Suicide
1.1 
per 
10,000
Firearm injuries
1.0 
per 
10,000
Accidental poisoning
9.9 
per 
100,000
Alcohol use
8.3 
per 
100,000
Falls 
8.1 
per 
100,000
HIV/AIDS
3.1 
per 
100,000
Work injuries
1.7 
per 
100,000
Drowning
1.2 
per 
100,000
Hang-gliding
8.6 
per 
1,000,000
Rock climbing
3.2 
per 
1,000,000
Choking by food
2.8 
per 
1,000,000
Air transport
2.3 
per 
1,000,000
Excessive heat
1.2 
per 
1,000,000
*Probability of dying
Source: Data from National Vital Statistics Reports 59:4, March 16, 
2011, and Health and Safety Executive, UK, September 4, 2012.
Figure 17 Risk assessment as performed by the EPA. The process 
of four steps in the risk assessment process is shown.
(Source: EPA, http://epa.gov/risk/risk-characterization.htm. January 19, 2011.)
DOSE-RESPONSE
ASSESSMENT
What are the health 
problems at different 
exposures?
HAZARD
IDENTIFICATION
What health problems 
are caused by the 
pollutant?
EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT
How much of the pollutant are 
people exposed to during a 
specific time period? How 
many people are exposed?
RISK 
CHARACTERIZATION
What is the extra risk of 
health problems in the 
exposed population?
Risk Assessment by the EPA
Risk assessment began at the EPA in the mid-1970s as a way 
of addressing the cancer risks associated with pesticides and 
toxic chemicals. It has developed into a highly science-based 
methodology directed toward understanding how pollutants 
may affect human health and the environment. As currently 
performed at the EPA, risk assessment for human health 
risks has four steps: hazard identification, dose-response 
 assessment, exposure assessment, and risk characterization 
(Fig. 17). The EPA also performs ecological risk assessment 
(ERA) in its responsibility for protecting natural organisms 
and ecosystems from adverse effects of human activities. The 
framework for ERA is conceptually quite similar to that used 
for human health risk assessment.
Hazard Identification: Is This Really a Hazard? Hazard 
identification is the process of examining evidence linking a 
potential hazard to its harmful effects. In the case of acci-
dents, the link is obvious. The use of cars, for example, in-
volves a certain number of crashes and deaths. In these cases, 
historical data, such as the annual highway death toll, are 
useful for calculating risks.
463

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
came about, and calculating the doses and length of time of 
their exposure.
Risk Characterization: What Does the Science Say?  The 
final step, risk characterization, is to pull together all the infor-
mation gathered in the first three steps, in order to determine 
the risk and its accompanying uncertainties. Here is where sci-
ence is able to inform the risk manager. The characterization 
summary should provide information about key supportive 
data and methods, their limitations, and, especially, the esti-
mates of risk and the uncertainties involved. Commonly, risk 
is expressed as the probability of a fatal outcome due to the 
hazard, as in Table 3 for common, everyday risks.
The EPA conducts an evaluation of risk information on 
hazards that chemicals pose to human health. The agency em-
ploys its Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) on science-
based information gathered from assays and epidemiological 
studies and publishes IRIS assessments after they have been 
thoroughly reviewed in draft form. Information on more than 
550 chemical substances can be found in the IRIS database 
(available on the Internet). One recent entry in this database 
is trichloroethylene, a widely used industrial solvent. After 
more than a decade of assessment, the EPA has concluded that 
trichloroethylene is carcinogenic to humans and also poses 
other health hazards to many human organ systems.
Another EPA agency, the National Center for Environ-
mental Assessment (NCEA) is the EPA’s program for assess-
ment of substances and processes that are widely released in 
the environment, such as common air pollutants. The NCEA 
has published 178 risk assessments on subjects from aerosols 
to watersheds on its Web site. The information in IRIS and 
NCEA assessments is then put to use by those charged with 
guarding human health and the environment.
Public-Health Risk Assessment
The World Health Organization broke new ground in the 
area of risk assessment with its 2002 World Health Report.16 
Until then, most risk assessment took place as a function of 
environmental regulation. The new effort began by looking 
at all of the risk factors commonly known to be responsible 
for poor health and mortality and then asking this question: 
“Of all the disease burden in this population, how much 
could be caused by this [particular] risk?” Then certain risk 
factors were chosen for special attention on the basis of the 
following criteria:
 • Potential global impact. The risk is likely to be among 
the leading causes of poor health and of mortality. For 
example, the risks of being overweight are now well 
documented in many of the developed countries, where 
the condition is a serious problem.
 • High likelihood of causality. It should be possible to 
trace the cause-effect relationships between poor health 
and the factor in question. Thus, overweight persons 
shown by epidemiological studies to be human carcinogens 
are also carcinogenic to test animals, suggesting that animal 
tests have some predictive value for humans.
Just Test People? In the past, chemical manufacturers 
that were interested in assessing the safety of pesticides (in 
order to have their products approved for use) paid human 
subjects to test the products. Such tests are far less expensive 
than the usual animal testing (volunteers may be paid only 
a few hundred dollars; rats apparently charge much higher 
fees). A National Academy of Sciences panel addressed this 
topic, stating that the use of human volunteers “to facilitate 
the interests of industry or of agriculture” is unjustifiable. 
The EPA agreed and banned any use of such tests. However, 
recent administrations, responding to requests from manu-
facturers, pressed the EPA to reevaluate its policy and allow 
human testing. A 2006 rule from the EPA forbids such test-
ing on children and pregnant women but allows it for others, 
satisfying the pesticide manufacturers. Recent EPA actions 
have established new, more stringent ethical standards15 to 
protect adult subjects; even now, most studies (33 per year) 
involve topical exposures rather than internal dosing.
Another source of information is the chemical or process 
itself: What are its physical and chemical properties, and what 
mode of action might the chemical or process take in induc-
ing cancer or other harmful effects? The EPA is exploring new 
approaches to testing chemicals for toxicity to people: Tox-
Cast is a chemical screening program that is now being used 
to screen up to 10,000 chemicals using rapid tests with human 
cells such as stem cells. Initial tests using chemicals already 
subjected to animal testing and epidemiological studies have 
indicated that this approach has great promise in reducing the 
time it takes to evaluate the risk posed by a chemical hazard.
In the end, hazard identification takes a “weight of the 
evidence” approach to determining the carcinogenic poten-
tial of a chemical or process. Standard descriptors are used 
in its conclusions, such as “likely to be carcinogenic to hu-
mans.” Thus, hazard identification tells us that we may have 
a problem.
Dose-Response and Exposure Assessment: How Much 
for How Long? When animal tests or human studies show 
a link between exposure to a chemical and an ill effect, the 
next step is to analyze the relationship between the concen-
trations of the chemical in the test (the dose) and both the in-
cidence and the severity of the response. It is at this point that 
vulnerability may be introduced; for example, it is known 
that children are more vulnerable to some cancer-causing 
chemicals because they are growing. From this information, 
projections are made about the number of cancers that may 
develop in a human population exposed to different doses of 
the chemical. Unless there is reason to assume otherwise, a 
linear response is used to determine an acceptable level of ex-
posure. This process is called dose-response assessment.
Following dose-response assessment is exposure assess-
ment. This procedure involves identifying human groups al-
ready exposed to the chemical, learning how their exposure 
15EPA. Expanded Protections for Subjects in Human Research Studies. February 16, 
2011. http://www.epa.gov/oppfead1/guidance/human-test.htm. January 19, 2012.
16World Health Organization. The World Health Report 2002: Reducing Risks, 
Promoting Healthy Life. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2002. www.who
.int/whr/2002/en.
464

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
have a greater tendency to develop diabetes, high blood 
pressure, and high cholesterol; these in turn lead to 
greater risks of heart disease, stroke, and many forms of 
cancer.
 • Modifiability. It should be possible to develop country-
wide risk reduction policies that substantially lessen the 
impact of the factor. For instance, overeating is a matter 
of individual behavior that can be difficult to change, but 
a society can draw greater attention to the epidemic of 
obesity, its health risks, and the steps that can be taken 
to prevent overeating.
 • Availability of data. There must be reliable data on the 
prevalence of the risk factor and its relationship to dis-
ease and mortality. With regard to overeating in the 
United States, the CDC coordinates a state-based moni-
toring system (the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance 
System) that collects information via telephone inter-
views. The CDC reports information on overeating and 
other, similar behavior-related health risks (participating 
in insufficient physical activity, failing to eat fruits and 
vegetables, using tobacco and alcohol) to the state and 
local health departments.
The more recent (2009) report17 basically updated the 
2002 effort for some 24 global risk factors.
The DALY. The data collected must be assessed with the use 
of a “common currency,” one that facilitates a comparison of 
different types of risks. The WHO reports use the measure-
ment known as the DALY—the disability-adjusted life year. 
One DALY represents the loss of one healthy year of a per-
son’s life. This measure, now in common usage in the global 
health community, assesses the burden of a disease in terms 
of life lost due to premature mortality and time lived with a 
disability (see Figure 9).
The WHO reports reveal some remarkable differences in 
risk factors in different groups of countries (Table 4). Each 
risk factor calls for a different suite of interventions. As a 
country evaluates its highest health risks, it will often have to 
prioritize its risk prevention strategies. This is especially true 
of the low-income developing countries, where public-health 
resources are severely limited. It is the opinion of the WHO 
that the scientific bases for the main risk factors presented in 
the reports are well understood. Also, the strategies for cost-
effective risk prevention for the main risks are straightfor-
ward. There is broad agreement about the need for action, 
for example, to address the increase in tobacco consumption 
and the role of unsafe sex in the HIV/AIDS epidemic. The 
WHO has an important role to play in coordinating efforts 
to translate scientific information into action, and its two re-
ports are major steps in carrying out that role.
Stewards of Health. In a very real sense, public-health 
ministries and agencies are the primary stewards of the 
health and welfare of a country’s people. Public policy should 
clearly reflect stewardship principles that put the health of 
17  World Health Organization, Global Health Risks, 2009, op. cit.
tabLe 4  Ten Leading Selected Risk Factors as 
Percentage Causes of Disease Burden, 
Measured in DALYs*
Low-income countries
Percentage 
of total
DALYs 
(millions)
Underweight
9.9%
82
Unsafe water, sanitation, and 
hygiene
6.3%
53
Unsafe sex
6.2%
52
Suboptimal breastfeeding
4.1%
34
Indoor smoke from solid fuels 
4.0%
33
Vitamin A deficiency
2.4%
20
High blood pressure
2.2%
18
Alcohol use
2.1%
18
High blood glucose
1.9%
16
Zinc deficiency 
1.7%
14
Middle-income countries
Alcohol use
7.6%
44
High blood pressure
5.4%
31
Tobacco use
5.4%
31
Overweight and obesity
3.6%
21
High blood glucose
3.4%
20
Unsafe sex
3.0%
17
Physical inactivity
2.7%
16
High cholesterol
2.5%
14
Occupational risks
2.3%
14
Unsafe water, sanitation, and 
hygiene
2.0%
11
High-income countries
Tobacco use
10.7%
13
Alcohol use
6.7%
 8
Overweight and obesity
6.5%
 8
High blood pressure
6.1%
 7
High blood glucose
4.9%
 6
Physical inactivity
4.1%
 5
High cholesterol
3.4%
 4
Illicit drugs
2.1%
 3
Occupational risks
1.5%
 2
Low fruit and vegetable intake
1.3%
 2
*Disability-adjusted life years: one DALY = loss of one healthy year of a 
person’s life.
Source: World Health Report, 2009.
465

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
has been in the design of regulations. The process has ena-
bled the agency to target appropriate hazards for regulation 
and to determine where to aim the regulations—that is, at 
the source, at the point of use, or at the point of disposal 
of the hazardous agent. As was done for toxic chemicals 
and cancer, a given risk level may be adopted as a standard 
against which policy makers can measure new risks.
Risk Perception
The U.S. public’s concern about environmental problems can 
be traced to the fear of hazards that pose a risk to human 
life and health. People may perceive that their lives are more 
hazardous than ever before, but that is not true. In fact, our 
society is freer from hazards than it ever has been, as is evi-
denced by increased longevity. Why, then, do people protest 
against nuclear power plants, waste sites, and pesticide resi-
dues in food when, according to experts, these hazards pose 
extremely small risks (Fig. 16)? The answer lies in people’s risk 
 perceptions—their intuitive judgments about risks. In short, 
people’s perceptions are not consistent with the results coming 
from a scientific analysis of risk. There are some good reasons 
for this discrepancy—and some lessons to be learned from it.
Hazard Versus Outrage. The reason for the inconsistency 
between public perception and actual risk calculations, ac-
cording to Peter Sandman18 of Rutgers University, is that the 
public perception of risks is often more a matter of outrage 
than one of hazard. Sandman holds that, while the term haz-
ard expresses primarily a concern for fatalities only, the term 
outrage expresses a number of additional concerns:
1. Lack of familiarity with a technology. Examples include 
how nuclear power is produced and how toxic chemi-
cals are handled.
2. Extent to which the risk is voluntary. Research has 
shown that people who have a choice in the matter will 
accept risks roughly 1,000 times as great as when they 
have no choice. People are much more accepting of a 
risk if they are in control of the elements of that risk, as 
in driving an automobile, swimming, and eating.
3. Public impression of hazards. Accidents involving many 
deaths (as at Bhopal) or a failure of technology (for ex-
ample, at Three Mile Island) are thoroughly imprinted 
into public awareness by media coverage and are not 
quickly forgotten.
4. Overselling of safety. The public becomes suspicious 
when scientists or public-relations people play up the 
benefits of a technology and play down its hazards.
5. Morality. Some risks have the appearance of being mor-
ally wrong. If it is wrong to subject humans to pesticide 
testing, the notion that the chemical companies clearly 
benefit from the testing is unacceptable. You should obey 
a moral imperative, regardless of the costs.
people and the environment above the economic bottom 
line, which often seems to drive our decisions. To quote the 
2002 World Health Report, “Governments are the stewards 
of health resources. This stewardship has been defined as ‘a 
function of a government responsible for the welfare of the 
population and concerned about the trust and legitimacy 
with which its activities are viewed by the citizenry.’” Gov-
ernments can accomplish much in the arena of preventive 
health, but they must nurture their scarce resources carefully. 
It is in that sense that the WHO focuses on reducing risks 
in order to promote health and provides a valuable tool for 
accomplishing this to all countries. Beyond the government, 
health care providers are also stewards whose responsibility 
is vitally important to environmental health.
Risk Management
In human health and environmental risk assessment, the 
analysis of hazards and risks is a task that falls primarily 
to the scientific community. The task is incomplete, how-
ever, if no further consideration is given to the informa-
tion gathered. Risk management naturally follows and is 
the responsibility of lawmakers and administrators. EPA 
policy separates risk assessment and risk management 
within the agency.
Risk management involves (1) a thorough review of 
the information available pertaining to the hazard in ques-
tion and the risk characterization of that hazard and (2) a 
decision as to whether the weight of the evidence justifies a 
regulatory action. Without doubt, public opinion can play a 
powerful role in both processes. In general, however, a regu-
latory decision will hinge on one or more of the following 
considerations:
1. Cost-benefit analysis. This type of analysis compares 
costs and benefits relative to a technology or proposed 
chemical product; if done fairly, the analysis can make 
a regulatory decision very clear cut. When the EPA is-
sued new regulations for air-pollution particulate matter 
in 2006, the benefits in human health far outweighed the 
regulatory costs.
2. Risk-benefit analysis. A decision can be made with re-
gard to the risks versus the benefits of being subjected to 
a particular hazard, especially when those benefits can-
not be easily expressed in monetary values. The use of 
medical CT scans is a good example. Because they rep-
resent a radiation exposure, the scans carry a calcula-
ble risk of cancer, but the benefit derived when you scan 
the brain for a suspected tumor is much greater than the 
cancer risk involved. However, there is concern about re-
peated CT scans because one abdominal scan is equiva-
lent to 500 chest X-rays.
3. Public preferences. As we will see, people have a much 
greater tolerance for risks that they feel are under their 
own control or are voluntarily accepted.
Risk management has been thoroughly incorporated 
into the EPA’s policy-making process. Its most common use 
18Peter M. Sandman. “Risky Business.” Rutgers Magazine. April/June 1989: 36–37.
466

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
perceived as much less important than they really are be-
cause of the public’s preoccupation with other, more imme-
diate issues, such as the economy, jobs, and elections. This 
difference underscores the importance of risk communica-
tion, a task that should not be left to the media. For exam-
ple, the value of ecosystems and their connections to human 
health and welfare need far greater emphasis in the public 
consciousness, and this responsibility falls to the scientific 
and educational communities as well as to government agen-
cies. Studies have shown that the most effective risk commu-
nication occurs by starting with what people already know, 
discovering what they need to know, and then tailoring the 
message so that it provides people with the knowledge that 
helps them make a more informed evaluation of risks. The 
process should not stop there, though: To be successful, risk 
communication should also involve dialogue among all the 
parties involved—namely, policy makers, the public, experts, 
and other interested groups.
The public’s concern for more than the probabilities of 
fatalities has merit. Public concern must be heard, under-
stood, and given a reasonable response. It may not be the 
best source of public policy, but it reflects certain values 
and concerns that could easily be omitted by an “objective,” 
scientific assessment. The fact is that subjective judgments 
are going to play a role at every step in the risk-assessment 
process, from hazard identification to risk perception to risk 
management. The uncertainties involved in risk assessment 
should remind us that the process is only a tool—but it is the 
best one we have.
6. Fairness. The benefits and the risks should be connected. 
If the benefits go to someone else, why should you ac-
cept any risk?19
Media’s Role. The public perception of risk is strongly 
influenced by the media, which are far better at communi-
cating the outrage elements of a risk than they are at com-
municating the hazard elements. Public concern over mad 
cow disease received extensive media coverage and had a 
high “outrage quotient,” and beef from Canada was banned 
in 2003 when the disease was found in two animals. How-
ever, cigarette smoking, which causes 443,000 deaths a year 
in the United States alone, receives minimal media attention 
because it is not “news.” Hence, there is no outrage factor. 
Indeed, it has been suggested that, if all the year’s smoking 
fatalities occurred on one day, the media would go ballistic, 
and smoking would be banned the next day!
Public Concern and Public Policy. Generally speak-
ing, public concern, rather than cost-benefit analysis or risk-
benefit analysis conducted by scientists, often drives public 
policy. The EPA’s funding priorities are set largely by Con-
gress, which is supposed to be responsive to its constituency. 
Is this a problem?
If public concern is the primary impetus for public pol-
icy, some serious risks may get less attention than they de-
serve. In particular, environmental concerns are commonly 
19V. Covello and P. Sandman, “Risk Communication, Evolution and Revolution,” 
in Solutions to an Environment in Peril, Ed. A. Wolbarst (Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2001), 164–178.
REVISITING THE THEMES
sound science
The continuing battle against pathogens and human dis-
orders like cancer and heart disease requires the sustained 
attention of dedicated research laboratories around the 
world. This is modern science in the direct interest of humankind. Risk 
assessment utilizes the scientific community in the final step of the 
process, at which risk characterization takes place. At that point, the 
scientists have evaluated the risk as best they can, so it is now up to 
those responsible for risk management. The WHO states that the basis 
for the major risk factors plaguing most societies has been scientifically 
established. There is more work to do, of course, but the failure to prove 
scientific causality cannot be an excuse for inaction by those responsible 
for people’s health.
sustainability
A foundational strategy of sustainable development is to 
reduce poverty, in part because the poor are susceptible to 
many hazards. Numerous risk factors are a consequence 
of the lack of access to clean water, healthy air, sanitation, nutritious 
food, and health care. Infectious diseases in particular are a tremendous 
impediment to the economic progress in poorer countries. It is hard to 
see how those countries can make much progress when HIV/AIDS, ma-
laria, and tuberculosis take such a heavy toll on their children and young 
adults. The first seven Millennium Development Goals all target envi-
ronmental health problems. If the world community takes these goals 
seriously, the outcome should be a revolution in public health that will 
move scores of countries much farther along in their quest for sustain-
able development.
stewardship
Governments are the stewards of their country’s health 
resources. Health ministries have a difficult task if they 
are not given the funding and personnel to carry out 
their mission. Fortunately, organizations such as the WHO can provide 
the vital information governments need to address their countries’ 
greatest health problems. The WHO exemplifies the stewardship 
concept of a community of nations acting together to bring care and 
information to those whose health is at risk. Those who work along-
side the WHO—the health ministries, health-related nongovernmental 
organizations, and health care providers—are the hands and hearts of 
the world  community.
s
G
r
a
their mission F
s
A
r
m
of the lack of ac
s
T
o
a
world This is m
467

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
REviEw QuEstions
 1. Define 
pollution, 
pollutant, 
nonbiodegradable, 
and 
 environment.
 2. Differentiate between a hazard and a risk. Where does vul-
nerability fit in?
 3. Define morbidity, mortality, and epidemiology.
 4. Describe the public-health roles of the CDC and the WHO.
 5. What are the four categories of human environmental haz-
ards? Give examples of each.
 6. List the top five risk factors that are responsible for global 
mortality and disease.
 7. Explore the impacts of poverty and wealth on causing dis-
ease and death.
 8. Document the efforts to control tobacco use both in the 
United States and globally.
 9. What is the significance of malaria worldwide, and what are 
some recent developments in the battle against this disease?
 10. Outline the four steps of risk assessment used by the EPA.
 11. What methods are used to test chemicals for their potential 
to cause cancer?
 12. Describe the process of risk assessment for public health as 
it was recently carried out by the WHO. What is a DALY?
 13. Discuss the relationship between public risk perception and 
assessment on the one hand; and public policy, on the other.
tHinking EnviRonmEntally
 1. Consider Table 4. Discuss each group’s risk factors that are 
primarily a consequence of human choice. Pick one of these 
factors, and describe how you might proceed to bring it 
under control in an appropriate country.
 2. What global accountability is there for natural disaster re-
lief? Consider the example of devastating weather in devel-
oping countries, triggered by climate change (which could be 
instigated by the more prosperous).
 3. Consult the CDC Web site (www.cdc.gov), and investigate 
one of the emerging infectious diseases or one of the “grisly 
seven.” What are the risks you take, and what precautions 
should you take, if traveling to an area where the disease has 
been found?
making a DiffEREncE
 1. Monitor the hazards in your own life, and take steps to re-
duce high-risk behavior.
 2. Install a carbon monoxide detector if you don’t already have 
one—and check your home’s radon levels.
 3. Steer clear of phthalates, found in nearly three-quarters of 
today’s beauty products. These are endocrine disruptors, and 
can  obstruct hormone functions, cause infertility, miscar-
riage, birth defects, breast cancer, and damage organs.
 4. Six percent of an average American’s day is spent on the 
road, but that time makes for 60% of their fine particle pol-
lution intake. Driving less is not only good for the environ-
ment, but also good for you!
 5. Instead of using toxic house cleaners, consider homemade 
combinations of white vinegar, castile soap, baking soda, 
and water.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
468

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
cREDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top right): Mircea Bezerghean/Shutterstock; (bottom left): PhilAugustavo/iStock-
photo; (top left): Capifrutta/Shutterstock,com; (bottom left): Pasieka/Science Photo 
Library/Alamy; (top left): Aflo Foto Agency/Alamy; (top right): Pammy1140/
Fotolia; (center left): Mark Pearson/Alamy; (center right): Ryan McGinnis/Alamy; 
(top left): Calvin Larsen/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (top right): Robert Harding/Glow 
Images, Inc.; (center left): Tomas Sereda/Fotolia; (center right): Bloomberg/Getty 
Images; Ulrich Doering/Alamy; AP Photo; Jake Lyell / Alamy
Text Credits
Source: Red Sky at Morning: America and the Crisis of the Global Environment, 
by James Gustave Speth. Published by Yale University Press, 2004;  Source: Mission 
Statement of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Source: “Risk com-
munication: Evolution and Revolution” by Vincent Covello and Peter M. Sandman, 
from Solutions to an Environment in Peril, edited by Anthony Wolbarst. Published 
by John Hopkins University Press, 2001; Table 1: Source: based on data from The 
Global Burden of Disease: 2008; Table 2: Source: based on data from the OFDA/
CRED International Disaster Database; Table 3: Source: based on “Risk-Benefit 
Analysis” by R. Wilson and E.A. Crouch; Table 4: “Ten Leading Selected Risk 
Factors as Percentage Causes of Disease Burden, Measured in DALYs,” from World 
Health Report 2009. Reprinted with permission; Figure  1: “Timeline: Pandemic 
(H1N1) 2009 laboratory confirmed cases and number of deaths as reported to 
WHO. Status as of: 15 August 2010,” from World Health Organization website. 
Copyright © 2010 by World Health Organization. Reprinted with permission; 
Figure 3: Sources: Data from: “Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2009” by Kenneth D. 
Kochanek, et al., from National Vital Statistics Reports, March 16, 2011, Volume 
59(4); Centers for Disease Control; and American Medical Association; Figure 4: 
Source: U.S. Department of Health & Human Services; Figure 5: Table from World 
Health Organization report: Global Tuberculosis Control 2011. Copyright © 2011 
by World Health Organization. Reprinted with permission; Figure 434, Figure 11: 
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Figure 16: “Loss of life expect-
ancy of the Danes related to various risk factors. Loss of life expectancy (years) 
for men and women,” by Krud Juel, Jan Sørensen, and Henrick Brønnum-Hansen, 
from Risk Factors and Public Health in Denmark—Summary Report, National 
Institute of Public Health, 2007. Copyright © 2007 by National Institute of Public 
Health, Denmark. Reprinted with permission; Figure  17: Source: Environmental 
Protection Agency. 
animal testing Procedures used to assess the toxicity of chemical 
substances, using rats, mice, and guinea pigs as surrogates for 
humans who might be exposed to the substances.
body mass index A measurement used to calculate overweight and 
obesity; the ratio of weight in kilograms divided by the square of 
height in meters.
carcinogen, carcinogenic Having the property of causing cancer, at 
least in animals and, by implication, in humans.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) An agency 
within the United States Department of Health and Human 
Services that is the lead federal agency for protecting the health 
and safety of the public.
dose-response assessment Part of risk assessment, establishing the 
number of cancers that might develop due to exposure to different 
doses of a chemical.
ecological risk assessment (ERA) Risk assessment by the EPA 
designed to protect natural organisms and ecosystems from 
adverse effects of human activities.
environment The combination of all things and factors external to 
the individual or population of organisms in question.
epidemiology, epidemiological study The study of the causes 
of disease (e.g., lung cancer) through an examination and 
comparison of large populations of people living in different 
locations or following different lifestyles or habits (e.g., smoking 
versus nonsmoking).
exposure assessment A part of risk assessment, identifying human 
groups exposed to a chemical and calculating the doses and length 
of time of their exposure.
FDA Food Safety Modernization Act A bill passed in 2010 that 
expanded the authority of the Food and Drug Administration 
over the food processing industry, in response to repeated 
outbreaks of food poisoning and pathogens in food.
hazard Anything that can cause (1) injury, disease, or death 
to humans; (2) damage to property; or (3) degradation of the 
environment. Cultural hazards include factors that are often 
a matter of choice, such as smoking or sunbathing. Biological 
hazards are pathogens and parasites that infect humans. Physical 
hazards are natural disasters like earthquakes and tornadoes. 
Chemical hazards refer to the chemicals in use in different 
technologies and household products.
hazard identification The process of examining evidence linking a 
potential hazard to its possible harmful effects; a major element 
of risk assessment by the EPA.
health According to the World Health Organization, “a state of 
complete physical, social, and mental well-being and not merely 
the absence of disease or infirmity.”
hygiene hypothesis The theory that human immune systems need 
to encounter microbes and even worms at early ages in order to 
stimulate a regulated anti-inflammatory network; this reduces 
incidences of allergies and asthma.
Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) A compendium of risk 
information published by the EPA providing data on chemical 
hazards; available on the Internet.
morbidity The incidence of disease in a population.
mortality The incidence of death in a population.
National Center for Environmental Assessment (NCEA) An agency 
within the EPA that performs and publishes risk assessments of 
substances and processes that are widely released in the environment.
nonbiodegradable Not able to be consumed or broken down by 
biological organisms. Nonbiodegradable substances include plastics, 
aluminum, and many chemicals used in industry and agriculture. 
Particularly dangerous are synthetic chemicals that are also toxic 
and tend to accumulate in organisms. (See biodegradable and
 bioaccumulation.)
pollutant A substance that contaminates air, water, or soil.
pollution According to the EPA, “the presence of a substance 
in the environment that, because of its chemical composition 
or quantity, prevents the functioning of natural processes and 
produces undesirable environmental and health effects.”
risk The probability of suffering injury, disease, death, or some 
other loss as a result of exposure to a hazard.
risk assessment/analysis The process of evaluating the risks 
associated with a particular hazard before taking some action.
risk characterization The process of determining the level of a risk and 
its accompanying uncertainties after hazard assessment, dose-response 
assessment, and exposure assessment have been accomplished.
risk management The task of regulators whose job is to review 
risk data and make regulatory decisions based on the data. The 
process often is influenced by considerations of costs and benefits 
as well as by public perception.
glossaRy
469

Environmental Hazards and Human Health
toxicity The condition of being harmful, deadly, or poisonous.
toxicology The study of the impacts of toxic substances on human 
health and the pathways by which such substances reach humans.
vector/vector control An agent, such as an insect or tick, that 
carries a parasite from one host to another; methods of controlling 
a parasite or disease by attacking the vector.
vulnerability A measure of the likelihood of exposure to a hazard.
risk perception Nonexperts’ intuitive judgments about risks, which 
often are not in agreement with the level of risk as judged by 
experts.
rotavirus A little-known virus that causes many childhood deaths, 
responsible for most cases of severe diarrhea.
Tobacco Control Act A law passed in 2009 giving the Food 
and Drug Administration greater authority to regulate tobacco 
products.
470

“T
he Maldives is the canary in the world’s carbon coal mine.” This was 
stated by Mohamed Nasheed, former president of the Maldives, an 
 archipelago of 1190 islands in the Indian Ocean that some 320,000 peo-
ple call home. Many of the islands are atolls (ring-shaped islands formed of coral), 
others little more than sandbars, and the capital, Malé, is a square mile of densely 
packed buildings surrounded by a seawall (Fig. 1a). The average elevation in the 
islands is a mere 3 feet (1 meter) above sea level, and seafront erosion has claimed 
many beaches and some buildings. Nasheed was working on a sovereign-wealth fund 
that would enable the Maldivians to purchase land somewhere (India, Sri Lanka?); 
the fund was to be financed by the tourism industry that is the economic engine 
of the islands. Over in the South Pacific, residents of numerous island  nations and 
islands are bracing for the rising sea level that is already submerging parts of their 
lands. Kiribati and Tuvalu are two such island nations whose existence is threatened 
by environmental changes linked to global warming; as salt water encroaches on 
the freshwater lenses that support plant life on the islands, it is likely that the entire 
populations of these two countries—some 110,000—will, like the Maldivians, be 
forced to emigrate.
Sea LeveL RiSe. The relentless rise of sea 
level, now at 3.2 mm/yr, is accelerating as the oceans 
continue to warm and ice sheets and glaciers melt. 
The  estimates of total sea level rise at year 2100 
range from a low of 20 cm to a high of 1.8 meters,1 
and because the low estimates do not take into consid-
eration any melting of the polar ice sheets, low-
lying regions like the Maldives and Pacific 
LeaRning ObjectiveS
 1. Atmosphere, Weather, and Cli-
mate: Describe the structure of 
the atmosphere and its gases; 
distinguish between weather and 
climate.
 2. Climate Change Science: Explore 
the science that describes the 
greenhouse effect, summarize 
the evidence for recent climate 
change, and evaluate the vari-
ous greenhouse gases and their 
impacts on present and future 
climates.
 3. Response to Climate Change: 
Examine the international and 
U.S. measures taken to mitigate 
climate change and evaluate 
their effectiveness.
Global Climate 
Change
Delegates meet at Durban, South Africa, for the 17th Conference of the Parties to the 
 Framework Convention on Climate Change, December 2011.
1Robert J. Nicholls and Anny Cazenave. “Sea-Level Rise and Its Impact on Coastal Zones.” 
Science, 328: 1517–1520. June 18, 2010.
From Chapter 18 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

Global Climate Change
islands are paying more attention to the high range estimates of 
sea level rise.
Far to the north, the island village of Shishmaref, Alaska, is 
falling into the sea. Built on permafrost and normally protected 
from ocean waves by sea ice, Shishmaref is now battered by 
waves as the summer sea ice is melted away, and the soil is shift-
ing as the permafrost is melted by the unusual summer warmth. 
Every year, some 20 feet of the shoreline is washed away (Fig. 1b), 
sometimes taking with it the villagers’ homes. The 600 inhabitants 
of Shishmaref are actively working toward relocating the entire 
community to higher ground elsewhere in Alaska. Scientists point 
out that the populations of these isolated islands will be merely 
the first wave of climate change refugees unless the global com-
munity of nations takes rapid steps to curb the fossil fuel emissions 
that are largely responsible for global climate change.
the FutuRe. Fast forward to 2050. Could it be that what-
ever happens this far into the future depends on the actions 
taken by the leading nations in the world now and in the next 
decade to address the issue of global climate change? Ethicists 
claim that we are in the predicament of having to make decisions 
now, costly and far-reaching decisions, in order that our children 
and grandchildren will not be living in a world that experiences 
unprecedented and dangerous environmental conditions.
Can all this be true? What is happening with our climate? 
Indeed, what controls the climate? We will seek answers to 
these questions as we first investigate the atmosphere, how it is 
structured, and how it brings us our weather and climate. Then 
we will consider the scientific evidence for global climate change, 
examine the future projections of conditions made by elegant 
computer modeling, and then look at the varied responses to ad-
dress global climate change.
(a)
Figure 1 Regions under threat from rising seas. (a) The city of 
Malé, capital of the Maldives, in the Indian Ocean. (b) A view of Shishmaref, 
on the Alaskan coast.
(b)
1  Atmosphere, Weather, 
and Climate
The atmosphere is a collection of gases that gravity holds in a 
thin envelope around Earth. The gases within the lowest layer, 
the troposphere, are responsible for moderating the flow of 
energy to Earth and are involved with the biogeochemical cy-
cling of many elements and compounds— oxygen, nitrogen, 
carbon, sulfur, and water, to name the most crucial ones. The 
troposphere ranges in thickness from 10 miles (16 km) in the 
tropics to 5 miles (8 km) in higher latitudes, due mainly to 
differences in solar energy. This layer contains practically all 
of the water vapor and clouds in the atmosphere; it is the 
site and source of our weather. Except for local temperature 
inversions, the troposphere gets colder with altitude (Fig. 2). 
Air masses in this layer are well mixed vertically, so pollut-
ants can reach the top within a few days. Substances enter-
ing the troposphere—including pollutants—may be changed 
chemically and washed back to Earth’s surface by precipita-
tion. Capping the troposphere is the tropopause, a boundary 
region where air shifts from cooling with height and begins 
to warm.
Above the tropopause is the stratosphere, a layer within 
which temperature increases with altitude, up to about 40 
miles above the surface of Earth. The temperature increases 
primarily because the stratosphere contains ozone (O3), a form 
of oxygen that absorbs high-energy radiation emitted by the 
Sun. Because there is little vertical mixing of air masses in the 
stratosphere and no precipitation from it, substances that enter 
it can remain there for a long time. Beyond the stratosphere are 
two more layers, the mesosphere and the thermosphere, where 
the ozone concentration declines and only small amounts of 
oxygen and nitrogen are found. Table 1 summarizes the char-
acteristics of the troposphere and stratosphere.
Weather
People sometimes make the mistake of assuming that one 
snowstorm or one hurricane is evidence for or against climate 
change. It is simply evidence that weather is happening. The 
472

Global Climate Change
release energy back upward through evaporation, convec-
tion, and reradiation of infrared energy.
Flowing Air. Some of the energy that is released from 
Earth’s surface is transferred to the atmosphere. Thus, air 
masses grow warmer at the surface of Earth and will tend to 
expand, becoming lighter. The lighter air will then rise, creat-
ing vertical air currents. On a large scale, this movement cre-
ates major convection currents. Air must flow in to replace 
the rising warm air, and the inflow leads to horizontal air-
flows, or wind. The ultimate source of the horizontal flow is 
cooler air that is sinking, and the combination produces the 
Hadley cell. These major flows of air create regions of high 
day-to-day variations in temperature, air pressure, wind, hu-
midity, and precipitation—all mediated by the  atmosphere—
constitute our weather. Climate is the result of long-term 
weather patterns in a region, patterns that involve decades 
or longer. The scientific study of the atmosphere—both of 
weather and of climate—is meteorology. You can think of 
the atmosphere-ocean-land system as an enormous weather 
engine, driven by solar power and strongly affected by the 
rotation of Earth and its tilted axis. Solar radiation enters the 
atmosphere and then takes a number of possible courses (Fig. 
3). Some (29%) is reflected by clouds and Earth’s surfaces, 
but most is absorbed by the atmosphere, oceans, and land, 
which are heated in the process. The land and oceans then 
tabLe 1 Characteristics of Troposphere and Stratosphere
Troposphere
Stratosphere
Extent: Ground level to 10 miles (16 km)
Extent: 10 miles to 40 miles (16 km to 65 km)
Temperature normally decreases with altitude, down to 270°F (259°C)
Temperature increases with altitude, up to 132°F (0°C)
Much vertical mixing, turbulent
Little vertical mixing, slow exchange of gases with troposphere, 
via diffusion
Substances entering may be washed back to Earth
Substances entering remain unless attacked by sunlight or other 
chemicals
All weather and climate take place here
Isolated from the troposphere by the tropopause
Ozone
shield
Stratopause
Stratosphere
Temperature (°C)
Troposphere
Tropopause
To mesosphere and thermosphere
Altitude (km)
50
40
30
20
10
0
–50
–25
0
25
Clouds and
weather
Pollutants
Figure 2 Structure and temperature profile of the atmosphere. The image on the left shows 
the layers of the atmosphere and the ozone shield, while the plot on the right shows the vertical temperature 
profile.
473

Global Climate Change
Figure 3 Solar-energy balance. Much of the incoming radiation from the Sun (29%) is reflected back to 
space, but the remainder (71%) is absorbed by the oceans, land, and atmosphere, where it creates our weather and 
fuels photosynthesis. Eventually, this absorbed energy is radiated back to space as infrared  energy (heat).
(Source: Rebecca Lindsey, Climate and Earth’s Energy Budget, NASA Earth Observatory, January 14, 2009.)
Incoming
solar
energy
Total reflected
(29%)
Reflected from
clouds and
atmosphere
(23%)
Absorbed
by clouds
and atmosphere
(23%)
Reflected
from surface
(6%)
Reradiated
from clouds and
atmosphere
Absorbed
by oceans and
land (48%)
(creates weather)
Outgoing infrared
energy (71%)
Radiated
infrared energy
from surface
Evaporation
and convection
Retained by
greenhouse
gases
rainfall (equatorial), deserts (25° to 35° north and south of 
the equator), and horizontal winds (trade winds).
Convection. On a smaller scale, convection currents bring 
us the day-to-day changes in our weather as they move in a 
general pattern from west to east. Weather reports inform us 
of regions of high and low pressure, but where do these come 
from? Rising air (due to solar heating) creates high pressure 
up in the atmosphere, leaving behind a region of lower pres-
sure close to Earth. Conversely, once the moist, high-pressure 
air has cooled by reradiating heat to space and losing heat 
through condensation (thereby generating precipitation), it 
flows horizontally toward regions of sinking, cool, dry air 
(where the pressure is lower). There the air is warmed at the 
surface and creates a region of higher pressure (Fig. 4). The 
differences in pressure lead to airflows, which are the winds 
we experience. As the figure shows, the winds tend to flow 
from high-pressure regions toward low-pressure regions.
Jet Streams. The larger-scale air movements of Hadley 
cells are influenced by Earth’s rotation from west to east. 
This creates the trade winds over the oceans and the gen-
eral flow of weather from west to east. Higher in the tropo-
sphere, Earth’s rotation and air-pressure gradients generate 
veritable rivers of air, called jet streams, that flow eastward at 
speeds of more than 300 mph and meander considerably. Jet 
streams are able to steer major air masses in the lower trop-
osphere. One example is the polar jet stream, which steers 
cold air masses into North America when it dips downward 
in latitude.
Put Together. . . Air masses of different temperatures and 
pressures meet at boundaries we call fronts, which are regions 
of rapid weather change. Other movements of air masses due 
to differences in pressure and temperature include hurricanes 
and typhoons and local, but very destructive, tornadoes. Fi-
nally, there are also major seasonal airflows—monsoons—
which often represent a reversal of previous wind patterns. 
Monsoons are created by major differences in cooling and 
heating between oceans and continents. The summer mon-
soons of the Indian subcontinent are famous for the benefi-
cial rains they bring and notorious for the devastating floods 
that can occur when the rains are heavy. Putting these move-
ments all together—taking the general atmospheric circula-
tion patterns and the resulting precipitation, then adding 
the wind and weather systems generating them, and finally 
mixing all this with the rotation of Earth and the tilt of the 
planet on its axis, which creates the seasons—yields the gen-
eral patterns of weather that characterize different regions of 
the world. In any given region, these patterns are referred to 
as the region’s climate.
474

Global Climate Change
on Climate Change (IPCC) published the Fourth Assess-
ment Report (AR4) on climate change. They concluded that 
warming of the climate system is unequivocal. Our climate is 
changing, the scientists said: The atmosphere is warmer (Fig. 
5), the oceans are warmer, there is more precipitation, there 
are more extreme weather events (like hurricanes, floods, 
2  Climate Change Science
Climate is the average temperature and precipitation ex-
pected throughout a typical year in a given region. Differ-
ent temperature and moisture regimes in different parts of 
the world have generated different types of ecosystems called 
biomes, reflecting the adaptations of plants, animals, and mi-
crobes to the prevailing weather patterns, or climate, of a re-
gion. The temperature and precipitation patterns themselves 
are actually caused by other forces—namely, the major deter-
minants of weather previously outlined. Humans can adjust 
to practically any climate (short of the brutal conditions of 
high mountains and burning deserts), but this is not true of 
the other inhabitants of the particular regions we occupy. If 
other living organisms in a region are adapted to a particu-
lar climate, then a major change in the climate represents a 
serious threat to the structure and function of the existing 
ecosystems. The subject of climate change is such a vital issue 
today because we depend on these other organisms for a 
host of vital goods and services without which we could not 
survive. If the climate changes, can these ecosystems change 
with it in such a way that the crucial support they provide us 
is not interrupted? Is Earth’s climate indeed changing? If so, 
what is causing it to change?
Synopsis of Global Climate Change
In 2007, after sifting through thousands of studies about 
global warming, scientists from the Intergovernmental Panel 
High
pressure
Low
pressure
Low
pressure
Heat release
Heat release as
infrared radiation
to space
High
pressure
Air rises,
expands,
and cools
Flows toward low pressure
Picks up moisture, heats up
Warm,
humid air
Sinks
and warms
Cool,
dry air
Warm,
dry
air
Precipitation
Airflow toward
low pressure
Condensation
into clouds
Moist surface warmed by solar radiation
Figure 4 A convection cell. Driven by solar energy, 
convection cells produce the main components of our 
weather as evaporation and condensation occur in rising 
air and precipitation results, followed by the sinking of dry 
air. Horizontal winds are generated in the process.
1880
1920
1900
1940
1960
1980
2000
Temperature anomaly (°C)
Year
GLOBAL LAND–OCEAN TEMPERATURE INDEX
Annual mean
5-year running mean
.6
.4
.0
–.4
–.2
.2
Figure 5 Annual mean global surface temperature anoma-
lies. The baseline, or zero point, is the period 1951–80. The warming trend since 
1975 is conspicuous.
(Source: NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, 2011.)
475

Global Climate Change
climate change. The IPCC has three working groups: one 
to assess the scientific issues (Working Group I), another to 
evaluate the impact of global climate change and the pros-
pects for adapting to it (Working Group II), and a third to in-
vestigate ways of mitigating the effects (Working Group III). 
The latest IPCC assessment working groups consist of more 
than 2,000 experts in the appropriate fields, from 154 coun-
tries. These experts are unpaid and participate at the cost 
of their own research and other professional activities. Each 
working group produced a separate report;2 all reports are 
available from the IPCC Web site (www.ipcc.ch).
The work of the IPCC has been guided by two basic 
questions:
Risk assessment—Is the climate system changing, and 
what is the impact on society and ecosystems?
Risk management—How can we manage the system 
through adaptation and mitigation?
Building on past assessments (1990, 1995, 2001) and 
new results of research, the three IPCC working groups re-
leased the Fourth Assessment Report in stages during 2007, 
the final product being Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Re-
port, which was released late that year and contained key 
findings of the working groups.
The UNEP issued a report in 2009 (Climate Change Sci-
ence Compendium 20093) that addressed many new findings 
since the IPCC’s assessment. Other updates have come from 
the American Meteorological Society4 and the U.S. Global 
Change Research Program.5 Work on the next full IPCC as-
sessment is under way and will be released in 2013. In this 
chapter, we will explore the information on climate change 
in some detail, making full use of the IPCC and many other 
reports. We begin with a look into the past, which harbors 
“records” of climate change.
Climates in the Past
Searching the past for evidence of climate change has become 
a major scientific enterprise, one that becomes more difficult 
the further into the past we try to search. Systematic records 
of the factors making up weather—temperature, precipita-
tion, storms, and so forth—have been kept for little more 
than 130 years. Nevertheless, these records clearly inform 
us that our climate is far from constant. The record of sur-
face temperatures, from weather stations around the world 
and from literally millions of observations of temperatures 
at the surface of the sea, tells an interesting story (see Fig. 
droughts, heat waves), glaciers are melting, and the sea level 
is rising.
The IPCC report stated that it is very likely (i.e., there is 
90–100% probability) that the warming is mostly caused by 
increased concentrations of anthropogenic (human-made) 
greenhouse gases (GHGs), atmospheric gases that trap in-
frared radiation. The most significant anthropogenic GHG is 
carbon dioxide (CO2), which has risen by 40%—from 280 
parts per million (ppm) to 394 ppm—since the Industrial 
Revolution began (Fig. 6). The source of this added CO2 is 
no surprise: Most of it comes from burning fossil fuels, and 
a smaller amount comes from burning forests (deforesta-
tion). The global use of fossil fuels is rising every year, and if 
nothing is done to reduce it, computer modeling tells us that 
the 21st century will see climate changes that are dangerous, 
possibly catastrophic. Sea levels will keep rising; there will 
be more frequent heat waves, changed weather patterns, and 
threats to natural ecosystems. In fact, these changes will go 
on for hundreds of years. Needless to say, this is not good 
news, and it has gotten the attention of the world. Efforts 
are under way to respond by way of mitigation (reducing 
GHG emissions) and adaptation (adjusting to coming cli-
mate changes). However, our civilization has no experience 
with a problem like this, and the way forward is still being 
debated.
IPCC and UNEP
The Fourth Assessment Report is an incredibly detailed and 
comprehensive study. In 1988, the UN Environment Program 
(UNEP) and the World Meteorological Society established 
the IPCC in order to provide accurate and relevant informa-
tion that would lead to an understanding of human-induced 
ATMOSPHERIC CO2 AT MAUNA LOA OBSERVATORY
1960
1970
1990
2010
1980
2000
360
320
340
380
Parts per million
Year
Figure 6 Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. The 
concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere fluctuates between winter and sum-
mer because of seasonal variation in photosynthesis. The average concentration 
is increasing due to human activities—in particular, burning fossil fuels and 
 deforestation.
(Source: NOAA Earth System Research Laboratory, 2011.)
2See, for example, Susan Solomon et al., Eds., Climate Change 2007: The Physical 
Science Basis, Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2007).
3Catherine P. McMullen, Ed. Climate Change Science Compendium 2009. 
United Nations Environment Program. http://www.unep.org/compendium2009. 
 December 13, 2011. 
4J. Blunden et al., Eds. State of the Climate in 2010. Special Supplement to the 
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, Vol. 92, No. 6, June 2011. http://
www1.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/cmb/bams-sotc/climate-assessment-2010-lo-rez.
pdf. December 13, 2011. 
5Thomas R. Karl et al., Eds. Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States. 
Cambridge University Press. 2009. www.globalchange.gov/usimpacts. December 13, 
2011.
476

Global Climate Change
and GHGs were low; during the warm interglacial periods, 
just the opposite was true. The GHG and temperature data 
match exactly. Carbon dioxide levels ranged between 150 
and 280 ppm.
The most likely explanation for these major oscillations 
is the existence of known variations in Earth’s orbit, where, 
in different modes of orbital configuration, the distribution 
of solar radiation over different continents and latitudes var-
ies substantially. These oscillations take place according to 
several periodic intervals, called Milankovitch cycles (after 
the Serbian scientist who first described them), of 100,000, 
41,000, and 23,000 years.
Rapid Changes. Superimposed on the major oscillations is 
a record of rapid climatic fluctuations during periods of gla-
ciation and warmer times (Fig. 7b). One such rapid change, 
called the Younger Dryas event (Dryas is a genus of Arctic 
flower), occurred toward the end of the last ice age. Earth 
had been warming up for 6,000 years and then plunged 
again into 1,150 years of cold weather. At the end of this 
event, 11,700 years ago, Arctic temperatures rose 7°C in 50 
years. The impact on living systems must have been enor-
mous. It is unlikely that this warming was due to variations 
in solar output: There is simply no evidence that the Sun has 
changed over the past million years, let alone undergone 
major changes in just a few decades. Instead, scientists have 
narrowed the field of possible explanations to the link be-
tween the atmosphere and the oceans.
Ocean and Atmosphere
More than two-thirds of Earth is covered by oceans, making 
ours mostly a water planet. Because we all live on land, it 
is hard for us to imagine the dominant role the oceans play 
5). Since 1880, global average temperature has shown peri-
ods of cooling and warming, but since 1976, it has increased 
0.6°C (1.1°F). During the 20th century, two warming trends 
occurred, one from 1910 to 1945 and the latest dramatic in-
crease from 1976 until the present. The first decade of the 
21st century has been the warmest decade on record.
Further Back. Observations on climatic changes can be 
extended much further back in time with the use of  proxies—
measurable records that can provide data on factors such as 
temperature, ice cover, and precipitation. For example, histor-
ical accounts suggest that the Northern Hemisphere enjoyed 
a warming period from 1100 to 1300 a.d. This was followed 
by the “Little Ice Age,” between 1400 and 1850 a.d. Addi-
tional proxies include tree rings, pollen deposits, changes in 
landscapes, marine sediments, corals, and ice cores.
Some work done quite recently on ice cores has both 
provided a startling view of a global climate that oscillates 
according to several cycles and afforded some evidence that 
remarkable changes in the climate can occur within as little 
as a few decades. Ice cores in Greenland and the Antarctic 
have been analyzed for thickness, gas content (specifically, 
carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4)), two GHGs, and 
isotopes, which are alternative chemical configurations of a 
given compound, due to different nuclear components. Iso-
topes of oxygen, as well as isotopes of hydrogen, behave dif-
ferently at different temperatures when condensed in clouds 
and incorporated into ice.
The record based on these analyses indicates that Earth’s 
climate has oscillated between ice ages and warm periods (Fig. 
7a). During major ice ages, huge amounts of water were tied 
up in glaciers and ice sheets, and the sea level was lower by 
as much as 400 feet (120 m). Ice cores from Antarctica show 
eight glacial periods and eight interglacial periods, over the 
past 800,000 years. During the glacial periods, temperatures 
0
–12
–8
–4
0
4
100
200
300
400
Age (1000 years before present)
500
600
700
800
300
400
500
600
700
800
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
Temperature anomaly
Antarctica (°C)
CO2 (ppm)
CH4 (ppb)
(a)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
10
0
Years ago (thousands)
Colder
Warmer
Younger
Dryas
Colder
(b)
(c)
Warmer
Figure 7 Past climates, as determined from ice cores. (a) Carbon dioxide, methane, and 
estimated global temperature from Antarctic ice cores, covering the past 800,000 years, compared with changes 
of the past century. Note how closely the temperature and GHG concentrations coincide. (b) Temperature patterns 
of the past 160,000 years, demonstrating climatic oscillations. (c) Higher resolution of the past 12,000 years. The 
Younger Dryas cold spell occurred at the start of this record. Note how rapidly the cold spell dissipated, at around 
10,700 years before the present.
(Sources: (a) The Bohr Institute; (b) & (c) Adapted from Robert W. Christopherson, Geosystems: An Introduction to Physical 
 Geography, 5th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2005).)
477

Global Climate Change
becoming less dense and welling up to the surface, where 
they are further warmed and begin to move as surface waters 
back again toward the North Atlantic. This movement trans-
fers enormous quantities of heat toward Europe, providing 
a climate that is much warmer than the high latitudes there 
would suggest.
Recently, the conveyor-belt paradigm has been chal-
lenged.6 Instead of the neat flows pictured in Figure 8, re-
search has revealed that eddies and oceanic winds inject and 
subtract water masses at many points in the overall circula-
tion, and the actual driving force for the turnover of ocean 
waters is unclear. What is clear is that the turnover does 
occur—deep waters are formed by sinking at the poles, and 
warm water does return northward to affect the climate of 
northern Europe. This new work has called into question 
some of the conjecture that changes in the climate might trig-
ger abrupt changes in the AMOC.
Abrupt Change. Recent evidence indicates that the AMOC 
has been interrupted in the past, changing climate abruptly. 
One mechanism that could have accomplished such a change 
is the appearance of unusually large quantities of freshwater 
in the North Atlantic. This would have the effect of lower-
ing the density of the water (and, therefore, preventing much 
of the massive sinking that normally occurs there). With this 
stagnation occurring in surface Arctic waters, the northward 
movement of warmer, saltier water would slow down. North 
Atlantic marine sediments show evidence of the periodic in-
vasion (six times in the past 75,000 years) of icebergs from 
the polar ice cap, which supplied huge amounts of fresh water 
as they melted—called Heinrich events, after the scientist 
who first described them. The evidence indicates that these 
invasions coincided with rapid cooling, as recorded in ice 
cores, and suggests that the AMOC shifted southward, with 
the NADW forming nearer to Bermuda than to Greenland. 
When this shift occurred, a major cooling of the climate took 
place within a few decades. Although it is not clear how, the 
normal thermohaline pattern returned and brought about 
another abrupt change, this time warming conditions in the 
North Atlantic. The Younger Dryas event likely involved just 
such a shift in the AMOC, brought on by the sudden release 
of dammed-up water from glacial Lake Agassiz into the St. 
Lawrence drainage. Referring to these abrupt changes in a 
recent article, oceanographer Wallace Broecker commented, 
“Earth’s climate system has proven itself to be an angry 
beast. When nudged, it is capable of a violent  response.”7
What If . . . ? Among the likely consequences of extended 
global warming are increased precipitation over the North 
Atlantic and more melting of sea ice and ice caps. If such 
a pattern is sustained, it could lead to a weakening in the 
normal operation of the AMOC and a change in climate, es-
pecially in the northern latitudes—a possibility that Broecker 
has called “the Achilles’ heel of our climate system.” Such a 
in determining our climate. Nevertheless, the oceans are the 
major source of water for the hydrologic cycle and the main 
source of heat entering the atmosphere. The evaporation of 
ocean water supplies the atmosphere with water vapor, and 
when water vapor condenses in the atmosphere, it supplies 
the atmosphere with heat (latent heat of condensation). The 
oceans also play a vital role in climate because of their in-
nate heat capacity—the ability to absorb energy when water 
is heated. Indeed, the entire heat capacity of the atmosphere 
is equal to that of just the top 3 meters of ocean water. It is 
this property that makes the climate milder in coastal areas. 
Finally, through the movement of currents, the oceans convey 
heat throughout the globe.
Thermohaline Circulation. For many years, oceanog-
raphers have described the existence of a thermohaline cir-
culation pattern that dominates oceanic currents, where 
thermohaline refers to the effects that temperature and sa-
linity have on the density of seawater. This pattern, known 
formally as the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation 
(AMOC) (Fig. 8), has been pictured as a giant, complex con-
veyor belt, moving water masses from the surface to deep 
oceans and back again. A key area is the high-latitude North 
Atlantic, where salty water from the Gulf Stream moves 
northward on the surface and is cooled by Arctic air currents. 
Cooling increases the density of the water, which then sinks 
to depths of up to 4,000 meters—the North Atlantic Deep 
Water (NADW). This deep-water current spreads southward 
through the Atlantic to the southern tip of Africa, where it 
is joined by cold Antarctic waters. Together, the two streams 
spread northward into the Indian and Pacific Oceans as 
deep currents. Gradually, the currents slow down and warm, 
Shallow ocean currents
Deep ocean currents
Rising ocean currents
Descending ocean currents
 
 
 
    warm
,
 sh
all
ow
  
 
c
u
r
r
e
n
t
 
c
o
l
d
, sa
l
t
y
,
 
de
ep
 cu
rr
ent
 
cold, 
sal
ty, 
d
e
e
p 
c
u
r
re
nt
 
wa
rm
, 
sh
allow   c
u
rrent 
Figure 8 The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation. Salty 
water flowing to the North Atlantic is cooled and sinks, forming the North Atlantic 
Deep Water system. This deep flow extends southward and is joined by Antarctic 
water, whereupon it extends into the Indian and Pacific Oceans.  Surface currents 
then proceed in the opposite direction, returning the water to  
the North Atlantic.
(Source: Adapted from Figure 3.15 from Our Changing Planet, 2nd ed., by Fred T. MacKenzie. 
Copyright © 1998 by Prentice Hall, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., 
Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458.)
6M. Susan Lozier. “Deconstructing the Conveyor Belt.” Science 328: 1507–1511. 
June 18, 2010.
7Wallace S. Broecker. “Does the Trigger for Abrupt Change Reside in the Ocean or 
in the Atmosphere?” Science 300 (June 6, 2003): 1519–1522.
478

Global Climate Change
Warming Processes. The interior of a car heats up when 
the car is sitting in sunlight with the windows closed. This 
heating occurs because sunlight comes in through the win-
dows and is absorbed by the seats and other interior objects, 
thus converting light energy into heat energy, which is given 
off in the form of infrared radiation. Unlike sunlight, infra-
red radiation is blocked by glass and so cannot leave the car. 
The trapped heat energy causes the interior air temperature 
to rise. This is the same phenomenon that keeps a greenhouse 
warmer than the surrounding environment.
Greenhouse Gases. On a global scale, water vapor, CO2, 
and other gases in the atmosphere play a role analogous to 
that of the glass in a greenhouse, hence the term greenhouse 
gases (GHGs). Light energy comes through the atmosphere 
and is absorbed by Earth and converted to heat energy at the 
planet’s surface. The infrared heat energy radiates back up-
ward through the atmosphere and into space. The GHGs that 
are naturally present in the troposphere absorb some of the 
infrared radiation and reradiate it back toward the surface; 
other gases (N2 and O2) in the troposphere do not (Fig. 9). This 
greenhouse effect was first recognized in 1827 by French sci-
entist Jean-Baptiste Fourier and is now firmly established. The 
GHGs are like a heat blanket, insulating Earth and delaying 
the loss of infrared energy (heat) to space. Without this insula-
tion, average surface temperatures on Earth would be about 
219°C instead of 114°C, and life as we know it would be 
impossible. Therefore, our global climate depends on Earth’s 
concentrations of GHGs. If these concentrations increase or 
decrease significantly, their influence as positive forcing agents 
will change, and our climate will change accordingly.
Ozone in the troposphere has a positive forcing effect, 
whereas its impact in the stratosphere is negative. However, 
the positive forcing predominates. Tropospheric ozone has a 
strong anthropogenic component linked to pollution. It var-
ies greatly in time and location and is highest in the vicinity 
of industrial societies.
Cooling Processes. Earth’s atmosphere is also subject to 
negative forcing factors. For example, on average, clouds cover 
50% of Earth’s surface and reflect some 23% of solar radia-
tion away to space before it ever reaches the ground. Sunlight 
reflected in this way is called the planetary albedo, and it con-
tributes to overall cooling by preventing a certain amount of 
warming in the first place. The effect of the albedo is especially 
true for low-lying, fluffy clouds and can be readily appreciated 
if you think of how you are comforted on a hot day when 
a large cloud passes between you and the Sun. The radiation 
that was heating you and your surroundings is suddenly in-
tercepted higher up in the atmosphere, and you feel cooler. 
However, high-lying, wispy clouds have a positive forcing ef-
fect, absorbing some of the solar radiation and emitting some 
infrared radiation themselves. Recent work indicates that the 
current net impact of clouds is a slightly positive forcing.
Snow and sea ice (the cryosphere) also reflect sunlight, 
contributing to the planetary albedo. Arctic warming has re-
duced this effect in recent decades, as open water and darker, 
unfrozen ground absorb sunlight. Cryosphere albedo is 
change could bring major cooling to Europe. However, there 
are doubts about the functioning of the conveyor-belt para-
digm, especially as it is presented as a smooth, simple set of 
ocean currents. Accordingly, most observers believe that ex-
pected increases in GHGs and the overall warming that this 
brings will prevent anything like a new ice age (as portrayed 
by the movie The Day After Tomorrow).
Ocean-Atmosphere Oscillations. Regional climates are 
notoriously erratic on time scales from a few days to decades. 
Studies of a number of ocean-atmosphere processes—processes 
that produce erratic climates on a global scale—have provided 
new insights into natural climate variability. There is, for exam-
ple, the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), where atmospheric 
pressure centers switch back and forth across the Atlantic, 
switching winds and storms in the process. There is also a 
warm-cool cycle, the Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation (IPO), 
that swings back and forth across the Pacific over periods of 
several decades.
Then there is the El Niño/La Niña Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO), where major shifts in atmospheric pressure over 
the central equatorial Pacific Ocean lead to a reversal of the 
trade winds. Incredibly, these reversals dominate the climate 
over much of the planet, and they can last for a year or two 
at a time. The 1997–2000 ENSO was the most intense of 
recent decades, and it spawned powerful global weather 
patterns that caused more than $36 billion in damages and 
more than 22,000 deaths. El Niños tend to encourage warm-
ing, while La Niñas do the opposite; 2010 had a strong El 
Niño, but 2011 was a strong La Niña year, with correspond-
ing warmer and cooler global temperatures.
These processes are becoming better understood, and as 
they are, they are beginning to provide explanations for some 
previously puzzling developments. For example, it is clear 
(Fig. 5) that a global warming trend was halted in the mid-
1940s and that it resumed 30 years later. Researchers have 
found evidence that this mid-century cooling was the result 
of shifting ocean circulation linked to the NAO. Forecasters 
have suggested that this and the other ocean-atmosphere os-
cillations have been turning greenhouse-based warming off 
and on. The El Niño/La Niña events have been happening 
more frequently and with greater intensity in recent decades, 
changes in the climate that may be linked to global warming.
The Earth as a Greenhouse
Factors that influence the climate include interactive inter-
nal components (oceans, the atmosphere, snow cover, sea ice) 
and external factors (solar radiation, the Earth’s rotation, 
slow changes in our planet’s orbit, and the gaseous makeup 
of the atmosphere). Radiative forcing is the influence any par-
ticular factor has on the energy balance of the atmosphere-
ocean-land system. A forcing factor can be positive, leading 
to warming, or negative, leading to cooling, as it affects the 
energy balance. Forcing is expressed in units of watts per 
square meter (W/m2); averaged over all of the planet, solar 
radiation entering the atmosphere is about 340 W/m2. It is 
this radiation that is acted on by the various forcing factors.
479

Global Climate Change
Aerosols. Aerosols are microscopic liquid or solid par-
ticles originating from land and water surfaces. Climatolo-
gists have found that industrial aerosols (from ground-level 
pollution) play a significant role in canceling out some of 
the warming from GHGs. Sulfates, nitrates, dust, and soot 
from industrial sources and forest fires enter the atmosphere 
and react with compounds there to form a high-level aero-
sol haze. This haze reflects and scatters some sunlight; the 
aerosols also contribute to the formation of clouds, which 
likewise increase the planetary albedo. Sooty aerosol (from 
fires) has an overall warming effect, but industrial sulfate 
aerosol creates substantial cooling, mainly through its ten-
dency to increase global cloud cover. The mean residence 
time of the sulfates and soot forming the aerosol is about 
a week, so the aerosol does not increase over time, as the 
GHGs do. However, because anthropogenic sulfate is more 
than double that coming from natural sources, its effect is 
substantial and persistent. Climatologists estimate that the 
cooling effect of these pollutants has counteracted much of 
reduced even more by the widespread black carbon soot orig-
inating from anthropogenic sources (diesel engine exhaust 
and fires). By darkening the snow and ice, the soot promotes 
the absorption of radiant energy rather than its reflection.
Volcanoes. Volcanic activity can also lead to planetary 
cooling. When Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines erupted in 
1991, some 20 million tons of particles and aerosols entered 
the atmosphere and contributed to a significant drop in glo-
bal temperature as radiation was reflected and scattered away. 
This global cooling effect lasted until the volcanic debris was 
finally cleansed from the atmosphere by chemical change and 
deposition, a process that took several years. However, some 
sulfate aerosols from volcanic sources enter the stratosphere, 
where they have a longer-term cooling effect; these have in-
creased since 2000, effectively reducing some of the global 
warming that otherwise might have occurred.8
Figure 9 The greenhouse effect. Solar radiation that reaches Earth’s surface is converted to infrared ra-
diation and is radiated upward. Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere intercept this radiation and are warmed. The 
greenhouse gases in turn reradiate heat energy, and much of this is directed back toward Earth’s surface.
(Source: S. Solomon et al., Eds. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2007), FAQ 1.3, Figure 1.)
Solar radiation powers
the climate system.
Some solar radiation
is reflected by
the Earth and the
atmosphere.  
Atmosphere
Earth
Sun
About half the solar radiation
is absorbed by the
Earth’s surface and warms it.
Infrared radiation is
emitted from the Earth’s
surface.
The Greenhouse Effect
Some of the infared
radiation passes through
the atmosphere, but most
is absorbed and re-emitted
in all directions
by greenhouse gas
molecules and clouds.
The effect of this is to
warm the Earth’s surface
and the lower atmosphere.
8S. Solomon et al. “The Persistently Variable ‘Background’ Stratospheric Aerosol 
Layer and Global Climate Change.” Science 333: 866–870. August 12, 2011.
480

Global Climate Change
Science Program (CCSP), which was created in 2002 by the 
Bush administration to address apparent unresolved questions 
about global climate change. The CCSP study, reported in May 
2006, found that “the discrepancy no longer exists because er-
rors in the satellite . . . data have been identified and corrected. 
New data sets have also been developed that do not show such 
discrepancies.” Indeed, the study found a remarkable agreement 
between surface temperatures and tropospheric temperatures, 
all of which indicate a continued rise in temperature consist-
ent with “our understanding of the effects of radiative forcing 
agents [showing] clear evidence of human influences on the cli-
mate system.”9 This report, the first of 21 assessments planned 
by the program, was approved by the Bush White House.
Ocean Heat Content. The upper 3,000 meters of the 
ocean have warmed measurably since 1955 (Fig. 10), a warm-
ing that dwarfs the observed warming of the atmosphere, ac-
counting for 90% of the heat increase of Earth systems in the 
past several decades. There is a fascinating story about the 
actual measurements of ocean heat content shown in Figure 
10 (described in Sound Science, “Getting It Right” ). A key 
analysis of Earth’s energy imbalance10 makes the case for the 
ocean’s continuing absorption of heat; over the past decade, 
the ocean has absorbed essentially all of the heat not yet seen 
in the atmosphere. This net absorption of heat energy has 
one long-term consequence and one that is more immediate.
The long-term consequence is the impact of this stored 
heat as it eventually comes into equilibrium with the atmos-
phere, raising temperatures over land and in the atmosphere 
even more. The immediate consequence is the rise in sea level 
that occurs because of thermal expansion. Sea level rose 
the potential global warming in recent decades. Because of 
progress made in curbing industrial pollutants in the United 
States and Europe, this impact has been declining over those 
regions. However, industrial growth in China and India has 
created a major rise in aerosols over Asia.
Solar Variability. Because the Sun is the source of ra-
diant energy that heats Earth, any variability in the Sun’s ra-
diation reaching Earth will likely influence the climate. Direct 
monitoring of solar irradiance goes back only a few decades, 
but it has confirmed that there is an 11-year cycle of changes 
involving solar radiation increases during times of high sun-
spot activity. Sunspots are known to block cosmic ray inten-
sity, and because cosmic rays help seed clouds, the diminished 
cloud cover allows more solar radiation to reach Earth’s 
surface. Indeed, variations in solar forcing are thought to be 
partly responsible for the early-20th-century warming trend. 
However, solar output began declining around 1985 and con-
tinued for at least 20 years, yet global temperatures were rising 
rapidly at that time and have continued to rise. The IPCC AR4 
assigned a slight warming role to fluctuations in solar radia-
tion, but found that GHGs were some 13 times more responsi-
ble for the rising global temperatures than were solar changes.
Thus . . . Global atmospheric temperatures are a balance be-
tween the positive and negative forcing from natural causes 
(volcanoes, clouds, natural GHGs, solar irradiance) and an-
thropogenic causes (sulfate aerosols, soot, ozone, increases in 
GHGs). The net result varies, depending on one’s location. 
The various forcing agents bring us year-to-year fluctuations 
in climate and make it difficult to attribute any one event or 
extreme season to human causation. Nevertheless, there has 
clearly been enough of a shift in many features of our climate 
in recent decades to generate international attention.
Evidence of Climate Change
There is much natural variation in weather from year to year, 
and local temperatures do not necessarily follow globally 
averaged ones. It is a fact, however, that the first decade of 
the 21st century is the warmest on record (Fig. 5). The years 
2005 and 2010 tied for a new record for global tempera-
ture—the warmest years since recordkeeping began. Since 
the mid-1970s, the average global temperature has risen 
about 0.6°C (1.1°F), almost 0.2°C per decade. The warm-
ing is happening everywhere but is greater at high latitudes 
in the Northern Hemisphere. Because of the continued in-
creases in anthropogenic GHGs in the atmosphere, the ob-
served warming is considered to be the consequence of an 
“enhanced greenhouse effect.”
Satellites. An interesting and controversial aspect of the 
warming trend involves measurements of tropospheric tem-
peratures (from Earth’s surface to 8 km above) made by 13 
different satellites over two decades. One early analysis of the 
data indicated virtually no temperature increase in the tropo-
sphere. Much was made of this apparent discrepancy with the 
surface temperature trends by skeptics eager to disprove global 
warming. This situation was addressed by the Climate Change 
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
Heat Content (1022 Joules)
Date (year)
Original data
Revised data
10
5
0
–5
Figure 10 Heat capture by the oceans. The plot shows the changes in 
heat content of the upper 2,290 feet (700 m) of the world’s oceans, as plotted by 
the Global  Oceanographic Data Archaeology and Rescue Project (GODAR). Heat 
content is measured in joules (J). Two plots are seen: an original data plot and 
a revised data plot after corrections were made. See Sound Science, “Getting It 
Right.”
(Source: Rebecca Lindsey, Correcting Ocean Cooling, Earth Observatory, November 5, 2008.)
9Climate Change Science Program. Temperature Trends in the Lower Atmosphere: 
Steps for Understanding and Reconciling Differences, A Report by the Climate 
Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research 
(Washington, DC: CCSP, 2006).
10James Hansen et al. “Earth’s Energy Imbalance: Confirmation and Implications,” 
Science 308 (June 2005): 1431–1435.
481

Global Climate Change
about 6 inches (15 cm) during the 20th century, a rate of 
1.5 millimeters per year. It is now rising more rapidly, at a 
rate of 3.2 millimeters per year (Fig. 11). About half of this 
rise is due to thermal expansion, and the remainder results 
from the melting of glaciers and ice fields. The IPCC AR4 
documents a general loss of land ice as glaciers and ice caps 
have thinned and melted. Significantly, historical sea level 
data indicate that the sea level was unchanged until 100 
years ago; this modern sea level rise is a new phenomenon 
and is consistent with the known pattern of anthropogenic 
climate warming.
Other Observed Changes. The IPCC AR4 and other re-
cent reports document a number of climate impacts, all of 
which are consistent with and contribute to the picture of 
GHG-caused climate change (note that most of these changes 
have potentially serious consequences for human and natural 
systems):
 • Broad increases in warm temperature extremes and de-
creases in cold temperature extremes have been docu-
mented. There are also seasonal changes: Spring comes 
earlier and fall is later in the Northern Hemisphere, 
SOUNd SCIENCE
Getting It Right
Josh Willis works at 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory and special-
izes in measurements 
of the ocean’s response 
to global warming. He publishes his results 
in peer-reviewed journals like the Journal of 
 Geophysical Research. In a 2004 paper, he 
presented work that showed the ocean heat 
content increasing between 1993 and 2003, 
in agreement with what climatologists were 
seeing with the atmospheric temperature meas-
urements. This is no trivial matter; the oceans 
absorb some 90% of the heat from global 
warming. However, Willis then did a follow-up 
study with colleague John Lyman, updating the 
time series from 2003 to 2005, showing that the 
oceans suddenly began to cool, and in a large 
way. This alarmed many climatologists and, at 
the same time, fed the climate change skeptics, 
who pounced on the data as proof that global 
warming wasn’t happening.
One climatologist who was especially dubi-
ous about Willis’s new data was Takmeng Wong, 
who works at NASA’s Langley Research Center. 
Wong had been measuring the exchange of en-
ergy between the Earth and space, and his data 
showed that the amounts of entering and out-
going energy at the top of the atmosphere were 
gradually climbing out of balance. More energy 
was entering than leaving. This was true for the 
2003–2005 time period as well, and Wong po-
litely asked Willis to reexamine his data because 
there was a clear discrepancy between the two 
studies. When Willis measured an even deeper 
ocean cooling in 2006, he began to entertain 
serious doubts about his data.
The source of the temperature data being 
employed by Willis was a flotilla of Argo 
floats—underwater robots that would sink to 
2,000 meters, drift with the ocean currents, 
and then pop up to the surface, taking water 
temperatures as they ascended. They then 
transmitted the data to a satellite. Willis found 
that, when tested, many new Argo floats were 
giving bad data—in fact, indicating cooler tem-
peratures than other devices being employed. 
He also consulted an independent set of data 
on satellite measurements of sea level. When 
water heats up, it expands, and the sea level 
data were showing a continual rise. One final 
factor in the data relates to a different data set 
on ocean temperatures from devices called XBTs 
(for expandable bathythermographs, which are 
dropped into the ocean and relay temperatures 
as they sink). An independent paper had shown 
that the XBT data from previous years were too 
warm. When Willis corrected his ocean warming 
time series with the too-warm XBT measure-
ments and the too-cool Argo measurements, 
the indications of ocean cooling went away. 
The warm pulses of the 1970s and 1980s disap-
peared, and the time series showed a gradual 
warming (Fig. 10).
The conclusion to this story is that you can 
never have too many independent measure-
ments if you want to measure something as 
huge as a warming planet. Taken together, 
ocean warming, sea level rise, and energy ex-
change with space are now telling a consistent 
story, one of a warming that can be attributed 
only to rising GHG emissions.
Source: Rebecca Lindsey, Correcting Ocean Cooling, NASA 
Earth Observatory, November 5, 2008.
J
N
L
i
o
Josh Willis, NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Willis is 
shown here receiving the Presidential Early Career 
Award for Scientists and Engineers in January 2010 
from John Holdren (White House Office of Science and 
Technology Policy Director) and Lori Garver (NASA 
Associate Administrator)
Figure 11 The rise in global mean sea level. Satellite radar altim-
eters have provided estimates of global sea level since 1993. The current rate 
is 3.2 mm/year. Note the 6 mm decline in 2010–2011, a consequence of the 
strong La Niña that produced massive rainfall events over land. Note, too, that 
the sea level started back up in mid-2011 as the La Niña began to subside.
(Source: Colorado University Sea Level Research Group, 2011. Used with permission.)
Date (year)
∆MSL (mm)
TOPEX
Jason-1
Jason-2
60-day smoothing
Rate = 3.2 ± 0.4 mm/yr
Seasonal signals removed
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
'12
'10
'08
'06
'04
'02
'00
'98
'96
'94
'92
482

Global Climate Change
While overall global temperature has increased a mod-
erate 1.1°F, temperatures in Alaska, Siberia, and north-
western Canada have risen 5°F in summer and 10°F in 
winter. Spring comes two weeks earlier in the Arctic than 
it did at the turn of the 21st century. The polar ice cap 
has lost nearly 20% of its volume in the past two dec-
ades, and permafrost has been melting all over the polar 
regions—lifting buildings, uprooting telephone poles, 
and breaking up roads.
 • The Greenland Ice Sheet, a huge reservoir of water, is 
melting and calving icebergs at unprecedented rates, un-
doubtedly a response to the rise in temperatures in the 
northern latitudes. A net loss of 530 cubic miles of water 
has occurred between 2003 and 2011 (Fig. 13). Record 
warm summers have accelerated Greenland ice melt; the 
largest loss (114 cubic miles) was in 2011. The two-mile-
high ice sheet contains enough water to raise ocean lev-
els 23 feet (7 m).
 • Temperatures in Antarctica, which holds enough ice to 
raise sea levels by 185 feet (57 m), have risen by more than 
0.5°C over the past 55 years; West Antarctica showed the 
greatest warming, at 0.85°C. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet 
(WAIS) is the continent’s most vulnerable ice mass be-
cause it is grounded below sea level. Ocean water is con-
stantly in contact with the edges of this ice sheet, and the 
ice sheet has been shrinking as the water eats away at the 
ice.  Melting of this ice sheet would raise global sea level 
shifting ecosystems and populations out of sync. More 
tree deaths and forest insect damage have also been 
traced to the warmer temperatures. Heat waves, like 
those that scorched Europe in 2010 and the United 
States in 2011 and 2012, are increasing in intensity and 
frequency.
 • Droughts are also increasing in frequency and intensity; 
the fraction of land area experiencing drought has more 
than doubled over the past 30 years, leading to a global 
decline in net primary productivity and significant reduc-
tions in corn and wheat crops. More than 60% of the 
United States has been under a drought that started in the 
late 1990s, seriously affecting agricultural crops and water 
resources. East Africa is experiencing its worst drought in 
60 years, overwhelming refugee camps and available food 
aid. The increased forest fire activity in the western United 
States is clearly related to droughts, warmer temperatures, 
and earlier springs; more than 8.5 million acres burned in 
2011, the third largest burn in history.
 • Rising Arctic temperatures have brought about a major 
shrinkage of Arctic sea ice, with an accelerating decrease 
(Fig. 12). According to a recent assessment,11 the Arc-
tic Ocean is likely to have an ice-free summer by 2030. 
11Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program. Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in 
the Arctic, Executive Summary. 2011. www.amap.no/swipa. December 19, 2011.
Figure 12 Decline of Arctic sea ice. (a) The extent of sea ice in September 2011 was 4.33 million km2 
(1.67 million mi2), the second lowest measure on record. The orange line is the median ice extent for September 
from 1979 to 2000. (b) Tracking with satellites shows the 33-year downward decline in the Arctic sea ice at the end 
of the northern summer. The decline is now 11.2% per decade.
(Source: National Snow and Ice Data Center, University of Colorado, October 2011.)
1979–2000 (median)
SEA ICE EXTENT 09/09/2011
1978
2010
2006
2002
1998
1994
1990
1986
1982
AVERAGE MONTHLY ARCTIC SEA ICE EXTENT
August 1978 to 2010
8.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
483

Global Climate Change
by 16 to 20 feet (5 to 6 m). The East Antarctic Ice Sheet 
contains eight times the mass of West Antarctic’s.
 • Glaciers have resumed a retreat that has been documented 
for more than a century, but that slowed in the 1970s and 
1980s. The World Glacier Monitoring Service has followed 
the melting and slow retreat of mountain glaciers all over 
the world. The response time of glaciers to climatic trends is 
slow—10 to 50 years—but the data collected show an ac-
celeration of glacial “wastage” since 1990 that is likely a re-
sponse to recent rapid atmospheric warming (Fig. 14). Loss 
of mountain glaciers is especially serious, as these glaciers 
are often critical water sources for arid lands below.
 • Patterns of precipitation are changing, with greater 
amounts from 30° N and 30° S poleward and with 
smaller amounts from 10° N to 30° N. Also, there have 
been widespread increases in heavy precipitation events, 
leading to more frequent flooding.
 • Marine fish species populations are shifting northward 
as sea temperatures have warmed, impacting the com-
mercial fisheries. Changing sea temperatures have also 
affected the spatial distribution of phytoplankton pro-
duction over major ocean areas.
 • The oceans have been soaking up some 30% of the 
CO2 emissions from human sources, for which we may 
be thankful because this slows the rise of atmospheric 
CO2 considerably. However, in doing so, the oceans are 
experiencing a decrease in pH, a process known as ocean 
acidification. Although the decrease is only about 0.1 
pH unit to date, there is serious concern about the future 
state of seawater pH in light of continued anthropogenic 
CO2 production. At some level, ocean acidification will 
make the warm oceans inhospitable to coral reefs; the 
coral animals depend on an equilibrium for carbon min-
erals that is affected by acidic conditions. The bottom 
line: Human use of fossil fuels has begun to change not 
only the temperature, but also the chemistry of the sur-
face oceans.
Given the accumulating evidence that the climate is 
changing and that the change is already causing an array 
of changes in biological, physical, and chemical systems on 
Earth, it is time to address the causes of these changes in 
more detail.
Rising Greenhouse Gases
According to the IPCC AR4 Synthesis Report, “Global 
GHG emissions due to human activities have grown since 
pre-industrial times, with an increase of 70% between 
Figure 13 Loss of mass of the Greenland Ice Sheet. The ice sheet 
loss has been measured by the gravity-measuring GRACE  satellites. The greatest 
decline occurred in 2010–2011, a total loss of 430 gigatons (114 cubic miles).
(Source: NOAA Arctic Report Card: Update for 2011.)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
–1200
2003
–1000
–800
–600
–400
–200
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005
2004
Gigatons
Year
LOSS OF MASS OF THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET
(b)
(a)
Figure 14 Shrinkage of the Muir glacier. The Muir glacier, a tidewa-
ter glacier in Alaska’s Glacier Bay, has retreated more than 7 miles (12 km) and 
thinned by more than 2,600 feet (800 m) since 1941. Once covered with ice and 
snow (a), the land now holds trees and shrubs (b).
(Source: NSIDC/WDC for Glaciology, compiled 2002, updated 2006, Online glacier photograph 
database, Boulder, CO: National Snow and Ice Data Center/World Data Center for Glaciology, 
 digital media.)
484

Global Climate Change
Sources. As Arrhenius suggested, the obvious place to look 
for the source of increasing CO2 levels is our use of fossil fuels. 
Every kilogram of fossil carbon burned produces 3.7 kilograms 
of CO2 that enters the atmosphere (each carbon atom in the fuel 
picks up two oxygen atoms in the course of burning and becom-
ing CO2). Currently, 9.1 billion metric tons (gigatons, or Gt) of 
fossil fuel carbon (GtC) are burned each year (Fig. 15), all added 
to the atmosphere as CO2 (about 5% of this total comes from 
cement production and is usually included in figures reported for 
fossil fuel emissions). About half of this amount comes from the 
industrialized countries (Fig. 16). Carbon dioxide accounts for 
about 20% of greenhouse warming, at current levels.
Climate change skeptics sometimes claim that much of the 
new CO2 comes from natural sources. This claim can be put to 
rest by considering the 14C signature of atmospheric CO2. 14C is 
a radioactive isotope of carbon that is formed in the atmosphere 
by bombardment of nitrogen atoms by cosmic rays; it decays 
over time to regenerate nitrogen atoms. Fossil fuels contain no 
14C because of radioactive decay (the half-life of 14C is 5730 
years). If significant amounts of CO2 originating from fossil fuel 
combustion are added to the atmosphere, the 14C in the atmos-
phere should be declining, and it clearly is (Fig. 17).
1970 and 2004.”12 They have continued to increase.13 
The most important of these anthropogenic GHGs is car-
bon dioxide (CO2).
Carbon dioxide. More than 100 years ago, Swedish scien-
tist Svante Arrhenius reasoned that differences in CO2 levels 
in the atmosphere could greatly affect Earth’s energy budget. 
Arrhenius suggested that, in time, the burning of fossil fuels 
might change the atmospheric CO2 concentration, though he 
believed that it would take centuries before the associated 
warming would be noticeable. He was not concerned about 
the impacts of this warming, arguing that such an increase 
would be beneficial. (He lived in Sweden!)
Carbon Dioxide Monitoring. In 1958, Charles Keeling 
began measuring CO2 levels on Mauna Loa, in Hawaii. Meas-
urements there have been recorded continuously, and they 
reveal a striking increase in atmospheric levels of the gas (Fig. 
6). The concentrations increased exponentially until the en-
ergy crisis in the mid-1970s, rose at a rate of 1.5 ppm/year for 
several decades, and in the 2000s began rising at a rate of 2.0 
ppm/year and higher. The data also reveal an annual oscilla-
tion of 5–7 ppm, which reflects seasonal changes of photosyn-
thesis and respiration in terrestrial ecosystems in the Northern 
Hemisphere. When respiration predominates (late fall through 
spring), CO2 levels rise; when photosynthesis predominates 
(late spring through early fall), CO2 levels fall. Most salient, 
however, is the relentless rise in CO2. As of mid-2012, atmos-
pheric CO2 levels were at 394 ppm, 40% higher than they 
were before the Industrial Revolution and higher than they 
have been for more than 800,000 years (Fig. 7a). Thus, our 
insulating blanket is thickening, and it is reasonable to expect 
that this will have a warming effect.
12Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis 
Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment. 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Core Writing Team, 
Pachauri, R. K., and Reisinger, A. (Eds.)). IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 2007.
13S. A. Montzka et al. Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gases and Climate Change. Nature 
476: 43–50. August 4, 2011.
Figure 15 Global carbon emissions from fossil fuel combus-
tion. Data from 1850 to 2010, from the Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis 
Center (CDIAC). The rise in the 2000s decade is conspicuous.
(Source: CDIAC, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 2011.)
10,000
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
Preliminary estimate 
for 2009/2010
1850
1870
1890
1910
1930
1950
1970
1990
2010
Flaring
Million Metric Tons of Carbon
Cement
Gas
Liquid
Solid
ESTIMATES OF GLOBAL CARBON EMISSIONS FROM FOSSIL-
FUEL COMBUSTION AND CEMENT MANUFACTURE
Figure 16 Sources of carbon dioxide emissions from fossil 
fuel burning. Total emissions in 2009 were approximately 8.3 GtC, or 30.3 
billion metric tons of CO2. Half of this (Europe, North America, Japan, South Korea, 
Taiwan, Saudi Arabia) comes from the industrialized countries. 
(Source: Data from U.S. Energy Information Administration, December 2011.)
Latin America
Africa
Middle East
Eurasia
Europe
North America
Asia/Pacific
4%
4%
6%
8%
14%
21%
44%
TOTAL EMISSIONS: 8.3 BILLION METRIC TONS OF CARBON
PER YEAR
80
40
50
60
70
2002
2010
2008
2006
Time
2004
Observed '14C (permil)
CLEAN AIR MEASUREMENTS AT NIWOT RIDGE, COLORADO
Figure 17 14C trend in the atmosphere. The Δ14C is the ratio of 14C to 
normal 12C. The smaller the ratio, the fewer 14C atoms are in the air. The decreas-
ing trend is due to 14C depleted CO2 emitted from burning fossil fuels.
(Source: NOAA Earth System Research Laboratory, Issue 6: Spring 2011.)
485

Global Climate Change
Most of these gases have anthropogenic sources and are 
increasing in concentration, raising the concern that future 
warming will extend well beyond the calculated effects of 
CO2 alone.
Water Vapor and Clouds. Water as vapor (a gas) or 
in clouds (an aerosol) absorbs infrared energy and is the 
most abundant GHG. Although it plays an important role 
in the greenhouse effect, its concentration in the tropo-
sphere is quite variable. Through evaporation and pre-
cipitation (the hydrologic cycle), water undergoes rapid 
turnover in the lower atmosphere. However, recent meas-
urements have found a general increase in water vapor in 
the atmosphere of 400 grams per cubic meter per decade 
since 1988. As temperatures over the land and oceans rise, 
evaporation increases, and the water vapor concentration, 
or humidity, rises. As the humidity rises, it traps more 
heat in the atmosphere, which causes even more warming. 
This phenomenon is called positive feedback and is one 
of the more disturbing features of future warming. The 
recent rise in atmospheric humidity is entirely consistent 
with the warming that has accompanied the rise in an-
thropogenic GHGs. Water vapor accounts for about 50% 
of the greenhouse effect, and clouds an additional 25%.
Methane. Methane (CH4), the third-most-important 
GHG, is 25 times more effective a GHG than is CO2, 
molecule for molecule. Primarily a product of microbial 
fermentative reactions, methane’s main natural sources 
are wetlands and green plants. Anthropogenic sources 
include livestock (methane is generated in the stomachs 
of ruminants), landfills, coal mines, natural-gas produc-
tion and transmission, rice cultivation, and manure. Al-
though methane is gradually destroyed in reactions with 
other gases in the atmosphere, it is being added to the at-
mosphere faster than it can be broken down. The concen-
tration of atmospheric methane has more than doubled 
since the Industrial Revolution, as revealed in core sam-
ples taken from glacial ice (Table 2). After rising at a rate 
of around 1.8 parts per billion (ppb) per year, methane 
It is estimated that land use changes such as defor-
estation add another 0.9 GtC annually to the carbon al-
ready coming from fossil fuel combustion. Over the past 
50 years, the release of carbon from fossil fuel use and de-
forestation has more than tripled. Fortunately, more than 
half of these carbon emissions are removed annually by 
so-called sinks.
Sinks. Careful calculations show that if all the CO2 
emitted from burning fossil fuels accumulated in the at-
mosphere, the concentration would rise by 3 or more ppm 
per year, not the actual 2 ppm charted in Figure 6. Thus, 
there must be carbon sinks that absorb CO2 and keep 
it from accumulating at a more rapid rate in the atmos-
phere. There is broad agreement that the oceans serve as 
a sink for about 30% of the CO2 emitted; some of this is 
due to the uptake of CO2 by phytoplankton, and some is 
a consequence of the undersaturation of CO2 in seawa-
ter. There are limitations to the ocean’s ability to absorb 
CO2, however, because only the top 300 m of the ocean 
are in direct contact with the atmosphere. (As mentioned 
earlier, the deep ocean layers do mix with the upper lay-
ers, but the mixing time is more than 1,000 years.) And, 
as the oceans acidify (precisely because they are absorb-
ing CO2), their capacity to continue this absorption will 
diminish.
The seasonal swings illustrated in Figure 6 show that 
biota can influence atmospheric CO2 levels. Measure-
ments indicate that terrestrial ecosystems also serve as 
carbon sinks. Indeed, these land ecosystems apparently 
have stored a net 25%, a figure that includes the losses 
from deforestation. As a result, terrestrial ecosystems, and 
especially forests, are increasingly valued for their ability 
to sequester carbon. A simple model of the major dynamic 
pools and fluxes of carbon, as presently understood, is 
presented in Figure 18.
Other Gases. Water vapor, methane, nitrous oxide, ozone, 
and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) also absorb infrared ra-
diation and add to the insulating effect of CO2 (Table 2). 
Figure 18 Global carbon cycle. Data are given 
in GtC (billions of metric tons of carbon). Pools are in the 
boxes, and fluxes (Gt C per year) are indicated by the ar-
rows.
(Source: U.S. DOE. 2008. Carbon Cycling and Biosequestration: 
Report from the March 2008 Workshop, DOE/SC-108, U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy Office of Science, pp. 2–3. http:// genomicscience.
energy.gov.)
Atmospheric CO2
800
Fossil fuel carbon
10,200
Terrestrial biosphere
Respiration
120
9.0
Combustion
Atmosphere-ocean exchange 
92 (±0.4)
90
123
Photosynthesis
Living – 550
Soils – 2,300
Oceanic dissolved
inorganic carbon
Surface – 1,000
Depths – 37,100
486

Global Climate Change
it is hoped that they will gradually decline in importance 
because of steps being taken to reduce their levels in the 
atmosphere.
The Atmosphere’s Control Knob. A recent report 
from the Goddard Institute for Space Studies14 examined 
the role of the different greenhouse gases in maintain-
ing temperatures on Earth. Some skeptics have claimed 
that because water vapor and clouds contribute the lion’s 
share of the greenhouse effect (75%), CO2 and the other 
greenhouse gases are not very important. On the contrary, 
Lacis and coauthors point out that, in fact, CO2 and the 
other noncondensing gases (water readily condenses and 
can be removed from the atmosphere) are the essential 
components of greenhouse warming because their “forc-
ing” role is what sustains the current levels of water vapor 
and clouds. They point out that without the stability of 
these noncondensing greenhouse gases, the water vapor 
and clouds could not maintain our current greenhouse 
conditions and Earth would be plunged into an icebound 
state. It is the radiative forcing of CO2 and the other gases 
that controls the feedback processes involved with water 
vapor and clouds, even though these on average contrib-
ute 75% of the greenhouse effect. Thus, CO2, because it is 
the most abundant noncondensing gas, is the key gas, the 
“control knob” that governs Earth’s temperature.
The IPCC AR4 Synthesis Report states: “Global atmos-
pheric concentrations of CO2, CH4 and N2O have increased 
markedly as a result of human activities since 1750 and now 
far exceed pre-industrial values determined from ice cores 
spanning many thousands of years . . . . There is very high 
confidence (90–100%) that the global average net effect of 
human activities since 1750 has been one of warming, with 
a radiative forcing of 11.6 W/m2.” Figure 19 shows the un-
derstanding of the various radiative forcing. It is evident that 
positive anthropogenic forcing far outweighs negative.
leveled off from 1999–2006 but is now increasing at a 
rate of 6 ppb/year. Measurements indicate that two-thirds 
of the present methane emissions are anthropogenic. Like 
CO2, methane is more abundant than it has been for at 
least the past 800,000 years.
Nitrous Oxide. Nitrous oxide (N2O) levels have in-
creased some 19% during the past 200 years and are still 
rising at a rate of 0.7 ppb per year. Sources of the gas in-
clude agriculture, the oceans, and biomass burning; lesser 
quantities come from fossil fuel burning and industry. 
N2O is produced in agriculture via anaerobic denitrifica-
tion processes, which occur wherever nitrogen (a major 
component of fertilizers) is highly available in soils. The 
buildup of nitrous oxide is particularly unwelcome be-
cause its long residence time (114 years) makes the gas a 
problem in not only the troposphere, where it contributes 
to warming, but also the stratosphere, where it contrib-
utes to the destruction of ozone.
Ozone. Although ozone in the troposphere is short-
lived and varies at many locations, it is a potent GHG. Some 
ozone from the stratosphere (where it is formed) descends 
into the troposphere, but the greatest source is anthropo-
genic, through the action of sunlight on pollutants. Estimates 
indicate that the concentration of ozone in the atmosphere 
has increased 36% since 1750. Major sources are automo-
tive traffic and burning forests and agricultural wastes.
CFCs and Other Halocarbons. Emissions of halocar-
bons are entirely anthropogenic. Like nitrous oxide, halocar-
bons are long lived and contribute to both global warming 
in the troposphere and ozone destruction in the stratosphere. 
Used as refrigerants, solvents, and fire retardants, some halo-
carbons have 10,000 times the capacity to absorb infrared 
radiation that CO2 does. The rate of production of halocar-
bons has declined due to adherence to the Montreal Proto-
col, and the concentration of halocarbons in the troposphere 
began declining in 1990 and is now only one-tenth of its 
former level.
Together the other anthropogenic GHGs are esti-
mated to account for 5% of greenhouse warming, about 
one-fourth of the impact of CO2. Although the tropo-
spheric concentrations of some of these gases are rising, 
tabLe 2 Anthropogenic Greenhouse Gases in the Atmosphere
Gas
Average Preindustrial 
Concentration (ppb)*
Approximate Current 
Concentration (ppb)
Radiative 
Forcing (W/m2)
Average Years 
in Atmosphere
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
280,000
392,000
1.76
ca. 120
Methane (CH4)
714
1,800
0.50
9
Nitrous oxide (N2O)
270
322
0.17
120
Chlorofluorocarbons 
and halocarbons
0
1.2
0.30
50–100
Sources: IPCC AR4; recent data from CDIAC.
*Parts per billion; 1,000 ppb 5 1 part per million (ppm).
14Andrew A. Lacis et al. “Atmospheric CO2: Principal Control Knob Governing 
Earth’s Temperature.” Science 330: 356–359. October 15, 2010. 
487

Global Climate Change
Modeling Global Climate. Weather forecasting employs 
powerful computers that are capable of handling large 
amounts of atmospheric data and applying mathematical 
equations to model the processes taking place in the atmos-
phere, oceans, and land. Forecasts of conditions for 72 hours 
or more have become quite accurate. Even though computing 
power has increased greatly in recent years, the somewhat 
chaotic behavior of weather parameters prevents longer-term 
forecasting.
Modeling climate is an essential strategy for exploring the 
potential future impacts of rising GHGs. Climatologists employ 
similarly powerful computers and have combined global at-
mospheric circulation patterns with ocean circulation, radiation 
feedback from clouds, and land surface processes to produce 
atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (AOGCMs) that 
are capable of simulating long-term climatic conditions. Many 
Future Changes in Climate
Higher temperatures, rising sea levels, heat waves, droughts, 
intense precipitation events, shifts in seasons, melting ice 
sheets, and Arctic thawing—these are happening right now, 
and GHG levels are continuing to rise as a result of human 
agency. The International Energy Agency projects a grow-
ing demand for fossil fuels as populations and economies 
grow. If global fossil fuel use continues on its present tra-
jectory, emissions of GHGs will increase 35% by 2030. By 
2050, emissions will increase 100%. Given the huge reserves 
of coal, ample supplies of natural gas, and remaining oil re-
serves, there is no reason to doubt this projection. However, 
it is clear that commitment to this future use of fossil fuels 
also will commit us to greater changes in climate. How much 
change, and when, would be a matter of guesswork if it were 
not for the use of climate models.
Figure 19 Radiative forcing. Positive and negative factors contribute to changes in energy balance within 
the atmosphere and at the Earth’s surface. The figure presents the human factors that have led to the current sus-
tained increase in radiative forcing (RF), in watts per square meter. The 90% confidence limits are indicated, and 
on the right, the relative radiative forcing and spatial scale of effects are shown, along with the level of scientific 
understanding.
(Source: S. Solomon et al., Eds. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 
Figure SPM 2.)
Long-lived
greenhouse gases
Ozone
Stratospheric
Land use
Tropospheric
Halocarbons
CH4
CO2
N2O
Black carbon
on snow
Radiative
Forcing Terms
Radiative forcing
Values (W/m2)
1.66 [1.49 to 1.83]
0.07 [0.02 to 0.12]
–0.5 [–0.9 to –0.1]
–0.7 [–1.8 to –0.3]
0.01 [0.003 to 0.03]
0.12 [0.06 to 0.30]
1.6 [0.6 to 2.4]
–0.05 [–0.15 to 0.05]
0.35 [0.25 to 0.65]
–0.2 [–0.4 to 0.0]
0.1 [0.0 to 0.2]
0.48 [0.43 to 0.53]
0.16 [0.14 to 0.18]
0.34 [0.31 to 0.37]
Spatial
scale
Global
Global
Global
Global
Continental
to global
Local to
continental
Continental
to global
Continental
to global
Continental
to global
Level of
scientific
understanding
High
High
Med
Low
Low
Low
Low
Med
– Low
Med
– Low
Surface albedo
Direct effect
Linear contrails
Solar irradiance
Natural
Anthropogenic
Total net
anthropogenic
Radiative Forcing (watts/meter2)
Total
Aerosol
Cloud albedo
effect
Stratospheric water
vapor from CH4
–2
–1
0
1
2
488

Global Climate Change
Figure 20, from the IPCC AR4, shows how closely models 
track the observed temperature changes from 1900 to 2004, 
taking into consideration natural and anthropogenic forcing. 
Earlier assessment reports projected global temperature in-
creases from 0.15 to 0.29°C per decade, based on less so-
phisticated models. These values compare favorably with the 
observed values of about 0.2°C per decade occurring since 
the  projections.
Running the Models. The AOGCMs are employed 
to examine the changes that might take place over the 21st 
century. A number of assumptions about GHG emissions are 
combined with a range of climate responses to GHG concen-
trations (called climate sensitivity) to project some 35 sce-
narios of 21st-century climate changes. In Figure 21, we show 
three scenarios to illustrate a range of climate responses. 
None of the scenarios considers the impacts of specific poli-
cies to reduce GHGs:
 • A2 is a high emissions scenario, reflecting a world of in-
dependent countries going their own way, with increas-
ing population and regionally varied economic growth; 
technological change is slower than in other scenarios.
 • A1B, a medium emissions scenario, reflects a world in 
which population reaches its peak in mid-century and 
then declines, economic growth is rapid, and new and 
efficient technologies are introduced; there is a balance 
across all energy sources, with no specific reliance on 
any one technology.
 • B1 is a lower emissions scenario, reflecting a more glo-
balized world with population developments as in A1B, 
but with effective global cooperation to reach sustain-
ability; in particular, technologies are clean and resource 
efficient.
Every scenario employed in the models generates a rise 
in CO2 concentrations and a corresponding rise in mean 
global temperature. Even if there were no increase at all in 
centers around the world are intensely engaged in exploring 
climate change by running models coupling the atmosphere, 
oceans, and land.
The best test of such models is the degree to which they 
can simulate present-day climate. A recent study compared 
some 50 climate models developed over the past two dec-
ades in order to answer this question: How well do coupled 
models simulate today’s climate?15 The authors concluded 
that the most recent models, especially those used for the 
IPCC AR4, have reached an unprecedented level of realism. 
15Thomas Reichler and Junsu Kim. “How Well Do Coupled Models Simulate 
 Today’s Climate?” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 89, No. 3 
(March 2008): 303–331.
Figure 20 Comparison between modeled and actual data on 
temperature anomalies, 1900–2000. Observed values are shown by 
the green line, and runs from 13 models are shown in color. (a) Model results with 
both anthropogenic and natural forcings. (b) Model results with only natural forc-
ings. The shaded areas mark the timing of major volcanic events.
(Source: S. Solomon et al., Eds. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Contribution 
of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2007), Figure 23, TS.)
Year
Temperature anomaly in °C
1900
–1.0
0.0
1.0
Year
Santa Maria
Observations
Models
Agung
El Chichon
Pinatubo
Santa Maria
Observations
Models
Agung
El Chichon
Pinatubo
ANTHROPOGENIC AND NATURAL FORCINGS
NATURAL FORCINGS ONLY
Temperature anomaly (°C)
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
0.5
–0.5
(a)
(b)
1900
–1.0
0.0
1.0
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
0.5
–0.5
Figure 21 Model projections of global mean warming. 
Projections are for the A2, A1B, and B1 scenarios starting in 2000 and extended 
to 2100. The orange curve from 2000 shows the forcing “commitment” if green-
house gas emissions were held constant in 2000. Annual carbon emissions and 
final CO2 concentrations corresponding to the three scenarios are also shown.
(Source: S. Solomon et al., Eds. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Contribution 
of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2007), Figure 32, TS.)
4
variability between models
C emissions
(Gt C)
CO2
(ppm)
28
830
16
700
12
540
emission
scenarios
high growth (A2)
moderate growth (A1B)
low growth (B1)
constant CO2
–1
1900
2000
2100
0
1
2
3
Global Surface Warming
489

Global Climate Change
 • The sea level, currently rising at a rate of 3.2 mm per 
year, will certainly continue to rise as a consequence of 
continued thermal expansion and snow and ice melt 
(Fig. 11). The range projected by the IPCC for the end 
of the 21st century is 7 to 23 inches (19 to 59 cm). Sig-
nificantly, the projections did not include melting of the 
Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets.
 • As the upper layers of the North Atlantic Ocean warm 
and become more fresh, the thermohaline circulation is 
expected to slow down, but no models show it collapsing.
 • Storm intensities are expected to increase, with higher 
wind speeds, more extreme wave heights, and more in-
tense precipitation; there will be fewer but more intense 
hurricanes in the Atlantic Basin.
 • Heat waves will become more frequent and longer 
lasting as the climate warms. Growing seasons will 
lengthen, and frost days will decrease in middle and 
high latitudes. Outbreaks of cold air in the Northern 
Hemisphere will diminish by 50% or more compared 
with the present.
 • Precipitation will decrease in already dry regions and in-
crease in already wet regions; there will be an increase 
in extremes of daily precipitation. Areas of extreme 
drought will expand, affecting up to 30% of the world’s 
land surface.
 • The changing climatic parameters will have profound 
impacts on ecosystems and species, the impacts accru-
ing as the temperature warms over time (Fig. 22): dam-
age to polar ecosystems (as we have seen), bleached and 
dying coral reefs, major loss of Amazon rain forests, 
widespread extinctions of species, and loss of ecosystem 
resilience.
 • Some impacts are positive: growing seasons would be 
longer in mid- to high latitudes, and temperatures would 
be more moderate in high-latitude countries like Canada 
and Russia.
A “business as usual” approach to climate change is best 
illustrated by the A2 scenario, which projects a temperature 
change between 3°C and 5°C. Note that the difference in tem-
perature between an ice age and the warm period following 
it is only 5°C, so in a century, unless some serious measures 
are taken, Earth’s climate will change dramatically. Respond-
ing to these changes will likely involve unprecedented and 
costly adjustments. The impact on natural ecosystems could 
be highly destabilizing. For the agricultural community, 
the greatest difficulty in coping with climatic change is not 
knowing what to expect. Already, farmers lose an average of 
one in five crop plantings because of unfavorable weather. As 
the climate shifts, the vagaries of weather will become more 
pronounced, and crop losses are likely to increase.
Sea Level. There is great uncertainty about the magni-
tude of the rise in sea level. A half-meter rise in sea level 
will flood many coastal areas and make them much more 
GHGs, current GHG concentrations represent a commit-
ment to further temperature increase due to the delay in the 
release to the atmosphere of energy stored in the oceans. 
That commitment is on the order of about 0.1°C per decade 
for the next several decades, as shown in Figure 21 (the or-
ange curve). Approximate peak carbon emissions and CO2 
concentrations corresponding with the three scenarios are 
also shown in Figure 21.
Projections. The AR4 examined the implications of 
the model runs and projected the potential future climate 
changes that could be expected, given the range of scenar-
ios and also the current picture of climate change already 
under way. The major consequence of rising GHG levels dur-
ing the 21st century is rising temperatures—the amount of 
rise depending on energy choices and other factors, such as 
population growth. Rising global temperatures are linked to 
two major impacts: regional climatic changes and a rise in 
sea level. Both of these effects show up in all of the models, 
though the details of regional changes from climate models 
are very uncertain. Some of the most significant findings are 
presented here:
 • Equilibrium climate sensitivity—the sustained change 
in mean global temperature that occurs if atmospheric 
CO2 is held at double preindustrial values, or about 
550 ppm—is in the range of 2–4.5°C, with a median 
of 3°C. A more recent estimate of climate sensitivity,16 
based on past glacial temperature ranges, suggests a 
lower range: 1.7–2.6°C, median 2.3° (though there are 
many uncertainties in this estimate).
 • The actual warming of the 21st century will be a conse-
quence of GHG emissions, whatever they are. The model 
scenarios project a range of surface warming in 2100 
compared with 1980–2000; for the B1, A1B, and A2 sce-
narios, the estimates average 1.8°C, 2.8°C, and 3.4°C, 
respectively. The projected rate of warming for the next 
two decades is 0.2°C per decade.
 • The warming is expected to occur in geographical pat-
terns similar to those of recent years: warming greatest 
at the higher latitudes and in continental interiors and 
least over the North Atlantic and the southern oceans. 
However, it will be warmer everywhere.
 • Because of the warming climate, snow cover and sea ice 
will decrease, possibly fully opening up the Arctic Ocean 
by mid-century. Glaciers and ice caps will continue to 
shrink, resulting in a rise in sea level. In the Arctic, up 
to 90% of the upper layer of permafrost is expected to 
thaw, creating a positive climate feedback as methane 
and CO2 are released.
 • Because the oceans will be absorbing so much CO2, they 
will continue to acidify, threatening coral reefs (which 
will already be stressed by warming tropical seas) and 
shellfish everywhere.
16Andreas Schmittner et al. “Climate Sensitivity Estimated from Temperature Re-
constructions of the Last Glacial Maximum.” Science 334: 1385–1388. December 
9, 2011.
490

Global Climate Change
understand global climate change. One of the tasks of the 
CCSP has been to communicate the findings of the scien-
tific community to policy makers and the broader public 
by publishing reports on climate change issues. These re-
ports, covering a broad range of topics, are available on the 
Internet (www.globalchange.gov) and are very well done.  
The 2009 report, Global Climate Change Impacts in the 
United States,17 draws from 19 existing CCSP reports and 
other peer-reviewed scientific assessments, such as those from 
the IPCC. It is designated as the United Synthesis Product 
(USP) and provides a detailed look at the impacts of climate 
change on various sectors (e.g., transportation, agriculture, 
human health) and regions (e.g., Northwest, Southwest, 
Northeast, Alaska) of the United States. Some highlights of 
the report are worth examining.
National Climate Change. Most of the global impacts 
of climate change—temperature increases, droughts, inten-
sity of hurricanes, seasonal changes, increased intensity of 
heavy rain events, floods, rising sea level, large wildfires, 
and melting glaciers, among others—have already been ob-
served in the United States. The projected future changes 
just reviewed will certainly also affect the United States. 
However, national and regional climates vary more than 
global climate, and the different regions of the United States 
have experienced different impacts and will do so in the 
prone to damage from storms, forcing people to abandon 
properties and migrate inland. A 1-meter rise would flood 
17% of Bangladesh, creating tens of millions of refugees 
and destroying half of the country’s rice lands. As we saw, 
for many of the small oceanic nations, a rise in sea level 
means obliteration, not just alteration. Models suggest 
that if the mean global temperature rises as much as 3°C 
above present levels, it will set up conditions that could 
cause widespread loss of the Greenland Ice Sheet. Recent 
studies have made it clear that the IPCC projections of sea 
level rise are strikingly on the low side. These studies indi-
cate that 21st-century warming would lead to a sea level 
rise of close to 2 meters, considering the plausible rates 
of melting of glaciers that run into the sea (in Greenland 
and Antarctica). And once atmospheric GHG levels are 
stabilized (assuming they are), temperatures and sea levels 
will continue to rise for hundreds of years because of the 
slow response time of the oceans. The expected continued 
rise would cause disasters in most coastal areas, which 
are home to half the world’s population and its business 
and commerce.
Climate Change Impacts 
in the United States
In 2002, the Bush administration launched the Climate 
Change Science Program (CCSP—now called the Global 
Change Research Program, or GCRP) to integrate the efforts 
of many federal agencies involved in the scientific effort to 
Figure 22 Global warm-
ing impacts on biologi-
cal systems. The impacts 
build up with greater tempera-
ture changes over time. The op-
timistic scenario is B1 from IPCC 
AR4; the pessimistic scenario is 
A2 from IPCC AR4.
(Source: Richard Kerr, “How Urgent 
Is Climate Change?” by Richard 
A. Kerr, from SCIENCE, November 
2007, Volume 318(5854). Copyright 
© 2007 by AAAS. Reprinted with 
permission. 
–0.5
0.0
Temperature change (°C) above preindustrial
0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5
4.5
1900
2000
2100
2200
> 4°C: Major extinctions around the globe 
≥ 40% of global ecosystems transformed
≥ 15% of global ecosystems transformed
Few ecosystems can adapt
Extinctions of 15%–40% of endemic species
in global biodiversity hot spots
Widespread coral mortality
~20%–30% of species committed to extinction
Major (≈20%–80%) loss of Amazon rainforest
Loss of ~10%–80% of various fauna in S. Africa
Coral reefs bleached
~10%–15% of species committed to extinction
Loss of 8% of freshwater fish habitat in N. America
Polar ecosystems increasingly damaged
Amphibian extinctions increasing on mountains
Optimistic scenario
Pessimistic scenario
Observed
17Thomas R. Karl, Jerry M. Melillo, and Thomas C. Peterson (Eds.). Global 
 Climate Change Impacts in the United States, Cambridge University Press, 2009.
491

Global Climate Change
Figure 23 Climate on the move in the Midwest. Model projections 
of summer average temperature and precipitation changes in Illinois and Michi-
gan for mid-century and end of century. The lower emissions scenario is IPPC B1, 
and the higher emissions scenario is IPPC A2. Note that both states are projected 
to get considerably warmer and have less summer  precipitation.
(Source: CSSP, Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States: Unified Synthesis 
 Product, 2009.)
Lower emissions
scenario
Higher emissions
scenario
end-of-century
end-of-century
end-of-century
mid-century
mid-century
mid-century
mid-century
end-of-century
ILLINOIS
MICHIGAN
future. Following are key observations from the report (and 
more recent updates):
 • The average U.S. temperature rose more than 2°F over 
the previous 50 years and will rise more; heat waves 
could become commonplace in the next 30 years.
 • Precipitation increased an average of about 5% over the 
previous 50 years. Shifting patterns have generally made 
wet areas wetter, while dry areas have become drier. This 
is projected to continue.
 • The heaviest downpours have increased approximately 
20% on average in the past century, and this is projected 
to continue, with the strongest increases in the wettest 
places.
 • Southwestern North America is experiencing the worst 
drought since 1900; future projections suggest that 
droughts could worsen across the region.
 • Many types of extreme weather events, in addition to 
heavy downpours, have become more frequent and 
intense during the past 40 to 50 years; 2011 was a 
record year for devastating weather in the United States, 
with 12  billion-dollar disasters and more than 1,000 
deaths.18
 • The destructive energy of Atlantic hurricanes has in-
creased in recent decades and is projected to increase 
further in this century.
 • Sea level rose 2 to 5 inches during the previous 50 years 
along many U.S. coasts; coastal cities with some 40 mil-
lion people are at risk because of the likely rise in sea 
level linked to 21st-century GHG emissions.
 • For cold-season storms outside the tropics, storm tracks 
are shifting northward, and the strongest storms are pro-
jected to become stronger.
 • Arctic sea ice is declining rapidly, and this is projected to 
continue.
Some interesting graphics are used to illustrate regional 
climate changes. For example, for the Midwest, the summer 
climate in Illinois and Michigan is shown shifting southward 
and westward (Fig. 23) as temperatures increase and precipi-
tation decreases. Significantly, the impacts of climate change 
in Alaska are greater than those in any other region of the 
United States. Average temperatures are projected to rise 4°F 
to 7°F by mid-century and could rise 8°F to 13°F by the end 
of the century if global emissions continue on their present 
course. The USP report’s concluding thoughts emphasize the 
importance of involving scientists, policy makers, and the 
public in “designing, initiating, and evaluating mitigation 
and adaptation strategies. . . . The best decisions about these 
strategies will come when there is widespread understanding 
of the complex issue of climate change—the science and its 
many implications for our  nation.”
We turn now to our society’s response to climate change.
3  Response to Climate Change
The world’s industries and transportation networks are so 
locked into the use of fossil fuels that high emissions of CO2 
and other GHGs seem certain to continue for the foresee-
able future, bringing on significant climate change. One 
possible response to this situation is adaptation. That is, we 
must anticipate some harm to natural and human systems 
and should plan adaptive responses to lessen the vulnerabil-
ity of people, their property, and the biosphere to coming 
changes.
Yet it seems more sensible to reduce the rate at which 
emissions are added to the atmosphere and, eventually, 
bring about a sustainable balance—though no one thinks 
that doing so will be easy. This is the mitigation response: 
Take action to reduce emissions. Before we deal with these 
responses, we need to address an important question: Why is 
there still so much doubt about climate change?
Skeptics, deniers, and Ethics
The scientific consensus on global climate change is clear: 
Global warming is well under way, and the consequences 
18Climate Central. “Top 10 States Ravaged by Extreme Weather in 2011.” Grist, 
December 30, 2011. www.grist.org. December 31, 2011.
492

Global Climate Change
grants to keep their laboratories and research empires in 
business.
“Climategate,” as it is called, involved the illegal hacking 
into computers at the University of East Anglia, a center of 
climate research. Private e-mails between climate researchers 
were made public, some of which were purported to reveal 
conspiratorial correspondence to falsify or hide data. In fact, 
the correspondence was taken out of context and misinter-
preted, deliberately, to suggest dishonesty on the part of the 
scientists. Several high-level investigations into the episode 
have cleared the scientists of any fraud or scientific malprac-
tice. “Climategate,” however, fed into the true conspiracy to 
deny that climate change was occurring, giving deniers a per-
fect occasion to question the scientists’ integrity and thus in-
fluence public opinion against climate change science.
Who are these “deniers”? Very often, they are conserva-
tive “think tanks” that are ideologically opposed to regu-
lation. They see the kinds of international agreements and 
national public policies needed to address climate change 
as threats to free market capitalism. They are often sup-
ported by industries that stand to lose profits if these policy 
changes are put in place—the fossil fuel industries (especially 
 ExxonMobil), the utilities, and their public supporting body, 
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Washington and Cook doc-
ument the work of these organizations and the range of argu-
ments they employ, and one of the authors (Cook) supports 
a Web site that counters virtually every “denialist” argument 
(www.skepticalscience.com) with careful reasoning and data. 
If the stakes were not so high, one could pass off this denial 
phenomenon as a sociological aberration. However, given 
the high stakes, the denial of climate change lands us firmly 
in the domain of ethics.
A Perfect Moral Storm. International treaties and na-
tional policies are needed to move us in the direction of miti-
gation and adaptation. But why should we do it? And how 
should we proceed?
In a recent book,23 philosopher Stephen Gardiner refers 
to our flawed attempts to address climate change as an ethi-
cal failure—in fact, a “perfect moral storm” (using the meta-
phor of Sebastian Junger’s book The Perfect Storm, a true 
account of the loss of the fishing boat Andrea Gail in a rare 
convergence of three bad storms in the North Atlantic). Gar-
diner’s three factors that converge are of deep moral signifi-
cance: 1) climate change is a global “storm,” one where the 
wealthy nations are able to shape what is done about it, pos-
sibly to the detriment of the poorer nations; 2) it is also an 
intergenerational storm, where the present generation has the 
power to affect future generations, who have no voice in the 
matter; 3) the third is a theoretical storm, in that the climate 
change threat is unprecedented and lacks adequate moral 
theories to give guidance for appropriate actions. The con-
vergence of these three interacting “storms,” says Gardiner, 
has led to our present lack of real progress in addressing the 
looming threat of global climate change.
of further climate change are potentially catastrophic. In-
ternational concern about this issue has led to a number 
of conferences designed to address climate change. In the 
United States, however, public opinion polls reveal a high 
level of skepticism about global warming. This attitude 
has puzzled scientists, who have seen the evidence for glo-
bal warming growing stronger all the time. Some recent 
work has reviewed this discrepancy,19 pointing out that 
most people do not spend time examining the scientific ev-
idence but instead form their opinions based on the views 
of organizations and media sources they trust. The high 
degree of public skepticism, then, can be traced to several 
factors:
 • A deliberate campaign to undermine trust in climate sci-
ence by organizations and corporations that stand to lose 
influence and profits if carbon emissions are curtailed.20 
This campaign has systematically spread  disinformation 
in order to confuse the public.21
 • A political divide that sees conservatives and Republicans 
showing much more skepticism about climate change 
than liberals and Democrats; this is especially evident in 
Congress, where the divide is virtually  unanimous.
 • An unfortunate release of hacked e-mails from a climate 
research group in the UK in late 2009 that has been 
called “Climategate” (more about this later) and led to 
an erosion of trust in climate scientists.
 • The coincidence of an economic crisis in the United 
States that has focused the public’s attention on eco-
nomic issues and provided fuel for the campaigns deter-
mined to attack the public’s trust in climate science and 
policy making.
Which Is It? True skeptics are those who seek after truth, 
looking for evidence that will guide them to correct conclu-
sions. Given the substantial public skepticism about global 
warming, it is fair to ask: Is this really skepticism, or is it 
simply misguided trust?
In a very insightful book, Haydn Washington and John 
Cook address the issue of those who are denying climate 
change.22 The authors charge that this is not a matter of 
skepticism; on the contrary, it is more accurate to use the 
label “deniers” to describe those who are challenging climate 
change science. In effect, they are either refusing to accept the 
evidence or possibly denying a truth they do not like. Of the 
numerous arguments presented by the deniers, one in par-
ticular has gained credence because of “Climategate.” The 
argument is that the world’s climate scientists are engaged in 
a conspiracy to deceive in order to continue to get  lucrative 
20Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway. Merchants of Doubt. Bloomsbury Press, 
New York. 2010.
21Steven A. Kolmes. “Climate Change: A Disinformation Campaign.” Environment 
53: 33–37. July/August, 2011.
22Haydn Washington and John Cook. Climate Change Denial: Heads in the Sand. 
Earthscan. Washington, DC, 2011.
19Sandra T. Marquart-Pyatt et al. “Understanding Public Opinion on Climate 
Change: A Call for Research.” Environment 53: 38–42. July/August 2011. 
23Stephen M. Gardiner. A Perfect Moral Storm: The Ethical Tragedy of Climate 
Change. Oxford University Press, New York. 2011.
493

Global Climate Change
25Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis 
Report, Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment. 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Geneva, Switzerland: 
IPCC, 2007).
24Nicholas Stern. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review 
 (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
To simplify what could become a complex philosophical 
discussion, here are three ethical principles that speak to the 
issue:
1. The first is the precautionary principle, as articulated in 
the 1992 Rio Declaration. The principle states, “In order 
to protect the environment, the precautionary approach 
shall be widely applied by States according to their ca-
pabilities. Where there are threats of serious or irrevers-
ible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be 
used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures 
to prevent environmental degradation.” Employing this 
principle is like taking out insurance: We are taking 
measures to avoid a highly costly, but uncertain, situa-
tion (albeit one that is appearing quite likely). The risk 
of serious harmful consequences is real, the scientific 
consensus is strong, but the political response, as we will 
see, is still inadequate.
2. The second is the polluter pays principle. Polluters 
should pay for the damage their pollution causes. This 
principle has long been part of environmental legisla-
tion. CO2 is where it is because the developed countries 
(and now many developing countries) have burned so 
much fossil fuel since the beginning of the industrial era. 
It has become clear that CO2 is a pollutant.
3. The third is the equity principle. Currently, the richest 
1 billion people produce 55% of CO2 emissions, while 
the poorest 1 billion produce only 3%. International 
equity and intergenerational equity are ethical princi-
ples that should compel the rich and privileged to care 
about those generations that follow—especially those in 
the poor countries who are even now experiencing the 
consequences of global climate change. Climate change 
is going to cause harm, as we have seen. If we are able 
to take action that will prevent both present and future 
harm, it would be morally wrong not to do so.
And so, what shall we do?
Mitigation
It will be costly to take the actions needed to mitigate the 
causes of climate change and to adapt to changes that are 
unavoidable, but the costs of inaction will be far higher. If 
climate change is unchecked, every country will be affected, 
but it will be most disastrous for the world’s poorest coun-
tries and people. Climatic disruptions will create hundreds of 
millions of refugees. Conflict and terrorism will surely follow 
in the wake of such deprivation, as people are radicalized by 
their plight. The impacts on the natural world will be equally 
severe, as we have seen (Fig. 22).
Some attempts have been made to put a price tag on in-
action; these are admittedly rough estimates, but ones based 
on sound analyses. For the United States, one study by the 
Natural Resources Defense Council estimates a total eco-
nomic cost of global warming at 3.6% of gross domestic 
product (GDP) by 2100, or almost $3.8 trillion (in today’s 
dollars). For just four impacts—hurricane damage, energy 
costs, real estate losses, and water costs—the price tag comes 
to almost $1.9 trillion. The Stern Review,24 an economic 
analysis commissioned by the British government, estimated 
that inaction on global climate change would result in eco-
nomic loss equivalent to 5% to 20% of global GDP per year 
for the indefinite future. Given the economic, environmental, 
and social costs of the consequences of unrestrained release of 
GHGs, it would seem that mitigation is absolutely essential. 
We need to reduce emissions of GHGs in order to prevent 
disaster. The next question is: What should be our target?
Achieving Stabilization. The stated objective of the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) is to 
stabilize the GHG content of the atmosphere at levels and 
on a time scale that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system. This means that GHG 
emissions must be brought under control to the point where 
they are no longer accumulating in the atmosphere, and it 
must be done before global temperatures rise to dangerous 
levels. Earth history tells us that with 3°C global warming, 
equilibrium sea level could be at least 80 feet (25 m) higher 
than today. This is clearly dangerous to human civilization 
and Earth systems in general and to be avoided. However, 
with current warming at about 0.8°C above pre-industrial 
levels and more warming already in the pipeline, we could 
get to 2°C in a couple of decades. Many feel that 2°C could 
well be a tipping point, a point beyond which irreversible—
and clearly dangerous—runaway climate change occurs no 
matter what we do.
So we have a target: hold global temperatures to 2°C 
above pre-industrial levels, which corresponds to a stable 
concentration of CO2 (with the other GHGs included) in the 
atmosphere of around 450 ppm. To achieve stabilization at 
450 ppm will require major changes in our energy systems. 
Current carbon emissions of 33 GtCO2/year will have to fall 
to 7 GtCO2/year by 2100 and then drop even further. This is 
the inconvenient truth Al Gore referred to in his 2006 film 
by the same name on global warming. The IPCC AR4 Syn-
thesis Report presented an analysis of six stabilization sce-
narios and their correspondence with global temperatures 
and sea level rise (Table 3). Global emissions of GHGs cor-
responding to the different scenarios are shown in Figure 24a, 
along with the time course of allowable emissions. The re-
lationship between temperature increase above preindus-
trial levels and GHG stabilization-level concentration for 
the six scenarios is shown in Figure 24b. The IPCC states: 
“In order to stabilize the concentration of GHGs in the at-
mosphere, emissions would need to peak and decline there-
after. The lower the stabilization level, the more quickly this 
peak and decline would need to occur.”25 Clearly, the only 
category in Table  3 and Figure 24 that is consistent with 
the FCCC objective of avoiding “dangerous anthropogenic  
494

Global Climate Change
interference” is category I. Again, from the IPCC: “Mitiga-
tion efforts over the next two to three decades will have a 
large impact on opportunities to achieve lower stabilization 
levels.”
We turn now to the question of what the international 
community has done in response to global climate change.
International Conferences.  One of the five documents 
signed by heads of state at the UN Conference on Environ-
ment and Development’s Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 
1992 was the Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(FCCC). This convention agreed to the goal of stabilizing 
GHG levels in the atmosphere, starting by reducing GHG 
tabLe 3 Stabilization Scenarios and Corresponding Global Temperatures and Sea Level Rise
Category
CO2-equivalent 
concentration at 
stabilization (including 
all GHGs) (ppm)
Peaking 
year for CO2
emissions
Change in  
global CO2 emissions 
in 2050 (% of 2000 
emissions) 
Global avg.  
temperature  
increase at 
equilibrium (°C)
Global avg. sea level  
rise above preindustrial  
at equilibrium from  
thermal expansion (m) 
I
445–490
2000–2015
285 to 250
2.0–2.4
0.4–1.4
II
490–535
2000–2020
260 to 230
2.4–2.8
0.5–1.7
III
535–590
2010–2030
230 to 15
2.8–3.2
0.6–1.9
IV
590–710
2020–2060
110 to 160
3.2–4.0
0.6–2.4
V
710–855
2050–2080
125 to 185
4.0–4.9
0.8–2.9
VI
 855–1130
2060–2090
190 to 1140
4.9–6.1
1.0–3.7
Source: IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report (Geneva, Switzerland: IPCC, 2008).
Figure 24 CO2 emissions and equilibrium  temperature increases for a range of 
 stabilization levels. (a) Global CO2 emissions for 1940 to 2000 and projected emissions ranges for six 
categories of stabilization scenarios from 2000 to 2100. The thickness of each band represents the uncertainty 
inherent in the model projections. The dashed lines (post-SRES range) show the upper and lower emissions range 
of more recently developed scenarios. (b) Corresponding relationship between a CO2 stabilization target and the 
likely equilibrium global temperature increase above preindustrial. The black line through the middle shows the 
best  estimate of the response of temperature to GHG concentrations (climate sensitivity); the orange and blue 
lines show the upper and lower bounds of climate sensitivities.
(Source: IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report, Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment. 
 Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Geneva, Switzerland: IPCC, 2007),  Figure 5-1.)
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
Year
(a)
(b)
2040
2060
2080
2100
–20
0
World CO2 emissions (GtCO2/yr)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Historical emissions
Stabilization level
300
400
500
700
800
600
900
1000
280
GHG concentration stabilization level (ppm CO2–eq)
0
2
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
4
6
8
10
Equilibrium global average temperature
increase above pre-indstrial (°C)
I 
: 445–490 ppm CO2–eq
II : 490–535 ppm CO2–eq
III : 535–590 ppm CO2–eq
IV : 590–710 ppm CO2–eq
V : 710–855 ppm CO2–eq
VI : 855–1130 ppm CO2eq
post-SRES range
emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000 in all industrial-
ized nations. Countries were to achieve the goal by voluntary 
means. Five years later, it was obvious that the voluntary ap-
proach was failing. All the developed countries except those 
of the European Union increased their GHG emissions by 
7% to 9% in the ensuing five years. The developing countries 
increased theirs by 25%.
Kyoto, 1997. Prompted by a coalition of island na-
tions (whose very existence is threatened by global climate 
change), the third Conference of Parties to the FCCC met 
in Kyoto, Japan, in December 1997 to craft a binding agree-
ment on reducing GHG emissions. In Kyoto, 38 industrial 
and former eastern bloc nations agreed to reduce emissions 
495

Global Climate Change
26United Nations Environment Program. Bridging the Emissions Gap: A 
UNEP Synthesis Report. November 2011. www.unep.org/publications/ebooks/
bridgingemissionsgap. December 28, 2011.
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1990
2060
2050
2040
2030
2020
2010
Reference
International pledges
Likely below 2°C
2000
Global greenhouse
gas emissions (GtCO2eq.)
The
Gap
Figure 25 The climate emissions gap.The plot shows estimates of 
global GHG emissions in gigatons of CO2 equivalents (other gases equated to 
CO2). The reference plot (blue line) shows emissions growth in the absence of the 
targets and pledges, the orange line shows the pledges made by countries follow-
ing the Copenhagen Accord, and the brown line shows the emissions pathway 
needed to keep the growth in global temperature below 2°C.
(Source: Climate Action Tracker, Dec. 11, 2011. Copyright © 2009 by Ecofys and Climate 
 Analytics.)
of six GHGs to 5.2% below 1990 levels, to be achieved by 
2012 (the Kyoto Protocol). The signatories to this agreement 
are called the Annex I parties; all others (the developing 
countries) are non–Annex I parties. At the conference, the de-
veloping countries refused to agree to any reductions, argu-
ing that the developed countries had created the problem and 
that it was only fair that the developing countries continue 
on their path to development as the developed countries had, 
energized by fossil fuels. This stance was in accord with the 
FCCC principle of “common but differentiated responsibili-
ties.” Under this principle, each nation must address climate 
change, but its priorities and efforts could differ according 
to national circumstances. Thus, the developing countries ar-
gued that their first priority was to alleviate poverty, whereas 
the developed countries had no such excuse.
The signers of the Kyoto Protocol had a great deal of 
flexibility in deciding how they would achieve their GHG 
reductions. The most obvious choices involve renewable en-
ergy, possibly nuclear energy, and a variety of energy conser-
vation strategies. They could plant forests to act as carbon 
sinks or engage in emissions trading with other Annex I par-
ties, either buying or selling assigned emissions amounts to 
meet targets. They could even implement projects that reduce 
emissions in other countries and earn credits toward their 
target emissions.
The targeted reductions of the Kyoto Protocol will not 
stabilize atmospheric concentrations of GHGs. The IPCC cal-
culates that it would take immediate reductions in emissions 
of at least 60% worldwide to stabilize GHG concentrations at 
today’s levels. Since this has no chance of happening, the con-
centration of GHGs in the atmosphere will continue to rise. 
The major weakness of the Kyoto Protocol is that the world’s 
largest GHG emitters—India, China, and the United States—
are not participating. The United States withdrew from the 
treaty in 2001, and recently, Canada, Japan, and Russia with-
drew also, with the result that Kyoto now only covers 13% of 
global emissions. Nevertheless, Kyoto was an important first 
step toward binding agreements to stabilize the atmosphere.
Bali, 2007. In December 2007, a UN-sponsored climate 
conference held in Bali addressed the need for greater cuts in 
GHG emissions when the Kyoto Protocol expires in 2012. At 
the Bali meeting, parties to the FCCC agreed to what was es-
sentially a “road map” to future negotiations. It was agreed that 
“deep cuts in global emissions will be required,” to achieve the 
objective of avoiding dangerous climate change, and a negotia-
tion process was established, to prepare for the next meeting.
Copenhagen, 2009. The next major climate conference 
was held in December 2009 in Copenhagen. There, delegates 
from around the world met to once again attempt to find 
agreement on climate change policy. On the plus side, the 
Copenhagen Accord was agreed to by 187 out of 192 coun-
tries. This accord amounted to pledges to implement actions 
that would limit global temperature increases to 2°C above 
pre-industrial levels, and a commitment by developed and 
developing countries to set countrywide emissions targets to 
be achieved by 2020. Still, nothing in the way of a binding 
agreement was reached there, nor was there even a timetable 
for reaching such agreements.
Cancún, 2010. At Cancún, negotiations by delegates 
appeared to get back on track after the disappointing Copen-
hagen meeting. Delegates approved the mitigation pledges 
made by all major GHG emitting countries in accordance 
with the Copenhagen Accord and established a Green Cli-
mate Fund of $30 billion to help the more vulnerable de-
veloping countries fund their mitigation pledges and cope 
with impacts of climate change. Also, mechanisms were set 
up to reward developing countries for maintaining their for-
ests (REDD, for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and 
Forest Degradation). Delegates postponed any decision on 
extending the Kyoto Protocol. There were still no binding 
agreements on emissions.
Durban, 2011. Once again, meeting in December as 
the 17th Conference of the Parties to the FCCC, delegates 
debated and negotiated what to do. In the end, they reached 
an agreement (the Durban Platform) to begin negotiations 
that would lead to a legally binding agreement by 2015, to 
take effect by 2020. The agreement aims at ensuring that 
emissions reductions will meet the goal of keeping global 
temperature rise below 2°C. Delegates also agreed to estab-
lish a second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, to 
begin when the first period ends (2012).
The Gap. At the Durban meeting, the United Nations En-
vironment Program released a report26 it was commissioned 
to develop. The report was based on the question of how the 
pledges made by each country, based on the Copenhagen 
Accord, help meet the 2°C target. The report showed that 
the pledges fall short of the target; thus, there is a climate 
emissions gap to be addressed, a gap of between 6 and 11 
GtCO2, depending on how well the pledges are kept (Fig. 25). 
The report states that to stay within the 2°C limit, emissions 
would have to peak before 2020, and that won’t happen un-
less new emissions targets are established. It is possible to  
496

Global Climate Change
Scientific Research. The Global Change Research Act 
of 1990 established a policy of support for research on cli-
mate change; the act mandates an interagency approach, 
where all of the agencies and departments that might be in-
volved in climate change research are to coordinate their ac-
tivities and programs as part of the official Global Change 
Research Program (GCRP). Lead agencies in this effort have 
been NOAA, NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the 
EPA. One example of the GCRP’s effort has been the 20 re-
ports of the Climate Change Science Program already men-
tioned. Budgetary support for the GCRP has been about $2 
billion per year. Hundreds of U.S. scientists have been in the 
lead in conducting research on climate change and publish-
ing their work, especially as they have participated in the 
IPCC assessments.
National Legislation. The U.S. Congress has failed to 
enact a comprehensive set of policies to address global cli-
mate change. It came close when a Democrat-controlled 
House passed the American Clean Energy and Security Act 
in 2009, which would establish an emissions reduction and 
trading plan called cap-and-trade (see Table 4), but the bill 
died in the Senate where Republican opposition was enough 
to prevent its passage. However, the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act has invested more than $43 billion in the 
close the gap, says the report, but countries need to realize 
that what they are pledging just won’t cut it.
Clearly, international accords are important, but it is 
legislative action at the national level that brings about emis-
sions reductions. A research team from the UK recently ana-
lyzed national-level legislation in 16 countries that are major 
GHG emitters.27 The study was encouraging: It reported on 
155 existing climate change-related laws that were in effect in 
the countries and found that many approaches were used to 
accomplish the goal of reducing GHG emissions and prepare 
the country for the impacts of climate change. This brings us 
to the question: What in fact has the United States been doing 
about global climate change and the FCCC?
U.S. Policy. Climate change policy in the United States 
can be described in four venues: (1) scientific research, 
(2)  national legislation, (3) regulatory action, and (4) state 
and local action. Of course, one major policy move was made 
by President George W. Bush in 2001 when he announced 
that the United States would withdraw from the Kyoto Pro-
tocol agreement.
27Terry Townshend et al. “Legislating Climate Change on a National Level.” Envi-
ronment 53: 5–17. September/October 2011.
tabLe 4 Options for Mitigation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Cap-and-trade. Place a cap on GHG emissions; for CO2, this can be accomplished by limiting the use of fossil fuels in industry and transportation. 
Rights to emit GHGs are allocated to different companies and are tradable in a market-based system. This has worked well internationally (in the 
EU), where different countries are allocated permits and can trade with other countries. It is anticipated that the cap will be reduced gradually until 
a stabilized atmosphere is achieved. This option generates potentially large revenues, which can be put to use in ways that can alleviate some of the 
problems created by the program.
Renewable energy. Invest in and deploy an increasing percentage of energy in the form of renewable-energy technologies: wind power, solar 
collectors, solar thermal energy, photovoltaics, biofuels, hydrogen-powered vehicles, and geothermal energy, among others.
Carbon capture and sequestration. Sequester CO2 emitted from burning fossil fuels at power plants by capturing it at the site of emission and 
pumping it into deep, porous underground formations. This is especially vital for coal-burning power plants, as coal is the most abundant fossil fuel 
energy source for many major GHG emitters. This is expected to push electricity prices up about $0.04 per kilowatt-hr.
Nuclear power. Encourage the development of nuclear power, first resolving issues concerning cost-effectiveness, reliability, spent fuel, and high-
level waste.
Reforestation. Stop the loss of tropical forests and encourage the planting of trees and other vegetation over vast areas now suffering from 
deforestation. Trees and other vegetation provide a sink for carbon that removes CO2 from the atmosphere.
Efficiency. Make energy conservation rules much more stringent. (Tighten building codes to require more insulation, use energy-efficient lighting, 
and so forth.)
Mileage standards. Reduce the amount of fuels used in transportation by raising mileage standards, encouraging car pooling, and stimulating mass 
transit in urban areas.
Subsidies. Remove fossil fuel subsidies like depletion allowances, tax relief to consumers, support for oil and gas exploration, and the substantial 
costs of maintaining access to Middle Eastern oil.
Population growth. Reducing population growth would make a substantial contribution to GHG emissions reduction, especially in the 
economically robust developing countries.
Carbon tax. Levy a tax on all fuels according to the amount of carbon dioxide that they produce when consumed. Such a tax, proponents believe, 
would provide both incentives to use renewable sources, which would not be taxed, and disincentives to consume fossil fuels. This puts the polluter-
pays principle into practice.
497

Global Climate Change
tabLe 5 Adaptation Strategies
All Countries
• Agriculture: Farmers shift to climate-resistant crops or crops more appropriate to the new climate regime. Irrigation is expanded to areas once 
fed only by rain.
• Structural concerns: Societies invest to reduce the costs and disruption from extreme weather events like storms, floods, droughts (e.g., 
seawalls, new reservoirs, revegetating coastal wetlands).
• Emergency preparedness: Societies invest in early-warning systems, high-quality climate information, intervention when needed (e.g., heat 
wave warnings, heavy precipitation events, shelters for those displaced or affected by events).
• Reducing risks: Societies establish a financial safety net to help their poorest members, providing insurance that accurately reflects new risks to 
discourage poor choices.
developing Countries
• Promoting development: Investments are made in health, education, economic opportunity, and food security (to lower people’s vulnerability 
to climate impacts and help them build adaptive capacity).
• Controlling diseases: Malaria, AIDS, tuberculosis, and emerging diseases are brought under control so that a changing climate does not 
increase their threat.
• Enhancing economic progress: Societies promote literacy, electronic communication, road infrastructure, and diversification of economic 
activity.
Source: Nicholas Stern, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
Mitigation Tools. Many options are available for reducing 
GHG emissions, many of which are already in place in the 
United States and globally. Table 5 presents a summary of 
most of the prominent mitigation tools. Appropriately, the 
majority of the options address the energy sector, where most 
of the anthropogenic GHGs are originating. What is needed, 
of course, is to “decarbonize” the energy economy, so that 
energy needs are met without fossil fuels. Every provision 
that promotes greater energy efficiency and the use of renew-
able energy sources is going to reduce GHG emissions in the 
United States. Recent legislation has made progress in energy 
efficiency and renewable energy.
There will be economic costs and benefits to mitigation 
efforts. The benefits come in the form of new industries and 
the jobs they create, savings from efficiency measures, and 
the ecosystem benefits from forests that are preserved and re-
grown. The net costs, as calculated by the Stern Review for 
stabilization at 550 ppm CO2, amount to around 2% of glo-
bal GDP by 2050. These are the costs of cutting GHG emis-
sions by reducing demand for emissions-intensive goods and 
services, increasing efficiencies of energy use, avoiding de-
forestation, and switching to lower-carbon technologies for 
power, heat, and transport. Recall that the Stern Review cal-
culated the costs of inaction to be from 5% to 20% of GDP.
As a bottom line, however, climate change is already 
happening and will likely accelerate in the future. Mitigation 
efforts will reduce the magnitude of future climate change, 
but adaptation will also be needed.
Adaptation
Adaptation means making adjustments in anticipation of 
changes brought on by the rising sea levels and temperatures 
of the next decades. It also means reducing vulnerability to 
the inevitable impacts of climate change. What makes this 
support of renewable energy and energy efficiency programs, 
which will certainly have an impact in lowering GHG emis-
sions. Other legislative actions include laws that established 
subsidies and rebates for renewable energy sources.
Regulatory Action. The Obama administration, under 
the Copenhagen Accord, has committed the United States 
to a reduction of GHG emissions by 17% below 2005 lev-
els, to be achieved by 2020. Major tools to accomplish this 
include all of the policies to promote renewable energy and 
energy conservation, especially the regulations that raise the 
corporate average fuel economy standards. Most important, 
however, is the role of the EPA. In 2009, taking its cue from a 
2007 Supreme Court ruling, the EPA determined that green-
house gases pose a danger to public health and welfare, thus 
giving the agency a green light to regulate CO2 and other 
GHGs. This move has infuriated many industry groups and 
their Republican allies, but their efforts to block the EPA 
from this role have so far failed. The agency has begun its 
regulatory efforts with the New Source Performance Stand-
ards for greenhouse gases from fossil-fueled power plants, 
announced in 2011. This permitting rule requires all new 
power plants to hold emissions to 1,000 pounds of CO2 per 
megawatt hour, something that natural gas plants can ac-
complish but coal plants cannot. Limits on existing coal 
plants are yet to come.
State and Local Action. It is encouraging that states 
are taking unilateral action to address global climate change. 
Many states are adopting renewable portfolio standards and 
are mandating reporting of GHG emissions. Several regions 
have established GHG emissions cap-and-trade programs 
similar to the Clean Air Act program that was successful in 
bringing down sulfur dioxide emissions. Many states have 
set quantitative goals for reducing GHG emissions. More 
than 1,000 mayors have pledged to move their cities to make 
GHG reductions under the Climate Protection Agreement.
498

Global Climate Change
4. The lack of resources, especially water and arable land, 
will lead to greater internal (and possibly international) 
conflicts. The U.S. Department of Defense has identified 
climate change as a significant national security issue, 
pointing out that climate change may act as an acceler-
ant of conflict.
A development worker29 states, “The last thing most 
people living in poverty need is climate change . . . It’s a very 
real intensifier of poverty today . . . (it) increases vulnerability 
to environmental shocks that are outside their control. . . .” 
Even now, more than 96% of disaster-related deaths take 
place in developing countries. It seems fair to ask, What kind 
of society are we if we ignore these needs and just let the cli-
mate keep on warming as we reject the changes we need to 
make to limit GHG emissions?
Geoengineering The threat of climate change is generat-
ing a host of futuristic schemes to help the fight against glo-
bal warming.30 Some of the schemes are clearly unworkable, 
while others have been floated as serious proposals. For ex-
ample, there is a proposal to fertilize vast areas of the oceans 
with iron, thereby stimulating phytoplankton growth, which 
would remove CO2 and sink to the depths. Another proposed 
scheme erects scrubbers, devices that would chemically ab-
sorb CO2 in the air and then store it in deep reservoirs. Still 
other methods would block some of the solar radiation from 
reaching Earth’s surface by, for example, injecting sulfate aer-
osols into the stratosphere or launching satellites into space 
that would release reflecting particles in the path of the Sun’s 
radiation. Most climate experts dismiss these schemes on the 
basis of their huge costs or the likelihood of unintended con-
sequences such as interference with weather patterns or eco-
system destruction; besides, they might not work at all.
It is fair to say that none of these schemes compares with 
what is already happening. Whatever the outcome, it is cer-
tain that we are conducting an enormous global experiment 
in geoengineering, and our children and their descendants 
will be living with the consequences. Global climate change 
is perhaps the greatest challenge facing human civilization in 
the 21st century.
process difficult is that the adaptations will be aiming at a 
moving target—and one that is uncertain at best. Adaptation 
is not cost free. Climate changes are bringing us into ever 
new situations, and some of them are developing rapidly. 
Climate-related natural disasters are already happening at a 
higher rate than ever and will only get worse.
The Stern Review detailed adaptations for developed 
and developing countries, many of which are presented in 
Table 5. The IPCC also weighed in with the AR4 report. In 
light of the risks, the IPCC stated, “The effects of climate 
change are expected to be greatest in developing countries 
in terms of loss of life and relative effects on investment and 
the economy.” A number of international funds have been es-
tablished to address these needs, the latest being the Green 
Climate Fund, launched at the Cancún international meeting. 
The emphasis of these funds is on the developing countries, 
because it is assumed that the developed countries will be far 
more able to afford the costs of adaptation (and can also af-
ford to finance the programs).
Poverty and Climate Change. It is painfully evident that 
climate change will be much harder on the poor, as docu-
mented in a recent article by Boorse;28 they are already strug-
gling to meet their needs for shelter, food, employment, and 
health care. The article lists several telling points:
1. 
The poor, especially in the less developed countries, are 
especially vulnerable to disasters. They lack buffers to 
help them deal with crop failures, storms, and floods—the 
kinds of impacts that will increase in the changing  climate.
2. 
The poorer countries are less able to divert resources to 
adaptation to the changing climate; they are already chal-
lenged to provide health care, education, and food. Fail-
ure of many to meet the Millennium Development Goals 
is evidence of their resource limitations.
3. Rising sea levels and other climate change impacts will 
inevitably displace millions in the poorer countries; the 
flood of environmental refugees will challenge the abil-
ity (and will) of the international community to pro-
vide aid.
28Dorothy Boorse. Loving the Least of These: Addressing a Changing Environ-
ment. National Association of Evangelicals. 2011. http://www.nae.net/images/
content/Loving_the_Least_of_These.pdf. December 31, 2011.
29Ibid., p. 35
30Catherine P. McMullen, ibid., pp. 51–53.
499

Global Climate Change
Review Questions
1. What are the important characteristics of the troposphere? 
Of the stratosphere?
 2. What are the main components of our weather, and how is 
weather related to climate?
 3. Provide a brief synopsis of global climate change. What are 
the main issues and trends?
 4. What has been discovered about global climate trends in the 
past? How do contemporary trends relate to past records?
 5. What is the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation? 
How does it work? What are the impacts of the El Niño/ 
La Niña Southern Oscillation (ENSO)?
 6. What is radiative forcing? Describe some warming and cool-
ing forcing agents.
 7. What evidence do global land and ocean temperatures pro-
vide for a warming Earth?
 8. What additional changes contribute to the picture of 
 human-caused warming?
 9. Which of the GHGs are the most significant contributors to 
global warming? How do they work?
10. Describe the data for atmospheric CO2. What are significant 
sources and sinks for atmospheric CO2? Why can CO2 be 
called “the atmosphere’s control knob?”
11. How are computer models employed in climate change re-
search? Describe several scenarios for 21st-century climate 
change.
12. What are the major IPCC projections for climate changes in 
the 21st century?
13. How does recent work revise the IPCC projections of future 
sea level rise?
14. What are some possible reasons for current skepticism about 
climate change in the U.S. public?
15. Give three ethical principles that can be brought to bear on 
“the perfect moral storm.”
16. Trace the political history of the international efforts to address 
global climate change. What is the “climate emissions gap”?
17. Describe recent U.S. climate change policy. What is the main 
reason for U.S. inaction to pass climate change legislation?
18. What mitigation steps could be taken to stabilize the GHG 
content of the atmosphere?
19. What are some adaptation steps that should be taken to an-
ticipate inevitable changes in climate?
REvISITING THE THEMES
Sound Science
Much of this chapter reflects some outstanding science, 
as our knowledge of climate change depends on the solid 
work of scientists from around the world. It is largely the 
scientists who are calling attention to the perils of climate change. They 
were the first to discover the risks involved, and they are now the chief 
advocates of effective action. The IPCC, with the thousands of scientists 
involved, has performed a masterful assessment of the scientific basis of 
climate change. In the United States, the CCSP/GCRP has also produced 
a portfolio of excellent analyses of climate change and its many dimen-
sions. More and more of the questions and uncertainties about climate 
change are being resolved as scientists continue to work.
Sustainability
Earth is in the midst of an unsustainable rise in atmos-
pheric GHG levels, the result of our intense use of fos-
sil fuels. In short, we completely depend on a host of 
 technologies that are threatening our future. Projections 
of business-as-usual fossil fuel use point to global consequences that 
are disastrous, but not inevitable. The United States and other developed 
countries will not escape these consequences, but the gravest of them 
affect the developing countries. A sustainable pathway is still open to us, 
and it involves a combination of steps we can take to mitigate the emis-
sions and bring the atmospheric concentration of GHGs to a stable, even 
declining, level.
Stewardship
Stewardly care for Earth is not really something we can 
ignore. We must face this “perfect moral storm,” and 
several principles have been cited as arguments for effective action 
to prevent dangerous climate change: the precautionary principle, the 
polluter-pays principle, and the equity principle. If we care about our 
neighbors and our descendants, we will take action both to mitigate 
the production of GHGs and to enable especially the poorer countries to 
adapt to coming unavoidable climate changes, even if taking such action 
is costly.
Public skepticism in the United States about climate change is a 
 serious problem, but the public gets its cues from the media and  political 
leaders, where denial of climate change is embedded like a destructive 
cancer. One can only hope that in time the public will reject the spuri-
ous arguments of the climate change deniers and seize the moral high 
ground in this battle for the future of our children and grandchildren.
S
M
scientists who a
M
a
w
i
ti t
h
S
S
i
S
E
p
s
t
500

Global Climate Change
thinkinG enviRonmentally
 1. What steps could you take to lower your climate impact? 
Check the Union of Concerned Scientists Web site for 
 suggestions.
 2. Research the deniers of global climate change. What evidence 
do they offer in support of their views? How does it compare 
with the evidence from the IPCC? On balance, what do the 
data indicate? Check www.skepticalscience.com.
 3. What recent developments most increase the urgency of 
 action in the international arena?
 4. Trace the history of the international conferences and their 
outcomes. What are the main areas of contention that are 
blocking any binding agreements?
makinG a DiffeRenCe
Anything you can do to cut energy use will cut your CO2 out-
put. In general, cutting CO2 will also cut your bills. Listed below 
are just a few examples.
 1. Buy items with the smallest amounts of packaging, The more 
packaging products have, the more space they take up in the 
distribution trucks, and the more CO2 emissions they create.
 2. Washing your clothes in cold water instead of hot will keep 
200 pounds of carbon dioxide from entering the atmosphere 
a year.
 3. The worst form of transportation for the climate is driving 
alone in a car. Use public transportation when possible, bike, 
walk, carpool, buy a hybrid—there are many options! When 
deciding on a car, make fuel economy a high priority. Driv-
ing 25 fewer miles a week will earn you 1,500 fewer pounds 
of CO2 per year.
 4. Replace your incandescent bulbs with compact fluorescent 
bulbs and the new LED lights.A group of earthworms
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
CReDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): Kyodo /Landov; (bottom left): Jack F/Fotolia; (top left): Shahee Ilyas/
Alamy; (center left): GABRIEL BOUYS/AFP/Getty Images; (top center): Office of 
Science and Technology Policy Executive Office of the President/NASA Images; 
(top right): National Snow and Ice Data Center; (top right): National Snow and 
Ice Data Center
Text Credits
Source: Red Sky at Morning: America and the Crisis of the Global Environment, by 
James Gustave Speth. Published by Yale University Press, 2004; 
Table 3: “Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups 
I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, Table SPM.6.” IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland; Figure  14a: National 
Snow and Ice Data Center; Figure 14b: National Snow and Ice Data Center; 
Figure 5: The Stern Review Report © Crown Copyright 2006 The Economics 
of Climate Change: The Stern Review © Cambridge University Press 2007. 
Source: “Global Land-Ocean Temperature Index” graph from NASA website.  
Based on Fig 1A from “Global Temperature Change,” by James Hansen, from 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, July 2006, Volume 103. 
Copyright © 2006 by National Academy of Sciences. Reprinted with permission; 
Figure 6: Source: Data from “Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations,” NOAA; 
Figure 7a: Adapted from The Niels Bohr Institute Archives; Figure 7b & c: Elemental 
Geosystems, 5th Edition, by Robert W. Christopherson. Copyright © 2007 by 
Pearson Education. Reprinted with permission; Figure 8: Our Changing Planet: 
An Introduction to Earth System Science and Global Environmental Change, 2nd 
Edition, by Fred T. Mackenzie. Copyright © 1998 by Pearson Education. Reprinted 
with permission; Figure 10: Source: Graph by Robert Simmon from “Correcting 
Ocean Cooling” by Rebecca Lindesy, from Earth Observatory website, February 
2007. National Aeronautics and Space Administration; Figure 11: Adapted from 
“The Rise In Global Mean Sea Level (2011_re14),” from CU Sea Level Research 
Group website. Copyright © 2011 by University of Colorado. Reprinted with per-
mission; Figure 12: Source: National Snow and Ice Data Center. Source: National 
Snow and Ice Data Center; Figure 13: Source: NOAA Arctic Report Card: Update 
for 2011; Figure 15: Source: Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center; 
Figure 16: Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration; Figure 17: Source: 
“The Cooperative Global Air Sampling Network Newsletter” from NOAA Earth 
System Research Laboratory, Spring 2011; Figure 18: Source: Carbon Cycling and 
Biosequestration: Report from the March 2008 Workshop, DOE/SC-108, U.S. 
Department of Energy Office of Science; Figure 19: “Climate Change 2007: The 
Physical Science basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Figure SPM.2.” 
Cambridge University Press. Reprinted with permission; Figure 19: “Climate 
Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Contribution of Working Group I to 
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
Figure TS.32.” Cambridge University Press. Reprinted with permission; Figure 19: 
“Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Contribution of Working Group 
I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, Figure TS.32.” Cambridge University Press. Reprinted with permission; 
Figure 22: “How Urgent Is Climate Change?” by Richard A. Kerr, from Science, 
November 2007, Volume 318(5854). Copyright © 2007 by AAAS. Reprinted with 
permission; Figure 23: Adapted from “Water Poverty Index,” by C. A. Sullivan, et 
al., Report to DFID, 2000, from Copyright © by Centre for Ecology & Hydrology. 
Reprinted with permission; Figure 24: “Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. 
Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Figure 1,” Cambridge University 
Press. Reprinted with permission; Figure 25: “Global Pathways” from Climate 
Action Tracker website. Copyright © 2011 by Climate Action Tracker Partners. 
Reprinted with permission. 
501

adaptation An ecological or evolutionary change in structure 
or function that enables an organism to adjust better to its 
environment and hence enhances the organism’s ability to survive 
and reproduce.
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) The pattern 
of ocean currents that involves global seawater movements 
between the surface and great depths. See conveyor system.
atmosphere-ocean general circulation model (AOGCM) A 
computer-based model for simulating long-term climatic 
conditions that combines global atmospheric circulation patterns 
with ocean circulation and cloud-radiation feedback.
climate A general description of the average temperature and 
rainfall conditions of a region over the course of a year.
Climate Change Science Compendium 2009 A report issued by 
the United Nations Environment Program that addresses many 
new findings in climate change science since the IPCC’s Fourth 
Assessment.
climate sensitivity The response of climate to greenhouse gas 
concentrations, usually measured as a rise in temperature as a 
consequence of a rise in greenhouse gas concentration.
convection/convection currents The vertical movement of air due 
to atmospheric heating and cooling, moving generally in a west-
to-east pattern.
Copenhagen Accord The agreement signed at the 2009 Copenhagen 
meeting of delegates of the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change, pledging actions to limit global temperature increases to 
2°C above preindustrial levels.
cryosphere Snow and sea ice in polar regions; it is significant in its 
contribution to the planetary albedo as it reflects sunlight.
Durban Platform An agreement forged at Durban in 2011 at the 
17th Conference of the Parties to the FCCC where delegates 
agreed to begin negotiations leading to a binding agreement to 
curb greenhouse gas emissions by 2015.
El Niño/La Niña Southern Oscillation (ENSO) A climatic 
phenomenon characterized by major shifts in atmospheric 
pressure over the central equatorial Pacific Ocean. An El Niño 
involves the movement of unusually warm surface water into 
the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean, and a La Niña reverses 
the pattern. These phenomena result in extensive disruption of 
weather around the world.
equilibrium climate sensitivity The sustained change in mean 
global temperature that occurs if atmospheric carbon dioxide is 
held at double preindustrial values, or 550 parts per million.
equity principle An ethical principle claiming that those who 
produce the most pollution should compensate those who 
produce less, especially because the less fortunate often suffer the 
most from, say, global climate change.
Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) A result of 
the 1992 Earth Summit, this international treaty was a start in 
negotiating agreements on steps to prevent future catastrophic 
climate change.
front The boundary where different air masses meet.
greenhouse gases Gases in the atmosphere that absorb infrared 
energy and contribute to the air temperature. These gases are 
like a heat blanket and are important in insulating Earth’s 
surface. Among the greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide, water 
vapor, methane, nitrous oxide, chlorofluorocarbons, and other 
halocarbons.
Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation (IPO) One of several ocean-
atmosphere cycles, a warm-cool cycle that swings back and forth 
across the Pacific over periods of several decades.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) The 
UN-sponsored organization charged with continually assessing 
the science of global climate change, its potential impacts, and the 
means of responding to the threat.
isotope A form of an element in which the atoms have more (or 
less) than the usual number of neutrons. Isotopes of a given 
element have identical chemical properties but differ in mass 
(weight) as a result of the superfluity (or deficiency) of neutrons. 
Many isotopes are unstable and radioactive. (See radioactive 
decay, radioactive emissions, and radioactive materials.)
jet stream A river of air, generated by Earth’s rotation and air-
pressure gradients, high in the troposphere that flows eastward at 
high speeds but meanders considerably.
Kyoto Protocol An international agreement among the developed 
nations to curb greenhouse gas emissions. The Kyoto Protocol 
was forged in December 1997 and became binding in 2004.
mesophere A layer of atmosphere beyond the stratosphere where 
only very small quantities of gas are found.
meteorology The scientific study of the atmosphere, involving 
both weather and climate.
Milankovitch cycle A cycle of major oscillations in the Earth’s 
orbit, taking place over frequencies of thousands of years and 
known to influence the distribution of solar radiation and 
therefore global weather patterns.
mitigation Reducing greenhouse gas emissions by a variety of 
strategies and policies.
monsoon The seasonal airflow created by major differences in 
cooling and heating between oceans and continents, usually 
bringing extensive rain.
North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) The cold, saline water 
that sinks in the high-latitude North Atlantic and initiates a 
deep current that spreads the waters throughout the oceans. See 
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation.
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) One of several ocean-
atmosphere oscillations where atmospheric pressure centers 
switch back and forth across the Atlantic, with many impacts on 
winds and storms.
ocean acidification An outcome of the rise in atmospheric carbon 
dioxide; as the oceans take up more and more of the CO2, the 
carbonate ion concentration is reduced, making it more difficult 
for coral animals to build their calcium carbonate skeletons.
planetary albedo The reflection of solar radiation back into space 
due to cloud cover, snow and ice, contributing to the cooling of 
the atmosphere.
polluter-pays principle An ethical principle whereby those who 
pollute the environment should pay for the damage their 
pollution causes.
positive feedback A phenomenon where some process leads to 
even more intensification of that process; an example is the 
evaporative rise in water vapor with global warming, adding 
water, a greenhouse gas, to the atmosphere.
precautionary principle The principle that says that where there 
are threats of serious or irreversible damage, the absence of 
scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing 
cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.
proxies These are measurable records, like tree rings, ice cores, 
and marine sediments, that can provide extensions back in time 
of climatic factors including temperatures and  greenhouse gases.
radiative forcing Refers to the internal or external factors of the 
climate system that can influence the climate, usually to promote 
warming or cooling of the atmosphere as they affect the Earth’s 
energy balance.
stratosphere The layer of Earth’s atmosphere between 10 and 
40 miles above the surface that contains the ozone shield. This 
layer mixes only slowly; pollutants that enter it may remain for 
long periods of time. (See troposphere.)
thermohaline Refers to temperature and salinity, specifically the 
cold temperature and high salinity of waters that sink in the 
North Atlantic and initiate the Atlantic Meridional Overturning 
Circulation.
GlossaRy
Global Climate Change
502

Global Climate Change
United Synthesis Product (USP) The 2009 report, Global Change 
Impacts in the United States, drawing from 19 existing Climate 
Change Science Program reports, providing a detailed look at the 
impacts of climate change on various sectors and regions in the 
U.S.
weather The day-to-day variations in temperature, air pressure, 
wind, humidity, and precipitation mediated by the atmosphere in 
a given region.
Younger Dryas event A rapid change in global climate between 
10,000 and 12,000 years ago that brought on 1,500 years of 
colder weather.
thermosphere The highest layer in the atmosphere, between the 
mesosphere and outer space.
tipping point A situation in a human-impacted ecosystem where a 
small action or reaction is the catalyst for a major change in the 
state of the system.
troposphere/tropopause The layer of Earth’s atmosphere from 
the surface to about 10 miles in altitude. The tropopause is the 
boundary between the troposphere and the stratosphere above. 
The troposphere is well mixed and is the site and source of our 
weather as well as the primary recipient of air pollutants. (See 
also stratosphere.)
503

This page intentionally left blank 

Atmospheric 
Pollution
From Chapter 19 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

O
n Tuesday morning, October 26, 1948, the people of Donora, Pennsylvania 
(population 13,000), awoke to a dense fog. Donora lies in an industrialized 
valley along the Monongahela River, south of Pittsburgh. On the outskirts 
of town, a sooty sign read, “DONORA: NEXT TO YOURS, THE BEST TOWN IN THE 
U.S.A.” The town had a large steel mill that used high-sulfur coal and a zinc-reduction 
plant that roasted ores laden with sulfur. At the time, most homes in the area were 
heated with coal. At first, the fog did not seem unusual: Most of Donora’s fogs lifted 
by noon, as the Sun warmed the upper atmosphere and then the land. This one,  
however, didn’t lift for five days. 
SickneSS and death. 
Through Wednesday and Thurs-
day, the air began to smell of  
sulfur dioxide—an acrid, pen-
etrating odor. By Friday morning, 
the town’s physicians began to 
get calls from people in trouble. 
At first, the calls were from 
elderly citizens and those with 
asthmatic conditions. They were 
having difficulty breathing. The  
Smog in Mexico City. Because of its geographic location and heavy automobile traffic, 
Mexico City has had some of the worst air pollution anywhere.
Learning ObjectiveS
 1. Air-Pollution Essentials: Review 
normal atmospheric cleansing 
and the formation of industrial 
and photochemical smog.
 2. Major Air Pollutants and Their 
Sources: Identify the variety and 
sources of the major air pollut-
ants, and classify them as pri-
mary or secondary pollutants.
 3. Impacts of Air Pollutants: Inves-
tigate how air pollutants impact 
human health and cause damage 
to agricultural crops and natural 
ecosystems.
 4. Bringing Air Pollution Under 
 Control: Summarize the ways 
that the Clean Air Act and its 
amendments, and regulations 
derived from them, have given 
the Environmental Protection 
Agency the responsibility of 
 controlling air pollution.
 5. Destruction of the Ozone Layer: 
Assess how chlorofluorocarbons 
and other gases have been 
implicated in the destruction of 
stratospheric ozone, and review 
the steps taken to bring back the 
ozone layer.
Atmospheric 
Pollution
506

Atmospheric Pollution
Figure 1  Donora Smog Victim.  A nurse administers oxygen to a pa-
tient in an emergency hospital in Donora, site of a lethal smog in 1948.
1 Air Pollution Essentials
For a long time, we have known that the atmosphere con-
tains numerous gases. The major constituents of the at-
mosphere are nitrogen (N2), at a level of 78.08%; oxygen 
(O2), at 20.95%; water vapor, ranging from 0% to 4%; 
argon (Ar), at 0.93%; and carbon dioxide (CO2), at 0.04%. 
Smaller amounts of at least 40 “trace gases” are normally 
present as well, including ozone, helium, hydrogen, methane, 
nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, and neon. In addition, the 
atmosphere contains aerosols: microscopic liquid and solid 
particles such as dust, carbon particles, pollen, sea salts, and 
microorganisms, originating primarily from land and water 
surfaces and carried up into the atmosphere. Outdoor air is 
a valuable and essential resource, providing gases that sus-
tain life and maintain warmth. It also shields the Earth from 
harmful radiation. With the advent of the Industrial Revolu-
tion, the mixture of gases and particles in our atmosphere 
began to change, and we learned the hard way about air  
pollution.
Pollutants and Atmospheric Cleansing
Air pollutants are substances in the atmosphere—certain 
gases and aerosols—that have harmful effects. Three factors 
determine the level of air pollution:
 • the amount of pollutants entering the air,
 • the amount of space into which the pollutants are dis-
persed, and
 • the mechanisms that remove pollutants from the air.
The lower atmosphere, called the troposphere (Fig. 2), 
is the site and source of our weather and contains almost all 
of the water vapor and clouds of the atmosphere. Pollutants 
that enter the troposphere are usually removed within hours 
or a few days unless they are carried up into the upper tropo-
sphere by towering cumulus clouds. If that happens, they can 
be carried far and persist for many days before they, too, are 
removed by cleansing agents. 
Some pollutants are resistant to most of the cleans-
ing mechanisms and can be carried up into the next 
higher layer of the atmosphere, the stratosphere. The most 
notorious of these are the ozone-depleting chemicals (chlo-
rine and bromine compounds), which we will consider in  
Section 5.
Atmospheric Cleansing. Environmental scientists distin-
guish between natural and anthropogenic (human-caused) 
air pollutants. For millions of years, volcanoes, fires, and 
dust storms have sent smoke, gases, and particles into the 
atmosphere. Trees and other plants also emit volatile or-
ganic compounds into the air around them as they photo-
synthesize. However, there are mechanisms in the biosphere 
that remove, assimilate, and recycle these natural pollut-
ants. First, a naturally occurring compound, the hydroxyl 
had nine bodies; two other morticians had one each. On Sunday 
morning, the mills were shut down. Even so, the owners were 
certain that their plants had nothing to do with the trouble. 
Mercifully, the rain came on Sunday and cleared the air—but 
not before more than 6,000 townspeople were stricken and  
20 elderly people had died. During the next month, 50 more 
people died.
MeMOriaL. Eventually, it was determined that the cause 
of the deaths was a combination of polluting gases and par-
ticles, a thermal inversion in the lower atmosphere, and a 
stagnant weather system that, together, brought home the 
deadly potential of air pollution. Today, a historical marker in 
the town and a small storefront museum commemorate the 
Donora Smog of 1948, but the lasting legacy of the smog and 
of those who suffered sickness and death are the state and 
national laws to control air pollution, culminating in the  
Clean Air Act of 1970 and its amendments. Donora was a 
landmark event. 
calls continued into Friday afternoon. People young and old 
were complaining of stomach pain, headaches, nausea, and 
choking (Fig. 1). Work at the mills went on, however. The first 
deaths occurred on Saturday morning. By 10 am, one mortician 
507

Atmospheric Pollution
down many particulate pollutants (other aerosols) from 
the atmosphere to the ocean, cleansing pollutant-laden air. 
Third, sunlight breaks organic molecules apart. These three 
processes hold natural pollutants below toxic levels (except 
in the immediate area of a source, such as around an erupt-
ing volcano). 
radical (OH), oxidizes many gaseous pollutants to products 
that are harmless or that can be brought down to the ground 
or water by precipitation (Fig. 3). Sea salts—picked up from 
sea spray as air masses move over the oceans—are a second 
cleansing agent. These salts, now aerosols, act as excellent 
nuclei for the formation of raindrops. The rain then brings 
Figure 3 The hydroxyl radical. 
This is a simplified model of atmospheric 
cleansing by the hydroxyl radical. The first step 
is the photochemical destruction of ozone, 
which is the major process leading to ozone 
breakdown in the troposphere. The second 
step produces hydroxyl radicals, which react 
rapidly with many pollutants, converting them 
to substances that are less harmful (CO2) or 
that can be returned to Earth via precipitation 
(HNO3, H2SO4).
Formation of Hydroxyl Radical
Reactions of Hydroxyl Radical with Pollutants
UV Radiation
Hydrocarbons
 O* + H2O
CO + H2O
H2O + NO
HNO3
NOx
NH3
H2S
O3
O2 + O*
2 OH
1.
2.
Hydroxyl radical is rapidly consumed,
yielding end products of carbon dioxide,
nitric acid, sulfuric acid, and water.
CO
CO2
SO2
SO2
H2SO4
These end products are flushed from the troposphere
by precipitation, causing acid deposition.
Photochemical breakdown of
tropospheric ozone releases an
oxygen molecule and a free
oxygen atom.
Hydroxyl radical is continuously
formed as free oxygen atoms
react with water.
OH
Figure 2 Layers of the atmosphere clos-
est to Earth’s surface. The troposphere extends 
from the surface to roughly 6 miles above the surface, 
and the stratosphere is above that. The colored band 
shows the average temperature of the atmosphere at 
different altitudes. In the troposphere, temperatures 
generally decrease with height, while in the strato-
sphere temperatures increase with height.  
6 miles/10 km
30 miles/50 km
Troposphere
Pressure (millibars)
Stratosphere
Temperature
–40
–20
0
20
°C
–40
1000
–4
32
68
°F
850
700
500
300
100
1
(Source: CCSP 1.1. Temperature Trends in the Lower 
 Atmosphere: Steps for Understanding and Reconciling 
 Differences. Thomas R. Karl, Susan J. Hassol, Christopher 
D. Miller, and William L. Murray, Eds., 2006. A Report by the 
Climate Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on 
Global Change Research, Washington, DC.)
508

Atmospheric Pollution
Industrial Smog. In Hard Times, Charles Dickens de-
scribed a typical English scene: “Coketown lay shrouded 
in a haze of its own, which appeared impervious to the 
sun’s rays. You only knew the town was there because 
there could be no such sulky blotch upon the prospect 
without a town.” This shrouding haze became known as 
industrial smog (a combination of smoke and fog), an ir-
ritating, grayish mixture of soot, sulfurous compounds, 
and water vapor (Fig. 4a). This kind of smog continues to 
be found wherever industries are concentrated and where 
coal is the primary energy source; such smog events mostly 
occur in the winter. The Donora incident is a classic exam-
ple. Currently, industrial smog can be found in the cities 
of China, India, Korea, and a number of eastern European 
countries. 
Photochemical Smog. After World War II, the boom-
ing economy in the United States led to the creation of 
vast suburbs and a mushrooming use of cars for commut-
ing to and from work. As other fossil fuels were used in 
place of coal for heating, industry, and transportation, 
industrial smog was largely replaced by another kind of 
smog. Increasingly, Los Angeles and other cities served 
by huge freeway systems began to be enshrouded daily 
in a brownish, irritating haze that was different from the 
more familiar industrial smog (Fig. 5). Weather condi-
tions were usually warm and sunny rather than cool and  
foggy, and, typically, the new haze would arise during the 
morning commute and begin to dissipate only by the time 
of the evening commute. This photochemical smog, as it 
came to be called, is produced when several pollutants 
from automobile exhausts—nitrogen oxides and volatile 
organic carbon compounds—are acted on by sunlight 
(Fig. 4b). 
Inversions. Certain weather conditions intensify levels of 
both industrial and photochemical smogs. Under normal 
conditions, the daytime air temperature is highest near the 
ground, because sunlight strikes Earth and the absorbed heat 
radiates to the air near the surface. The warm air continues 
Many of the pollutants oxidized by the hydroxyl radi-
cal are of concern because human activities have raised 
their concentrations far above normal levels. Recent stud-
ies have shown that the hydroxyl radical plays a key role 
in the removal of anthropogenic pollutants from the at-
mosphere. Highly reactive hydrocarbons are oxidized 
within an hour of their appearance in the atmosphere, 
and nitrogen oxides (NOx) are converted to nitric acid 
(HNO3) within a day. It takes months, however, for car-
bon monoxide (CO) to be oxidized by hydroxyl and years 
in the case of methane (CH4). As Figure 3 shows, the pho-
tochemical breakdown of tropospheric ozone is the major 
source of the hydroxyl radical (not shown is a newly dis-
covered additional source of the hydroxyl radical, from 
the photoexcitation of nitrogen dioxide). As we will see, 
higher levels of ozone result from higher concentrations of 
other polluting gases.
Recent research1 indicates that the atmospheric lev-
els of hydroxyl are quite stable, suggesting that formation 
and breakdown are balanced. Some hydroxyl is used up 
during reactions with CO and CH4, but hydroxyl is recy-
cled as it reacts with most other pollutants. This is good 
news for now, but researchers are concerned that future 
pollutants and climate change could affect the hydroxyl 
balance. 
Smogs and Brown Clouds
Down through the centuries, the practice of venting the 
products of combustion and other fumes into the atmos-
phere remained the natural way to avoid their noxious 
effects within buildings. With the Industrial Revolution 
of the 1800s came crowded cities and the use of coal for 
heating and energy. It was then that air pollution began in 
earnest.
1S. A. Montzka et al. “Small Interannual Variability of Global Atmospheric 
 Hydroxyl.” Science 331: 67–69. January 7, 2011.
Figure 4 Industrial and photochemical smog. (a) Industrial smog occurs when coal is burned and 
the atmosphere is humid. (b) Photochemical smog  occurs when sunlight acts on vehicle pollutants.
(a) Industrial smog
(b) Photochemical smog
Sulfur dioxide and particulates
from burning coal
Fog or humid air
Photochemical
smog
Sunlight
Industrial
smog
Nitrogen oxides and volatile
organic compounds
509

Atmospheric Pollution
officials to urge people with breathing problems to stay indoors. 
For many people, smog causes headaches, nausea, and eye and 
throat irritation. It may aggravate preexisting respiratory con-
ditions, such as asthma and emphysema. In some industrial cit-
ies (such as Donora), air pollution reached lethal levels under 
severe temperature inversions. These cases became known as 
air-pollution disasters.  London experienced repeated episodes 
of inversion-related disasters in the mid-1900s. One episode in 
1952 resulted in 4,000  pollution-related deaths.
Atmospheric Brown Clouds. A relative newcomer on the 
air-pollution scene is the so-called atmospheric brown cloud 
(ABC), a 1- to 3-kilometer-thick blanket of pollution that fre-
quently hovers over south and central Asia. The ABC is in fact a 
persistent aerosol, similar to the summer aerosol found over in-
dustrial regions in the North Temperate Zone, but dissimilar in 
that it persists year-round and has a different makeup. Unique 
to rise, carrying pollutants upward and dispersing them at 
higher altitudes (Fig. 6a). At times, however, a warm air layer 
occurs above a cooler layer. This condition of cooler air 
below and warmer air above is called a temperature inver-
sion (Fig. 6b). Inversions often occur at night, when the sur-
face air is cooled by radiative heat loss. Such inversions are 
usually short lived, as the next morning’s sunlight begins the 
heating process anew and any pollutants that accumulated 
overnight are carried up and away. During cloudy weather, 
however, the Sun may not be strong enough to break up the 
inversion for hours or even days. A mass of high-pressure air 
may move in and sit above the cool surface air, trapping it. 
Topography can also intensify smog as cool ocean air flows 
into valleys and is trapped there by nearby mountain ranges. 
Los Angeles has both topographical features. 
When such long-term temperature inversions occur, pollut-
ants can build up to dangerous levels, prompting local health 
(a)
(b)
Figure 5 Los Angeles air. (a) Los Angeles on a good day. (b) LA under a blanket of photochemical smog.
Figure 6 Temperature inversion. A temperature inversion may cause episodes of high concentrations of 
air pollutants. (a) Normally, air temperatures are  highest at ground level and decrease at higher elevations.  
(b) In a temperature inversion, a layer of warmer air overlies cooler air at ground level.
Cooler air
Cool air
Warm air
Altitude
0
0
Ground
level
(a)
(b)
Temperature
Cool air
Warm inversion layer
Cool air
Altitude
0
0
Ground
level
Temperature
510

Atmospheric Pollution
to the ABC is the high proportion of black carbon and soot de-
rived from biomass burning (residential cooking, agricultural 
clearing) and fossil fuel combustion (coal and diesel exhaust). 
Ozone and acid rain accompany the ABC.
The impacts of the ABC are serious: major dimming, es-
pecially over large cities; reductions in rainfall due to the aer-
osol particles; solar heating of the atmosphere and decreased 
reflection by snow and ice (both of which are contributing to 
a shrinking of the Hindu Kush–Himalaya–Tibetan glaciers, 
vital water sources for the major river systems of eastern 
Asia); a weakening of the Indian summer monsoon; reduced 
crop yields due to the dimming and to ozone levels; and 
heightened acute and chronic health effects typical of expo-
sure to industrial and urban air pollution.
Industrial smog from coal burning, photochemical smog 
from vehicular exhaust, and atmospheric brown cloud are all 
caused by the release of pollutants, and we now turn our at-
tention to those pollutants.
2  Major Air Pollutants and Their 
Sources
In large measure, anthropogenic air pollutants are direct and 
indirect products of the combustion of coal, gasoline, other 
liquid fuels, and refuse (wastepaper, plaster, and so on). These 
fuels and wastes are organic compounds. With complete 
combustion, the products of burning organic compounds are 
carbon dioxide and water vapor. Unfortunately, combustion 
is seldom complete, and many complex chemical substances 
are involved. The combustion of fuels and refuse creates a 
host of gaseous and particulate products that in turn create 
unwanted problems before they are cleansed from the air. 
Other processes producing air pollutants are evaporation (of 
volatile substances) and strong winds that pick up dust and 
other particles.
Primary Pollutants
Table 1 presents the names, symbols, major sources, char-
acteristics, and general effects of the major air pollutants. 
The first seven (particulates, volatile organic compounds, 
carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, lead, 
and air toxics) are called primary air pollutants because 
they are the direct products of combustion and evapo-
ration. Some primary pollutants may undergo further 
reactions in the atmosphere and produce additional un-
desirable compounds, called secondary air pollutants 
(ozone, peroxyacetyl nitrates, sulfuric acid, and nitric acid). 
Sources of air pollution are summarized in Figure 7. Power 
plants are the major source of sulfur dioxide, particulates 
originate from all sorts of combustion, and transportation  
Figure 7 The prime sources of the major anthropogenic air pollutants. Industrial  processes 
and transportation generate a toxic brew of primary and secondary air pollutants.
Refuse incinerators
Industrial stacks
Motor vehicles
Coal-burning
power plants
Particulates
Hydrocarbons
Carbon monoxide
Nitrogen
oxides
Sulfur dioxide
Ozone, PANs
Acids–
Sulfuric
Nitric
PRIMARY POLLUTANTS
+ Light
SECONDARY POLLUTANTS
511

Atmospheric Pollution
Figure 8 Industrial pollution. Because the stack of this wood-products 
mill in New Richmond, Quebec Province, Canada, lacks electrostatic precipitators, 
the plume contains substantial amounts of suspended particulate matter that can 
be seen from a great distance.
accounts for the lion’s share of carbon monoxide and ni-
trogen oxides. This diversity suggests that strategies for 
controlling air pollutants will be different for the different 
sources.   
When fuels and wastes are burned, particles consist-
ing mainly of carbon are emitted into the air; these are 
the particulates we see as soot and smoke (Fig. 8). In ad-
dition, various unburned fragments of fuel molecules 
are given off; these are the VOC emissions. Incompletely 
oxidized carbon is carbon monoxide (CO), in contrast 
to completely oxidized carbon, which is carbon diox-
ide (CO2). Combustion takes place in the air, a mixture 
of 78% nitrogen and 21% oxygen. At high combustion 
temperatures, some of the atmospheric nitrogen gas is oxi-
dized to form the gas nitric oxide (NO). In the air, nitric 
oxide immediately reacts with additional oxygen to form 
nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4). 
tabLe 1 Major Anthropogenic Air Pollutants and Their Effects
Name
Symbol
Source
Description and Effects
Primary Pollutants    
Suspended 
particulate matter
PM
Soot, smoke, metals, and carbon from 
combustion; dust, salts, metal, and dirt from 
wind erosion; atmospheric reactions of gases
Complex mixture of solid particles and aerosols; reduces 
lung function and affects respiration and cardiovascular 
disease
Volatile organic 
compounds
VOC
Incomplete combustion of fossil fuels; 
evaporation of solvents and gasoline; 
emission from plants
Mixture of compounds, some carcinogenic; major agent 
of ozone formation
Carbon monoxide
CO
Incomplete combustion of fuels
Invisible, odorless, tasteless gas; poisonous because of 
ability to bind to hemoglobin and block oxygen delivery 
to tissues; aggravates cardiovascular disease
Nitrogen oxides
NOx
From nitrogen gas due to high combustion 
temperatures when burning fuels; also from 
wood burning
Reddish-brown gas and lung irritant; aggravates 
respiratory disease; major source of acid rain; contributes 
to ozone formation
Sulfur dioxide
SO2
Combustion of sulfur-containing fuels, 
especially coal
Poisonous gas that impairs breathing; major source of 
acid rain; contributes to particle formation
Lead
Pb
Battery manufacture; lead smelters; 
combustion of leaded fuels and solid wastes
Toxic at low concentrations; accumulates in body and 
can lead to brain damage in children
Air toxics
Various
Fuel combustion in vehicles; industrial 
processes; building materials; solvents
Toxic chemicals, many of which are known human 
carcinogens (e.g., benzene, asbestos, vinyl chloride); Clean 
Air Act identifies 187 air toxics
Radon
Rn
Rocks and soil; natural breakdown of 
radium and uranium
Invisible and odorless radioactive gas can accumulate inside 
homes; second leading cause of lung cancer in United States
Secondary Pollutants       
Ozone
O3
Photochemical reactions between VOCs 
and NOx
Toxic to animals and plants and highly reactive in lungs; 
oxidizes surfaces and rubber tires
Peroxyacetyl nitrates
PAN
Photochemical reactions between VOCs 
and NOx
Damages plants and forests; irritates mucous membranes 
of eyes and lungs
Sulfuric acid
H2SO4
Oxidation of SO2 by OH radicals
Produces acid deposition, damages lakes, soils, artifacts
Nitric acid 
HNO3
Oxidation of NOx by OH radicals
Produces acid deposition, damages lakes, soils, artifacts
512

Atmospheric Pollution
Figure 9 U.S. emissions of five 
primary air pollutants, by source, 
for 2011. Fuel combustion refers to fuels 
burned for electrical power generation and 
for space heating. Note especially the differ-
ent contributions by transportation and fuel 
combustion/electric utilities, the two major 
sources of air pollutants.  
(Source: EPA National Emissions Inventory, 2012. 
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/trends/index.html.)
62.4
8.06
4.6
12.0
12.1
All others
Vehicles and non-road engines
Industrial and commercial facilities
Electric utilities
1.4%
2.1%
32.7%
63.8%
Miscellaneous
Electric utilities
Industrial/commercial/residential
Transportation
3%
17%
29%
51%
Fuel combustion
Transportation
Miscellaneous
Industrial processes
2.4%
29.9%
30.4%
37.4%
Transportation
Industrial processes
Fuel combustion
Miscellaneous (dust, fires, etc.)
7.7%
10%
21.3%
61%
Fuel combustion
Non-road engines
Miscellaneous
Highway vehicles
7.6%
Industrial processes
5.6%
8.8%
25%
SULFUR
DIOXIDE
PM-2.5 
PARTICULATE 
MATTER
NITROGEN
OXIDES
VOLATILE
ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS
CARBON
MONOXIDE
Millions of metric tons
Sources
53%
Figure 10 Clean Air Act impacts. Comparison of percent reductions in 
the emission of six criteria air pollutants between 1970 and 2011. PM2.5 compari-
son values are from 1990, when data were first gathered, and 2011. 
(Source: EPA National Emissions Inventory, 2012. http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/trends/index.
html.)
CO
(−68%)
NOx
(−55%)
VOC
(−65%)
SO2
(−74%)
PM2.5
(−39%)
Pb
(−99%)
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160 180
Million Tons
2011
1970
Thousand Tons
COMPARISON OF 1970 AND 2011 EMISSIONS
These compounds are collectively referred to as the nitro-
gen oxides, or NOx. Nitrogen dioxide absorbs light and is 
largely responsible for the brownish color of photochemi-
cal smog. 
In addition to organic matter, fuels and refuse contain 
impurities and additives, and these substances are also emit-
ted into the air during burning. Coal, for example, contains 
from 0.2% to 5.5% sulfur. In combustion, this sulfur is oxi-
dized, giving rise to several gaseous oxides, the most common 
being sulfur dioxide (SO2). Coal also contains heavy-metal 
impurities such as mercury, and refuse contains an endless 
array of “impurities.”
Tracking Pollutants. The Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) operates the Clearinghouse for Inventories 
and Emissions Factors, which tracks trends in national 
emissions of the primary pollutants from all sources. The 
EPA also follows air quality by measuring ambient con-
centrations (where ambient means “present in the air”) of 
the pollutants at thousands of monitoring stations across 
the country. According to EPA data, 2011 emissions 
in the United States of the first five primary pollutants 
amounted to 99 million tons. By comparison, in 1970, 
when the first Clean Air Act became law, these same five 
pollutants totaled 301 million tons. The relative amounts 
emitted in the United States in 2011, as well as their 
major sources, are illustrated in Figure 9. The general pic-
ture shows remarkable improvement for emissions over 
the past 40 years (Fig. 10), reflecting the effectiveness of 
Clean Air Act regulations. This progressively improving 
trend over time has occurred in spite of large increases in 
513

Atmospheric Pollution
Secondary Pollutants
Ozone and numerous reactive organic compounds are 
formed as a result of chemical reactions between nitrogen 
oxides and volatile organic carbons. Because sunlight pro-
vides the energy necessary to propel the reactions, these 
products are also known as photochemical oxidants. Note 
that these reactions and the ozone they produce are en-
tirely in the troposphere; ozone in the stratosphere is 
“good” ozone, protecting life from damaging ultraviolet 
(UV) radiation. In preindustrial times, ozone concentra-
tions ranged from 10 to 15 parts per billion (ppb), well 
below harmful levels. Summer concentrations of ozone in 
unpolluted air in North America now range from 20 to 
50  ppb. Polluted air may contain ozone concentrations 
of 150 ppb or more, a level considered quite unhealthy if 
encountered for extended periods. EPA data indicate that 
ambient ozone levels, monitored across the United States 
at some 1,100 sites, declined by 20% between 1980 and 
1992, leveled off during the 1990s, and then declined 11% 
in the first decade of the 2000s. Ozone air quality stand-
ards are the leaders in nonattainment across the country; 
108 million people live in counties that still do not meet 
ozone standards.
Ozone Formation. A simplified view of the major reac-
tions in the formation of ozone and other photochemi-
cal oxidants is shown in Figure 12. Nitrogen dioxide 
absorbs light energy and splits to form nitric oxide and 
atomic oxygen, which rapidly combines with oxygen gas 
to form ozone. If other factors are not involved, ozone 
and nitric oxide then react to form nitrogen dioxide and 
oxygen gas. A steady-state concentration of ozone re-
sults, and there is no appreciable accumulation of the gas 
(Fig.  12a). When VOCs are present, however, the nitric 
oxide reacts with them instead of with the ozone, caus-
ing several serious problems. First, the reaction between 
nitric oxide and the VOCs leads to highly reactive and 
damaging compounds known as peroxyacetyl nitrates, or  
the gross domestic product, vehicular miles traveled, and 
population and energy consumption (Fig. 11).   
Getting the Lead Out. The sixth type of primary 
 pollutant—lead and other heavy metals—is discussed sepa-
rately because the quantities emitted are far less than the 
levels for the first five. Before the EPA-directed phaseout in 
the 1980s and 1990s, lead was added to gasoline as an inex-
pensive way to prevent engine knock. Emitted with the ex-
haust from gasoline-burning vehicles, lead remained airborne 
and traveled great distances before settling as far away as 
the glaciers of Greenland. Since the phaseout, concentrations 
of lead in the air of cities in the United States have declined 
remarkably. However, lead levels are elevated around air-
ports where piston-engine aircraft operate, the reason being 
that aviation gasoline still uses leaded gasoline (jet fuel has 
no added lead). Between 1980 and 2010, lead levels in air 
fell 89%. At the same time, levels of lead in children’s blood 
have dropped 92% (some children still get lead from dust 
and paint chips). Lead concentrations in Greenland ice have 
also decreased significantly. All these declines indicate that 
lead restrictions in the United States and most other North-
ern Hemisphere nations have had a global impact. The data 
indicate that we have reached a steady state in lead emis-
sions and that any new reductions must target leaded avia-
tion gasoline, which accounts for half of the current lead air 
emissions. Lead smelters and battery manufacturers also add 
to the burden of lead.
Toxics and Radon. As with lead, the concentrations of 
toxic chemicals and radon in the air are small compared 
with those of the other primary pollutants. Some of the air’s 
toxic compounds—benzene, for example—originate with 
transportation fuels. Most, however, are traceable to indus-
tries and small businesses. Radon, by contrast, is produced 
by the spontaneous decay of fissionable material in rocks 
and soils. Radon escapes naturally to the surface and seeps 
into buildings through cracks in foundations and basement 
floors, sometimes collecting in the structures.
Figure 11 Comparison of growth 
versus emissions. Gross domestic product, 
vehicle miles traveled, energy consumption, CO2 
emissions, and population are compared with 
aggregate reductions in emissions of the six 
principal pollutants from 1970 to 2010. 
(Source: EPA Air Trends, 2012. http://epa.gov/airtrends/
aqtrends.html.)
–80%
220%
210%
170%
51%
30%
–71%
44%
200%
180%
160%
140%
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
–20%
–40%
–60%
70
10
09
08
07
06
05
04
03
02
01
Year
00
99
98
97
96
95
90
80
Gross Domestic 
Product
Vehicle Miles 
Traveled
Population
Energy 
Consumption
CO2 Emissions
Aggregate Emissions
(Six Common Pollutants)
514

Atmospheric Pollution
moisture and oxidants such as hydroxyl. Sulfuric and nitric 
acids are the acids in acid rain (technically referred to as acid 
deposition). We now turn our attention to this important and 
widespread problem.
Acid Precipitation and Deposition
Acid precipitation refers to any precipitation—rain, fog, mist, or 
snow—that is more acidic than usual. Because dry acidic parti-
cles are also found in the atmosphere, the combination of pre-
cipitation and dry-particle fallout is called acid  deposition. In the 
late 1960s, Swedish scientist Svante Odén first documented the 
acidification of lakes in  Scandinavia and traced it to air pollutants 
PANs (Fig. 12b). Second, numerous aldehyde and ketone 
compounds are produced as the VOCs are oxidized by 
atomic oxygen, and these compounds are also noxious. Fi-
nally, with the nitric oxide tied up in this way, the ozone 
tends to accumulate. Because of the complex air chemistry 
involved, ozone concentrations may peak 30 to 100 miles 
(50 to 160 km) downwind of urban centers where the pri-
mary pollutants were generated. As a result, ozone con-
centrations above the air quality standards are sometimes 
found in rural and wilderness areas. 
Sulfuric acid and nitric acid are considered secondary 
pollutants because they are products of sulfur dioxide and 
nitrogen oxides, respectively, reacting with atmospheric 
Figure 12 Formation of ozone and other photochemical oxidants. (a) Nitrogen oxides, by 
themselves, would not cause ozone and other oxidants to reach damaging levels, because reactions involving ni-
trogen oxides are cyclic. (b) When VOCs are also present, however, reactions occur that lead to the accumulation of 
numerous damaging compounds—most significantly, ozone, the most injurious.
Primary pollutants
Secondary pollutants
Major pollutants from vehicles
(a) Nitrogen oxides alone
NO2
NO
Atomic
oxygen
Oxygen
gas
O
+
O2
O3
Ozone
   O3
Ozone
Aldehydes,
ketones
PANs and
numerous other
H, C, N, O
compounds
O2
O2
NO2
NO
Nitric oxide
+
NO2
NO
O
O
VOCs
+
+
+
+
+
(b) Nitrogen oxides plus volatile organic compounds
Photochemical oxidants—all highly reactive compounds that are damaging to plants and animals
No accumulation because reactions are cyclical
Sunlight
Sunlight
NOx
Nitrogen
oxides
VOCs
515

Atmospheric Pollution
Sulfuric acid (H2SO4)
Nitric acid (HNO3)
Water vapor and 
cloud chemistry
Sulfur dioxide and
nitrogen oxides
emissions
Dry fallout
Water
condensation
Acid dew
Dry fallout
Acid rain
Acid snow
Acid
snow melt
Acid leaching
Aluminum toxicity
Acid fog
Die-off of
aquatic life
Damage to
vegetation
Dry fallout
Water
condensation
Acid dew
Figure 13 Acid deposition. Emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides react with hydroxyl  radicals 
and water vapor in the atmosphere to form their  respective acids, which return to the surface either as dry acid 
deposition or, mixed with water, as acid precipitation. Various effects of acid deposition are noted.
originating in other parts of  Europe and Great Britain. Since then, 
careful monitoring has shown that broad areas of North Amer-
ica, as well as most of  Europe and other industrialized regions of 
the world, have been  experiencing precipitation that is between 
10 and 1,000 times more acidic than usual. This has affected eco-
systems in  diverse ways, as illustrated in Figure 13. 
To understand the full extent of the problem, we must 
first understand some principles about acids and how we 
measure their concentration.
Acids, Bases, and pH. Acidic properties (for example, a 
sour taste and corrosiveness) are due to the presence of hy-
drogen ions (H1, hydrogen atoms without their electron), 
which are highly reactive. Therefore, an acid is any chemi-
cal that releases hydrogen ions when dissolved in water. The 
chemical formulas of a few common acids are shown in 
Table 2. Note that all of them ionize—that is, their compo-
nents separate—to create hydrogen ions plus a negative ion. 
The higher the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution, 
the more acidic the solution. 
A base is any chemical that releases hydroxide ions 
(OH2, oxygen-hydrogen groups with an extra electron) 
when dissolved in water. (See Table 2.) The bitter taste and 
caustic properties of alkaline, or basic, solutions are due to 
the presence of hydroxide ions.
The concentration of hydrogen ions is expressed as pH. 
The pH scale goes from 0 (highly acidic) through 7 (neutral) 
to 14 (highly basic) (Fig. 14). As the pH scale numbers go from 
0 to 7, the concentration of hydrogen ions (H1) decreases, and 
the solution becomes less acidic and more neutral. As the num-
bers go from 7 to 14, the concentration of hydrogen ions gets 
lower, but the concentration of hydroxide ions (OH2) increases, 
and the solution becomes more basic. The numbers on the scale 
(0–14) represent the negative logarithm (power of 10) of the hy-
drogen ion concentration, expressed in grams per liter (g/L). For 
example, a solution with a pH of 1 has an H1 concentration of 
1021 g/L, a pH of 2 has a concentration of 1022 g/L, and so on. 
Because numbers on the pH scale represent powers of 10, 
there is a tenfold difference between each unit and the next. For 
example, pH 5 is 10 times as acidic (has 10 times as many H1 
ions) as pH 6, pH 4 is 10 times as acidic as pH 5, and so on.
Extent and Potency of Acid Precipitation. In the absence 
of any pollution, rainfall is normally somewhat acidic, with a 
pH of 5.6, because carbon dioxide in the air readily dissolves 
in, and combines with, water to produce carbonic acid. Acid 
precipitation, then, is any precipitation with a pH less than 5.5.
Since the middle of the 20th century, acid precipitation has 
been the norm over most of the Western world. The pH of rain 
and snowfall over a large portion of eastern North America used 
516

Atmospheric Pollution
and nitric acids, which dissolve readily in water or adsorb 
to particles and are brought down to Earth in acid deposi-
tion. This usually occurs within a week of the oxides entering 
the atmosphere. Another important source of acidification is 
traced to the use of nitrogen fertilizers, made by the Haber-
Bosch process whereby atmospheric N2 (a nonreactive form 
of nitrogen) is converted into reactive ammonia (NH3) and 
incorporated into urea ((NH2)2CO). In turn, urea gives off 
NH3 in the presence of water, which is volatile and enters 
the atmosphere. Whether in the atmosphere, soil, or natural 
waters, ammonia is eventually oxidized to nitrate (NO3
2) by 
bacterial action, a process that generates acidity.
Natural sources contribute substantial quantities of pol-
lutants to the air, including 50 million to 70 million tons per 
year of sulfur dioxide (from volcanoes, sea spray, and micro-
bial processes) and 30 million to 40 million tons per year of 
nitrogen oxides (from lightning, the burning of biomass, and 
microbial processes). Anthropogenic sources per year are 
 estimated at 115 million tons of sulfur dioxide, 60 million 
to be quite acidic, reflecting the west-to-east movement of pol-
luted air from the Midwest and industrial Canada. Many areas 
in this region once regularly received precipitation having a pH 
of 4.0 and, occasionally, as low as 3.0 (Fig. 15a). Acid precipita-
tion was heavy in Europe in the latter half of the 20th century, 
from the British Isles to central Russia. Like North America, acid 
precipitation has declined greatly in these regions. It is on the rise 
in China and India as these countries increasingly exploit their 
coal resources. It has not disappeared in eastern North America, 
but pH values lower than 4.6 are now uncommon (Fig. 15b). 
Sources of Acid Deposition. Chemical analysis of acid 
precipitation reveals the presence of two acids, sulfuric acid 
(H2SO4) and nitric acid (HNO3). As we have seen, burn-
ing fuels produce sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, so one 
source of the acid deposition problem is evident. These ox-
ides enter the troposphere in large quantities from both an-
thropogenic and natural sources. Once in the troposphere, 
they are oxidized by hydroxyl radicals (Fig. 3) to sulfuric 
tabLe 2 Common Acids and Bases
Formula
Yields
H1 Ion(s)
Plus
Negative Ion
Acid
Hydrochloric acid
HCl
→
H1
1
Cl2  Chloride
Sulfuric acid
H2SO4
→
2H1
1
SO4
22  Sulfate
Nitric acid
HNO3
→
H1
1
NO3
2  Nitrate
Phosphoric acid
H3PO4
→
3H1
1
PO4
32  Phosphate
Acetic acid
CH3COOH
→
H1
1
CH3COO2  Acetate
Carbonic acid
H2CO3
→
H1
1
HCO3
2  Bicarbonate
Formula
Yields
OH2 Ion(s)
Plus
Positive Ion
Base
Sodium hydroxide
NaOH
→
OH2
1
Na1 Sodium 
Potassium hydroxide
KOH
→
OH2
1
K1  Potassium 
Calcium hydroxide
Ca(OH)2
→
2OH2
1
Ca21  Calcium 
Ammonium hydroxide
NH4OH
→
OH2
1
NH4
1  Ammonium 
Figure 14 The pH scale. Each unit on the scale represents 
a tenfold difference in hydrogen ion concentration.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13 14
Neutral
pH scale
Increasingly acidic
Stomach
acid
Beer
Sea
water
Milk of
magnesia
Lye
Ammonia
Vinegar
Unpolluted
rainwater
Milk
Increasingly basic
517

Atmospheric Pollution
of sources has shifted from predominantly sulfur dioxide to 
nitrogen oxides and ammonia. 
3 Impacts of Air Pollutants
Air pollution is an alphabet soup of gases and particles, mixed 
with the normal constituents of air. The amount of each pol-
lutant present varies greatly, depending on its proximity to the 
source and various conditions of wind and weather. As a re-
sult, we are exposed to a mixture that varies in makeup and 
concentration from day to day—even from hour to hour—and 
from place to place. Consequently, the effects we feel or ob-
serve are rarely, if ever, the effects of a single pollutant. Instead, 
they are the combined impact of the whole mixture of pollut-
ants acting over our life span up to that point.
For example, plants may be so stressed by pollution that 
they become more vulnerable to other environmental factors, 
such as drought or attack by insects. Humans may develop 
lung disease due to the combined effects of ozone and NOx. 
Given the complexity of this situation, it is often difficult to 
determine the role of any particular pollutant in causing an 
observed result. Nevertheless, some significant progress has 
been made in linking cause and effect.
Human Health
The air-pollution disasters in Donora and London dem-
onstrated that exposure to air pollution can be deadly. 
Every one of the primary and secondary air pollutants 
(Table 1) is a threat to human health, particularly the 
health of the respiratory system (Fig. 17). Acute exposure 
to some pollutants can be life threatening, but many ef-
fects are chronic, acting over a period of years to cause 
a gradual deterioration of physiological functions and 
to 70 million tons of nitrogen oxides, and 50 million tons of 
ammonia.2 The vital difference between natural and anthro-
pogenic sources is that anthropogenic sources are strongly 
concentrated in industrialized and agricultural regions, 
whereas the emissions from natural sources are spread out 
and are a part of the global environment. Levels of the an-
thropogenic oxides have increased sixfold3 since 1900, while 
levels of the natural emissions have remained fairly constant.  
As Figure 9 indicates, 8.06 million tons of sulfur diox-
ide were released into the air in 2011 in the United States; 
92% was from fuel combustion (mostly from coal-burning 
power plants). Some 12.0 million tons of nitrogen oxides 
were released, 51% of which can be traced to transportation 
emissions and 41% to fuel combustion at fixed sites. In ad-
dition, 4.1 million tons of ammonia were released to the at-
mosphere in 2011 from fertilizer use and livestock. Nitrogen 
oxides and ammonia are doubly damaging because the ni-
trogen contributes to eutrophication in aquatic ecosystems. 
In the eastern United States, the source of much of the acid 
deposition was identified as the tall stacks of 50 huge, older 
coal-burning power plants located primarily in the Midwest  
(Fig. 16a). The tall stacks were built to alleviate local sulfur di-
oxide pollution at ground level. The good news is that many of 
these same plants are now reducing their emissions as a result 
of the Clean Air Act. Figure 16b shows the current geographic 
distribution of coal power plants with and without scrubbers 
(emissions control devices). Acid-generating emissions have 
decreased by 65% over the past 20 years, but there is obvi-
ously more that can be done. Of great significance, the pattern 
3S. J. Smith et al. “Anthropogenic Sulfur Dioxide Emissions: 1850–2005.” Atmos-
pheric Chemistry and Physics 11: 1101–1116. 2011.
Figure 15 Acid deposition in eastern North America. (a) 1994 rainfall pH distribution across the 
United States; dots show locations of measuring  stations. (b) 2010 rainfall pH distribution. 
(Source: National Atmospheric Deposition Program (NRSP-3). 2012. NADP Program Office, Illinois State Water Survey. 2204 Griffith 
Dr., Champaign, IL 61820).
Lab pH
Sites not pictured:
Alaska 01
Alaska 03
Puerto Rico 20
≤ 4.1
≥ 5.7
4.5
4.9
5.3
5.2
5.1
5.2
(a)
Hydrogen ion concentration as pH from measurements
made at the Central Analytical Laboratory, 1994
Sites not pictured:
Alaska 01
Alaska 03
Alaska 06
Puerto Rico 20
Virgin Islands 01
5.2
5.2
5.3
5.0
5.1
(b)
Hydrogen ion concentration as pH from measurements
made at the Central Analytical Laboratory, 2010
2Karen C. Rice and Janet S. Herman. “Acidification of Earth: An Assessment Across 
Mechanisms and Scales.” Applied Geochemistry 27: 1–14. 2012.
518

Atmospheric Pollution
The leading cause of this disease is smoking, but in many 
developing countries, the burning of wood and dung in 
indoor stoves for heating and cooking delivers much 
the same burden of pollutants as smoking to the women 
who tend the stoves and the children who are with them. 
COPD involves three separate disease processes: emphy-
sema (destruction of the lung alveoli—see Fig. 17), bron-
chitis (inflammation and obstruction of the airways), and 
asthma.
Asthma. Those most sensitive to air pollution are 
small children, asthmatics, people with chronic pulmonary 
or heart disease, and the elderly. Asthma is an immune-
system disorder characterized by impaired breathing 
caused by constricted air passageways. Asthma episodes 
are triggered by contact with allergens (dust mites, molds, 
pet dander) and compounds in polluted air (ozone, par-
ticulate matter, SO2). According to the National Center 
for Health Statistics,  almost 456,000 hospitalizations for 
asthma occur yearly, together with 1.75 million visits to 
hospital emergency departments. The highest prevalence 
is among children from birth to 4 years of age. In the 
past decade, the incidence of asthma in the United States 
 doubled, affecting 25 million people (including 7 million 
children).
Strong Evidence. Two key studies recently analyzed by 
the Health Effects Institute provide strong evidence of the 
harmful effects of fine particles and sulfur pollution. These 
studies followed thousands of adult subjects living in 154 
eventual premature mortality. More over, some pollutants 
are carcinogenic, adding significantly to the risk of lung 
cancer as they are breathed into the lungs. 
Chronic Effects. Many people living in areas of urban 
air pollution suffer from chronic effects. Long-term ex-
posure to sulfur dioxide can lead to bronchitis (inflam-
mation of the bronchi). Chronic inhalation of ozone can 
cause inflammation and, ultimately, fibrosis of the lungs, 
a scarring that permanently impairs lung function. Car-
bon monoxide reduces the capacity of the blood to carry 
oxygen, and extended exposure to carbon monoxide can 
contribute to heart disease. Chronic exposure to nitrogen 
oxides impairs lung function and is known to affect the 
immune system, leaving the lungs open to attack by bac-
teria and viruses. Exposure to airborne particulate matter 
can bring on a broad range of health problems, including 
respiratory and cardiovascular pathology. Other factors—
such as poor diet, lack of exercise, preexisting diseases, 
and individual genetic makeup—may add to the effects of 
pollution to bring on adverse health outcomes.
COPD. Any one or combination of these exposures 
can develop into chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), a slowly progressive lung disease that makes it 
increasingly hard to breathe. COPD is estimated to affect 
15 million people in the United States and is the fourth 
leading cause of death (128,000 deaths/year). Worldwide, 
COPD afflicts up to 10% of adults ages 40 and older. 
Figure 16 Midwestern coal-burning power plant. (a) Standard smokestacks of this coal-burning 
power plant were replaced by new 1,000-foot (330-m) stacks to aid in the dispersion of pollutants into the at-
mosphere. The taller stacks alleviated local air-pollution problems, but created a more widespread distribution of 
acid-generating pollutants. (b) Distribution of coal-burning power plants and their SO2 emissions (2010); green 
indicates plants with flue gas scrubbers, blue shows plants with planned scrubbers, and gold shows plants without 
scrubbers to remove emissions. 
(Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration, Today in Energy, Dec. 21, 2011.)
25,000 to 60,000
15,000 to 24,999
7,000 to 14,999
3,000 to 6,999
1,000 to 2,999
1 to 999
SO2 Emissions
 Short Tons       
Flue Gas Desulfurization  Status
FGD
Planned FGD
No FGD
(a)
(b)
519

Atmospheric Pollution
Figure 17 The respiratory system. (a) In 
the lungs, air passages branch and rebranch and finally 
end in millions of tiny sacs called alveoli. These sacs 
are surrounded by capillaries. As blood passes through 
the capillaries, oxygen from inhaled air diffuses into the 
blood from the alveoli. Carbon dioxide  diffuses in the 
reverse direction and leaves the body in the exhaled air. 
(b) On the left is normal lung tissue, and on the right is 
lung tissue from a person who suffered from emphysema, 
a chronic lung disease in which some of the structure of 
the lungs has broken down. Cigarette smoking and heavy 
air pollution are associated with the development of em-
physema and other chronic lung diseases.
Branch from
pulmonary vein
Branch from
pulmonary artery
Alveoli
Capillaries
surrounding
alveolus
Bronchiole with
artery and vein
Blood capillary with
red blood cells
CO2
O2
Magnification about 250x
Bronchus
Right lung
Bronchiole
Pharynx
Trachea
(a)
(b)
U.S. cities for as long as 16 years. In the studies, higher con-
centrations of fine particles were correlated with increased 
mortality, especially from cardiopulmonary disease and lung 
cancer. The more polluted the city, the higher the mortality. 
The studies were used by the EPA to step up its regulatory 
attention to fine particles.
Fine particles were also cited as a key to heightened costs 
of air pollution in Southern California, along with ozone. Both 
pollutants exceed federal standards and were judged to cause 
more deaths in the region than did traffic accidents. Meeting 
those standards would save $28 billion annually in avoided 
health care costs, missed work, school absences, and prema-
ture deaths, according to a research study from California 
State University, Fullerton, in 2008. Health impacts of the ex-
cess pollutants include asthma, chronic bronchitis, and cardio-
vascular problems.
520

Atmospheric Pollution
Mercury. One of the heavy-metal pollutants, mer-
cury, deserves special attention. It is a toxic element, one 
that binds to key proteins in the body and can lead to 
many neurological disorders. In fetuses and small chil-
dren, mercury impairs brain development. Power plants 
are the major source of mercury reaching the environ-
ment, and once present in aquatic systems, mercury is 
converted to a highly toxic form, methylmercury, which 
accumulates in fish as a consequence of bioaccumulation. 
In recent tests, the EPA reported methyl mercury concen-
trations that exceeded recommendations in the game fish 
of 49% of lakes and reservoirs. Every state has adviso-
ries warning consumers about the dangers of mercury in 
locally caught fish. As we will see, the EPA has recently 
stepped up the regulatory restrictions on mercury releases 
from power plants.
Acute Effects. In severe cases, air pollution reaches lev-
els that cause death, though such deaths usually occur 
among people already suffering from critical respiratory 
or heart disease or both. The gases present in air pollu-
tion are known to be lethal in high concentrations, but 
such concentrations occur nowadays only in cases of acci-
dental poisoning. Nevertheless, intense air pollution puts 
an additional stress on the body, and if a person is already 
in a weakened condition (as are, for example, the elderly 
or asthmatics), this additional stress may be fatal. Most 
of the deaths in air-pollution disasters reflect the acute 
effects of air pollution. However, recent research shows 
that even moderate air pollution can cause changes in car-
diac rhythms of people with heart disease, triggering fatal 
heart attacks.
Carcinogenic Effects. The heavy-metal and organic con-
stituents of air pollution include many chemicals known to 
be carcinogenic in high doses. According to the industrial 
reporting required by the EPA, 4.7 million tons of hazard-
ous air pollutants (the air toxics—see Table 1) are released 
annually into the air in the United States. The presence of 
trace amounts of these chemicals in the air may be respon-
sible for a significant portion of the cancer observed in hu-
mans. One major source of such carcinogens is diesel exhaust  
(Fig.  18). The EPA has classified diesel exhaust as a likely 
human carcinogen and has established the National Clean 
Diesel Campaign to reduce emissions from the current die-
sel truck fleet and establish standards for new diesel- powered 
engines. 
In some cases, exposure to a pollutant can be linked 
directly to cancer and other health problems by way of 
epidemiological evidence. One pollutant that clearly and 
indisputably is correlated with cancer and other disor-
ders is benzene. This organic chemical is present in motor 
fuels and is also used as a solvent for fatty substances and 
in the manufacture of detergents, explosives, and phar-
maceuticals. Environmentally, benzene is found in the 
emissions from fossil fuel combustion that result from op-
erating motor vehicles and burning coal and oil. Benzene 
Figure 18 Diesel truck exhaust. Diesel truck exhaust is a major source 
of hazardous air pollutants as well as particulates, and the exhaust from diesel 
engines has been classified as a probable human carcinogen.
is also present in tobacco smoke, which accounts for half 
of the public’s exposure to the chemical. The EPA has 
classified benzene as a known human carcinogen, linked 
to leukemia in persons encountering the chemical through 
occupational exposure. Chronic exposure to benzene can 
also lead to numerous blood disorders and damage to the 
immune system.
The Environment
Experiments show that plants are even more sensitive to air 
pollutants than are humans. Before emissions were controlled, 
it was common to see wide areas of totally barren land or 
 severely damaged vegetation downwind from smelters and 
coal-burning power plants. The pollutant responsible was 
usually sulfur dioxide.
Crop Damage. Nowadays, damage to crops, orchards, 
and forests downwind of urban centers is caused mainly 
by exposure to ozone. The ozone gains access to plants 
through their stomata, the respiratory pores in all plant 
leaves. Symptoms of ozone damage include black flecking 
521

Atmospheric Pollution
Forest Damage. The negative impact of air pollution on 
wild plants and forest trees may be even greater than on ag-
ricultural crops.
Ozone Damage. Studies have shown that ozone dam-
age to forest trees begins at about 40 ppb and gets more 
intense with higher levels. In California and southern Appa-
lachian forests, ozone levels often reached 60 ppb and above, 
and seasonal losses in tree stem growth in the latter were 
measured at 30–50% for most species. Studies in European 
forests found that ozone stress affects photosynthetic carbon 
uptake, increases respiration of foliage, amplifies water loss, 
and generally disrupts carbon and nutrient metabolism. In 
sum, research has suggested that as temperatures climb and 
moisture is less predictable under conditions of expected 
global climate change, ozone levels will have an increasingly 
 serious impact on forest growth.
Damage from Acid Deposition. From the Green 
Mountains of Vermont to the San Bernardino Mountains 
of California, the die-off of forest trees in the 1980s caused 
great concern. Red spruce forests were especially vulnerable. 
In New England, 1.3 million acres of high-elevation forests 
were devastated. Commonly, the damaged trees lost needles 
as acidic water drew calcium from them, rendering them 
more susceptible to winter freezing. Sugar maples, important 
forest trees in the Northeast, have shown extensive mortality, 
ranging from 20–80% of all trees in some forests.
Much of the damage to forests from acid precipitation is 
due to chemical interactions within the forest soils. Sustained 
acid precipitation at first adds nitrogen and sulfur to the soils, 
which stimulate tree growth. In time, though, these chemicals 
leach out large quantities of the buffering chemicals (usually 
calcium and magnesium salts). When these buffering salts no 
longer neutralize the acid rain, aluminum ions, which are toxic, 
are dissolved from minerals in the soil. The combination of alu-
minum and the increasing scarcity of calcium, which is essential 
to plant growth, leads to reduced tree growth. Research at the 
Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest in the White Mountains 
and yellowing of leaves (Fig. 19). Crops vary in their sus-
ceptibility to ozone, but damage to many important crops 
(such as soybeans, corn, and wheat) is observed at common 
ambient levels of ozone (Fig. 20). Unfortunately, ozone levels 
are highest in summer, when crops are growing, and rural 
areas often experience high ozone levels as ozone forms 
downwind of pollution sources. The $27 billion U.S. soy-
bean crop suffers a loss of almost $2 billion annually due 
to ozone. Much of the world’s grain production occurs in 
regions that receive enough ozone pollution to reduce crop 
yields. India loses $5 billion yearly to ozone crop damage, 
China loses $2.5 billion, and farmers in Europe lose more 
than $7.5 billion yearly to ozone.  
Crop Yield (%)
Seasonal Ozone Concentration (ppb)
Sorghum
Field Corn
Winter Wheat
Soybean
Peanut
Cotton
60%
80%
100%
20
40
60
80
100
PROPORTIONAL YIELD RESPONSE
40%
Figure 20 Ozone impact on crop 
yields. Some crop species react more strongly to 
ozone than others. 
(Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research 
Service: Effects of Ozone Air Pollution on Plants. 2009. www.ars.
usda.gov/Main/docs.htm?docid=12462.)
Figure 19 Ambient ozone injury. This potato leaf shows the black fleck-
ing symptomatic of ozone damage. 
(Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service. Effects of Ozone Air Pol-
lution on Plants. 2009. www.ars.usda.gov/Main/docs.htm?docid=12462.)
522

Atmospheric Pollution
Apparently, many areas remain healthy, whereas others have 
become acidified to the point of becoming lifeless. How is this 
possible? The key lies in the system’s acid neutralizing capac-
ity (ANC). Despite the addition of acid, a system may be pro-
tected from changes in pH by a neutralizer—a buffer that, when 
present in a solution, has a large capacity to absorb hydrogen 
ions and thus maintain the pH at a relatively constant value.
Limestone (CaCO3) is a natural acid neutralizer 
(Fig. 21) that protects lakes from the effects of acid precipita-
tion in many areas of the North American continent, particu-
larly in the Midwest. Lakes and streams receiving their water 
from rain and melted snow that have percolated through soils 
derived from limestone will contain dissolved limestone. The 
regions that are sensitive to acid precipitation are those con-
taining much granitic rock, which does not yield good ANC. 
The good news is that the sensitive regions (New England, the 
Adirondacks, the Northern Appalachian Plateau) are recovering 
their ANC, and the percentage of acidic lakes has declined in 
the past 18 years.4 The decline is consistent with the decrease in 
acid deposition in these regions, which has been brought about 
by the reductions of SO2 and NOx emissions mandated by the 
Clean Air Act.  
Visibility. A clear blue sky and good visibility are matters 
of health, but they also carry significant aesthetic value and 
can have a deep psychological impact on people. Can a value 
be put on these benefits? Many of us spend thousands of 
dollars and hundreds of hours commuting long distances to 
work so that we can live in a less polluted environment than 
the one in which we work. Ironically, the resulting traffic and 
congestion cause much of the very pollution we are trying 
to escape. Then we travel to national parks and wilderness 
areas and too often find that the visibility in these natural 
areas is impaired by what has been called “regional haze,” 
coming from particulates and gases originating hundreds of 
miles away. In an encouraging move, the EPA established a 
of New Hampshire has shown a marked reduction in calcium 
and magnesium in the forest soils from the 1960s on, which is 
reflected in the amount of calcium in tree rings over the same 
period. The net result of these changes has been a decline in 
forest growth. Experimental liming of soils in forests showing 
maple tree dieback was able to restore the trees to health, and 
aluminum ion concentrations were seen to decrease greatly. Al-
though acid deposition has declined since the 1980s, few studies 
have actually tracked the recovery of terrestrial ecosystems.
Impacts on Aquatic Ecosystems. Some 50 years ago, 
anglers started noticing sharp declines in fish populations in 
many lakes in Sweden, Ontario, and the Adirondack Moun-
tains of upper New York State. Since that time, as ecologi-
cal damage continued to spread, studies have revealed many 
ways in which air pollution—especially acid deposition— 
alters and may destroy aquatic ecosystems.
The pH of an environment is extremely critical because 
it affects the function of virtually all enzymes, hormones, and 
other proteins in the bodies of all organisms living in that en-
vironment. Ordinarily, organisms are able to regulate their 
internal pH within the narrow limits necessary to function 
properly. A consistently low environmental pH, however, often 
overwhelms the regulatory mechanisms in many life forms, thus 
weakening or killing them. Most freshwater lakes, ponds, and 
streams have a natural pH in the range from 6 to 8, and organ-
isms have adapted accordingly. The eggs, sperm, and developing 
young of these organisms are especially sensitive to changes in 
pH. Most are severely stressed, and many die, if the environ-
mental pH shifts as little as one unit from the optimum.
As aquatic ecosystems become acidified, a shift occurs from 
acid-sensitive to acid-tolerant species. The acid-sensitive species 
die off, either because the acidified water kills them or because it 
keeps them from reproducing. Figure 13 shows that acid precipi-
tation may leach aluminum and various heavy metals from the 
soil as the water percolates through it. Normally, the presence 
of these elements in the soil does not pose a problem because 
they are bound in insoluble mineral compounds and, therefore, 
are not absorbed by organisms. As the compounds are dissolved 
by low-pH water, however, the metals are freed. They may then 
be absorbed by and are highly toxic to both plants and animals. 
For example,  mercury tends to accumulate in fish as lake waters 
become more acidic.
Acid deposition hit some regions especially hard in the 
latter part of the 20th century. In Ontario, Canada, approx-
imately 1,200 lakes lost their fish life. In the Adirondacks, 
a favorite recreational region for New Yorkers, 346 lakes 
were without fish in 1990. In New England and the eastern 
Catskills, more than 1,000 lakes have suffered from recent 
acidification. The physical appearance of highly acidified 
lakes is deceiving. From the surface, they are clear and 
blue, the outward signs of a healthy condition. However, 
the only life found below the surface is acid-loving mosses 
growing on the bottom.
Neutralizing Capacity. As Figure 15a indicates, wide re-
gions of eastern North America receive substantial amounts  
of acid precipitation, yet not all areas have acidified lakes. 
4Executive Office of the President. National Acid Precipitation Assessment Pro-
gram Report to Congress 2011: An Integrated Assessment. USGS, 2011. http://
ny.water.usgs.gov.
Figure 21 Acid neutralizing. Acids may be neutralized by certain non-
basic compounds. A chemical such as limestone (calcium carbonate) reacts with 
hydrogen ions as shown. Hence, the pH of a lake or river remains close to neutral 
despite the additional acid, when it contains adequate acid neutralizing capacity.
H
O
O
O
C
O
H
H+
H+
O
O
C
Ca2+
2-
Ca2+
Soluble
calcium
Lime
CaCO3
Acid
H+
Carbon
dioxide
Water
523

Atmospheric Pollution
gradually increased from some 11.4 million tons in 1900 to 
their peak of 53 million tons in 1973. Although this number 
has been reduced by almost two-thirds, the pollutants still 
come back down as acid deposition, generally to the east of 
their origin because of the way weather systems flow. And the 
soils retain much of the sulfate deposition they have received. 
The deposits cross national boundaries, too. As a result, Can-
ada receives half of its acid deposition from the United States, 
and Scandinavia gets it mostly from Great Britain and other 
western European nations. Japan receives the wind-borne 
pollution from widespread coal burning in Korea and China. 
For good reason, the problem of acid deposition has been ad-
dressed at national and international levels. Accordingly, we 
turn next to the efforts made to curb air pollution.
4  Bringing Air Pollution Under 
Control
By the 1960s, it was obvious that pollutants produced by 
humans were overloading natural cleansing processes in the 
atmosphere. The unrestricted discharge of pollutants into the 
atmosphere could no longer be tolerated.
Clean Air Act
Federal legislation regarding air pollution was first intro-
duced in 1955 as the Air Pollution Control Act. Several minor 
amendments followed until, under grassroots pressure from 
citizens, the U.S. Congress enacted a major bill, the Clean Air 
Act Amendments of 1970 (CAA). Together with amendments 
passed in 1977 and 1990, this law, administered by the EPA, 
represents the foundation of U.S. air-pollution control efforts. 
The act called for identifying the most widespread pollutants, 
setting ambient standards (levels that need to be achieved to 
protect environmental and human health), and establishing 
control methods and timetables to meet standards.
NAAQS. The CAA mandated the setting of standards for 
four of the primary pollutants—particulates, sulfur diox-
ide, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxides—and for the 
secondary pollutant ozone. At the time, these five pollut-
ants were recognized as the most widespread and objection-
able ones. Today, with the addition of lead, they are known 
as the criteria pollutants and are covered by the National 
 Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). The primary 
standard for each pollutant is based on the presumed high-
est level that can be tolerated by humans without notice-
able ill effects, minus a 10–50% margin of safety. For some 
of the pollutants, long-term and short-term levels are set. 
The short-term levels are designed to protect against acute 
effects, while the long-term standards are designed to pro-
tect against chronic effects and damage to crops, animals, 
vegetation, and buildings. The EPA is required to review 
the pollutants every five years and make adjustments if the 
science justifies changes. The NAAQS have far-reaching 
 impacts on many regulations, and proposed changes always 
generate controversies.
Regional Haze Rule in 1999, aimed at improving the visibil-
ity at 156 national parks and wilderness areas. The regula-
tions call on all 50 states to establish goals for improving 
visibility and to develop long-term strategies for reducing the 
emissions (especially particles) that cause the problem.
Effects on Materials and Aesthetics. Walls, windows, 
and other exposed surfaces turn gray and dingy as particu-
lates settle on them. Paints and fabrics deteriorate more rap-
idly, and the sidewalls of tires and other rubber products 
become hard and checkered with cracks because of oxidation 
by ozone. Metal corrosion is increased dramatically by sulfur 
dioxide and acids derived from sulfur and nitrogen oxides, as 
are weathering and the deterioration of stonework.
Limestone and marble (which is a form of limestone) are 
favored materials for the outsides of buildings and for monu-
ments (collectively called artifacts). The reaction between 
acid deposition and limestone is causing these structures to 
erode at a tremendously accelerated pace. Monuments and 
buildings that have stood for hundreds or even thousands 
of years with little change are now dissolving and crumbling 
away (Fig. 22). The corrosion of buildings, monuments, and 
outdoor equipment by acid precipitation costs billions of dol-
lars for replacement and repair each year in the United States. 
In an extreme case of corrosion, a 37-foot bronze Buddha in 
Kamakura, Japan, is slowly dissolving away as precipitation 
from Korea and China bathes the statue in highly acidic rain. 
Although the decay of artifacts is a tragic loss in itself, it 
should also stand as a grim reminder of how we are dissolv-
ing away the buffering capacity of ecosystems. As the saying 
goes, “What goes up must come down.” The sulfur and nitro-
gen oxides pumped into the troposphere in the United States 
Figure 22 Effect of pollution on monuments. The corrosive  effects 
of acids from air pollutants are dissolving away the features of many monuments 
and statues, as seen in the angel perched on this building buttress.
524

Atmospheric Pollution
In spite of these difficulties, however, total air pollutants were 
reduced by some 25% during a time when both population 
and economic activity increased substantially, and even in the 
noncompliant regions, the severity of air-pollution episodes 
lessened. Accordingly, some significant changes were made in 
the law and in the regulations that followed.
1990 Amendments. The Clean Air Act Amendments of 
1990 (CAAA) targeted specific pollutants more directly and 
enforced compliance more aggressively, through such means 
as the imposition of sanctions. As with the earlier law, the 
states do much of the work in carrying out the mandates of 
the 1990 act. Each state must develop a State Implementa-
tion Plan (SIP) that is designed to reduce emissions of every 
NAAQS pollutant whose control standard (Table 3) has not 
been attained. One major change was the addition of a per-
mit application process (already in place for the release of 
pollutants into waterways). Polluters must apply for a permit 
that identifies the kinds of pollutants they release, the quanti-
ties of those pollutants, and the steps they are taking to re-
duce pollution. Permit fees provide funds the states can use 
to support their air-pollution control activities. 
Under the CAAA, regions of the United States that 
have failed to attain the required levels must submit attain-
ment plans based on reasonably available control technol-
ogy (RACT) measures. Offending regions must convince the 
EPA that the standards will be reached within a certain time 
frame. The state SIPs and attainment performances are en-
forced by EPA sanctions that impose costly withholding of 
federal funds in case of failures.
Dealing with the Pollutants
The Clean Air Act and its amendments give the EPA broad 
authority to write regulations for reducing air pollutants, 
using a process known as rulemaking. The process involves 
a proposed rule stage and a final rule stage. EPA will give 
notice first of a proposed rule, which allows a period of one 
to three months for public review and comments. Next, the 
agency is required to consider the comments received, and 
when the final rule is published, responses to the comments 
are usually discussed, and any changes made on the basis of 
the comments are noted. Then the final rule is published in 
the Federal Register (available on the Internet), the official 
daily publication for a host of federal notices, regulations, 
executive orders, and other presidential documents. Once 
published, a final rule has the force of law until it is amended 
or repealed. We will consider the air pollution regulations by 
the different categories of pollutants.
Reducing Particulates. Prior to the 1970s, the major sources 
of particulates were industrial stacks and the open burning of 
refuse. The CAA mandated the phaseout of open burning of 
refuse and required that particulates from industrial stacks be 
reduced to “no visible emissions.” To reduce stack emissions, 
industries were required to install filters, electrostatic precipi-
tators, and other devices (though many facilities in place be-
fore the 1970 CAA were exempted). These measures markedly 
NESHAPs. In addition, the CAA required the EPA to estab-
lish National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollut-
ants (NESHAPs) for a number of toxic substances (the air 
toxics). The Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 greatly ex-
tended this section of the EPA’s regulatory work by specifi-
cally naming 187 toxic air pollutants for the agency to track 
and regulate. The EPA tracks both the criteria pollutants and 
the hazardous air pollutants in a database, the National Emis-
sions Inventory. This database serves as an essential source of 
information for the EPA in carrying out its regulatory respon-
sibilities.
Control Strategy. The basic strategy of the 1970 Clean Air 
Act was to regulate the emissions of air pollutants so that 
the ambient criteria pollutants would remain below the pri-
mary standard levels. This approach is called command-and-
control because regulations were enacted requiring industry 
to achieve a set limit on each pollutant through the use of 
specific control equipment. The assumption was that human 
and environmental health could be significantly improved by 
a reduction in the output of pollutants. If a particular region 
was in violation for a given pollutant, a local government 
agency would track down the source(s) and order reductions 
in emissions until the region came into compliance.
Unfortunately, this strategy proved difficult to implement. 
Most of the regulatory responsibility fell on the states and cit-
ies, which were often unable or unwilling to enforce control. 
tabLe 3  National Ambient Air Quality 
Standards for Criteria Pollutants 
(NAAQS)
Pollutant
Averaging Time*
Primary Standard
PM10 particulates
24 hours
150 mg/m3
PM2.5 particulates**
1 year
15 mg/m3***
24 hours
35 mg/m3
Sulfur dioxide
1 hour
0.075 ppm
3 hours
0.5 ppm
Carbon monoxide
8 hours
9 ppm
1 hour
35 ppm
Nitrogen dioxide
Annual mean
0.053 ppm
1 hour
0.100 ppm
Ozone
8 hours
0.075 ppm
Lead
3 months
0.15 mg/m3
Source: U.S. EPA, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, National 
Ambient Air Quality Standards. October 2011. www/epa.gov/air/criteria.
html.
*The averaging time is the period over which concentrations are measured 
and averaged.
**PM2.5 is the particulate fraction having a diameter smaller than or equal 
to 2.5 micrometers.
***New proposed standard is 12 to 13 mg/m3.
525

Atmospheric Pollution
major concerns associated with this category of pollutants. 
Under the CAAA, Congress identified 187 toxic pollutants. 
It then directed the EPA to identify major sources of these 
pollutants and to develop maximum achievable control tech-
nology (MACT) standards, the NESHAPs. Besides affect-
ing control technologies, the standards include options for 
substituting nontoxic chemicals, giving industry some flex-
ibility in meeting MACT goals. State and local air-pollution 
authorities are responsible for seeing that industrial plants 
achieve the goals. In response to the CAAA, the EPA has mo-
bilized more than 300 monitoring sites to track emissions of 
the affected substances (Fig. 23). To reduce the contribution 
from vehicles, the agency requires cleaner burning fuels (re-
formulated gasoline) in urban areas. Industrial sources are 
being addressed by setting emission standards for some 82 
stationary-source categories (e.g., paper mills, oil refineries). 
After years of piecemeal and delayed regulations, the 
EPA published final rules in December 2011 that for the first 
time will force the older coal- and oil-fired power plants to 
control their pollutants. The major focus of these new stand-
ards is mercury, a contaminant in coal and oil that is released 
to the air when these fuels are burned. The standards—the 
Mercury and Air Toxics Standards—require all coal- and oil-
fired power plants to limit their emissions of mercury, acid 
gases, and other metallic toxic pollutants, preventing 90% 
of the mercury and 88% of acid gases from being emitted. 
Because of the controls needed to accomplish these reduc-
tions, emissions of SO2 and fine particles will also be greatly 
reduced. The human health value of these new controls is es-
timated at $37 billion to $90 billion and will prevent 11,000 
premature deaths per year; the estimated costs to industry 
to effect these controls is $9.6 billion per year. The industry 
has up to four years to comply with these new standards. In-
dustry lobbies claimed that this and other new rule changes 
amount to a “train wreck” for the electric power industry, 
predicting a wave of coal-plant closures and major increases 
in electricity costs. A recent Congressional Research Service 
report5 found these claims to be wildly overstated. The study 
concluded that there will be closures of old coal-fired power 
plants, but these are inefficient and dirty and are largely 
being replaced by newer natural gas–fired plants. 
Limiting Pollutants from Motor Vehicles. Cars, trucks, 
and buses release nearly half of the pollutants that foul our 
air. Vehicle exhaust sends out VOCs, carbon monoxide, and 
nitrogen oxides that lead to ground-level ozone and PANs. 
Additional VOCs come from the evaporation of gasoline and 
oil vapors from fuel tanks and engine systems. The 1970 CAA 
mandated a 90% reduction in these emissions by 1975. This 
timing proved to be unrealistic, but enough improvements 
have been made over the years that today’s new cars have ac-
tually achieved a 90% emissions reduction. This improvement 
is fortunate because driving in the United States has been in-
creasing much more rapidly than the population has. Between 
reduced the levels of particulates since the 1970s, but par-
ticulates continued to be released from steel mills, power 
plants, cement plants, smelters, construction sites, and die-
sel engines. Wood-burning stoves and wood and grass fires 
also contribute to the particulate load, making regulation 
even more difficult. Before 1987, the NAAQS particulate 
standard was “total suspended particulates,” and this was 
replaced in 1987 by the PM10 standard (all particles 10 mi-
crometers or less in diameter), based on the understanding 
at the time of particles that could reach the interior regions 
of the respiratory tract.
The EPA added a new ambient air quality standard 
for particulates—PM2.5—in 1997, on the basis of informa-
tion indicating that smaller particulate matter (less than  
2.5 micrometers in diameter) has the greatest effect on 
health. The coarser material (PM10) is still regulated but is 
not considered to play as significant a role in health problems 
as do the finer particles. There is overwhelming evidence 
that the finer particles (2.5 microns or less) go right into 
the lungs when breathed. Responding to this evidence, the 
EPA announced a revision to the NAAQS in 2006, reducing 
the 24-hour primary standard for PM2.5 from 65 µg/m3 to 
35 µg/m3. The EPA left the annual standard at 15 µg/m3, in 
spite of recommendations from the EPA’s Clean Air Scien-
tific Advisory Committee that it be lowered. More recently 
(June, 2012), the EPA proposed strengthening the annual 
standard by lowering it to a range of 12 to 13 µg/m3. This 
proposal came as a response to legal action by the American 
Lung Association. Industry groups maintain that the cur-
rent standard is protective enough, but the EPA defended 
the change by showing benefits far outweighing the costs of 
implementation.
Controlling Air Toxics. By EPA estimates, the amount of 
air toxics emitted annually into the air in the United States is 
around 4.7 million tons. These come from stationary sources 
(factories, refineries, power plants), mobile sources (cars, 
trucks, buses), and indoor sources (solvents, building materi-
als). Cancer and other adverse health effects, environmental 
contamination, and catastrophic chemical accidents are the 
5James E. McCarthy and Claudia Copeland. “EPA’s Regulation of Coal-Fired 
Power: Is a ‘Train Wreck’ Coming?” Congressional Research Service R41914. 
 August 8, 2011. www.crs.gov.
Figure 23 Air toxics monitoring station. A radiation monitoring de-
vice has been added to this air toxics monitoring station located on the grounds 
of a school in Anaheim, California.
526

Atmospheric Pollution
sport-utility vehicles (SUVs), vans, and pickup trucks surged 
from 25% of the combined light-duty vehicle sales in 1990 
to 50% in 2004. Automobile sales finally passed those of 
heavier vehicles in 2008, a response to both high fuel prices 
and the economic recession. The EPA’s “adjusted” fuel econ-
omy estimates for model year 2011 are as follows (these are 
real-world estimates, based on five different driving condi-
tions): automobiles 25.9 mpg and “trucks” (includes mini-
vans, SUVs, and pickups) 18.9 mpg, giving a fleet average 
of 22.8 mpg. The efficiencies have risen above earlier peak 
values (achieved in 1987) since model year 2009 and are get-
ting better every year (Fig. 25). 
CAFE Standards. Under the authority of the Energy 
Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 and its amendments, 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration was 
given the authority to set corporate average fuel economy 
(CAFE) standards for motor vehicles. The intention of the 
law was to conserve oil and promote energy security. The 
standard set in 1984 for passenger cars required a fleet av-
erage of 27.5 mpg. The standard for light trucks (pickups, 
SUVs, minivans) was set at 20.7 mpg and eventually raised 
to 22.2 mpg. Note that the EPA’s “adjusted” vehicle perform-
ances are lower than CAFE standards by 25% due to the 
different measurement methods used; the “unadjusted” EPA 
measurements of fuel economy are the basis for manufactur-
ers’ compliance with the CAFE standards.
The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 
mandated a new CAFE fuel economy standard of 35 mpg 
for the combined fleet of cars and light trucks, to be 
achieved by 2020. Congress passed this legislation as a 
major step toward a new energy future of reduced reliance 
on foreign oil and increased renewable energy, with a view 
toward reducing CO2 greenhouse gas emissions. In 2009, 
the Obama EPA set more stringent fuel-economy standards, 
1970 and 2011, the number of vehicle miles increased from 
1 trillion to 3 trillion miles per year, and between 1980 and 
2010, the number of registered vehicles  increased more than 
56%. It is hard to imagine what the air would be like without 
the improvements mandated by the CAA.
Emissions. The reductions in automobile emissions have 
been achieved with a general reduction in the size of passenger 
vehicles, along with a considerable array of pollution-control 
devices, among which is one that affords the computerized con-
trol of fuel mixture and ignition timing, allowing more com-
plete combustion of fuel and decreasing VOC emissions. To 
this day, however, the most significant control device on cars is 
the catalytic converter (Fig. 24). As exhaust passes through this 
device, two different catalysts are at work: a reduction catalyst 
that converts NOx emissions to harmless nitrogen gas and an 
oxidation catalyst that oxidizes unburned hydrocarbons and 
carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide. 
Emissions standards set in 1968 were subsequently 
tightened because of continuing failure to meet air quality 
standards in many regions of the United States. The latest 
of these were the Tier 2 standards, phased in over the 2004 
to 2009 model years. Emissions standards require attainment 
of specific levels or below of volatile organic carbons, car-
bon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, formaldehyde, and particu-
late matter. All vehicles used for personal transportation, up 
to larger SUVs and passenger vans, are subject to the Tier 2 
standards. These are the emissions that are tested by state-
certified inspection stations, now required in most states.
Efficiency. Although the Clean Air Act does not ad-
dress fuel efficiency, it is obvious that less fuel burned means 
fewer pollutants emitted. Two negative factors have recently 
affected fuel efficiency and consumption rates. First, the 
elimination of federal speed limits in 1996 reduced fuel ef-
ficiencies because of the higher speeds. Second, the sale of 
Figure 24 Cutaway of a catalytic  converter.  Engine gas is routed 
through the converter, where catalysts promote chemical reactions that change 
the harmful hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, and  nitrogen oxides into less harm-
ful gases, such as carbon dioxide, water, and nitrogen.
To exhaust
pipe
Gases 
from
engine
Heat shield
Air from air pump
Oxidation catalyst
to remove CO and
hydrocarbons
Reduction catalyst
for NOx removal
Figure 25 Fuel economy and light-duty vehicles.  Changes in the 
fuel economy in model years from 1975 to 2011. “Truck” refers to pickups,  family 
vans, and SUVs. 
(Source: EPA, Office of Transportation and Air Quality. Light-Duty Automotive  Technology, 
 Carbon  Dioxide Emissions, and Fuel Economy Trends: 1975 Through 2011. EPA-420-R-12-001a, 
March 2012. April 30, 2012.)
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Model year
Adjusted composite MPG
Car
Both
Truck
ADJUSTED FUEL ECONOMY BY MODEL YEAR 
(with three-year moving average)
527

Atmospheric Pollution
commercial charging stations are becoming available to en-
able speedy recharging of the batteries. Both types of vehi-
cles have now hit the mass market but, except for the  Nissan 
Leaf, are somewhat pricey. It is certain that all of these in-
novative vehicles will become commonplace as the United 
States moves toward the 2025 fuel efficiency target.
Managing Ozone. Because ozone is a secondary pollutant, 
the only way to control ozone levels is to address the com-
pounds that lead to ozone formation. For a long time, it was 
assumed that the best way to reduce these levels was simply 
to reduce emissions of VOCs. The steps pertaining to motor 
vehicles in the CAAA addressed the sources of about half of 
the VOC emissions. Point sources (industries) accounted for 
another 45% of such emissions, and area sources (numer-
ous small emitters, such as dry cleaners, print shops, and 
users of household products) represented the remaining 5%. 
RACT measures have already been mandated for many point 
sources, and much progress has been made through EPA, 
state, and local regulatory efforts to reduce emissions from 
those sources. Since passage of the CAAA, VOC emissions 
have declined by 50%.
However, recent understanding of the complex chemi-
cal reactions involving NOx, VOCs, and oxygen has thrown 
some uncertainty into this strategy of simply emphasizing 
a reduction in VOCs. The problem is that both NOx and 
VOC concentrations are crucial to the generation of ozone 
(Fig. 12). Either one or the other can become the rate-limiting 
factor in the reaction that forms ozone. Thus, as the ratio of 
VOCs to NOx changes, the concentration of NOx can be-
come the controlling chemical factor, pointing to the need to 
reduce NOx emissions as well. This happens more commonly 
in air-pollution episodes that occur over a period of days than 
in the daily photochemical smog of the urban city.
New Ozone Standards? The revised ozone standard 
announced in 1997 (0.08 ppm instead of 0.12 ppm) met with 
strong opposition from industry groups, which obtained a 
court injunction in 1999 prohibiting the EPA from enforc-
ing the new standard. However, the U.S. Supreme Court up-
held the EPA in the dispute. This and other delays put off 
implementation of the revised standard to 2004. Cost-benefit 
estimates indicated that the anticipated health benefits far 
outweighed the costs of compliance. Then the EPA’s Sci-
ence Advisory Committee recommended in 2007 that a new 
ozone standard in the range of 0.06–0.07 ppm be set, based 
on human health concerns. EPA Administrator Stephen 
Johnson decided on a level of 0.075 ppm and published the 
new standard in early 2008—to the dismay of public-health 
advocates. The new ozone standard is expected to prevent 
a substantial number of premature deaths, but only a third 
of those that the lower standard would have prevented. EPA 
Administrator Lisa Jackson proposed lowering the standard 
but was asked by President Obama to withdraw the recom-
mendation because the NAAQS would be reconsidered in 
2013 anyway.
Down with NOx. In a response to petitions from states 
in the Northeast that were having trouble achieving ozone 
and particulates ambient standards because of out-of-state 
calling for an annual fuel economy increase of 5%, begin-
ning with the 2011 model year. By 2016, the CAFE fleet 
standard would reach 35.5 mpg. For the first time, regula-
tions also were set for greenhouse gas emissions, to be low-
ered to 250 grams of CO2 per mile by 2016. Then, working 
with automakers, unions, and environmental groups, the 
Obama administration announced a new round of CAFE 
standards: the combined fleet would have to achieve a 54.5 
mpg and 163 g/mile CO2 emissions target by 2025. Achiev-
ing these goals will certainly require some innovative tech-
nological advances in vehicle design, but at the same time, 
achieving the goals will cut oil imports in half, eliminate 
billions of tons of CO2 emissions, and save drivers thou-
sands of dollars per year in fuel costs.
Getting Around. Even though many Americans con-
tinue to prefer SUVs and larger automobiles, there are defi-
nite signs of change, particularly in light of the sustained high 
prices of gasoline in recent years. One option is the  hybrid 
 electric vehicle, which combines a conventional gasoline en-
gine and a battery-powered electric motor to achieve sub-
stantial improvements in fuel economy. Such vehicles have 
been marketed by Honda and Toyota for almost a decade 
and are the most fuel-efficient cars in the United States. The 
Toyota Prius averages 46 mpg, while the Honda Insight gets 
43 mpg, according to EPA figures.
All of the major automakers are jumping on the hybrid 
bandwagon, and higher prices of gasoline have boosted hy-
brid sales in the United States. Sales of hybrids soared in 
2007, with 352,000 units sold, but with the downturn in the 
economy, hybrid sales dropped to 268,000 vehicles in 2011, 
about 2.1% of the passenger vehicle sales. Most newer hy-
brids are “green” versions of standard vehicles, including 
SUVs. For example, the Toyota Camry hybrid employs the 
same 2.5-liter gasoline engine as the standard four-cylinder 
Camry, but combines it with a large battery nestled behind 
the rear seat. Two electric motors work as generators that 
charge the battery as the car slows down. The car starts out 
under electric power, and with acceleration, the gasoline en-
gine kicks in. When the car is sitting at a stoplight or coasting 
down a hill, the gasoline engine shuts off and starts auto-
matically when speeding up. The EPA rates the 2012 Camry 
hybrid at 43 mpg, tops for all mid-sized hybrid sedans.
Prices for hybrids are several thousand dollars above 
those for comparable standard vehicles, but with gasoline 
ranging as high as $4 or more a gallon, the savings catch up 
with the extra cost in a few years. As more and more of the 
new hybrids are sold, prices are expected to drop substan-
tially. For a time, a federal tax credit was available for hybrid 
buyers that offset much of the cost differential. Many states 
still offer tax incentives for hybrid buyers.
Another encouraging trend is the development of plug-in 
hybrid cars and electric cars. The plug-in hybrid has a larger 
battery pack than the conventional hybrid and can be driven 
up to 40 miles on a charge; after that, a down-sized gasoline 
engine either recharges the battery or serves as the source of 
propulsion. Electric vehicles are just that—all electric, with 
rechargeable batteries that give the vehicle a range up to 100 
miles, depending on the speed of driving. Both in-home and 
528

Atmospheric Pollution
court to reconsider its decision. In December 2008, the court 
reversed its ruling and kept CAIR in force until the EPA fixed 
the rule in accord with CAA requirements.
CSAPR. In 2011, the Obama EPA announced the 
Cross-State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR) to replace CAIR. 
This rule addresses the same pollutants as CAIR and several 
additional states in the Midwest (Fig. 26). The rule requires 
reductions in NOx and SO2 to begin in 2012 and tighten 
further in 2014, with the final reductions in power plant 
SO2 emissions of 73% from 2005 levels and NOx  reductions 
of 54%. The rule involves some significant improvements 
in the manner in which upwind states are required to pro-
tect downwind states. In late 2012, the CSAPR rule was 
overturned  by a US Court of Appeals, claiming that EPA 
overstepped its  authority. CAIR is back in force. 
To accomplish the emissions reductions, both CAIR and 
CSAPR involve a system that was first implemented with the 
Acid Rain Program (ARP), called cap-and-trade. A target cap, 
or budget, is set by EPA for SO2 or NOx, in units of millions 
of tons of emissions. At the start, power plants are granted 
emission allowances based on formulas in the regulations. 
The plants are free to choose how they will achieve their al-
lowances, whether by installing emissions control systems 
or purchasing allowances from utilities that are under their 
budgeted allowance. The exchange of allowances occurs as a 
market, with prices fluctuating in response to supply and de-
mand. For example, the price for SO2 at the end of 2010 was 
$19 per ton, while NOx went for $325 per ton.
The impacts of these regulations for human health are 
significant. The EPA estimates that the regulations would, 
by 2014, have prevented 13,000 to 34,000 premature 
deaths, 15,000 nonfatal heart attacks, and 400,000 cases 
of aggravated asthma, among other benefits. The monetary 
benefits were estimated at $120 billion to $280 billion per 
year, while the costs of implementation would have been 
approximately $2.4 billion per year.6 
Coping with Acid Deposition
Scientists working on acid-rain issues in the 1980s calculated 
that a 50% reduction in acid-causing emissions in the United 
States would effectively prevent further acidification of the envi-
ronment. This reduction was not expected to correct the already 
bad situations, but together with natural buffering processes, it 
was estimated to be capable of preventing further environmen-
tal deterioration. Because we knew that about 50% of acid-pro-
ducing emissions came from coal-burning power plants, control 
strategies focused on these sources.
Political Developments. Although evidence of the link 
between power-plant emissions and acid deposition was 
well established by the early 1980s, no legislative action was 
taken until 1990. The problem was one of different regional 
interests. Throughout the 1980s, a coalition of politicians 
from the Midwestern states, representatives of high-sulfur 
emissions, the EPA has implemented regulations to reduce 
NOx emissions from mobile sources and from power plants 
and large industrial boilers and turbines. For the mobile 
sources, which account for 59% of the smog-generating 
emissions in the eastern United States, the EPA established 
the Tier 2 standards, which were phased in gradually be-
tween 2004 and 2009. Under these regulations, emissions for 
all SUVs, pickup trucks, and passenger vans are held to the 
same standards as those for passenger cars. For NOx, this 
means a gradual reduction to 0.07 grams per mile for the 
fleet of cars sold by each manufacturer, an 83% reduction 
over 2003 passenger car standards.
CAIR. States in the eastern half of the country continue 
to bear the burden of pollutants that are carried long dis-
tances by wind and weather, making it more difficult for them 
to attain the NAAQS levels for ozone and particulate matter. 
To address this, the Bush EPA announced a new rule in 2005 
to accomplish further reductions of SO2 and NOx emissions. 
The Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) set new lower caps on 
SO2 and NOx in 28 states in the Midwest and East, many of 
which are upwind of states experiencing nonattainment of 
ozone and particulate matter. CAIR would reduce SO2 emis-
sions 50% beginning in 2010 and 65% beginning in 2015. 
NOx emissions would be reduced by similar percentages.
The new rules had a mixed reception. The industries and 
utilities were disappointed because the rules lacked the curb 
on lawsuits that a congressional act would provide, but they 
were pleased with the extended time frame for compliance. 
However, CAIR received a legal setback when a federal ap-
peals court overturned the CAIR regulations, stating that the 
program had “more than several fatal flaws,” including not 
being strict enough. However, the EPA, numerous states, and 
the Environmental Defense Fund successfully petitioned the 
Figure 26 Map of states covered by the Cross-State Air Pollu-
tion Rule (CSAPR).  The CSAPR is the 2011 EPA rule that replaces the Clean 
Air Interstate Rule (CAIR), designed to prevent downwind states from NOx and 
SO2 pollutants. 
(Source: EPA CSAPR Fact Sheet. www.epa.gov/airtransport/statesmap.html. May 2, 2011.)
States controlled for both fine particles (annual SO2 and NOX) 
and ozone (ozone season NOX) (20 States)
States controlled for fine particles only (annual SO2 and NOX) (3 States)
States controlled for ozone only (ozone season NOX) (5 States)
States not covered by the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule
6EPA. Cross-State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR). www.epa.gov/airtransport/. 
April 20, 2012.
529

Atmospheric Pollution
3. Many utilities are trading their emission allowances. 
The purchase of allowances often represents a less 
costly way to achieve compliance than by purchasing 
low-sulfur coal or adding a scrubber. A typical trans-
action might involve a trade in the rights to emit, say, 
10,000 tons of sulfur dioxide at a cost of $19 a ton. 
The combination of approaches has created so many 
efficiencies that it has cut compliance costs to 10% of 
what was expected.
To carry out Title IV of the CAAA, the EPA initiated 
a two-phase approach. Phase I aimed at a reduction of 3.5 
million tons of SO2 by 2000. Remarkably, the goal was met 
and even exceeded—at a cost far below the gloomy indus-
try predictions (Fig. 27). Phase II began in 2000 and tar-
geted the remaining sources of SO2 in order to reach the 
8.9-million-ton cap by 2010. This goal was met for the first 
time in 2007, when power plant SO2 emissions totaled 8.9 
million tons of SO2. The emissions continue to drop, reach-
ing 5.17 million tons in 2010, as CAIR reductions have 
been implemented and as more and more power plants 
have switched from coal to natural gas. This is a decrease 
of 67% from 1990 levels (Fig. 27). 
The 2001 goal for a 2-million-ton reduction in NOx 
emissions by fixed sources was met in 2000 and every year 
since; in fact, emissions reductions of NOx are more than 
double the Title IV reduction objective. The Acid Rain Re-
duction Program was responsible for a large portion of these 
reductions, but the CAIR has also played a significant role 
in recent years, as we have seen. Current (2010) fixed source 
emissions of NOx are 2.1 million tons, a decrease of 67% 
from 1990 levels. However, these sources account for less 
than half of all NOx emissions, and the trend in total NOx 
emissions has been a slower decline than that for SO2.
Field News. The news from the field reflects the trends. 
Under the Acid Rain Program, air quality has improved, 
with significant benefits to human health, reductions in acid 
deposition, some recovery of freshwater lakes and streams, 
and improved forest conditions. Concentrations of sulfate in 
rain and deposition on the land have shown a significant de-
cline (41–69%) over a large part of the eastern United States 
in the past 18 years. The acidified streams and lakes of the 
Adirondacks and New England have seen some recovery, in 
the form of pH increases and increases in acid neutralizing 
 capacity.
One reason for the slow recovery is the continued im-
pact of nitrogen deposition. Apparently, nitrogen plays a 
much larger role in acid deposition than was once believed. 
In passing the CAAA, Congress did not set curbs on nitro-
gen emissions, but simply opted to reduce the emissions 
from fixed sources. The other reason that slow progress has 
been made in recovery is the long-term buildup of sulfur 
deposits in soils. Residual sulfur takes a long time to flush 
from natural ecosystems. Accordingly, most scientists believe 
that the recovery of the affected ecosystems will require fur-
ther reductions in both sulfur and nitrogen emissions. Acid 
rain still falls on eastern forests, as Figure 15b indicates.  
coal producers, and representatives from the electric power 
industry effectively blocked all attempts at passing legislation 
that would take action on acid deposition.
On the other side of the issue were New York and the 
New England states, as well as most of the environmental 
and scientific communities, which argued that it was both 
possible and necessary to address acid deposition and that 
the best way to do so was to control emissions from power 
plants. Also, since 70% of Canada’s acid-deposition problem 
came from the United States, diplomatic pressure toward a 
resolution was applied.
Action. With the passage of Title IV of the CAAA, the 
outcome of the controversy became history. However, two 
decades of action were lost because of political delays. In the 
wake of the passage of the 1990 act, Canada and the United 
States signed a treaty stipulating that Canada would cut its 
power plant SO2 emissions by half and cap them at 3.5 mil-
lion tons by the year 2000. Canada has done well; its emis-
sions are now about 1.8 million tons and are expected to 
stay down. So has the United States.
Title IV of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. 
Title IV of the CAAA addressed the acid-deposition problem 
by mandating reductions in both sulfur dioxide and nitrogen 
oxide levels. The major provisions of the Title IV ARP are as 
follows:
1. By 2010, total power plant SO2 emissions were to be 
reduced 10 million tons below 1980 levels. This is the 
50% reduction called for by scientists, and it involved 
the setting of a permanent cap of 8.9 million tons on 
such emissions.
2. In a major departure from the command-and-control 
approach, Title IV promoted a free-market approach 
to regulation of SO2. This was the original cap-and-
trade program that the CAIR and CSAPR have been 
grafted on.
3. New utilities do not receive allowances. Instead, they 
have to buy into the system by purchasing existing al-
lowances. Thus, there are a finite number of allowances.
4. 
Nitrogen oxide emissions from power plants were to 
be reduced by 2 million tons by 2001. This was to be 
 accomplished by regulating the boilers used by the utilities 
and by mandating the continuous monitoring of emissions.
Accomplishments of Title IV. The utilities industry re-
sponded to the new law with three actions:
1. Many utilities have switched to low-sulfur coal, avail-
able in Appalachia and the western United States.
2. Many older power plants have added scrubbers—“liquid 
filters” that put exhaust fumes through a spray of water 
containing lime. SO2 reacts with the lime and is precipi-
tated as calcium sulfate (CaSO4). Because the technology 
for high-efficiency scrubbing is well established, more 
and more power plants are installing scrubbers, which 
have been required for all coal-burning power plants 
built after 1977.
530

Atmospheric Pollution
opportunities for economic growth and tend to disregard the 
costs avoided (from improved health).
The Acid Rain Program has recently been examined 
from a benefit-cost perspective.8 Benefits from improve-
ments in human health have received the greatest attention 
from economic and scientific analyses, but some progress 
has been made in evaluating the aesthetic and environmen-
tal benefits as well. Health benefits extend well beyond the 
acid deposition issues, because the reductions in NOx and 
SO2 reduce the levels of PM2.5 particulates and ozone. The 
estimated value of the program’s health benefits in the year 
2010 ranges from $174 billion to $427 billion, and the pro-
gram prevented some 160,000 premature deaths. Two en-
vironmental benefit assessments have been made: Benefits 
from improved visibility were $40 billion in 2010, while 
environmental benefits to New York State alone were esti-
mated at $1.1 billion per year. The estimated 2010 costs of 
administering and implementing the ARP were $3 billion, 
far below early estimates. The benefit-cost ratio speaks for 
itself. Acid rain is just one of many problems brought on 
by our involvement in major technologies, and although 
decades of inaction passed before it was addressed by pub-
lic policy, the CAAA has made real improvements in the 
troposphere, ecosystems suffering from acidification, and 
human health. 
We turn now to yet another problem of unintended 
consequences, where the use of some apparently harmless 
chemicals led to destruction of the stratospheric ozone that 
protects Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation.
The 2011 National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program 
Report to Congress7 concluded that further reductions in 
SO2 and NOx will be needed in order to achieve substan-
tial recovery of acidic lakes and streams and improvement 
of forest soils. These reductions are in the pipeline, as we 
have seen. 
Costs and Benefits
We have air pollution because we want the goods and serv-
ices that inevitably generate it. We want to be warm or cool, 
depending on the weather; we use electricity to power our 
homes, institutions, and manufacturing facilities; we crave 
freedom of movement, so we have our motor vehicles, trains, 
boats, and planes; and we want the array of goods produced 
by industries, from food to DVDs to computers to toys—
the list is endless. We embrace all of these because we de-
rive some benefit from them. The benefits may be essential 
or trivial, but we are accustomed to having them, as long as 
we can pay for them. Satisfying all of these needs and wants 
is what drives the American economy—and it produces mil-
lions of tons of pollutants in the process.
In recent decades, we have been learning that air pollu-
tion does not have to get worse—that in fact it can be rem-
edied enough to keep most of us from getting sick and the 
environment from being degraded. But the remedies come 
with a price. Without question, measures taken to reduce air 
pollution carry an economic cost. Some critics have charged 
that air-pollution controls are not cost effective; that is, the 
benefits are not nearly as great as the costs. They see lost 
Figure 27 Power plant SO2 emissions covered 
under the Acid Rain and CAIR programs.  Emis-
sions from all power plants were under ARP allowances for 
the first time in 2006 and even more so in 2007. 
(Source: Executive Office of the President. National Acid Precipitation 
Assessment Program Report to Congress 2011: An Integrated Assess-
ment. USGS, 2011. http://ny.water.usgs.gov.)
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
16.0
18.0
20.0
1980
1990
1995
2000
2005
2008
2009
2010
CAIR SO2 units not in the ARP
All ARP units, including future CAIR
SO2 units also in the ARP
ARP units not covered by the CAIR
SO2 program
2010 ARP budget
2010 CAIR SO2 program budget
SO2 EMISSIONS FROM CAIR SO2 ANNUAL PROGRAM AND ARP SOURCES, 1980–2010
7Executive Office of the President, op cit.
8U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radiation. The Benefits 
and Costs of the Clean Air Act from 1990 to 2020. Summary Report, March 2011. 
www.epa.gov/air/sect812/aug10/summaryreport.pdf.
531

Atmospheric Pollution
Protocol. Table 4 summarizes some of the major findings of the 
panel’s 2010 assessment.9  
Radiation and Importance of the Shield
Solar radiation emits electromagnetic waves with a wide range 
of energies and wavelengths (Fig. 28). Visible light is that part of 
the electromagnetic spectrum that can be detected by the eye’s 
photoreceptors. Ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths are slightly shorter 
than the wavelengths of violet light, which are the shortest 
wavelengths visible to the human eye. UVB radiation consists of 
5  Destruction of the Ozone Layer
The stratospheric ozone layer protects Earth from harmful ul-
traviolet radiation. The depletion of this layer is another major 
atmospheric challenge that is the result of human technology. 
Environmental scientists have traced the problem to a widely 
used group of chemicals: the chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs. As 
with global warming, there were skeptics who were unconvinced 
that the problem was serious. However, scientists have achieved 
a strong consensus on the ozone depletion problem, reflected 
in the work of the Scientific Assessment Panel of the Montreal 
tabLe 4 Key Findings of the 2010 Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion
1.  The Montreal Protocol is working as intended: There is clear evidence of a decrease in the atmospheric burden of ozone-depleting substances 
(ODS) and some early signs of stratospheric ozone recovery.
2.  Springtime polar ozone depletion continues to be severe in cold stratospheric winters. Large Antarctic holes continue, and large Arctic ozone 
depletion occurs during colder Arctic winters. Antarctic ozone levels are projected to return to normal levels around 2060–2075.
3.  Ozone abundances over regions outside of the poles no longer continue to decline, in spite of contributions of polar ozone depletion to 
extrapolar regions. It is likely that global ozone will return to normal levels around the middle of the 21st century.
4.  Our basic understanding that anthropogenic ODS have been the principle cause of the ozone depletion over the past decades has been 
strengthened.
5.  The abundances of anthropogenic ODS in the troposphere and the stratosphere show a downward trend from their peak values in the 1990s.
6.  There are significant connections between ozone depletion efforts and climate change: Some of the replacements for ODS are potent greenhouse 
gases, and some greenhouse gases promote cooling in the stratosphere, which affects ozone depletion reactions.
Source: World Meteorological Organization, Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 2010, Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project 
Report No. 52 (Geneva, Switzerland: World Meteorological Organization), 20.
Figure 28 The electromagnetic spectrum.  
Ultraviolet radiation, visible light, infrared radiation, 
and many other forms of radiation are at different 
wavelengths on the electromagnetic spectrum.
10,000 km
1000 km
100 km
10 km
1 km
100 m
10 m
1 m
100 mm
10 mm
1 mm
100  μm
10 μm
1 μm
.1 μm
.01 μm
.001 μm
.0001 μm
TV broadcasts
FM radio
TV broadcasts
Weather
Radar
Microwaves
X rays
Gamma rays
AM radio broadcasts
Long radio waves
Short radio
waves
Infrared radiation
Ultraviolet radiation
Audible
sound (not
electromagnetic)
Red
Orange
Yellow
Green
Blue
Violet
Visible light
20 m
1 cm
.7 μm
.6 μm
.5 μm
.4 μm
Wavelength
.3 μm
UVA
UVB
9World Meteorological Organization. Global Ozone Research and Monitoring 
Project—Report No. 52. Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 2010. http://
ozone.unep.org/Assessment_Panels/SAP/Scientific_Assessment_2010/index.shtml.
532

Atmospheric Pollution
wavelengths that range from 280 to 315 nanometers (0.28 mm 
to 0.32 mm), whereas UVA radiation is from 315 to 400 nano-
meters (0.32 mm to 0.40 mm).  Because energy is inversely related 
to wavelength, UVB is more energetic and, therefore, more dan-
gerous, but UVA can also cause damage. 
Upon penetrating the atmosphere and being absorbed 
by biological tissues, UV radiation damages protein and 
DNA molecules at the surfaces of all living things. (This 
damage is what occurs when you get a sunburn.) If the 
full amount of UV radiation falling on the stratosphere 
reached Earth’s surface, it is doubtful that any life could 
survive. We are spared the more damaging effects from 
UV rays because most UV radiation (more than 99%) is 
absorbed by ozone in the stratosphere. For that reason, 
stratospheric ozone is commonly referred to as the ozone 
shield (Fig. 29). 
However, even the small amount (less than 1%) of UVB 
radiation that does reach us is responsible for sunburns and 
more than 700,000 cases of skin cancer and precancerous 
ailments per year in North America as well as for damage 
to plant crops and other life-forms. (See Sound Science, 
 “Coping with UV Radiation.”) 
Formation and Breakdown of the Shield
Ozone is formed in the stratosphere when UV radiation acts 
on oxygen (O2) molecules. The high-energy UV radiation first 
causes some molecular oxygen (O2) to split apart into free oxy-
gen (O) atoms, and these atoms then combine with molecular 
oxygen to form ozone via the following  reactions:
 
O2 1 UVB → O 1 O 
(1)
 
O 1 O2 → O3 
(2)
Not all of the molecular oxygen is converted to ozone, 
however, because free oxygen atoms may also combine with 
ozone molecules to form two oxygen molecules in the fol-
lowing reaction:
 
O 1 O3 → O2 1 O2 
(3)
Finally, when ozone absorbs UVB, it is converted back to 
free oxygen and molecular oxygen:
 
O3 1 UVB → O 1 O2 
(4)
Thus, the amount of ozone in the stratosphere is dy-
namic. There is an equilibrium due to the continual cycle of 
reactions of formation (Eqs. 1 and 2) and reactions of de-
struction (Eqs. 3 and 4). Because of seasonal changes in solar 
radiation, ozone concentration in the Northern Hemisphere 
is highest in summer and lowest in winter. Also, in general, 
ozone concentrations are highest at the equator and dimin-
ish as latitude increases—again, a function of higher overall 
amounts of solar radiation. However, the presence of other 
chemicals in the stratosphere can upset the normal ozone 
equilibrium and promote undesirable reactions there.
Halogens in the Atmosphere. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 
are a type of halogenated hydrocarbon. CFCs are nonreactive, 
nonflammable, nontoxic organic molecules in which both chlo-
rine and fluorine atoms have replaced some hydrogen atoms. At 
room temperature, CFCs are gases under normal (atmospheric) 
pressure, but they liquefy under modest pressure, giving off heat 
in the process and becoming cold. When they revaporize, they 
reabsorb the heat and become hot. These attributes led to the 
widespread use of CFCs (more than 1 million tons per year in 
the 1980s) for the following applications:
 • In refrigerators, air conditioners, and heat pumps as the 
heat-transfer fluid;
 • In the production of plastic foams;
 • By the electronics industry for cleaning computer parts, 
which must be meticulously purified; and
 • As the pressurizing agent in aerosol cans.
Rowland and Molina. All of the preceding uses led to the 
release of CFCs into the atmosphere, where they mixed with the 
normal atmospheric gases and eventually reached the strato-
sphere. In 1974, chemists Sherwood Rowland and Mario Mo-
lina published a classic paper10 (for which they were awarded 
the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1995) concluding that CFCs 
could damage the stratospheric ozone layer through the release 
of chlorine atoms and, as a result, UV radiation would increase 
and cause more skin cancer. Rowland and Molina reasoned that, 
0
Altitude (miles)
Altitude (miles)
Ozone Concentration
5
Stratosphere
Ozone in the Atmosphere
Troposphere
Reduced
Harsh UV
The Ozone Layer
Harsh 
UV
Solar light
10
15
20
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Figure 29 Ozone in the atmosphere. The vertical distribution of ozone 
in the troposphere (green) and stratosphere (red), showing the location of the 
stratospheric ozone layer that absorbs 99% of UV radiation. 
(Source: Synthesis and Assessment Product 2.4. Report by the U.S. Climate Change  Science 
Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research. November 2008.)
10M. J. Molina and F. S. Rowland, “Stratospheric Sink for Chlorofluoro-Methanes: 
Chlorine-Atom Catalyzed Distribution of Ozone,” Nature 249 (1974): 810–812.
533

Atmospheric Pollution
 
ClO 1 ClO → 2Cl 1 O2 
(7)
Reactions 6 and 7 are called the chlorine catalytic cycle 
because chlorine is continuously regenerated as it reacts with 
ozone. Thus, chlorine acts as a catalyst, a chemical that promotes 
a chemical reaction without itself being used up in the reaction. 
Because every chlorine atom in the stratosphere can last from 
40 to 100 years, it has the potential to break down 100,000 
molecules of ozone. Thus, CFCs are judged to be damaging be-
cause they act as transport agents that continuously move chlo-
rine atoms into the stratosphere. The damage persists because 
the chlorine atoms are removed from the stratosphere only very 
slowly. Figure 30 shows the basic processes of ozone formation 
and destruction, including recent refinements to our knowledge 
of those processes that will be explained shortly. 
EPA Action. After studying the evidence, the EPA became 
convinced that CFCs were a threat and, in 1978, banned their 
although CFCs would be stable in the troposphere (where they 
have been found to last 70 to 110 years), in the stratosphere they 
would be subjected to intense UV radiation, which would break 
them apart, releasing free chlorine atoms via the following reac-
tion: 
 
CFCl3 1 UV → Cl 1 CFCl2 
(5)
Ultimately, all of the chlorine of a CFC molecule would be 
released as a result of further photochemical breakdown. The 
free chlorine atoms would then attack stratospheric ozone to 
form chlorine monoxide (ClO) and molecular  oxygen:
 
Cl 1 O3 → ClO 1 O2 
(6)
Furthermore, two molecules of chlorine monoxide may 
react to release more chlorine and an oxygen molecule:
SOUND SCIENCE
Coping with UV Radiation
People living in Chile, 
Australia, and New 
Zealand are no strangers 
to the effects of the 
thinner ozone shield. UV 
alerts are given in those parts of the Southern 
Hemisphere during spring months as lobes of 
ozone-depleted stratospheric air move outward 
from the Antarctic. At times, the ozone above 
those countries can be less than half its normal 
concentration, which means that greater intensi-
ties of UV radiation reach Earth’s surface. It is 
predicted that one out of every three Australians 
will develop serious and perhaps fatal skin can-
cer in his or her lifetime.
Even without a thinner ozone layer, UV 
radiation is a serious problem. Concerned over 
the rising incidence of skin cancer and cataract 
surgery in the United States, the EPA, together 
with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-
ministration and the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, has initiated a new UV Index 
(see the table at the end of the essay). The index 
takes the form of daily forecasts of UV exposure, 
issued by the Weather Service for 58 cities. Sat-
ellite measurements of stratospheric ozone are 
combined with other weather patterns. The goal 
of the index is to remind people of the dangers 
of UV radiation and to prompt them to take 
appropriate action to avoid cancer, premature 
aging of the skin, eye damage, cataracts, and 
blindness. For at least the next two decades, the 
dangers will be quite noticeable, ranging from a 
greater incidence of sunburn to a likely epidemic 
of malignant melanoma.
Less obvious, but no less important, are the 
chronic effects of exposure to the Sun. The nor-
mal aging of skin—coarse wrinkling, yellowing, 
and the development of irregular patches of 
heavily pigmented and unpigmented skin—is 
now known to be largely the result of dam-
age from the Sun. This can happen even in the 
absence of episodes of sunburn. Further, a large 
proportion of the million cataract operations 
performed annually in the United States can be 
traced to UV exposure, another of the chronic 
effects of this kind of radiation.
The most serious impact of chronic exposure 
to the Sun is skin cancer; more than 1 million 
new cases occur each year in the United States, 
according to the National Cancer Institute. Three 
types of skin cancer are traced to UV exposure: 
basal cell carcinoma (BCC), squamous cell 
carcinoma (SCC), and melanoma. Most of the 
skin cancers (75%) are BCCs, slow growing and 
therefore treatable. SCC accounts for about 20% 
of skin cancers and can also be cured if treated 
early. However, it metastasizes (spreads away 
from the source) more readily than BCC and 
thus is potentially fatal. Melanoma (6%) is the 
most deadly form of skin cancer, as it metasta-
sizes easily. Melanoma is often traced to occa-
sional sunburns during childhood or adolescence 
or to sunburns in people who normally stay out 
of the sun.
What is an appropriate response to this 
disturbing information? First, know when UV 
intensity is greatest (three hours on either side 
of midday), and take precautions accordingly. 
Protect your eyes with sunglasses and a hat, 
and apply sunscreen with a sun protection 
factor (SPF) rating of 15 or higher during such 
times. Think twice before considering sunbath-
ing or using tanning beds, and never proceed 
without sunscreen that is strong enough to 
prevent sunburn. Always protect children with 
sunscreen. Their years of potential exposure 
are many, and their skin is easily burned. 
And if you detect a patch of skin or a mole 
that is changing in size or color or that is red 
and fails to heal, consult a dermatologist for 
 treatment.    
P
A
Z
t
t
UV Index (EPA)
Exposure 
Category 
Index 
Value
Minutes to Burn for 
“Never Tans” (Most 
Susceptible)
Minutes to Burn 
for “Rarely Burns” 
(Least Susceptible)
Minimal
0–2
35
.120
Low
3–4
20
.120
Moderate
5–6
12
90
High
8–9
 8
55
Very high
10–12
 6
40
534

Atmospheric Pollution
“hole” (actually, a serious thinning) in the stratospheric 
ozone layer over the South Pole. There, in an area the size 
of the United States, ozone levels were 50% lower than nor-
mal. The hole would have been discovered earlier by NASA 
satellites monitoring ozone levels except that computers 
were programmed to reject data showing a drop as large 
as 30% as being due to instrument anomalies. Scientists 
had assumed that the loss of ozone, if it occurred, would 
be slow, gradual, and uniform over the whole planet. The 
ozone hole came as a surprise, and if it had occurred any-
where but over the South Pole, the UV damage would have 
been extensive. As it is, the limited time and area of ozone 
depletion there have not apparently brought on any cata-
strophic ecological events so far.
News of the ozone hole stimulated an enormous scien-
tific research effort. A unique set of conditions was found to 
use in aerosol cans in the United States. Manufacturers quickly 
switched to nondamaging substitutes, such as butane, and things 
were quiet for several years. CFCs continued to be used in ap-
plications other than aerosols, however, and skeptics demanded 
more convincing evidence of their harmfulness.
Atmospheric scientists reasoned that any substance car-
rying reactive halogens to the stratosphere had the potential 
to deplete ozone. These substances include halons, methyl 
chloroform, carbon tetrafluoride, and methyl bromide. 
Chemically similar to chlorine, bromine also attacks ozone 
and forms a monoxide (BrO) in a catalytic cycle. Because of 
its extensive use as a soil fumigant and pesticide, bromine 
plays a major role in ozone depletion. (Bromine is 16 times 
as potent as chlorine in ozone destruction.)
The Ozone “Hole.” In the fall of 1985, British atmos-
pheric scientists working in Antarctica reported a gaping 
Figure 30 Stratospheric ozone formation and destruction. UV radiation stimulates ozone 
production at the lower latitudes, and ozone-rich air  migrates to high latitudes. At the same time, CFCs and other 
compounds carry halogens into the stratosphere, where they are broken down by UV radiation, to release chlorine 
and bromine. Ozone is subject to high-latitude loss during winter, as the chlorine cycle is enhanced by the polar 
stratospheric clouds. Midlatitude losses occur as chlorine reservoirs are stimulated to release chlorine by reacting 
with stratospheric sulfate aerosol.
O3 Transport
STRATOSPHERIC OZONE FORMATION AND DESTRUCTION
Ultraviolet radiation
from the Sun
Cl reservoirs react with SSA
to release active chlorine, which
adds to midlatitude O3 loss
North Pole
S. America
60N
Equator
High-Latitude
Ozone Loss
Enhanced chlorine
cycle: O3 loss
Cl Reservoirs
Antarctica
South Pole
60S
Enhanced chlorine cycle: O3 loss 
is accelerated; “hole” results
Cl Reservoirs
CFCs react with UV and release
chlorine, which can react with
ozone to produce chlorine
monoxide (ClO).  This results in
midlatitude ozone loss.  Other 
atmospheric gases react with
chlorine and chlorine monoxide
to form Cl reservoirs, which are
usually inert.
O3 Production
Str
ato
sp
he
ric
 S
ulf
ate
 A
ero
so
l (
SS
A) 
Str
ato
sp
he
re 
 Tr
op
op
au
se
 
   
N. 
Po
lar
 S
tra
to
sp
he
ric
 C
lo
ud
s 
S. 
Po
lar
 S
tra
to
sp
he
ric
 C
lo
ud
s 
Tro
po
sp
he
re 
CFCs
CFCs
N. America
535

Atmospheric Pollution
stratospheric temperatures, and this is beginning to influence 
Arctic ozone levels. The 2011 Arctic winter and spring brought 
an unusually long cold period, and an ozone hole developed that 
covered 2 million square kilometers and involved a loss of 80% 
of the ozone layer. This loss allowed high levels of UV radiation 
over northern Canada, Russia, and Europe in the spring.
Further Ozone Depletion. Ozone losses have not been con-
fined to Earth’s polar regions, though they are most spectacu-
lar there. A worldwide network of ozone- measuring stations 
sends data to the World Ozone Data Center in  Toronto, Canada. 
Reports from the center reveal ozone depletion levels of 3.5% 
and 6% over the period 2006–2009 in the midlatitudes of the 
Northern and Southern Hemispheres, respectively. Polar ozone 
depletion and the subsequent  mixing of air masses are respon-
sible for much of this loss. There is virtually no ozone depletion 
over tropical regions. The good news from the network is that 
ozone levels are improving.
Is the ozone loss significant to our future? The EPA 
has calculated that the ozone losses of the 1980s will 
eventually have caused 12 million people in the United 
States to develop skin cancers over their lifetime and that 
93,000 of these cancers will be fatal. Americans are esti-
mated to have developed more than 900,000 new cases of 
skin cancer a year in the 1990s. The ozone losses of that 
decade allowed more UVB radiation than ever to reach 
Earth. Studies have confirmed increased UVB levels, espe-
cially at higher latitudes.
Coming to Grips with Ozone Depletion The dramatic 
growth of the hole in the ozone layer (Fig. 31) galvanized a 
response around the world. Scientists and politicians in the 
United States and other countries have achieved treaties de-
signed to avert a UV disaster.
be responsible for the hole. In the summer, gases such as ni-
trogen dioxide and methane react with chlorine monoxide 
and chlorine to trap the chlorine, forming so-called chlorine 
reservoirs (Fig. 30) and preventing much ozone depletion.
Polar Vortex. When the Antarctic winter arrives in June, 
it creates a vortex (like a whirlpool) in the stratosphere, which 
confines stratospheric gases within a ring of air circulating 
around the Antarctic. The extremely cold temperatures of the 
Antarctic winter cause the small amounts of moisture and 
other chemicals present in the stratosphere to form the south 
polar stratospheric clouds. During winter, the cloud particles 
provide surfaces on which chemical reactions release molecu-
lar chlorine (Cl2) from the chlorine reservoirs.
When sunlight returns to the Antarctic in the spring, the 
Sun’s warmth breaks up the clouds. UV light then attacks the 
molecular chlorine, releasing free chlorine and initiating the 
chlorine cycle, which rapidly destroys ozone. By  November, the 
beginning of the Antarctic summer, the vortex breaks down, 
and ozone-rich air returns to the area. However, by that time, 
ozone-poor air has spread around the Southern Hemisphere. 
Shifting patches of ozone-depleted air have caused UV radia-
tion to increase to 20% above normal in Australia. Television 
stations there now report daily UV readings and warnings for 
Australians to stay out of the sun. On the basis of current data, 
estimates indicate that in  Queensland, where the ozone shield is 
thinnest, two out of three  Australians are expected to develop 
skin cancer by the age of 70. The ozone hole intensified during 
the 1990s and has leveled off between 22 million and 27 million 
square  kilometers, an area as large as North America (Fig. 31).  
Because severe ozone depletion occurs under polar conditions, 
observers have been keeping a close watch on the  Arctic. The 
higher temperatures and weaker vortex formation there pre-
vent the severe losses that have become routine in the Antarctic. 
However, one of the impacts of global climate change is lower 
Figure 31 Ozone loss and extent of ozone 
hole. (a) The decline in ozone from 1980 to 2011 is shown 
in Dobson units for September 21 to October 16 each year 
(the average amount of ozone in the stratosphere is 300 
Dobson units). (b) The size of the ozone hole is plotted for 
the same time frame, showing the origin of the hole and its 
leveling off in the last few years. No data were acquired in 
1995, shown as a blue column in both plots.  
(Source: NASA Ozone Hole Watch. http://ozonewatch.gsfc.nasa.gov/. 
May 15, 2012.)
1980
1980
1990
1990
2000
2000
2010
2010
0
0
50
100
150
5
10
15
20
25
Size of Antarctic Ozone Hole
(Million km2)
Ozone over Antarctic
(Dobson units)
(a)
(b)
536

Atmospheric Pollution
The Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 also address this 
problem—in Title VI, Protecting Stratospheric Ozone. Title VI is 
a comprehensive program that restricts the production, use, emis-
sions, and disposal of an entire family of chemicals identified as 
ozone depleting. For example, the program calls for a phase out 
schedule for the hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), a family of 
chemicals being used as less damaging substitutes for CFCs until 
nonchlorine substitutes are available. Halons—used in chemical 
fire extinguishers—were banned in 1994. The CAAA also regu-
lates the servicing of refrigeration and air-conditioning units.
The Montreal Protocol had its 25th anniversary in 2012. As 
a result of this and subsequent agreements, CFCs are no longer 
being produced or used. Substitutes for CFCs are readily avail-
able and, in some cases, are even less expensive than CFCs. The 
most commonly used substitutes are HCFCs, which still con-
tain some chlorine and are scheduled for a gradual phaseout 
(by 2030). Although they contain chlorine, HCFCs are largely 
destroyed in the troposphere and are much less capable of de-
stroying stratospheric ozone than CFCs. The most promising 
substitutes are hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), which contain no 
chlorine and are judged to have no ozone-depleting potential. 
They do, however, have significant global warming potential. Be-
cause CFCs are potent greenhouse gases, phasing out CFCs and 
other ozone-depleting substances is helping the efforts to slow 
down global climate change. Ironically, HFCs are likely to have a 
marked influence on global climate change if their use increases 
in the future.
Other ozone-depleting substances are still a concern. Methyl 
bromide continues to be produced and released into the atmos-
phere; the compound is employed as a soil fumigant to control 
agricultural pests. Under the Montreal Protocol, it was scheduled 
to be completely phased out by 2005 in the developed countries 
and 10 years later in the developing countries. In the meantime, 
bromine is likely to play a greater role in ozone depletion rela-
tive to chlorine. Responding to requests from the agricultural 
industry, the United States has repeatedly received “critical use” 
exemptions to the ban for use of this ozone-depleting chemi-
cal. However, the EPA is phasing out these uses, and the current 
(2012) level is just 4.6% of 1991 use (1,180 tons vs. 25,500 tons).
Montreal Protocol. In 1987, under the auspices of its envi-
ronmental program, the United Nations convened a meeting 
in Montreal, Canada, to address ozone depletion. Member na-
tions reached an agreement, known as the Montreal Protocol, 
to scale back CFC production 50% by 2000. All 196 United 
Nations member countries have ratified the agreement.
The Montreal Protocol was written even before CFCs 
were so clearly implicated in driving the destruction of ozone 
and before the threat to Arctic and temperate-zone ozone 
was recognized. Because ozone losses during the late 1980s 
were greater than expected, an amendment to the protocol 
was adopted in June 1990. The amendment required partici-
pating nations to phase out the major chemicals destroying 
the ozone layer by 2000 in developed countries and by 2010 
in developing countries. In the face of evidence that ozone 
depletion was accelerating even more, another amendment 
to the protocol was adopted in November 1992, moving the 
target date for the complete phaseout of CFCs to January 1, 
1996. Timetables for phasing out all of the suspected ozone-
depleting halogens were shortened at the 1992 meeting.
Quantities of CFCs were still being manufactured after 
1992 to satisfy legitimate demand in the developing countries. 
However, according to the Montreal Protocol, all  manufacturing 
of CFCs was to have been halted by December 31, 2005. The 
results of the protocol can be seen clearly in Figure 32, which 
shows the time course of production of ozone-depleting sub-
stances (ODS) and the abundance of those chemicals in the strat-
osphere. Ozone depletion  continues to occur because the ODS 
are long-lived in the stratosphere. 
Action in the United States. The United States was the 
leader in the production and use of CFCs and other ODS, 
with DuPont Chemical Company being the major producer. 
Following years of resistance, DuPont pledged in 1988 to 
phase out CFC production by 2000. In late 1991, a company 
spokesperson announced that, in response to new data on 
ozone loss, DuPont would accelerate its phaseout. Many of 
the large corporate users of CFCs (AT&T, IBM, and North-
ern Telecom, for example) phased out their CFC use by 1994.
Figure 32 Production and presence 
of ozone-depleting substances in 
the atmosphere: Past, present, and 
future. (a) Production of ozone-depleting 
substances (ODS); CFCs are shown in green, and 
HCFCs, being used to replace CFCs, are shown 
in blue. (b) Relative abundances of ozone-
depleting chlorine and bromine in the strato-
sphere. The impact of the Montreal Protocol and 
its amendments is clear. 
(Source: UN Environment Program, Scientific Assess-
ment of Ozone Depletion: 2006.)
Ozone-depleting
chlorine and bromine
in the stratosphere
OzDS
production
1980
Now
~2100
(a)
(b)
537

Atmospheric Pollution
of the Montreal Protocol and the final steps of CFC phaseout, 
the world has shown that it can respond collectively and effec-
tively to a clearly perceived threat. The ozone layer is expected 
to recover completely by midcentury in the midlatitudes and a 
couple of decades later in the polar regions. The scientific com-
munity has played a crucial role in this episode, first alerting the 
world and then plunging into intense research programs to as-
certain the validity of the threat. Scientists continue to influence 
the political process, which has forged a response to the threat. 
Although skeptics were stressing the uncertainties in our under-
standing of ozone loss and its consequences, the strong consen-
sus in the scientific community convinced the world’s political 
leaders that action was clearly needed. This is a most encourag-
ing development as we look forward to the actions that must 
be taken during the 21st century to prevent catastrophic global 
climate change.  
Another ODS is nitrous oxide (N2O). Figure 12a shows 
how nitric oxides are able to destroy ground-level ozone. This 
can also happen in the stratosphere, where N2O is broken down 
into NOx and the nitrogen oxides deplete ozone there, along 
with the chlorine and bromine compounds. Even though the 
current ozone depletion in the stratosphere is largely due to ac-
cumulated chlorine and bromine compounds from past releases, 
nitrous oxide is the predominant anthropogenic ODS currently 
being released and is expected to remain the largest throughout 
the 21st century. Oddly, this substance is not yet addressed by 
the Montreal Protocol and its amendments.11 
Final Thoughts. The ozone story is a remarkable episode in 
human history. From the first warnings in 1974 that something 
might be amiss in the stratosphere because of a practically inert 
and highly useful industrial chemical, through the development 
11A. R. Ravishankara et al. “Nitrous Oxide (N2O): The Dominant Ozone-De-
pleting Substance Emitted in the 21st Century.” Science 326: 123–125. October 
2, 2009.
REVISITING THE THEMES
Sound Science
Atmospheric science has come a long way in the past 
half-century. Some of its triumphs include understanding 
causes and effects that are operative in photochemical 
smog, discovering the cleansing role of the hydroxyl radical, tracing the 
sources of lead and mercury in humans, working out causes and effects 
in the acid-rain story, and alerting the world to ozone shield destruction. 
Sound science is increasingly important in measuring ambient pollut-
ant levels and in devising technologies to prevent more pollution. Many 
scientists have put their reputations and careers on the line as they have 
fought for policy changes to correct the human and environmental dam-
age they have uncovered.
Sustainability
Air pollution was on an unsustainable track, with indus-
trial smog producing health disasters, photochemical 
smog making city living intolerable for many, crops and 
natural ecosystems deteriorating seriously, and the ozone shield being 
destroyed. Less obvious, but just as important, chronic exposure to air 
pollutants was responsible for poor health and increased mortality for 
millions. Are we now back on a more sustainable track? The important 
indicators would be long-term declines in the following: lead in the 
environment,  annual amounts of emissions of pollutants, acid and 
sulfate deposition in the Northeast, ambient levels of pollutants, asthma 
hospitalizations, and locations that are noncompliant. Most of these 
parameters are moving in the right direction, but much remains to be 
done. The ozone story represents a sustainable pathway. Levels of ozone-
destroying chemicals are now declining, and it is very likely that the 
ozone layer will be “healthy” by midcentury.
Stewardship
Stewardship means doing the right thing when faced with 
difficult problems and choices. It is fair to say that our so-
ciety has responded well in caring for children threatened 
by high lead levels in their blood and, in general, in taking the costly 
actions we have documented in this chapter. Further, in addressing acid 
deposition, we have even shown care for the natural world. The need for 
stewardship is still very strong, however, and thankfully, there are many 
in nongovernmental and other organizations, and indeed many in the 
EPA, that are determined to stay the course and make sure that effective 
action is taken. Often, though, they have to do battle with industry lob-
bies and special interests that are concerned with the economic bottom 
line and that seem unable to embrace the common good represented by 
effective action to curb pollution.
S
S
d
c
by high lead lev
S
A
t
s
natural ecosyste
S
A
h
c
smog discoveri
Review Questions
1. What naturally occurring cleanser helps to remove pollut-
ants from the atmosphere? Where does it come from? What 
other mechanisms also act to cleanse the atmosphere of 
 pollutants?
2. Describe the origins of industrial smog, photochemical 
smog, and atmospheric brown clouds. What are the differ-
ences in the cause and appearance of each?
 3. What are the seven major primary air pollutants and their 
sources?
 4. What are the major secondary pollutants, and how are they 
formed?
 5. What is the difference between an acid and a base? What is 
the pH scale?
538

 13. What are the major steps being taken to reduce emissions 
from passenger vehicles? What are the CAFE standards, and 
how are they changing?
 14. How do CAIR and CSAPR address downwind ozone 
 pollution?
 15. What has been happening in the United States to reduce acid 
deposition, and how successful has it been?
 16. How is the protective ozone shield formed? What causes its 
natural breakdown?
 17. How do CFCs affect the concentration of ozone in the 
stratosphere and contribute to the formation of the ozone 
hole?
 18. Describe the international efforts that are currently in place 
to protect our ozone shield. What evidence is there that such 
efforts have been effective?
 6. What two major acids are involved in acid deposition? 
Where does each come from?
 7. What impacts does air pollution have on human health? Give 
the three categories of impact, and distinguish among them.
 8. Describe the negative effects of pollutants on crops, forests, 
and other materials. Which pollutants are mainly responsi-
ble for these effects?
 9. How can a shift in environmental pH affect aquatic ecosys-
tems? What protects these ecosystems in some regions?
 10. What are the criteria pollutants and the National Ambient 
Air Quality Standards, and how are the standards used?
 11. Discuss ways in which the Clean Air Act Amendments of 
1990 address the failures of previous legislation.
 12. Describe the new Mercury and Air Toxics Standards and the 
impacts they will have on industry and on human health.
thinking enviRonmentAlly
 1. Motor vehicles release close to half the pollutants that dirty 
our air. What alternatives might be introduced to encourage 
a decrease in our use of automobiles and other vehicles with 
internal combustion engines?
 2. How would our pattern of life be different in the absence of 
the Clean Air Act and its amendments? Write a short essay 
describing the possibilities.
 3. The wind blows across Country A and into Country B. 
Country A has fossil fuel–burning power plants, but a rela-
tively low level of air pollution. Country B has power plants 
run by moving water (hydroelectric plants), but a higher 
level of pollution. What’s happening? What could the two 
countries do to correct the situation? Explain how this per-
tains to international air-pollution laws.
 4. A large amount of air pollution is attributed to manufactur-
ing. Some would argue that it is not technologically possible, 
or economically efficient, to eliminate this pollution. How 
would you respond to this argument?
 5. What arguments might the auto and utility industries pre-
sent to delay regulatory action on particulates and ozone? 
How would health officials respond to their arguments?
mAking A DiffeRence
 1. At all costs, avoid burning trash in your yard. It’s illegal in 
many places and can lead to birth defects, cancers, and lung 
diseases.
 2. Check your home heating system. Simple wood smoke 
 contains fine particles that are associated with serious nega-
tive health effects. The tiny size of these pollutants allows 
them to be easily inhaled, traveling deep into your lungs 
where they can cause respiratory and cardiovascular prob-
lems, including premature death. Woodstoves, fireplaces, 
and other wood-burning devices put out hundreds of times 
more air pollution than other sources of heat such as natural 
gas, propane, oil, and electricity.
 3. Discuss air-pollution issues with your employer. Many em-
ployers are realizing the benefits of considering air quality 
issues. Green travel plans, alternative-powered vehicles, and 
the provision of cycling facilities are just three ways employ-
ers can help to reduce their impacts on air quality, realize a 
financial saving, and maintain a healthy workforce.
 4. If you live in an urban area, take advantage of public trans-
portation. It helps ease urban congestion as well as atmo-
spheric conditions in the area.
 5. When you buy a new car, consider purchasing a hybrid- 
electric or an all-electric vehicle.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
Atmospheric Pollution
539

Atmospheric Pollution
cReDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top right): Ronaldo Schemidt/AFP/Getty Image; (bottom right): Tomas Sereda/
Fotolia; Bettmann/Corbis; (top left): Ekash/iStockphoto; (top right): Daniel Stein/
iStockphoto: Richard T. Wright; (top right): Les Cunliffe/Fotolia; (center right): 
Alexandra Gl/Fotolia; (center): hartphotography/Fotolia; (right): Elenathewise/
Fotolia; (bottom right): Stefan Redel/Fotolia; (bottom): martin33/Fotolia; (top left): 
Grapes - Michaud/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (center): Matt Meadows/Peter Arnold/
Getty Images; (center left): Matt Meadows/Peter Arnold/Getty Images; Seth Joel/
Photographer’s Choice/Getty Images; AS Heagle/United States Department of 
Agriculture; Balliolman/Fotolia; AP Photo
Text Credits
Figure 3: Source: “National Ambient Air Quality Standards” from Environmental 
Protection Agency, October 2011; Table 4: Source: “Scientific Assessment of Ozone 
Depletion: 2010,” from Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project Report, 
No. 52, Geneva, Switzerland: World Meteorological Organization, 20; Figure  9: 
Source: “National Emissions Inventory (NEI) Air Pollutant Emissions Trends Data” 
from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency website; Figure 10: Source: “National 
Emissions Inventory (NEI) Air Pollutant Emissions Trends Data” from U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency website; Figure 11: Source: “Air Quality Trends” 
from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency website; Figure 15: Source: “NADP 
Data and Information Use Conditions” from National Atmospheric Deposition 
Program website; Figure 16: Source: “Coal plants without scrubbers account 
for a majority of U.S. SO2 emissions” from Today in Energy, from U.S. Energy 
Information Agency website; Figure 20: Source: “Effects of Ozone Air Pollution 
on Plants” from U.S. Department of Agriculture website; Figure 25: Source: 
Environmental Protection Agency; Figure 26: Source: Environmental Protection 
Agency; Figure 27: Source: “United States Geological Survey (USGS): Water 
Resources of New York” from the USGS website; Figure 29: Source: Report by the 
U.S. Climate Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change 
Research; Figure 31: Source: “Ozone Hole Watch” from the NASA website; Figure 
32: “Production and presence of ozone-depleting substances in the atmosphere: past, 
present, and future,” from Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion. Copyright © 
2006 by United Nations. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.
acid Any compound that releases hydrogen ions when dissolved in 
water. Also, a water solution that contains a surplus of hydrogen 
ions.
acid deposition Any form of acid precipitation and also fallout of 
dry acid particles. (See acid precipitation.)
acid neutralizing capacity (ANC) In a water body, the capacity 
to neutralize acids due to the presence of buffer chemicals in 
solution.
acid precipitation Includes acid rain, acid fog, acid snow, and 
any other form of precipitation that is more acidic than normal 
(i.e., less than pH 5.6). Excess acidity is derived from certain air 
pollutants—namely, sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen.
air pollutants Gases or aerosols in the atmosphere that have 
harmful effects on people or the environment.
Air Pollution Control Act Federal legislation introduced in 1955 
that was the first attempt to bring air pollution under control.
air toxics A category of air pollutants that includes radioactive 
materials and other toxic chemicals that are present at low 
concentrations but are of concern because they often are 
carcinogenic.
ambient standards Air-quality standards (set by the EPA) 
determining certain levels of pollutants that should not be 
exceeded in order to maintain environmental and human health.
atmospheric brown cloud (ABC) A 1- to 3-km-thick blanket of 
pollution that frequently sits over south and central Asia, made 
up of black carbon and soot from biomass and fossil fuel burning.
base Any compound that releases hydroxyl (OH–) ions when 
dissolved in water. A solution that contains a surplus of hydroxyl 
ions.
benzene An organic chemical present in crude and refined oil 
products and tobacco smoke, a known human carcinogen.
cap-and-trade system A form of market-based environmental 
policy that sets a maximum level of pollutant (the cap), distributes 
pollution permits, and allows industries to trade permits to 
achieve their allowable pollution.
carbon monoxide A highly poisonous gas, the molecules of which 
consist of a carbon atom with one oxygen attached. Not to be 
confused with carbon dioxide, a natural gas in the atmosphere.
catalyst A substance that promotes a given chemical reaction 
without itself being consumed or changed by the reaction. Enzymes 
are catalysts for biological reactions. Also, catalysts are used in 
some pollution control devices (e.g., the catalytic converter).
catalytic converter The device used by vehicle manufacturers to 
reduce the amounts of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and 
nitrogen oxides in a vehicle’s exhaust. The converter contains 
catalysts that changes these compounds to less harmful gases as 
the exhaust passes through.
chlorine catalytic cycle In the stratosphere, a cyclical chemical 
process in which chlorine monoxide breaks down ozone.
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) Synthetic organic molecules that 
contain one or more of both chlorine and fluorine atoms and that 
are known to cause ozone destruction.
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) A progressive lung 
disease that makes it hard to breathe, involving three syndromes: 
asthma, bronchitis, and emphysema.
Clean Air Act of 1970 Amended in 1977 and 1990, the act is the 
foundation of U.S. air pollution control efforts.
Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) EPA rule published in 2005 
establishing cap-and-trade programs for sulfur dioxide and 
nitrogen oxides in 28 eastern states.
command-and-control strategy The basic strategy behind most 
public policy having to do with air and water pollution. The 
strategy involves setting limits on pollutant levels and specifying 
control technologies that must be used to achieve those limits.
criteria pollutants Certain pollutants whose levels are used as a 
gauge for the determination of air (or water) quality.
Cross State Air Pollution Rule The ruling by the EPA that replaces 
the Clean Air Interstate Rule, requiring reductions in NOx and 
SO2 to aid states in the East to achieve ozone and particulate 
matter reductions.
Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 Legislation 
establishing energy policy by emphasizing demand-side policies 
such as conserving energy and using renewable energy sources.
hybrid electric vehicle An automobile combining a gasoline motor 
and a battery-powered electric motor that produces less pollution 
and gets higher gasoline mileage than do conventional gasoline-
powered vehicles.
hydroxyl radical The hydroxyl group (OH), missing the electron. 
The hydroxyl radical is a natural cleansing agent of the 
atmosphere. It is highly reactive, readily oxidizes many pollutants 
upon contact, and thus contributes to their removal from the air.
industrial smog The grayish mixture of moisture, soot, and 
sulfurous compounds that occurs in local areas in which industries 
are concentrated and coal is the primary energy source.
glossARy
540

Atmospheric Pollution
of hydrogen ions (H1). pH 7 is neutral; values decreasing from 7 
indicate increasing acidity, and values increasing from 7 indicate 
increasing basicity. Each unit from 7 indicates a tenfold increase 
over the preceding unit.
photochemical oxidants A major category of secondary air 
pollutants, including ozone, that are highly toxic and damaging, 
especially to plants and forests. Formed as a result of interactions 
between nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons driven by sunlight.
photochemical smog The brownish haze that frequently forms 
on otherwise clear, sunny days over large cities with significant 
amounts of automobile traffic. Photochemical smog results 
largely from sunlight-driven chemical reactions among nitrogen 
oxides and hydrocarbons, both of which come primarily from 
auto exhausts.
primary air pollutants Pollutants released directly into the 
atmosphere, mainly as a result of burning fuels and wastes, as 
opposed to secondary air pollutants.
reasonably available control technology (RACT) Applied to the 
goals of the Clean Air Act, EPA-approved forms of technology 
that will reduce the output of industrial air pollutants. (See 
maximum achievable control technology.)
secondary air pollutants Air pollutants resulting from reactions of 
primary air pollutants resident in the atmosphere. Secondary air 
pollutants include ozone, other reactive organic compounds, and 
sulfuric and nitric acids. (See ozone, peroxyacetyl nitrates, and 
photochemical oxidants.)
sulfur dioxide (SO2) A major air pollutant and toxic gas formed as 
a result of burning sulfur. The major sources are burning coal (in 
coal-burning power plants) that contains some sulfur and refining 
metal ores (in smelters) that contain sulfur.
sulfuric acid (H2SO4) The major constituent of acid precipitation. 
Formed when sulfur dioxide emissions react with water vapor in 
the atmosphere. (See sulfur dioxide.)
temperature inversion The weather phenomenon in which a layer 
of warm air overlies cooler air near the ground and prevents the 
rising and dispersion of air pollutants.
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) A category of major air 
pollutants present in the air in the vapor state. The category includes 
fragments of hydrocarbon fuels from incomplete combustion and 
evaporated organic compounds such as paint solvents, gasoline, 
and cleaning solutions. Volatile organic compounds are major 
factors in the formation of photochemical smog.
lead One of the heavy metal pollutants, lead was once added 
to gasoline to improve combustion. It is toxic in very small 
quantities and has been removed from all but aviation gasoline.
maximum achievable control technology (MACT) The best 
technology available for reducing the output of especially toxic 
industrial pollutants.
Mercury and Air Toxics Standards Rules published by the EPA in 
2011 that require all coal- and oil-fired power plants to limit their 
emissions of mercury and other toxic pollutants; industries have 
four years to comply with the rules.
Montreal Protocol An agreement made in 1987 by a large group 
of nations to cut back the production of chlorofluorocarbons in 
order to protect the ozone shield. A 1990 amendment called for 
the complete phaseout of these chemicals by 2000 in developed 
nations and by 2010 in less-developed nations.
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) The allowable 
levels of ambient criteria air pollutants set by EPA regulation.
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants 
(NESHAPs) The standards for allowable emissions of certain 
toxic substances.
nitric acid A secondary air pollutant and a major component of 
acid deposition, nitric acid is produced when NOx in the air reacts 
with the hydroxyl radical and water.
nitrogen oxides (NOX) A group of nitrogen-oxygen compounds 
formed when some of the nitrogen gas in the air combines with 
oxygen during high-temperature combustion. Nitrogen oxides are 
a major category of air pollutants and, along with hydrocarbons, 
are a primary factor in the production of ozone and other 
photochemical oxidants that are the most harmful components 
of photochemical smog. Nitrogen oxides also contribute to acid 
precipitation.
ozone A gas, O3, that is a secondary air pollutant in the lower 
atmosphere but that is necessary to screen out ultraviolet 
radiation in the stratosphere. May also be used for disinfecting 
water.
particulates See PM2.5 and PM10 and suspended particulate 
matter.
peroxyacetyl nitrates (PANs) A group of compounds present 
in photochemical smog that are extremely toxic to plants and 
irritating to the eyes, nose, and throat membranes of humans.
pH The scale used to designate the acidity or basicity (alkalinity) of 
solutions or soil, expressed as the logarithm of the concentration 
541

This page intentionally left blank 

From Chapter 20 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
Water Pollution 
and Its 
Prevention

Learning Objectives
 1. Perspectives on Water Pollution: 
Summarize the impacts that dis-
ease organisms, organic wastes, 
chemical pollutants, sediments, 
and nutrients have on human 
health and the environment.
 2. Wastewater Treatment and 
M anagement: Examine the meth-
ods used by cities and towns to 
deal with human and domestic 
wastes.
 3. Eutrophication: Describe the 
undesirable changes that take 
place in aquatic ecosystems 
when nutrients are introduced.
 4. Public Policy and Water Pollution: 
Explain how the Clean Water Act 
and its amendments give the 
Environmental Protection Agency 
jurisdiction over water-pollution 
issues and what responsibility the 
states have for managing pollu-
tion and wastewater programs.
Water Pollution 
and Its 
Prevention
Hypoxic zone
OK
TX
NM
CO
WY
MT
LA
AR
MS
AL
GA
SC
NC
VA
TN
KY
WV
PA
OH
IN
IL
MO
KS
IA
WI
MI
MN
SD
ND
0
300 km
0
300 miles
The Mississippi River watershed. The Mississippi River watershed consists of 40% of 
the landmass of the lower 48 states. Runoff from this huge area delivers 500 million tons of 
 sediment and more than 1 million tons of nutrients to the Gulf of Mexico yearly. Below: A type 
of phytoplankton, viewed through a microscope (SEM). 
(Source: Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force. Gulf Hypoxia Annual Report 2010.)
T
he Mississippi RiveR wateRshed encompasses 40% of the land area of the United 
States; the river collects water from this huge area and eventually delivers it to 
the Gulf of Mexico. Because much of the watershed is America’s agricultural 
heartland, the Mississippi River is a reflection of what happens on the nation’s farms. 
When U.S. farm production experienced tremendous growth during the latter half of 
the 20th century, more and more fertilizers were spread on agricultural fields, and 
more animals were raised on feedlots. At the same time, wetlands bordering river 
tributaries were drained and no 
longer intercepted agricultural 
runoff. The result was a tripling of 
soluble nitrogen delivered to the 
river and, eventually, to the Gulf 
of Mexico. 
DeaD ZOne. The impact of 
this major flow of nitrogen to the Gulf 
of Mexico was first detected in 1974 by 
544

 marine scientists who found areas in the gulf where oxygen 
had disappeared from bottom sediments and much of the water 
column above them. This absence of oxygen is deadly to the 
bottom-dwelling animals and any oxygen-breathing creatures 
in the water column that are not able to escape. At first, the 
hypoxic (lacking oxygen) area—or dead zone, as it is called—
was thought to be similar to those in other bodies of water 
that receive high levels of nutrients—a minor disturbance that 
would disappear seasonally. But then the hypoxic area suddenly 
doubled in size following the 1993 floods in the Midwest, and it 
continues to grow (Fig. 1). It averaged 6,700 mi2 (17,300 km2) 
from 2005 to 2011. The shrimpers and fishers who work these 
waters have learned to avoid the hypoxic area. 
the cuLprit. To the scientists working on the problem, the 
connection between nitrogen and hypoxia was clear. Nitrogen 
is a common limiting factor in coastal marine waters. Where 
abundant, it promotes the dense growth of phytoplankton—
photosynthetic microorganisms that live freely suspended in the 
water. Zooplankton—microscopic animals in the water—rapidly 
consume the phytoplankton and multiply. As the abundant phy-
toplankton and zooplankton (and their fecal pellets) die or sink 
toward the bottom, they are decomposed by bacteria, a process 
that consumes dissolved oxygen. Eventually, the oxygen is used 
up, creating a dead zone. In the Gulf of Mexico, the zone can 
extend up from the bottom of the sea to within a few meters of 
the surface. Typically, it stays from May through September, finally 
being dispersed by the mixing of the water column as colder 
weather sets in.
Because the gulf’s fishery is a $2.8 billion dollar en-
terprise, the problem eventually got national attention. In 
1998, Congress passed the Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia 
Research and Control Act, establishing an interagency task 
force of scientists charged with assessing the dead zone in 
the Gulf of Mexico, as well as harmful algal blooms—another 
 water-pollution problem discussed later in the chapter (see 
Sustainability, “Harmful Algal Blooms”). The Mississippi River/
Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force released its 
first report in May 2000, confirming the connection between 
nitrogen and the dead zone and laying out options for reduc-
ing the nitrogen load coming downriver. Two strategies were 
key to mitigation of the problem: (1) reduction of fertilizer use, 
to greatly reduce farm runoff and lessen the nitrogen loads of 
streams and rivers in the Mississippi basin; and (2) the resto-
ration and promotion of nitrogen retention and denitrification 
processes in the basin. 
The task force proposed an action plan in 2001 with the 
goal of reducing the size of the hypoxic area to 1900 mi2 
(5000 km2) by 2015. The plan was voluntary and depended 
largely on conservation funding from the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) to farmers upriver. Seven years into the 
plan, the dead zone had not shown any signs of shrinking. The 
latest (2008) action plan recommended a reduction target of 
45% of the nitrogen and phosphorus and also acknowledged 
that the 1900 mi2 goal by 2015 was likely unattainable. Sig-
nificant new funding has come from the 2008 Farm Bill, and 
the USDA is directing $320 million to agricultural conservation 
programs in 13 participating states to aid farmers in reducing 
or treating runoff from farms.
The Gulf of Mexico dead zone turns out to be one more 
costly lesson about eutrophication (enrichment by nutrients): It 
is unreasonable to allow vital water resources to receive pollut-
ants and then expect those resources to continue to provide us 
with their usual bounty of goods and services. Since the 1960s, 
the number of coastal dead zones has doubled every decade; 
worldwide, more than 415 are now known, affecting a total area 
of over 95,000 square miles.
In this chapter, we will focus on water quality. Eutrophi-
cation and other forms of water pollution are discussed, and 
we take a close look at wastewater treatment.
Mg/L 
Dissolved
Oxygen
Atchafalaya River
TX
LA
Mississippi River
Terrebonne Bay
Gulf of Mexico
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 1 The 2011 dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico. Each year oxygen disappears from middle depths 
to the bottom over thousands of square miles of the Gulf of Mexico. In 2011, the dead zone was 6,765 mi2, 
an area almost the size of New Jersey.
 (Source: NOAA News, Aug. 4, 2011. With permission from LUMCON.)
Water Pollution and Its Prevention
545

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
SuStainability
Harmful algal blooms
Imagine driving along 
Palos Verdes Drive on 
the California coast and 
having a pelican fall 
out of the sky and crash 
into your windshield. You’d probably rather not 
imagine that, but every spring along the coast 
of Southern California for the past 10 years, 
dead marine birds, sea otters, dolphins, and sea 
lions have been washing up on the beaches, 
and pelicans have literally dropped out of the 
sky—victims of an algal toxin, domoic acid. 
This toxin is acquired by birds and mammals 
that have ingested marine shellfish and small 
fish that have passed the toxin along by ingest-
ing smaller planktonic organisms that have 
been feeding on a diatom occurring in dense 
“blooms” in the water. Domoic acid doesn’t 
harm invertebrates or fish, but in mammals and 
birds, it causes brain damage that incapacitates 
them, often leading to death. The first reported 
outbreak occurred in Prince Edward Island, 
Canada, in 1987, when more than 100 people 
were sickened and three died from eating 
blue mussels. The spring visit of the toxin on 
the California coast is a recent phenomenon, 
and observers note that it seems to be getting 
worse every year.
Turning eastward, in 1988, Dr. Joanne 
Burkholder, a North Carolina State University 
plankton biologist, examined some open sores 
that were found on menhaden fish from a North 
I
P
t
h
o
dinoflagellates, have been occurring in coastal 
waters all around North America. They may be 
responsible for more than $1 billion in economic 
damage to coastal systems and fisheries. Scien-
tists believe that nutrients—especially nitrogen 
and phosphorus—are the basic culprits in feed-
ing the growth of the algae in estuaries and 
coastal waters. Recently, five federal agencies 
joined to sponsor the Ecology and Oceanog-
raphy of Harmful Algal Blooms (ECOHAB), a 
national research program studying HABs in U.S. 
coastal waters. Like the dead zones, the blooms 
of harmful algae are increasing in frequency. 
These blooms are virtually always associated 
with nutrient enrichment, and they are found in 
freshwater lakes as well as coastal marine en-
vironments. They are a nasty reminder that our 
work in cleaning up the nation’s waterways still 
has a long way to go.
Carolina estuary. She identified a new organism, 
a microscopic dinoflagellate (a type of alga) she 
named Pfiesteria piscicida. (Recently, a second 
toxic species, Pfiesteria shumwayae, has been 
identified.) Pfiesteria is a shapeshifter: it can be 
an amoeba, or a flagellate, or a cyst. Sometimes 
it secretes a toxin that stuns the fish, and then 
it turns into a form that proceeds to feed on the 
fish, which have been disoriented by the toxin. 
Sometimes it behaves like an ordinary alga and 
lives by photosynthesis.
Pfiesteria has been implicated in at least 
50 major fish kills in Albemarle and Pamlico 
sounds, North Carolina, and has been identified in  
waters from Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Florida, 
and even northern Europe. In the summer of 
1997, fish kills struck several tributaries of the 
Chesapeake Bay, particularly the Pocomoke 
River. The fish kills and catches of fish with 
 ulcerous lesions finally led the state to close the 
river to all fishing and harvesting of shellfish. 
When news of the fish kills in the Chesapeake 
Bay and the impacts on humans became public, 
there was a predictable panic response, and con-
sumers all around the Chesapeake Bay stopped 
eating seafood. In Maryland alone, the economic 
loss was estimated at between $15 million and 
$20 million in sales during 1997. 
The domoic acid and Pfiesteria episodes 
join a long list of what are called harmful 
algal blooms (HABs). Red tides, consisting of 
concentrations of different species of toxic 
Lesions on menhaden fish caused by Pfiesteria .
1  Perspectives on Water Pollution
In the early days of the Industrial Revolution in the United 
States, little attention was given to the pollution of lakes, 
rivers, and the coastal ocean. Industries emptied their 
wastes into the closest waterway, and the general means 
of disposing of human excrement was the outdoor privy 
(or behind the nearest bush). Seepage from the privy fre-
quently contaminated drinking water and caused disease, 
especially in places where privies and wells were located 
near one another. In the late 1800s, Louis Pasteur and 
other scientists showed that sewage-borne bacteria were 
responsible for many infectious diseases. This important 
discovery led to intensive efforts to rid cities of human 
excrement as expediently as possible. Cities already had 
drain systems for storm water, but using these systems for 
human wastes had been prohibited. With the urgency of 
the situation, however, minds quickly changed. The flush 
toilet was introduced, and sewers were tapped into storm 
drains. Thus, Western civilization adopted the one-way 
flow of flushing domestic and industrial wastewater into 
natural waterways. Introducing sewage into a waterway 
was symptomatic of an approach that believed “the solu-
tion to pollution is dilution.”
As a result of this practice, receiving waters that had 
limited capacity for dilution became open cesspools of foul 
odors, vermin, and filth as the overload of organic matter de-
pleted dissolved oxygen and most aquatic life suffocated. For 
increasing distances around or downstream from the sewage 
outfall, the water became unfit for any recreational use be-
cause of the sewage contamination. Any further use of the 
water for human consumption required extensive treatment 
to remove pathogens.
Industrial wastes only added insult to injury. From the 
dawn of the Industrial Age to the relatively recent past, it was 
common practice to flush all waste liquids and contaminated 
water into sewer systems or directly into natural waterways. 
Many human health problems followed, but they either were 
546

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
Cleveland, Ohio, was carrying so much flammable material 
that it actually caught fire, which destroyed seven bridges be-
fore the fire burned itself out (Fig. 2).
Worsening pollution (from both chemicals and sew-
age) and increasing recognition of the adverse health ef-
fects finally created a degree of public outrage that pushed 
Congress to pass the Clean Water Act of 1972 (CWA). 
This legislation gave the newly created Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) the responsibility to carry out a 
very ambitious goal—namely, to restore and maintain the 
chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation’s 
waters. The CWA was to achieve zero discharge of pollut-
ants by 1985, a totally naïve (and impossible) task, given 
the nature of the pollutants involved. However, imperfect 
as it is, the Clean Water Act (and its amendments) is still 
recognized as one of the most far-reaching and effective en-
vironmental laws ever enacted. 
Water Pollution: Sources and types
Water pollutants originate from a host of human activities 
and reach surface water or groundwater through an equally 
diverse host of pathways. For purposes of regulation, it is 
customary to distinguish between point sources and non-
point sources of pollutants (Fig. 3). Point sources involve 
the discharge of substances from factories, sewage systems, 
power plants, underground coal mines, and oil wells. These 
sources are relatively easy to identify and, therefore, are eas-
ier to monitor and regulate than nonpoint sources, which are 
poorly defined and scattered over broad areas. Some of the 
most prominent nonpoint sources of pollution are agricul-
tural runoff (from farm animals and croplands), storm-water 
drainage (from streets, parking lots, and lawns), and atmos-
pheric deposition (from air pollutants washed to or depos-
ited as dry particles on Earth). Pollution occurs as rainfall 
and snowmelt move over and through the ground, picking 
up pollutants as they go.  
not recognized as being caused by the pollution or were ac-
cepted as the “price of progress.”
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1948 was the 
first federal foray into water pollution legislation, providing 
technical assistance to state and local governments, but oth-
erwise leaving things up to the states and local municipalities. 
In the 1950s, as industrial production expanded and synthetic 
organics came into widespread use in the developed countries, 
many streams and rivers essentially became open chemical 
sewers as well as sewers for human waste. These waters not 
only were devoid of life, but also were themselves hazardous. 
Finally, in 1969, the Cuyahoga River, which flows through 
Figure 2 Cuyahoga River on fire. In 1969, the Cuyahoga River 
in Cleveland, Ohio, caught fire, burning seven bridges. Flammable material from 
industrial sources was being discharged into the river. This incident captured  
national attention and contributed to the public outrage over water pollution, 
leading to the Clean Water Act of 1972.
Wastewater
treatment plant
POINT
SOURCES
NONPOINT
SOURCES
Factory
AIR
POLLUTANTS
City streets
Suburban
development
Rural
homes
Cropland
Animal feedlot
Figure 3 Point and nonpoint 
sources. Point sources are far easier to 
identify and correct than the  diffuse nonpoint 
sources.
547

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
Two basic strategies are employed in attempting to bring 
water pollution under control: (1) reduce or remove the 
sources and (2) treat the water before it is released so as to 
remove pollutants or convert them to harmless forms. Water 
treatment is the best option for point sources. Source reduc-
tion can be employed for both kinds of sources and is the 
best option for nonpoint sources.
Pathogens. The most serious and widespread water pol-
lutants are infectious agents that cause sickness and death. 
The excrement from humans and other animals infected 
with certain pathogens (disease-causing bacteria, viruses, 
and other parasitic organisms) contains large numbers of 
these organisms or their eggs. Table 1 lists the most com-
mon waterborne pathogens. Even after symptoms of disease 
disappear, an infected person or animal may still harbor 
low populations of the pathogen, thus continuing to act 
as a carrier of disease. If wastes from carriers contaminate 
drinking water, food, or water used for swimming or bath-
ing, the pathogens can gain access to, and infect, other indi-
viduals (Fig. 4). 
Public Health. Before the connection between dis-
ease and sewage-carried pathogens was recognized in the 
mid-1800s, disastrous epidemics were common in cities. 
Epidemics of typhoid fever and cholera killed thousands 
of people prior to the 20th century. Today public-health 
measures that prevent this disease cycle have been adopted 
throughout the developed world and, to an increasing ex-
tent, in the developing world. The following measures were 
far more important than modern medicine in controlling 
waterborne diseases:
1. Purification and disinfection of public water supplies 
with chlorine or other agents 
Figure 4 The Ganges River in India. In many places in the developing 
world, the same waterways are used simultaneously for drinking, washing, and 
disposal of sewage. A high incidence of disease, infant and childhood mortality, 
and parasites is the result.
tabLe 1 Pathogens Carried by Sewage
Disease
infectious agent
Typhoid fever
Salmonella typhi (bacterium)
Cholera
Vibrio cholerae (bacterium)
Salmonellosis
Salmonella species (bacteria)
Diarrhea
Escherichia coli (bacterium)
Campylobacter species (bacteria)
Cryptosporidium parvum (protozoan)
Infectious hepatitis
Hepatitis A virus
Poliomyelitis
Poliovirus
Dysentery
Shigella species (bacteria)
Entamoeba histolytica (protozoan)
Giardiasis
Giardia intestinalis (protozoan)
Numerous parasitic diseases
Roundworms, flatworms
2. Sanitary collection and treatment of human and animal 
wastes
3. Maintenance of sanitary standards in all facilities in which 
food is processed or prepared for public consumption
4. Instruction in personal and domestic hygiene practices
Standards regarding these measures are set and enforced 
by government public-health departments. A variety of other 
measures are enforced as well. For example, if bathing areas 
are contaminated with raw sewage, health departments close 
them to swimming. Implicit in all measures is monitoring for 
sewage contamination. (See Sound Science, “Monitoring for 
Sewage Contamination.”) Our own personal hygiene, sani-
tation, and health precautions—such as not drinking water 
from untested sources, washing hands frequently, and mak-
ing sure that foods like pork, chicken, and hamburger are al-
ways well cooked—remain the last and most important line 
of defense against disease.
Sanitation 5 Good Medicine. Many people attribute 
good health in a population to modern medicine, but good 
health is primarily a result of the prevention of disease through 
public-health measures. According to the 2012 report Progress 
on Drinking Water and Sanitation,1 780 million people still 
lack access to safe drinking water and 2.5 billion live in areas 
having poor (or no) sewage collection or treatment (Fig. 5). 
Each year, more than 2 million deaths (mostly among children 
under five) are traced to waterborne diseases. Millennium 
Development Goal 7 addresses these serious public-health 
needs: “Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without 
sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanita-
tion”. The 2012 progress report stated that the drinking 
water target was met in 2010, but the world is seriously 
behind in many regions in meeting the sanitation target. 
1Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: 2012 Update. UNICEF and World 
Health Organization. 2012. http://www.unicef.org/media/files/JMPreport2012.pdf.
548

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
SounD SCienCe
Monitoring for Sewage Contamination
An important aspect of 
public health is the detec-
tion of sewage in water 
supplies and other bod-
ies of water with which 
humans come in contact. It is virtually impossible 
to test for each specific pathogen that might be 
present in a body of water. Therefore, an indirect 
method called the fecal coliform test has been 
 developed. This test is based on the fact that 
huge populations of a bacterium called E. coli 
(Escherichia coli) normally inhabit the lower 
intestinal tract of humans and other animals, 
and large numbers of the bacterium are excreted 
with fecal material. In temperate regions at least, 
E. coli does not last long in the outside environ-
ment. Therefore, the presumption is that when E. 
coli is found in natural waters, it is an indication 
of recent and probably persisting contamination 
with sewage wastes. In most situations, E. coli is 
not a pathogen itself, but is referred to as an indi-
cator organism: Its presence indicates that water 
is contaminated with fecal wastes and that sew-
age-borne pathogens may be present. Conversely, 
the absence of E. coli is taken to mean that water 
is free from such pathogens. 
The fecal coliform test, one technique of 
which is shown in the accompanying figure, 
detects and counts the number of E. coli in a 
sample of water. Thus, the results indicate the 
relative degree of contamination of the water 
and the relative risk of pathogens. For example, 
to be safe for drinking, water may not have any 
fecal coliform in a 0.4-cup (100 mL) sample. 
The same sample with as many as 200 E. coli is 
still considered safe for swimming. Beyond that 
level, a river or beach may be posted as pol-
luted, and swimming and other direct contact 
should be avoided. By contrast, raw sewage 
(99.9% water, 0.1% waste) has E. coli counts 
in the millions.
A
p
t
s
i
Testing water for sewage contamination by the 
Millipore technique. (a) A Millipore filter disk is placed 
in the filter apparatus. (b) A sample of the water being 
tested is drawn through the filter, and any bacteria 
present are entrapped on the disk. (c) The disk is then 
placed in a petri dish on a special medium that supports 
the growth of bacteria and that will impart a particular 
color to fecal E. coli bacteria. Next, the dish is incubated 
for 24 hours at 44.5°C, during which time the bacteria 
on the disk will multiply to form a colony visible to 
the naked eye. (d) Escherichia coli bacteria, indicating 
 sewage contamination, are identifiable as the colonies 
with a metallic green sheen.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
91 – 100%
76 – 90%
50 – 75%
< 50%
No data
Proportion of the population using improved sanitation in 2010
Figure 5 Worldwide distribution of improved sanitation. Less than half the population has 
adequate sanitation in much of the developing world. The Millennium Development Goal of reducing by half the 
proportion of people without improved sanitation will not be met without additional effort.
(Source: Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: 2012 Update. UNICEF and World Health Organization, 2012. www.unicef.org/
media/files/JMPreport2012.pdf.)
549

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
goes anaerobic (has zero oxygen), only bacteria can sur-
vive, using their abilities to switch to fermentation or 
anaerobic respiration (metabolic pathways that do not re-
quire oxygen). A typical BOD value for raw sewage would 
be around 250 ppm. Even a moderate amount of sewage 
added to natural waters containing at most 10 ppm DO 
can deplete the water of its oxygen and produce highly un-
desirable consequences well beyond those caused by the in-
troduction of pathogens (Fig. 6). 
Chemical Pollutants. Because water is such an excellent 
solvent, it is able to hold many chemical substances in so-
lution that have undesirable effects. Water-soluble inorganic 
chemicals constitute an important class of pollutants that 
include heavy metals (lead, mercury, arsenic, nickel, and so 
forth), acids from mine drainage (sulfuric acid) and acid pre-
cipitation (sulfuric and nitric acids), and road salts employed 
to melt snow and ice in the colder climates (sodium and cal-
cium chlorides). The organic chemicals are another group of 
substances found in polluted waters. Petroleum products pol-
lute many bodies of water, from the major oil spills in the 
ocean to the small streams receiving runoff from parking lots. 
Other organic substances with serious impacts are the pes-
ticides that drift down from aerial spraying or that run off 
from land areas, as well as the various industrial chemicals, 
such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), cleaning solvents, 
and detergents.
Many of these pollutants are toxic even at low con-
centrations. Some may become concentrated as they are 
passed up the food chain in a process called biomagnifi-
cation. Even at very low concentrations, they can render 
water unpalatable to humans and dangerous to aquatic life. 
At higher concentrations, they can change the properties of 
bodies of water so as to prevent them from serving any use-
ful purpose except perhaps navigation. Acid mine drainage, 
for example, pollutes thousands of miles of streams in coal-
bearing regions of the United States (Fig. 7). Stream bottoms 
are coated with orange deposits of iron, and the water is so 
acidic that only a few hardy bacteria and algae can tolerate 
it. 
Sediments. As natural landforms weather, especially dur-
ing storms, a certain amount of sediment enters streams 
and rivers. However, erosion from farmlands, deforested 
slopes, overgrazed rangelands, construction sites, min-
ing sites, stream banks, and roads can greatly increase the 
load of sediment entering waterways. Frequently, storm 
drains simply lead to the nearest depression or some natu-
ral  streambed. Sediments (sand, silt, and clay) have direct 
and extreme physical impacts on streams and rivers. When 
erosion is slight, streams and rivers of the watershed run 
clear and support algae and other aquatic plants that attach 
to rocks or take root in the bottom. These producers, plus  
miscellaneous detritus from fallen leaves, support a com-
plex food web of bacteria, protozoa, worms, insect larvae, 
snails, fish, crayfish, and other organisms, which keep them-
selves from being carried downstream by attaching to rocks 
Almost one-fourth of the developing world’s people have 
no adequate place to go to the bathroom and generally re-
lieve themselves in streams, backyards, and woods, contam-
inating the water and the places where children play. When 
it rains, the drainage ditches and alleys run with human and 
animal excrement. 
Largely because of poor sanitation regarding water 
and sewage, a significant portion of the world’s population 
is chronically infected with various pathogens. Moreover, 
populations in areas where there is little or no sewage 
treatment are extremely vulnerable to deadly  epidemics of 
many diseases spread by way of sewage. This is especially 
true of cholera. Because of unsanitary conditions, an out-
break of cholera in Peru in 1990 killed almost 9,000 people 
as it spread through Latin America. The 2010 earthquake 
in Haiti created huge refugee camps, where a deadly out-
break of cholera brought 180,000 cases and 5,000 deaths. 
The source of the cholera there was traced to UN peace-
keepers from Nepal, where the disease is endemic. Wastes 
from the peacekeepers’ camps were simply emptied into 
the nearest watercourse. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) reports numerous cholera outbreaks annually, and 
cases frequently number in the thousands, with hundreds 
of deaths. 
organic Wastes. Along with pathogens, human and 
animal wastes contain organic matter that creates serious 
problems if it enters bodies of water untreated. Other kinds 
of organic matter (leaves, grass clippings, trash, and so 
forth) can enter bodies of water as a consequence of run-
off. With the exception of plastics and some human-made 
chemicals, these wastes are biodegradable. As mentioned 
in connection with the Gulf of Mexico dead zone, when 
bacteria and detritus feeders decompose organic matter 
in water, they consume oxygen gas dissolved in the water. 
The amount of oxygen that water can hold in solution is 
severely limited. In cold water, dissolved oxygen (DO) can 
reach concentrations up to 10 parts per million (ppm); 
much less can be held in warm water. Compare this ratio 
with that of oxygen in air, which is 200,000 ppm (20%), 
and you can understand why even a moderate amount of 
organic matter decomposing in water can deplete the water 
of its DO. Bacteria keep the oxygen supply depleted as long 
as there is dead organic matter to support their growth and 
oxygen replenishment is inadequate.
boD. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) is a measure of 
the amount of organic material in water, stated in terms of 
how much oxygen will be required to break it down bio-
logically, chemically, or both. The higher the BOD meas-
ure, the greater the likelihood that dissolved oxygen will be 
depleted in the course of breaking down the organic mate-
rial. A high BOD causes so much oxygen depletion that 
animal life is severely limited or precluded, as in the bot-
tom waters of the Gulf of Mexico. Fish and shellfish are 
killed when the DO drops below 2 or 3 ppm, though some 
are less tolerant at even higher DO levels. If the system  
550

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
or seeking shelter behind or under rocks. Even fish that 
maintain their position by active swimming occasionally 
need such shelter to rest (Fig. 8a). 
Suspended Load. Sediment entering waterways in large 
amounts has an array of impacts. Sand, silt, clay, and organic 
particles (humus) are quickly separated by the agitation of 
flowing water and are carried at different rates. Clay and 
humus are carried in suspension, making the water turbid 
and reducing the amount of light penetrating the water and, 
hence, reducing photosynthesis as well. As the material set-
tles, it coats everything and continues to block photosynthe-
sis. It also kills the animals by clogging their gills and  feeding 
structures. The eggs of fish and other aquatic organisms are 
particularly vulnerable to being smothered by sediment.
Bed Load. Especially destructive is the bed load of sand 
and silt, which is not readily carried in suspension, but is 
Sewage
discharge
(high BOD)
Clean
water
Oxygen sag
DOmin
Deficit (D)
Dissolved oxygen (DO)
Saturation DO
Clean water,
rocky or
sandy bottom
Dissolved
Oxygen
(DO)
ppm
Physical
Appearance
Fish
life
Bottom
Organisms
Cloudy water,
bottom sludge,
foul smells
Cloudy water,
bottom sludge,
foul smells
Clear water,
rocky or
sandy bottom
Clearer, green water,
bottom sludge
Trout,
dace,
bass
No fish
No fish
Trout,
dace,
bass
Bullheads,
carp,
suckers
Mayfly larvae,
stonefly larvae,
caddis fly larvae
Blackfly larvae,
sludge worms
Sludge worms,
Rat-tailed maggots
Mayfly larvae,
stonefly larvae,
caddis fly larvae
Blackfly larvae,
Sludge worms,
filamentous algae
Clean
water
Decline
Severe
damage
Recovery
4
6
8
2
Figure 6 The oxygen sag curve. When sewage with a high BOD is discharged into a stream or small 
river, it creates an oxygen deficit and severely affects the stream’s biology.
Figure 7 Acid mine drainage. Acidic water from mines contains high 
concentrations of sulfides and iron, which are oxidized when they come into 
the open, thus producing unsightly and sterile streams.
551

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
(a) Stream ecosystem with
LOW sediment load
(b) Same stream with
HIGH sediment load
(c) 
Many hiding and
resting places for
small fish, etc.
ream with
diment load
Hiding and resting
places buried under
sediment
Clay in suspension
prevents light
penetration
Attached aquatic
organisms scoured from rocks
by sand washing along bottom
Almost all
organisms
eliminated
Bacteria,
protozoan
insect larva
attached
to rocks
Good light penetration
supports photosynthesis
of attached algae, aquatic
plants, and abundant food
chains
Figure 8 Impact of sediment on 
streams and rivers. (a) The ecosystem 
of a stream that is not subjected to a large 
sediment bed load. (b) The changes that occur 
with large sediment inputs. (c) Platte River at 
Lexington, Nebraska. The sandbars seen here 
constitute the bed load; they shift and move 
with high water, preventing the reestablish-
ment of aquatic vegetation.
552

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
irrigation water, and are present in crop residues. When nu-
trients are applied in excess of the needs of plants or when 
runoff from agricultural fields and feedlots is heavy, the nu-
trients are picked up by water that eventually enters streams, 
 rivers, lakes, and the ocean. Other nonpoint sources of nu-
trients include acid rain and snow, lawns and gardens, golf 
courses, and storm drains.
Water Quality Standards. When is water considered pol-
luted? Many water pollutants—like pesticides, cleaning sol-
vents, and detergents—are substances that are found in water 
only because of human activities. Others, such as nutrients and 
sediments, are always found in natural waters, and they are a 
problem only under certain conditions. In both cases, pollution 
means any quantity that is harmful to human health or the en-
vironment or prevents full use of the environment by humans 
or natural species. The mere presence of a substance in water 
does not necessarily pose a problem. Rather, it is the concen-
tration of the pollutant that must be of primary concern.
Criteria Pollutants. But what concentration is worri-
some? To provide standards for assessing water pollution, the 
EPA has established the National Recommended Water Qual-
ity Criteria. On the basis of the latest scientific knowledge, the 
EPA has listed 167 chemicals and substances as criteria pollut-
ants. The majority of these are toxic chemicals, but many are 
also natural chemicals or conditions that describe the state of 
water, such as nutrients, hardness (a general measure of dis-
solved calcium and magnesium salts) and pH (a measure of 
the acidity of the water). The list identifies the pollutant and 
then recommends concentrations for freshwater, saltwater, 
and human consumption (usually of fish and shellfish). Val-
ues are given for the criteria maximum concentration (CMC), 
the highest single concentration beyond which environmental 
impacts may be expected, and the criterion continuous con-
centration (CCC), the highest sustained concentration beyond 
which undesirable impacts may be expected. The criteria are 
recommendations meant to be used by the states, which are 
given the primary responsibility for upholding water-pollution 
laws. States and Native American tribes may revise these crite-
ria, but their revisions are subject to EPA approval.
Drinking water standards are much stricter. For these, 
the EPA has established the Drinking Water Standards and 
Health Advisories, a set of tables that are updated periodi-
cally. These standards, covering some 94 contaminants, are 
enforceable under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water 
Act (SDWA) of 1974. They are presented as maximum 
 contaminant levels (MCLs). To see how these two sets of 
standards work, consider the heavy metal arsenic.
Arsenic. Arsenic is listed as a known human  carcinogen 
by the Department of Health and Human Services; it  occurs 
naturally in groundwater, reaching high concentrations in 
some parts of the world. The CMC and CCC values for  
arsenic are 340 μg/L and 150 μg/L (1 μg/L 5 1 part per 
billion) for freshwater bodies and 69 μg/L and 36 μg/L for 
saltwater bodies. The drinking-water MCL concentration, 
however, is 10 μg/L, and therein lies a story.
For years, the MCL concentration for arsenic was 50 μg/L, 
despite warnings by the U.S. Public Health Service and the 
gradually washed along the bottom. As particles roll and tum-
ble along, they scour organisms from the rocks. They also bury 
and smother the bottom life and fill in the hiding and resting 
places of fish and crayfish. Aquatic plants and other organisms 
are prevented from reestablishing themselves because the bot-
tom is a constantly shifting bed of sand (Fig. 8b and c). Mod-
ern storm-water management is designed to reduce the bed 
load, usually via storm drains that are periodically emptied of 
their sediment. Many newer housing developments include a 
storm-water retention reservoir, which is simply a pond that 
receives and holds runoff from the area during storms. Water 
may infiltrate the soil or may create a pocket of natural wet-
land habitat supporting wildlife (Fig. 9). 
Sediments do not receive the attention the news media 
give to hazardous wastes and certain other pollution prob-
lems, but erosion is so widespread throughout the world that 
few streams and rivers escape the harsh impact of excessive 
sediment loads.
nutrients. Some of the inorganic chemicals carried in solu-
tion in all bodies of water are classified as nutrients— essential 
elements required by plants. The two most important nutrient 
elements for aquatic plant growth are phosphorus and nitro-
gen, and they are often in such low concentrations in water 
that they are the limiting factors for phytoplankton or other 
aquatic plants. More nutrients mean more plant growth, so 
nutrients become water pollutants when they are added from 
point or nonpoint sources and stimulate undesirable plant 
growth in bodies of water. The most obvious point sources of 
excessive nutrients are sewage outfalls. As we will see in Sec-
tion 2, it is costly to remove nutrients from sewage during the 
treatment process, so that is not always done. If the sewage is 
not treated at all, higher levels of nutrients will enter the water, 
which is what’s happening in much of the developing world.
Agricultural runoff is the most notorious nonpoint 
source of nutrients. The nutrients are applied to agricul-
tural crops as chemical fertilizers, manure, and dissolved in 
Figure 9 Storm-water management. Rather than letting excessive 
runoff from developed areas cause flooding and other environmental damage, 
runoff can be funneled into a retention pond, as shown here. Then it can drain 
away slowly, maintaining natural stream flow, or it can recharge groundwater. The 
retention pond may be designed to retain a certain amount of water and thus cre-
ate a pocket of wildlife habitat in an otherwise urban or suburban setting.
553

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
the wastewater from sinks, tubs, and toilets in homes and 
other buildings. (Note the distinction between the two terms; 
it is incorrect to speak of storm drains as sewers.)
The ideal modern system, then, is one in which all waste-
water is collected separately from storm water and is fully 
treated to remove pollutants before the water finally is re-
leased. But progress toward this goal has been extremely un-
even. Up through the 1970s, even in the United States and 
other developed countries, thousands of communities still 
discharged untreated sewage directly into waterways, and for 
many more, the degree of treatment was minimal. Indeed, the 
increasing sewage pollution of waterways and beaches was the 
major impetus behind the passage of the Clean Water Act.
Before addressing methods of treating wastewater, let 
us clarify which contaminants and pollutants we are talking 
about.
the Pollutants in Raw Wastewater
Raw wastewater is not only the flushings from toilets, but also 
the collection of wastewater from all other drains in homes 
and other buildings. A sewer system brings all tub, sink, and 
toilet drains from all homes and buildings together into larger 
and larger sewer pipes, just as the branches of a tree eventu-
ally come together into the trunk. This total mixture collected 
from all drains, which flows from the end of the “trunk” of the 
collection system, is called raw sewage or raw wastewater. Be-
cause we use such large amounts of water to flush away small 
amounts of dirt, especially as we stand under the shower or 
often just run the water, most of what goes down sewer drains 
is water. Raw wastewater is about 1,000 parts water for every 
1 part waste—99.9% water to 0.1% waste.
Given our voluminous use of water, the quantity of raw 
wastewater output is on the order of 150–200 gallons (600–800 
L) per person per day. That is, a community of 10,000 persons 
will produce 1.5 million to 2.0 million gallons (6–8 million L) 
of wastewater each day. With the addition of storm water, raw 
wastewater is diluted still more. Nevertheless, the pollutants are 
sufficient to make the water brown and foul smelling.
The pollutants in wastewater generally are divided into 
the following four categories, which correspond to the tech-
niques used to remove them:
1. Debris and grit: rags, plastic bags, coarse sand, gravel, 
and other objects flushed down toilets or washed 
through storm drains.
2. Particulate organic material: fecal matter, food wastes 
from garbage-disposal units, toilet paper, and other mat-
ter that tends to settle in still water.
3. Colloidal and dissolved organic material: very fine par-
ticles of particulate organic material, bacteria, urine, 
soaps, and detergents and other cleaning agents.
4. Dissolved inorganic material: nitrogen, phosphorus, and 
other nutrients from excretory wastes and detergents.
In addition to the four categories of pollutants in “stand-
ard” raw wastewater, variable amounts of pesticides, heavy 
metals, and other toxic compounds may be found because 
WHO that this was much too high a level. (Both bodies recom-
mended 10 μg/L.) The problem is the cancer risk. From stand-
ard risk assessment processes, the cancer mortality risk was 
assessed at 1 in 100 for people drinking water regularly at the 
50 μg/L level. This ratio is more than 100 times higher than 
the permitted risk for any other contaminant. Before President 
Clinton left office in early 2001, the EPA determined that the 
MCL for arsenic should be lowered, but the pending rule was 
withdrawn by the next administration, on the premise that 
“sound science” did not clearly support the new rule. Many 
states and rural areas were complaining that attaining the lower 
arsenic concentration would be too costly. In the end, after a 
National Academy of Sciences report and urgings from both 
the House and the Senate, then EPA administrator Christine 
 Whitman upheld the Clinton era rule and set the arsenic MCL at  
10 μg/L in October 2001.
Other Applications. Two important applications of 
water quality criteria are the National Pollution Discharge 
Elimination System (NPDES) and Total Maximum Daily Load 
(TMDL) programs. The NPDES program addresses point-
source pollution and issues permits that regulate discharges 
from wastewater-treatment plants and industrial sources. The 
TMDL program, by contrast, evaluates all sources of pollut-
ants entering a body of water, especially nonpoint sources, 
according to the water body’s ability to assimilate the pollut-
ant. For both of these programs, water quality criteria provide 
an essential means of assessing the condition of the receiving 
body of water as well as evaluating the levels of the various 
pollutant discharges. We will examine these two programs in 
more detail when we consider the problem of eutrophication.
The good news is that, according to the EPA, 92% of the 
people in the United States have access to drinking water that 
meets the drinking water standards. However, on the basis of 
data supplied to the EPA by the states, 41,266 rivers, lakes, 
and estuaries are not meeting the recommended water qual-
ity standards, and this excludes more than 60% of U.S. wa-
ters that have not been assessed at all. The major problems 
(in order) are pathogens, mercury, nutrients, other heavy met-
als, sediments, and oxygen depletion. As we proceed, we will 
address the specifics of public-policy responses to this serious 
national problem. We turn now to ways of dealing with the bi-
ological wastes that are a large part of our pollution problem.
2  Wastewater treatment 
and Management
To alleviate the problem of sewage-polluted waterways, 
facilities were designed and constructed to treat the out-
flow before it entered the receiving waterway. The first 
 wastewater-treatment plants in the United States were built 
around 1900. However, the combined volumes of sewage 
and storm water soon proved impossible to handle. During 
heavy rains, wastewater would overflow the treatment plant 
and carry raw sewage into the receiving waterway. Gradu-
ally, regulations were passed requiring municipalities to in-
stall separate systems—storm drains to collect and drain 
runoff from precipitation and sanitary sewers to receive all 
554

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
material is a necessary first step. Usually, removal involves two 
steps: the screening out of debris and the settling of grit. Debris 
is removed by letting raw sewage flow through a bar screen, a 
row of bars mounted about 1 inch apart. Debris is mechani-
cally raked from the screen and taken to an incinerator. After 
passing through the screen, the water flows through a grit 
chamber—a swimming pool–like tank—in which velocity is 
slowed just enough to permit the grit to settle. The settled grit is 
mechanically removed from these tanks and taken to landfills.
After debris and grit are removed, the water then flows 
very slowly through large tanks called primary clarifiers. Be-
cause its flow is slow, the water is nearly motionless for sev-
eral hours. The particulate organic material, about 30–50% 
people often pour unused portions of products containing 
such materials down sink, tub, or toilet drains. Also, indus-
tries may discharge various toxic wastes into sewers.
Removing the Pollutants from Wastewater
The challenge of treating wastewater is more than installing 
a technology that will do the job; it is also finding one that 
will do the job at a reasonable cost. A diagram of wastewater 
treatment procedures is shown in Figure 10. 
Primary treatment. Because debris and grit will damage 
or clog pumps and further treatment processes, removing this 
Figure 10 A diagram of wastewater treatment. Raw sewage moves from the grit chamber to 
undergo primary treatment, in which sludge is removed. The clarified water then undergoes secondary treatment 
(shown here as activated-sludge or trickling-filter treatment).
1
Bar screen removes debris.
Debris is then incinerated.
2
Grit chambers allow grit to
settle so it can be removed and
taken to landfills.
PRIMARY TREATMENT
Debris and grit removal
3
In primary clarifiers, organic
matter settles to the bottom and fat
floats to the top. This organic
matter and fat (raw sludge) is then
removed and treated separately.
4
The trickling-filter system
allows water to percolate through
bed of rocks hosting various
bacteria and other detritus.
4
In the activated-sludge system,
detritus-feeding organisms
consume most of biomass as
water percolates over rocks.
SECONDARY TREATMENT
Colloidal and dissolved organic
matter removal
5
In the secondary clarifier tank
organisms settle and become
next batch of activated sludge.
RAW SEWAGE
Bar screen
Grit chamber
Clarified water
Primary clarifier
OR
Secondary clarifier
DISINFECTION RELEASE
Debris removed
and incinerated
Grit removed
and sent to landfill
Grit settles to bottom
Organic matter settles
Fat and oil float to top
Raw sludge
removed for further
treatment
Water enters at center and
flows out over weir at edge
OR
Trickling-filter
Clarified water is
sprinkled onto
rock bed
Air bubbling system
or paddles keep tank
well-aerated
Activated-sludge
555

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
of organic material and its resulting BOD was considered 
the prime objective. Ending up with a nutrient-rich dis-
charge was not recognized as a problem. Today, with in-
creased awareness of the problem of cultural eutrophication,  
secondary activated-sludge systems have been added and are 
being modified and operated in a manner that both removes 
nutrients and oxidizes detritus in a process known as biologi-
cal nutrient removal (BNR).
Nitrogen.  Inthe natural nitrogen cycle, various bac-
teria convert nutrient forms of nitrogen  (ammonia and 
nitrate) back to non-nutritive nitrogen gas in the atmos-
phere through denitrification. For the biological removal 
of nitrogen, then, the activated-sludge system is parti-
tioned into zones, and the environment in each zone is 
controlled in a manner that promotes the denitrifying 
process (Fig. 12). The resulting inert nitrogen gas is vented 
into the air. 
of the total organic material, settles to the bottom, where 
it can be removed. At the same time, fatty or oily material 
floats to the top, where it is skimmed from the surface. All 
the material that is removed, both particulate organic mate-
rial and fatty material, is combined into what is referred to 
as raw sludge, which must be treated separately.
Primary treatment involves nothing more complicated 
than putting polluted water into a tank, letting material set-
tle, and pouring off the water. Nevertheless, such treatment re-
moves much of the particulate organic matter at minimal cost.
Secondary treatment. Secondary treatment is also called 
biological treatment because it uses organisms—natural de-
composers and detritus feeders. Basically, an environment is 
created that enables these organisms to feed on the colloidal 
and dissolved organic material and break it down to carbon 
dioxide, mineral nutrients, and water via their cell respira-
tion. The wastewater from primary treatment is a food- and 
water-rich medium for the decomposers and detritus feeders. 
The only thing that needs to be added to the water is  oxygen 
to enhance the organisms’ respiration and growth. Either 
of two systems may be used to add oxygen to the water: a 
trickling-filter system or an activated-sludge system. In the 
trickling-filter system, the water exiting from primary treat-
ment is sprinkled onto, and allowed to percolate through, a 
bed of fist-sized rocks 6–8 feet (2–3 m) deep (Fig. 11). The 
spaces between the rocks provide good aeration. Like a natu-
ral stream, this environment supports a complex food web 
of bacteria, protozoans, rotifers (organisms that consume 
protozoans), various small worms, and other detritus feed-
ers attached to the rocks. The organic material in the water, 
including pathogenic organisms, is absorbed and digested by 
decomposers and detritus feeders as it trickles by. 
The activated-sludge system (Fig. 10, bottom) is a more 
efficient, and the most common, secondary-treatment sys-
tem. Water from primary treatment enters a large tank that 
is equipped with an air-bubbling system or a rapidly churn-
ing system of paddles. A mixture of detritus-feeding  organisms, 
referred to as activated sludge, is added to the water as it en-
ters the tank, and the water is vigorously aerated as it moves 
through the tank. Organisms in this well-aerated environment 
reduce the biomass of organic material, including pathogens, 
as they feed. As the organisms feed on each other, they tend to 
form into clumps, called floc, that settle readily when the water 
is stilled. Then, from the aeration tank, the water is passed into 
a secondary clarifier tank, where the organisms settle out, and 
the water—now with more than 90% of the organic material 
removed—flows on. The settled organisms are pumped back 
into the aeration tank. (They are the activated sludge that is 
added at the beginning of the process.) Surplus amounts of 
 activated sludge, which occur as populations of organisms 
grow, are removed and added to the raw sludge. The organic 
material is oxidized by microbes to form carbon dioxide, 
water, and mineral nutrients that remain in the water solution.
biological nutrient Removal. The original secondary-
treatment systems were designed and operated so as to sim-
ply maximize biological digestion, because the elimination 
Figure 11 Trickling filters for secondary treatment. 
(a) The water from primary clarifiers is sprinkled onto, and trickles through, a bed 
of rocks 6–8 feet deep. (b) Various bacteria and other detritus feeders adhering to 
the rocks consume and digest organic matter as it trickles by in the water, which 
is collected at the bottom of the filters and goes on for final clarification and 
disinfection.
(a)
(b)
556

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
provides a safer way of adding chlorine to achieve disin-
fection. Because chlorine reacts with organic chemicals, all 
chlorine treatments are known to produce a variety of toxic 
disinfection by-products, like chlorinated hydrocarbons. And 
residual chlorine introduced to waterways is itself toxic and 
can harm natural biota. These impacts are minimized if the 
effluent is well diluted by natural water.
Other disinfecting techniques are coming into use, 
 although they are more costly than chlorine disinfection. 
One alternative is ozone gas, which kills microorganisms 
and breaks down to oxygen gas, improving water quality 
in the process. Ozone is unstable and, hence, explosive, so 
it must be generated at the point of use, a step that demands 
 considerable capital investment and energy. Another disinfec-
tion technique is to pass the effluent through an array of ul-
traviolet lights mounted in the water. (Standard fluorescent 
lights without the white coating emit ultraviolet light.) The 
ultraviolet radiation kills microorganisms but does not oth-
erwise affect the water.
Final effluent. After all these steps, the wastewater from 
a modern treatment plant has a lower organic and nutri-
ent content than many bodies of water into which it is 
discharged. BOD values are commonly 10 to 20 ppm, as 
 opposed to 200 ppm in the incoming sewage. In other words, 
discharging the wastewater may actually contribute toward 
improving water quality in the receiving body. In water-short 
Phosphorus. In an environment that is rich in oxygen 
but relatively lacking in food (the environment of zone 3 in 
Figure 12), bacteria take up phosphate from the solution and 
store it in their bodies. Thus, phosphate is removed as the 
excess organisms are removed from the system. These organ-
isms, together with the phosphate they contain, are added 
to, and treated with, the raw sludge, ultimately producing a 
more nutrient-rich, treated sludge product.
Various chemical treatments are often used as an 
 alternative to BNR. One such process is simply to pass the 
effluent from standard secondary treatment through a  filter 
of lime, which causes the phosphate to precipitate out as in-
soluble calcium phosphate. Another is to treat the  effluent 
with ferric chloride, which produces insoluble ferric phos-
phate, or with an organic polymer, which gives rise to a floc. 
With these methods, most of the phosphorus is removed 
along with the sludge.
Final Cleansing and Disinfection. With or without BNR, 
the wastewater is subjected to a final clarification and dis-
infection (Fig. 10, bottom). Although few pathogens survive 
the combined stages of treatment, public-health rigors still 
demand that the water be disinfected before being discharged 
into natural waterways. The most widely used  disinfecting 
agent is chlorine gas because it is both effective and rela-
tively inexpensive. However, chlorine gas is dangerous to 
work with. More commonly, sodium hypochlorite (Clorox®) 
Figure 12 Biological nutrient removal (BNR). The secondary treatment—the activated-sludge proc-
ess—may be modified to remove nitrogen and phosphate, while at the same time breaking down organic matter. 
For this BNR process, the aeration tank is partitioned into three zones, only a third of which is aerated. As seen 
in the diagram, ammonium (NH4 +) is converted to nitrate (NO3
–) in zone 3. Recycled to zone 2, which is without 
oxygen gas (anoxic), the nitrate supplies the oxygen for cell respiration. In the process, the nitrate is converted 
to nitrogen gas, which is released into the atmosphere. Phosphate is taken up by bacteria in zone 3 and removed 
with the excess sludge.
Zone 1
anaerobic
Effluent from
primary
treatment
Activated
sludge
return
Aeration
Activated sludge return
Activated
sludge
Removal of
excess
sludge with
organic
phosphate
Sludge
treatment
Mixer
Colloidal and
dissolved organic
matter
Bacteria
fermentation
Bacteria
Bacteria
Phosphate
uptake
Growth
Growth
Growth
Organic
acids
Organic
acids
NH4
+
NH4
+
N2
O2
CO2
NO3
–
NO3
–
PO4
3–
NH4
+
PO4
3–
Zone 2
anoxic
Zone 3
oxygen-rich
Secondary
clarifier
Clarified
water
+
+
+
557

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
consortium of anaerobic bacteria breaks down the organic 
matter. The end products of this decomposition are carbon 
dioxide, methane, and water. Thus, a major by-product 
of anaerobic processes is biogas, a gaseous mixture that is 
about two-thirds methane. The other third is made up of car-
bon dioxide and various foul-smelling organic compounds 
that give sewage its characteristic odor. Because of its meth-
ane content, biogas is flammable and can be used for fuel. In 
fact, it is commonly collected and burned to heat the sludge 
digesters because the bacteria working on the sludge do best 
when maintained at about 104°F (38°C). 
After four to six weeks, anaerobic digestion is more or 
less complete, and what remains is called treated sludge or 
biosolids, consisting of the remaining organic matter, which 
is now a relatively stable, nutrient-rich, humus-like mate-
rial suspended in water. Pathogens have been largely, if not 
 entirely, eliminated.
Such treated sludge makes an excellent organic fertilizer 
that can be applied directly to lawns and agricultural fields 
in the liquid state in which it comes from the digesters, pro-
viding the benefit of both the humus and the nutrient-rich 
water. Alternatively, the sludge may be dewatered by means 
of belt presses, whereby the sludge is passed between rollers 
that squeeze out most of the water (Fig. 14a). This leaves the 
organic material as a semisolid sludge cake (Fig. 14b), which, 
after disinfection, is easy to stockpile, distribute, and spread 
on fields with traditional manure spreaders. 
Pasteurization. After the raw sludge is dewatered, the re-
sulting sludge cake may be put through ovens that operate like 
oversized laundry dryers. In the dryers, the sludge is pasteur-
ized—that is, heated sufficiently to kill any pathogens (exactly 
the same process that makes milk safe to drink). The product 
is dry, odorless organic pellets. Milwaukee, Wisconsin, which 
has a particularly rich sludge resulting from the brewing in-
dustry, has been using this process for more than 60 years. The 
city bags and sells the pellets throughout the country as an 
organic fertilizer under the trade name Milorganite®.
Composting. Another process sometimes used to treat sew-
age sludge is composting. Raw sludge is mixed with wood 
chips or some other water-absorbing material to reduce the 
water content. It is then placed in windrows—long, narrow 
piles that allow air to circulate easily through the material and 
that can be turned with machinery. Bacteria and other decom-
posers break down the organic material to rich humus-like 
material that makes an excellent treatment for poor soil.
alternative treatment Systems
Despite the expansion of sewage collection systems, many 
homes in rural and suburban areas lie outside the reach of 
a municipal system. For these homes, on-site treatment sys-
tems are required. Currently, 25% of the U.S. population is 
served by such systems. The traditional and still most com-
mon on-site system is the septic system (Fig. 15). Wastewa-
ter flows into the tank, where particulate organic material 
settles to the bottom. The tank acts like a primary clarifier 
areas, there is every reason to believe that the treated water 
itself, with minimal additional treatment, could be recycled 
into the municipal water-supply system.
Bear in mind that the techniques we have described 
here represent the state of the art. Many cities, even in the 
 developed world, are still operating with antiquated systems 
that provide lower-quality treatment. A few coastal cities still 
persist in discharging sewage that has received only primary 
treatment directly into the ocean, although in the United 
States this practice has almost disappeared.
treatment of Sludge
Recall that the particulate organic matter that settles out or 
floats to the surface of sewage water in primary treatment 
forms the bulk of raw sludge, though the sewage also contains 
excesses from activated-sludge and BNR systems. Raw sludge 
is a gray, foul-smelling, syrupy liquid with a water content of 
97–98%. Pathogens are certain to be present in raw sludge 
because it includes material directly from toilets. Indeed, raw 
sludge is considered to be a biologically hazardous material. 
However, as nutrient-rich organic material, it has the potential 
to be used as organic fertilizer if it is suitably treated to kill 
pathogens and if it does not contain other toxic contaminants.
Three commonly used methods for treating sludge and 
converting it into organic fertilizer are anaerobic digestion, 
pasteurization, and composting. Because this is a develop-
ing industry, it is unclear which method will prove most cost 
effective and environmentally acceptable over the long run. 
Also, none of these methods is capable of removing toxic 
substances such as heavy metals and nonbiodegradable 
 synthetic organic compounds. The presence of such toxins 
can preclude the use of sludge as fertilizer.
anaerobic Digestion. Anaerobic digestion is a process 
that allows bacteria to feed on the sludge in the absence 
of oxygen. The raw sludge is put into large airtight tanks 
called sludge digesters (Fig. 13). In the absence of oxygen, a 
Figure 13 Anaerobic sludge digesters. In these tanks at the Deer Is-
land Sewage Treatment Plant, Boston, the bacterial digestion of raw sludge in the 
absence of oxygen leads to the production of methane gas, which is tapped from 
the tops of the tanks, and humus-like organic matter, which can be used as a soil 
conditioner. The egg-like shape of the tanks facilitates mixing and digestion.
558

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
For this reason, the EPA has made several resources available 
to local and state agencies responsible for maintaining water 
quality: voluntary national guidelines, a handbook for man-
agement, and a manual for on-site wastewater systems.
Septic System Primer. The following are some simple sug-
gestions for successful septic system maintenance:
1. Use caution in disposing of materials down the drain. Do 
not dump coffee grounds, cat litter, diapers, grease, femi-
nine hygiene products, pesticides, paint, gasoline, house-
hold chemicals (like chlorine-containing compounds), or 
other products that could either fill up or clog the septic 
tank or kill the bacteria that make the system work.
2. Maintain your system by having it inspected regularly and 
pumped out at least every five years—more frequently if 
you have a larger family. Keep records of maintenance, 
and have a map of the location of your septic tank and 
the leaching field.
3. If you have a garbage disposal unit, get rid of it; the 
added materials will shorten the life of the system and 
force it to be pumped out more frequently.
4. Keep heavy equipment and vehicles off your system and 
leaching field.
Composting toilet Systems. A viable and relatively in-
expensive alternative to septic systems, especially for more 
remote and occasional use, is the composting toilet system 
(Fig. 16). The objective of the system is to provide a sanitary 
means of treating human wastes that will destroy human 
pathogens and produce a stable humus-like end product that 
can be safely disposed of. There are many types of these sys-
tems available, but they have some common components: 
 • A bathroom toilet that connects to a composting reactor. 
This can have a removable bowl for easy cleaning.
in a municipal system. Water containing colloidal and dis-
solved organic material, as well as dissolved nutrients, flows 
into the gravel or crushed stone lining the leaching field and 
gradually percolates into the soil. Organic material that set-
tles in the tank is digested by bacteria, but accumulations still 
must be pumped out regularly. Soil bacteria decompose the 
colloidal and dissolved organic material that comes through 
the leaching field. Prerequisites for this traditional system are 
suitable land area for the drain field and subsoil that allows 
sufficient percolation of water. 
Unfortunately, on-site systems frequently fail, result-
ing in unpleasant sewage backup into homes and pollution 
of groundwater and surface waters. Homeowners are often 
unaware of how the systems work, and most local regulatory 
programs do not require homeowners to be accountable for 
them. Substantial nutrient and pathogen pollution of ground-
water and surface waters is traced to failed on-site systems. 
Figure 14 Dewatering treated sludge. (a) Sludge (98% water) may be dewatered by means of belt 
presses, as shown here. The liquid sludge is run between canvas belts going over and between rollers, so that much 
of the water is pressed out. (b) The resulting “sludge cake” is a semisolid humus-like material that can be used as 
an organic fertilizer.
(a)
(b)
Figure 15 Septic system. Sewage treatment for a private home, using a 
septic tank and leaching field. Normally, the pipes and the tank are buried under-
ground. They are shown uncovered here only for illustration.
(Source: http://www.catawbariverkeeper.org/issues/library-of-documents-on-sewage-issues-
and-treatment/septictankdiagram.jpg/view?searchterm=septic+system)
Septic tank
Manhole
(for cleanout)
Household
wastewater
Gravel or
crushed stone
Perforated
pipe
Nonperforated pipe
Vent pipe
Distribution
box
(optional)
Drain field
559

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
using effluents for irrigation. The nutrient-rich water 
coming from the standard secondary-treatment process is ben-
eficial for growing plants. The problem is that we don’t want 
to put that water into waterways, where it will stimulate the 
growth of undesirable algae. But why not use it for irrigat-
ing plants we do want to grow? This is a way of completing 
the nutrient cycle. Indeed, the concept has been put into prac-
tice in a considerable number of locations as an alternative to 
upgrading the treatment to remove nutrients. Again, effluents 
must not be contaminated with toxic materials.
To illustrate, the nutrient-rich effluent from standard sec-
ondary treatment from St. Petersburg, Florida, was causing 
cultural eutrophication in Tampa Bay. Now, St. Petersburg 
uses the effluent to irrigate 4,000 acres (1,600 hectares) of 
urban open space, from parks and residential lawns to a golf 
course. Revenues from the water sales help offset operating 
costs. Similarly, Bakersfield, California, receives a $30,000 
annual income from a 5,000-acre (2,000 hectares) farm irri-
gated with its treated effluent. And Clayton County, Georgia, 
is irrigating 2,500 acres (1,000 hectares) of woodland with 
partially treated sewage. Hundreds of similar projects are 
under way around the country.
A number of developing countries irrigate croplands 
with raw (untreated) sewage effluents. The crops respond 
well, but parasites and disease organisms can easily be trans-
ferred to farmworkers and consumers. Therefore, it is im-
portant to emphasize that only treated effluents should be 
 • A composting reactor that receives solid and liquid 
wastes from the toilet. The reactor can be right under 
the toilet seat (self-contained) or located in the basement 
or on the ground outside.
 • An exhaust system (may have a fan) to remove the odors 
and vapors that result from decomposition of the waste 
matter.
 • Some means of ventilation in the reactor to promote aer-
obic breakdown of waste. This can be active or passive. 
Active systems involve rotating drums, automatic mix-
ers, fans, and the like, and passive systems simply allow 
the waste to decompose in cool temperatures.
 • A means of managing and draining excess liquid and 
leachate (liquid that has percolated through the wastes) 
and an access door for removing the end product.
These systems require active management if they are 
constantly in use, and the end product must legally be 
buried or removed by a licensed septage hauler. They are 
capable of reducing toilet wastes to 10–30% of their origi-
nal volume. Their most common use is in vacation cot-
tages, roadside rest stops, and parks, but where building 
codes permit, they can also be employed in urban settings. 
The Institute of Asian Research in Vancouver, British Co-
lumbia, is a 30,000-square-foot office complex that is not 
connected to the city sewer system and uses only compost-
ing toilets to handle human wastes.
Figure 16 Composting toilet system. (a) A toilet in the bathroom leads to (b) the composting  reactor, 
which receives the wastes and allows them to decompose. These systems are often used in vacation  cottages, 
parks, and roadside rest stops. They reduce human wastes to as little as 10% of their original volume.
560

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
or are rooted in, the bottom of a body of water. All com-
mon aquarium plants and sea grasses are benthic plants. As 
shown in Figure 17a, benthic plants may be categorized as 
submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV), which generally grows 
totally under water, or emergent vegetation, which grows 
with the lower parts in water but the upper parts emerging 
from the water. 
To thrive, SAV requires water that is clear enough to 
allow sufficient light to penetrate to allow photosynthesis. As 
water becomes more turbid (cloudy), light is diminished. In 
extreme situations, it may be reduced to penetrating to just a 
few centimeters beneath the water’s surface. Thus, increasing 
turbidity decreases the depth at which SAV can survive.
Another important feature of SAV is that it absorbs 
its required mineral nutrients from the bottom sediments 
through the roots, just as land plants do. SAV is not limited 
by water that is low in nutrients. Indeed, enrichment of the 
water with nutrients is counterproductive for SAV because it 
stimulates the growth of phytoplankton.
Phytoplankton. Phytoplankton 
consist 
of 
numerous 
species of photosynthetic algae, protists, and chlorophyll-
containing bacteria (cyanobacteria, formerly referred to as 
blue-green algae) that grow as microscopic single cells or 
in small groups, or “threads,” of cells. Phytoplankton live 
suspended in the water and are found wherever light and 
nutrients are available (Fig. 17b). In extreme situations, 
water may become pea-soup green (or tea colored, depend-
ing on the species involved), and a scum of phytoplankton 
may float on the surface and absorb essentially all the light. 
However, phytoplankton reach such densities only in nutri-
ent-rich water, because, not being connected to the bottom, 
they must absorb nutrients from the water. A low level of 
nutrients in the water limits the growth of phytoplankton 
accordingly.
Considering the different requirements of SAV and phy-
toplankton, the balance between them is altered when nutri-
ent levels in the water are changed. As long as water remains 
low in nutrients, populations of phytoplankton are sup-
pressed, the water is clear, and light can penetrate to support 
the growth of SAV. As nutrient levels increase, phytoplankton 
can grow more prolifically, making the water turbid and thus 
shading out the SAV.
the impacts of nutrient enrichment
A lake in which light penetrates deeply—one in which 
the bottom is visible beyond the immediate shoreline—is 
 oligotrophic (low in nutrients). Such a lake is fed by a water-
shed that holds its nutrients well. A forested watershed, for 
example, holds nitrogen and phosphorus tightly and allows 
very little of those elements to enter the water draining into 
the streams and rivers. If the streams feed into a lake, it will 
reflect their low nutrient content.
In an oligotrophic lake, the low nutrient levels limit the 
growth of phytoplankton and allow enough light to pene-
trate to support the growth of SAV, which draws its nutri-
ents from the bottom sediments. In turn, the benthic plants 
used for irrigation. In Matimangwe, Mozambique, sewage is 
treated in dry pits and turned into a rich fertilizer that dra-
matically increased the food harvest, using a latrine system 
called EcoSan. The wastes are mixed with soil and ash and 
left for eight months, while the lack of moisture and long in-
cubation kill off pathogens and turn the wastes into a rich 
compost.
Reconstructed Wetland Systems. In treating wastewa-
ter, it is also possible to make use of the nutrient-absorbing 
capacity of wetlands in suitable areas and under suitable cli-
matic conditions. The project may be part of a wetlands re-
covery program, or artificial wetlands may be constructed.
In the 1960s and 1970s, for example, much of the land 
around Orlando, Florida, which was originally wetlands, 
was drained and converted to cattle pasture. At the time, 
Orlando was discharging 20 million gallons (75 million L) 
per day of nutrient-rich effluent into the St. Johns River fol-
lowing secondary treatment. Through the Orlando Easterly 
Wetlands Reclamation Project, 1,200 acres (480 hectares) of 
pastureland were converted back to wetlands. The project 
involved scooping soil from pastures and building berms 
(mounds of earth) around them to create a chain of shallow 
lakes and ponds. In addition, 2 million wetland plants rang-
ing from bulrushes and cattails to various trees were planted. 
The effluent entering the upper end now percolates through 
the wetlands for about 30 days before entering the St. Johns 
River virtually pure. The project has recreated a wildlife hab-
itat that supports some threatened and endangered species 
like the snail kite. Wetland systems can be designed for small 
as well as large areas and are becoming an increasingly pop-
ular alternative for small communities. The key to success for 
such systems is to ensure that they are kept in balance and 
not provided more input than they are able to handle.
Many aquatic systems are simply not able to act 
like wetlands and absorb extra nutrients without major 
changes in ecosystem function. This response, called eu-
trophication, is the most widespread water-pollution prob-
lem in the United States.
3 eutrophication
The term trophic refers to feeding. Literally, eutrophic means 
“well nourished.” As we will see, there are some quite un-
desirable consequences of high levels of “nourishment” in 
bodies of water. Although eutrophication can be an entirely 
natural process, the introduction of pollutants into bod-
ies of water has greatly increased the scope and speed of 
eutrophication.
Different Kinds of aquatic Plants
To understand eutrophication, you need to be able to distin-
guish between benthic plants and phytoplankton.
benthic Plants. Benthic plants (from the Greek benthos, 
meaning “deep”) are aquatic plants that grow attached to, 
561

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
A dead zone has been created; it can be as limited as a small 
lake basin or as extensive as the Baltic Sea, and the cause is 
always nutrient enrichment.
In sum, eutrophication refers to this whole sequence 
of events, starting with nutrient enrichment and proceed-
ing to the growth and die-off of phytoplankton, the ac-
cumulation of detritus, the growth of bacteria, and, finally, 
the depletion of dissolved oxygen and the suffocation of 
higher organisms (Fig. 18). For humans, a eutrophic body 
of water is unappealing for swimming, boating, and sport-
fishing. Also, if the lake is a source of drinking water, its 
value may be greatly impaired because phytoplankton 
rapidly clog water filters and may cause a foul taste. Even 
worse, some species of phytoplankton secrete various 
toxins into the water that may kill other aquatic life and 
be injurious to human health as well. (See Sustainability, 
“Harmful Algal Blooms.”) 
Shallow lakes and Ponds. In lakes and ponds whose 
water depth is 6 feet (2 m) or less, eutrophication takes a 
somewhat different course. There, SAV may grow to a height 
of a meter or more, reaching the surface. Thus, with nutrient 
enrichment, the SAV is not shaded out but grows abundantly, 
sprawling over and often totally covering the water surface 
with dense mats of vegetation that make boating, fishing, or 
swimming impossible (Fig. 19). Any vegetation beneath these 
support the rest of a diverse aquatic ecosystem by providing 
food, habitats, and dissolved oxygen. The oligotrophic body 
of water is prized for its aesthetic and recreational qualities 
as well as for its production of game fish.
the Process of eutrophication. As the water of an oli-
gotrophic body becomes enriched with nutrients, numerous 
changes are set in motion. First, the nutrient enrichment al-
lows the rapid growth and multiplication of phytoplankton, 
increasing the turbidity of the water. The increasing turbidity 
shades out the SAV that lives in the water. With the die-off of 
SAV, there is a loss of food, habitats, and dissolved oxygen 
from their photosynthesis.
Phytoplankton have remarkably high growth and re-
production rates. Under optimal conditions, phytoplankton 
biomass may double every 24 hours, a capacity far beyond 
that of benthic plants. Thus, phytoplankton soon reach a 
maximum population density, and continuing growth and re-
production are balanced by die-off. Dead phytoplankton set-
tle out, resulting in heavy deposits of detritus on the lake or 
river bottom. In turn, the abundance of detritus supports an 
abundance of decomposers, mainly bacteria. The explosive 
growth of bacteria, consuming oxygen via respiration, cre-
ates an additional demand for dissolved oxygen. The result 
is the depletion of dissolved oxygen, creating hypoxic condi-
tions, with the consequent suffocation of fish and shellfish. 
Figure 17 Aquatic photosynthesizers. (a) Benthic, or bottom-rooted, plants. These are subdivided 
into submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) and emergent vegetation. (b) Phytoplankton, various photosynthetic 
 organisms that are either single cells or small groups or filaments of cells, float freely in the water.
(a) BENTHIC PLANTS
(b) PHYTOPLANKTON
Cattails
Bulrushes
Water lily
Arrowheads
Pond weeds
Muskgrass
Emergent vegetation
Emergent vegetation
0.1 mm
Cyanobacteria
Filamentous green algae
Green algae
Diatoms
Submerged
aquatic vegetation
562

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
mats is shaded out. As the mats of vegetation die and sink to 
the bottom, they create a BOD that often depletes the water 
of dissolved oxygen, causing the death of aquatic organisms 
other than bacteria. 
natural Versus Cultural eutrophication. In nature, 
apart from human impacts, eutrophication is part of the 
process of natural succession. Over periods of hundreds or 
thousands of years, bodies of water are subject to gradual 
enrichment with nutrients. Thus, natural eutrophication is 
a normal process. Wherever nutrients come from sewage-
treatment plants, poor farming practices, urban runoff, 
and certain other human activities, however, humans have 
inadvertently managed to vastly accelerate the process 
of nutrient enrichment. The accelerated eutrophication 
caused by humans is called cultural eutrophication.
Figure 18 Eutrophication. As  nutrients 
are added from sources of pollution, an oligo-
trophic system rapidly becomes eutrophic and 
undesirable.
OLIGOTROPHIC
EUTROPHIC
• Nutrient-rich
• Phytoplankton
  thrive
• Nutrient-rich
• Rapid turnover
  of phytoplankton
• Accumulation
  of detritus
  of dead algae
• Low in nutrients
• Phytoplankton
  limited
• Water clear
• Light penetrates
• Submerged aquatic
  vegetation (SAV)
  thrives
• Water turbid
• SAV shaded out
• Decomposers
  feed on detritus
• Depletion of
   dissolved oxygen
• Fish and shellfish
  suffocate
NUTRIENT INPUTS
Figure 19 Eutrophication in shallow lakes and ponds. In shal-
low water, sufficient light for photosynthesis continues to reach the submerged 
aquatic vegetation. The oversupply of nutrients stimulates growth, so that vegeta-
tion reaches the surface and forms mats. The vegetation has been raked into piles 
prior to removal. 
563

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
Getting at the Root Cause. Controlling eutrophication 
requires long-term strategies for correcting the problem, 
which ultimately means reducing the inputs of nutrients and 
sediments—two of the types of pollution discussed at the be-
ginning of this chapter. The first step is to identify the major 
point and nonpoint sources of nutrients and sediments. Then 
it is a matter of developing and implementing strategies for 
correction. Which source or factor is most significant will 
depend on the human population and the land uses within 
the particular watershed. Therefore, each watershed must be 
analyzed as a separate entity, and appropriate measures must 
be taken to reduce the levels of nutrients and sediments exit-
ing from that watershed. In the sections that follow, we shall 
discuss major strategies used to control the root causes of 
eutrophication.
First, consider the concept of limiting factors, in which 
the lack of only one nutrient can suppress growth. In natural 
freshwater systems, phosphorus is the most common limiting 
factor. In marine systems (like the coastal Gulf of Mexico), 
the limiting nutrient is most often nitrogen. Both in the envi-
ronment and in biological systems, phosphorus (P) is present 
as phosphate (PO4
3–), and nitrogen is present in a variety of 
compounds, most commonly as nitrate (NO3
–) or the ammo-
nium ion (NH4
+).
Ecoregional Nutrient Criteria. Beginning in 2001, 
the EPA began publishing water-quality nutrient criteria 
aimed at preventing and reducing the eutrophication that 
affects so many bodies of water. The agency listed its rec-
ommended criteria for causative factors—nitrogen and 
phosphorus—and for response factors—chlorophyll a as a 
measure of both phytoplankton density and water clarity. 
The EPA divided the country into ecoregions and deter-
mined criteria levels for each specific region. For example, 
ecoregion VIII, which is composed of the northern Great 
Lakes and the northeastern states, has the following criteria 
for lakes and reservoirs: total phosphorus 8.0 μg/L, total 
nitrogen 0.24 mg/L, chlorophyll a 2.43 μg/L, and Secchi 
depth (a measurement of transparency) 4.93 meters. Other 
ecoregions often have higher criteria levels, reflecting their 
differences from the pristine waters around the northern 
Great Lakes. Like the other water quality criteria, the nu-
trient criteria are provided as targets for the states as they 
address their water-pollution (and especially their eutrophi-
cation) problems.
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System 
(NPDES): Control Strategy for Point Sources. In heavily 
populated areas, discharges from sewage-treatment plants 
have been major sources of nutrients entering waterways. 
The levels of phosphate in effluents from these plants were el-
evated even more in areas where laundry detergents contain-
ing phosphate were used. Phosphate contained in detergents 
goes through the system and out with the discharge unless 
the system has a nutrient removal component. In regions 
where eutrophication has been identified as a problem, a 
key step toward prevention has been to ban the sale of phos-
phate-based laundry detergents. Because many states estab-
lished bans on the use of these products, the major laundry 
detergent manufacturers voluntarily ended their manufacture 
Combating eutrophication
There are two approaches to combating the problem of cul-
tural eutrophication. One is to attack the symptoms—the 
growth of vegetation, the lack of dissolved oxygen, or both. 
The other is to get at the root cause—excessive inputs of 
 nutrients and sediments.
attacking the Symptoms. Attacking the symptoms is 
appropriate in certain situations where immediate remedia-
tion is the goal and costs are not prohibitive. Methods of at-
tacking the symptoms of eutrophication include (1) applying 
chemical treatments (with herbicides), (2) aerating, (3) har-
vesting aquatic weeds, and (4) drawing water down.
Applying Herbicides. Herbicides are often applied to 
ponds and lakes to control the growth of nuisance plants. To 
control phytoplankton growth, copper sulfate and diquat are 
frequently used. For controlling SAV and emergent vegeta-
tion, fluridone, glyphosate, and 2,4-D are employed. How-
ever, at the concentrations required to bring the vegetation 
under control, these compounds are sometimes toxic to fish 
and aquatic animals. Also, fish are often killed after herbicide 
is applied, because the rotting vegetation depletes the water 
of dissolved oxygen. In sum, herbicides provide only cosmetic 
treatment, and as soon as they wear off, the vegetation grows 
back rapidly.
Aerating. Decomposers deplete the water of dissolved 
oxygen, thus suffocating other aquatic life, in the final and 
most destructive stage of eutrophication. Artificial aeration 
of the water can avert this terminal stage. An aeration tech-
nique currently gaining in popularity is to lay a network of 
plastic tubes with microscopic pores on the bottom of the 
waterway to be treated. High-pressure air pumps force mi-
crobubbles from the pores, and the bubbles dissolve directly 
into the water. The method is proving effective in speeding 
up the breakdown of accumulated detritus, improving water 
quality, and enabling the return of more desirable aquatic 
life. Despite its high cost, the technique is applicable to har-
bors, marinas, and some water-supply reservoirs, where the 
demand for better water quality justifies the cost.
Harvesting. In shallow lakes or ponds, where the prob-
lem is bottom-rooted vegetation reaching and sprawling over 
the surface, harvesting the aquatic weeds (see Figure 19) may 
be an expedient way to improve the water’s recreational po-
tential and aesthetics. Commercial mechanical harvesters are 
used, and nearby residents sometimes get together to remove 
the vegetation by hand. The harvested vegetation makes 
good organic fertilizer and mulch. But even harvesting has a 
limited effect: The vegetation soon grows back because roots 
are left in the nutrient-rich sediments. 
Drawing Water Down. Because many recreational 
lakes are dammed, another option for shallow-water weed 
control is to draw the lake down for a period each year. This 
process kills most of the rooted aquatic plants along the 
shore, although they grow back in time.
All of these approaches are only temporary fixes for the 
problem and have to be repeated often, at significant cost, to 
keep the unwanted plant growth under control.
564

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
Best Management Practices. Reducing or eliminating 
pollution from nonpoint sources will involve different strate-
gies for different sources. For example, where a significant 
portion of the watershed is devoted to agricultural activities, 
the major sources of nutrients and sediments are likely to 
be (1) erosion and leaching of fertilizer from croplands and 
(2) runoff of animal wastes from barns and feedlots. All the 
practices that can be used to minimize such erosion, runoff, 
and leaching are lumped under a single term, best manage-
ment practices. This includes all the methods of soil conser-
vation available. Table  2 lists examples of these practices for 
a variety of nonpoint sources.
Once control measures have been put in place, the pol-
luted body of water must be monitored to determine whether 
in 1994. However, the bans do not usually cover dishwash-
ing detergents, some brands of which contain as much as 
8.7% phosphate.
Bans on detergents with phosphate and upgrades of 
sewage-treatment plants have brought about marked im-
provements in waterways that were heavily damaged by ef-
fluents from these plants. In a sense, however, these are the 
easy measures, as the target for correction (the effluent) is an 
obvious point source, and methods for correcting the prob-
lem are clear cut. The NPDES permitting process is the basic 
regulatory tool for reducing point-source pollutants. Under 
the Clean Water Act, “anyone discharging pollutants from 
any point source into waters of the U.S. [must] obtain an 
NPDES permit from EPA or an authorized state.” More than 
140,000 facilities are now regulated by way of NPDES per-
mits. The permit must be drawn up in the context of the total 
pollutant sources (point and nonpoint) affecting a watershed 
or body of water.
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL): Control Strat-
egy for Nonpoint Sources. Correction becomes more dif-
ficult, but no less important, when the source is diffuse, as in 
the case of farm and urban runoff. Remediation of such non-
point sources will involve thousands—perhaps millions—of 
individual property owners adopting new practices regarding 
land management and the use of fertilizer and other chemi-
cals on their properties. Nevertheless, that is the challenge. 
Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act requires states to de-
velop management programs to address nonpoint sources of 
pollution. Thus, there is a legal mandate to address the issues 
of agricultural and urban runoff.
The EPA has opted to develop regulations via the TMDL 
program. The concept is straightforward:
 • Identify the pollutants responsible for degrading a body 
of water.
 • Estimate the pollution coming from all sources (point 
and nonpoint).
 • Estimate the ability of the body of water to assimilate 
the pollutants while retaining water quality.
 • Determine the maximum allowable pollution load.
 • Within a margin of safety, allocate the allowable level 
of pollution among the different sources, such that the 
water quality standards are achieved.
As with most attempts at solving environmental prob-
lems, the devil is in the details. The states are responsible 
for administering TMDL pollution abatement, but the EPA 
maintains oversight and approval of the results. State admin-
istrators have a number of options for managing nonpoint-
source pollution, including regulatory programs, technical 
assistance, financial assistance, education and training, and 
demonstration projects. By 2011, the states had listed more 
than 41,000 water bodies as being impaired. More than 
5,100 were on the list because of nutrient overload. The EPA 
has approved a total of 46,000 TMDLs submitted by the 
states to correct the impairments and has substantially closed 
the gap between the state listings and the approved TMDLs.
tabLe 2  best Management Practices 
for Reducing Pollution from nonpoint 
Sources
agriculture
Forestry
Animal waste management
Ground cover maintenance
Conservation tillage
Limiting disturbed areas
Contour farming
Log removal techniques
Strip-cropping
Cover crops
Crop rotation
Fertilizer management
Integrated pest management
Range and pasture  
management
Terraces
Construction
Limiting disturbed areas
Nonvegetative soil stabilization
Runoff detention and retention
urban
Flood storage
Porous pavements
Runoff detention and  
retention
Street cleaning
Pesticide and herbicide 
management
Proper management of roads
Removal of debris
Riparian zone management
Mining
Underdrains
Water diversion
Multicategory
Buffer vegetated strips
Detention and sedimentation 
basins
Devices to encourage infiltration
Vegetated waterways
Interception and diversion of 
runoff
Sediment traps
Streamside management zones
Vegetative stabilization and 
mulching
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Guidance for Water Quality-
Based Decisions: The TMDL Process, EPA440-4-91-001 (Washington, DC: 
USEPA, 1991).
565

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
by a group of limnologists from the University of Washing-
ton showed that phosphate was the culprit. Before the di-
version, the lake was receiving 220 tons of phosphate per 
year from all sources. Afterward, the total dropped to 40 
tons per year, well within the lake’s normal capacity to ab-
sorb phosphate by depositing it in deep bottom sediments. 
One clear lesson learned was that sewage-treatment effluent 
must never be allowed to enter a lake unless nutrients are 
removed as part of the treatment. The major lesson, however, 
was that eutrophication can be reversed by paying attention 
to nutrient inputs and addressing the various sources. Lake 
management, in other words, is a matter of controlling the 
phosphate loading into a lake from all sources: human and 
animal sewage, agricultural and yard fertilizers, street run-
off, and failing septic systems. Many lakes are now protected 
by associations of concerned citizens who see themselves as 
stewards of their lake.
4  Public Policy and Water 
Pollution
In the United States, the responsibility for overseeing the 
health of the nation’s waters rests with the EPA. However, 
the EPA can develop regulations only if Congress gives it the 
authority to do so. Hence, the foundation for public policy 
must be the laws passed by Congress. Some major legisla-
tive milestones in protecting the nation’s waters are listed 
in Table 3. The landmark legislation is the Clean Water Act 
of 1972 (CWA), which gave the EPA jurisdiction over (and 
for the first time required permits for) all point-source dis-
charges of pollutants; simply put, all discharges into U.S. 
waters are unlawful unless authorized by a permit. This act 
and subsequent amendments have provided $85 billion to 
help cities and towns build treatment plants to meet the 
federal requirement for secondary treatment of all sewage. 
As the table shows, the 1987 amendments to the CWA es-
tablished a revolving loan fund—the Clean Water State Re-
volving Fund (SRF) program—to replace the direct-grants 
program. To build treatment facilities, local governments 
water quality standards are being attained. Several years of 
data collection may be necessary to detect genuine trends 
in quality. When water quality standards are reached and 
sustained, the body of water is removed from the list of im-
paired waters. To date, a total of 1,748 previously impaired 
bodies of water have been removed from the list (not a very 
impressive record). If standards are not met, the TMDL proc-
ess must be revisited and new pollution allowances allocated.
Recovery. The good news is that cultural eutrophica-
tion and other forms of water pollution can be control-
led and often reversed, provided that a total watershed 
management approach is undertaken. For a small lake 
fed from a modest-sized watershed, the task may be quite 
straightforward because major sources of nutrients can 
be identified and addressed. For large bodies of water, 
such as the Chesapeake Bay—with a watershed of 63,700 
square miles (165,000 km2) in six states and the District 
of  Columbia—the task is enormous. The Chesapeake Bay 
has suffered from heavy nutrient pollution, with cultural 
eutrophication destroying all but a tenth of the 600,000 
acres of vital sea grasses that once formed the basis of the 
bay’s rich ecosystem. A dead zone appears every year, in-
volving up to 40% of the main bay for 10 months of the 
year. The Chesapeake Bay Program, a state-federal part-
nership begun in 1987, set the ambitious goal of achiev-
ing federal clean water standards by 2010. Unfortunately, 
new development in the watershed contributed nutrients 
and sediments as fast as the restoration efforts reduced 
them. Although there have been signs that the dead zone 
has been decreasing, other water quality indicators have 
shown little change. At the end of 2010, the EPA stepped 
in with an enforceable “road map” to put the estuary on a 
path to recovery.2 The agency set a bay-wide TMDL that 
will limit specific nutrient inflows from each of the bay’s 
tributaries. This will give the states clear targets for imple-
menting the restoration activities. 
lake Washington. One remarkable success story is Lake 
Washington, east of Seattle (Fig. 20). This 34-square-mile lake 
is at the center of a large metropolitan area. During the 1940s 
and 1950s, 11 sewage-treatment plants were sending state-
of-the-art treated water into the lake at a rate of 20 million 
gallons per day. At the same time, phosphate-based deter-
gents came into wide use. The lake responded to the mas-
sive input of nutrients by developing unpleasant “blooms” of 
noxious blue-green algae. The water lost its clarity, the desir-
able fish populations declined, and masses of dead algae ac-
cumulated on the shores of the lake.
Citizen concern led to the creation of a system that di-
verted the treatment-plant effluents into nearby Puget Sound, 
where tidal flushing would mix them with open-ocean water. 
The diversion was complete by 1968, and the lake responded 
quickly. The algal blooms diminished, the water regained its 
clarity, and by 1975, recovery was complete. Careful studies 
2Juliet Eilperin. “EPA Unveils Massive Restoration Plan for Chesapeake Bay.” The 
Washington Post, December 30, 2010. 
Figure 20 Lake Washington. A testimony to the fact that bodies of water 
can recover from cultural eutrophication, Lake Washington is now thriving be-
cause sources of nutrients enriching the lake have been removed.
566

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
and animal feeding operations—are also receiving the 
EPA’s attention in the form of new regulations. Recent at-
tempts by Republicans in Congress to block the EPA from 
carrying out many of its mandates on these issues have 
failed to pass.3 
Nevertheles, much progress has been made in the 
40 years since the enactment of the Clean Water Act. This 
act is seen as one of the most successful of our nation’s envi-
ronmental laws. The number of people in the United States 
served by adequate sewage-treatment plants has risen from 
85 million to 223 million. Soil erosion has been reduced 
by 1 billion tons annually, and two-thirds of the nation’s 
waterways are safe for fishing and swimming—double the 
number from 1972. Many of the nation’s most heavily used 
rivers, lakes, and bays—including the Androscoggin River 
in Maine, Boston Harbor, the upper Mississippi River, the 
South Platte River, the upper Arkansas River, Lake Erie, the 
Illinois River, and the Delaware River—have been cleaned 
up and restored. Fish now swim in rivers once so polluted 
that only bacteria and sludge worms could survive. Levels 
of toxic chemicals in the Great Lakes have been greatly re-
duced. A national sense of stewardship has been applied to 
the rivers, lakes, and bays that are our heritage from a pre-
vious generation, and public policy has been enacted and 
billions of dollars spent to bring our waters back from a 
polluted condition. 
borrow at low interest rates, and as they repay the loans, 
the funds received are used for more loans. The fund may 
also be used to control nonpoint-source pollution. To date, 
more than $74 billion in SRF loans have been made by  
the states. However, the EPA estimates that an additional 
$298 billion is needed to meet the funding needs for Clean 
Water infrastructure. 
Reauthorization
Reauthorization of the Clean Water Act is long overdue. Con-
gress has been hung up on debates over whether regulations 
should be strengthened or weakened, whether federal regu-
lations in the wetlands permit program intrude on private 
land-use rights, and how regulatory relief should be provided 
to industries, states, cities, and individuals required to take 
actions to comply with the regulations. Its approach for the 
past two decades has been to reauthorize the provisions of the 
CWA and its amendments, usually maintaining a status quo 
in the EPA’s annual appropriations for CWA programs.
Problems and Progress
The EPA has identified nonpoint-source pollution as the 
nation’s number-one water-pollution problem, with the 
construction of new wastewater-treatment facilities not far 
behind. Other significant issues—including storm- water 
discharges, combined and separate sewer overflows, wet-
lands protection, mountaintop mining filling of streams, 
tabLe 3
legislative Milestones in Protecting natural Waters and Water Supplies
1899—Rivers and Harbors Act: First federal legislation protecting the nation’s waters in order to promote commerce.
1948—Water Pollution Control Act: Authorizes the federal government to provide technical assistance and funds to state and local governments to 
promote efforts to protect water quality.
1972—Clean Water Act: Establishes a comprehensive federal program to achieve the goal of protecting and restoring the physical, chemical, and 
biological integrity of the nation’s waters. Requires permits for any discharge of pollution, strengthens water quality standards, and encourages the 
use of the best achievable pollution control technology. Provides billions of dollars for construction of sewage-treatment plants.
1972—Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act: Prevents unacceptable dumping in oceans.
1974—Safe Drinking Water Act: Authorizes the EPA to regulate the quality and safety of public drinking-water supplies, maintain drinking-water 
standards for numerous contaminants, and set requirements for the chemical and physical treatment of drinking water.
1977—Clean Water Act amendments: Strengthen controls on toxic pollutants and allow states to assume responsibility for federal programs.
1987—Water Quality Act: Enacts major amendments to the Clean Water Act that (1) create a revolving loan fund to provide ongoing support for 
the construction of treatment plants, (2) address regional pollution with a watershed approach, and (3) address nonpoint-source pollution, with 
requirements for states to assess the problem and develop and implement plans for dealing with it. Makes available $400 million in grants to carry 
out its provisions.
1996—Safe Drinking Water Act amendments: Impose numerous requirements for managing water supplies, establish a revolving loan fund to help 
municipalities update their water system infrastructure, and provide flexibility for the EPA to base its selection of contaminants on health risk and 
costs and benefits.
2002—Great Lakes Legacy Act: Enacted amendments to CWA provisions for the Great Lakes and authorized $50 million annually for fiscal years 
2004–2008 for the EPA to conduct projects designed to remediate sediment problems in the Great Lakes.
3Claudia Copeland. “Water Quality Issues in the 112th Congress: Oversight and 
Implementation.” CRS Report for Congress R41594. November 7, 2011. www
.crs.gov.
567

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
ReViSitinG tHe tHeMeS
sound science
Solid scientific research and communication were essential 
in establishing the basic knowledge about pollutants and 
their impacts on human health and the environment. They 
continue to be highly important as the EPA carries out its 
research and regulatory activities for administering the Clean Water Act 
and the Safe Drinking Water Act. The criteria pollutant standards for natu-
ral waters and the maximum contaminant standards for drinking waters 
must be based on accurate risk assessments as the EPA develops and de-
fends its regulatory activities. Sound science was particularly crucial in the 
investigation of dead zones and algal blooms and their causes.
sustainability
Our natural waters represent an enormous bank of eco-
system capital, providing essential goods and services to 
people everywhere. The sustainability of whole ecosys-
tems is threatened when we fail to handle our wastes in a conscientious 
manner. The opening story of the dead zone demonstrates how it is 
possible for nutrient overload to degrade an enormous area of the Gulf 
of Mexico. Unfortunately, a similar situation exists in the Chesapeake 
Bay and in many other bodies of water. These are just a couple of the 
more spectacular examples. The more important battlegrounds are the 
thousands of smaller lakes, rivers, and coastal estuaries that are also 
suffering from human impacts. More needs to be done, especially at the 
state level, to improve our national water quality; Congress can play an 
important role as it establishes funding for the states to carry out its 
mandates. Many states are behind in assessing water quality, and the 
need for updating sewage-treatment systems is enormous.
stewardship
Stewardship means intentionally caring for people and 
the natural world. The public-health measures put in place 
in the past two centuries represent the stewardship of 
human resources. Also, as we divert public and private 
resources to cleaning up our waterways, we are acting as good stewards 
in the best sense of the concept. Lakes and watersheds often benefit 
from people and associations that have provided leadership in correcting 
the problems that lead to eutrophication. The Lake Washington story is 
an excellent example. Stewardship also means caring for our neighbors’ 
needs, and nowhere are those needs more apparent than in the need for 
clean water and sanitation in so many developing countries. A sense of 
the global reach of water pollution is difficult to imagine, yet billions of 
people in the developing countries are held back from achieving their 
physical and intellectual potential because of the terrible effects of pol-
luted water and lack of sanitation.
s
S
t
i
h
s
O
s
p
tems is threaten
s
S
i
t
c
RevIeW QuestIons
1. What practices and consequences led to passage of the Clean 
Water Act of 1972?
2. Discuss each of the following categories of water pollutants 
and the problems they cause: pathogens, organic wastes, 
chemical pollutants, and sediments.
3. How are water quality standards determined? Distinguish 
between water quality criteria pollutants and maximum 
contaminant levels.
4. Name and describe the facility and the process used to re-
move debris, grit, particulate organic matter, colloidal and 
dissolved organic matter, and dissolved nutrients from 
wastewater.
5. Why is secondary treatment also called biological treatment? 
What is the principle involved? What are the two alternative 
techniques used?
6. What are the principles involved in removing biological nu-
trients from waste, and what is accomplished by doing so? 
Where do nitrogen and phosphate go in the process?
7. Name and describe three methods of treating raw sludge, 
and give the end product(s) that may be produced from each 
method.
 8. How may sewage from individual homes be handled in the 
absence of municipal collection systems? What are some 
problems with these on-site systems?
 9. Describe and compare submerged aquatic vegetation and 
phytoplankton. Where and how does each get nutrients and 
light?
10. Explain the difference between oligotrophic and eutrophic 
waters. Describe the sequential process of eutrophication.
11. Distinguish between natural and cultural eutrophication.
12. What is being done to establish nutrient criteria?
13. How does the NPDES program address point-source pollu-
tion by nutrients?
14. Describe the TMDL program. How does it address 
nonpoint-source pollution, and what role do water quality 
criteria play in the program?
15. What are some of the important public-policy issues relating 
to water quality?
568

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
thInkIng envIRonmentally
 1. A large number of fish are suddenly found floating dead on 
a lake. You are called in to investigate the problem. You find 
an abundance of phytoplankton and no evidence of toxic 
dumping. Suggest a reason for the fish kill.
 2. Nitrogen pollution has damaged the San Diego Creek– 
Newport Bay ecosystem in California by encouraging the 
heavy growth of intertidal algae. Report on the TMDL for 
this system. Consult the EPA Web site: http://water.epa.gov/
lawsregs/lawsguidance/cwa/tmdl/nutrients.cfm.
 3. Arrange a tour to the sewage-treatment plant that serves 
your community. Compare it with what is described in this 
chapter. Is the water being purified or handled in a way that 
will prevent cultural eutrophication? Are sludges being con-
verted to and used as fertilizer? What improvements, if any, 
are in order? How can you help promote such improve-
ments?
 4. Suppose a new community of several thousand people is 
going to be built in Arizona (with a warm, dry climate). You 
are called in as a consultant to design a complete sewage sys-
tem, including the collection, treatment, and use or disposal 
of by-products. Write an essay describing the system you 
recommend, and give a rationale for the choices involved.
makIng a DIffeRence
 1. Check out the lakes and ponds in your area, and determine 
whether cultural eutrophication is occurring. If you find that 
it is, follow up by consulting a local environmental group, 
and get involved in combating the problem.
 2. Investigate sewage treatment in your community. To what 
extent is the sewage treated? Where does the effluent go? 
The sludge? Are there any problems? Are there alternatives 
that are more ecologically sound? Consult local environ-
mental groups for help.
 3. Bring discarded household chemicals to hazardous-waste 
collection centers; do not pour them down the drain. Pour-
ing chemicals down the drain could upset your septic system 
or contaminate treatment-plant sludge.
 4. Test your soil before using fertilizers. Excess from overferti-
lizing can leach into groundwater or contaminate rivers or 
lakes. Also, avoid using fertilizers and pesticides near surface 
waters.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cReDIts
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top right): Courtesy of NASA Images Images; (bottom right): Science Photo 
Library / Alamy; (center right): richard ellis/Alamy; (top left): AP Photo; Robert 
Harding Picture Library / SuperStock; (left): Bob Hudson/George Waclawin/
Bernard J. Nebel; (center left): Bob Hudson/George Waclawin/Bernard J. Nebel; 
(center): Bob Hudson/George Waclawin/Bernard J. Nebel; (center right): Bob 
Hudson/George Waclawin/Bernard J. Nebel; Thomas R. Fletcher / Alamy; (bot-
tom): Charles R. Belinky/Photo Researchers, Inc.; Bernard J. Nebel; (top right): 
Bernard J. Nebel; (center right): Bernard J. Nebel; eric fowke/alamy; (top left): 
Bernard J. Nebel; (top right): Bernard J. Nebel; (top left): Scott Smith/Sancor 
Industries Ltd; (top right): Scott Smith/Sancor Industries Ltd; (bottom right): G. 
Avila / Alamy; Jennifer Weinberg / Alamy
text Credits
NASA. Table 2: Source: “Guidance for Water Quality-Based Decisions: The TMDL 
Process” from Environmental Protection Agency; Figure 1: Source: “The Mississippi 
River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force” from the Environmental 
Protection Agency website; Figure 5: Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation, 
2012 Update. Copyright © 2012 by World Health Organization. Reprinted with 
permission. 
569

activated-sludge system A system for removing organic wastes 
from water. The system uses microorganisms and active aeration 
to decompose such wastes. The system is used most as a means 
of secondary sewage treatment following the primary settling of 
materials.
anaerobic digestion The breakdown of organic material by 
microorganisms in the absence of oxygen. The process results in 
the release of methane gas as a waste product.
Bar screen In a primary sewage treatment plant, a row of bars 
about one inch apart that provides initial screening of debris 
found in incoming sewage.
bed load The load of coarse sediment, mostly coarse silt and sand, 
that is gradually moved along the bottom of a riverbed by flowing 
water rather than being carried in suspension.
benthic plants Plants that grow under water and that are attached to 
or rooted in the bottom of the body of water. For photosynthesis, 
these plants depend on light penetrating the water.
best management practice Farm management practice that serves 
best to reduce soil and nutrient runoff and subsequent pollution.
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) The amount of oxygen that 
will be absorbed or “demanded” as wastes are being digested 
or oxidized in both biological and chemical processes. Potential 
impacts of wastes are commonly measured in terms of the BOD.
biogas The mixture of gases—about two-thirds methane, one-third 
carbon dioxide, and small portions of foul-smelling compounds—
resulting from the anaerobic digestion of organic matter. The 
methane content enables biogas to be used as a fuel.
biological nutrient removal (BNR) A process employed in sewage 
treatment to remove nitrogen and phosphorus from the effluent 
coming from secondary treatment.
biosolid In sewage treatment, biosolids are the relatively stable 
organic matter that remains after anaerobic digestion has taken 
place in sludge digesters.
Clean Water Act of 1972 (CWA) The cornerstone federal 
legislation addressing water pollution.
composting compost The process of letting organic wastes 
decompose in the presence of air. A nutrient-rich humus, or 
compost, is the resulting product.
composting toilet A toilet that does not flush wastes away with 
water but deposits them in a chamber where they will compost. 
(See composting.)
criteria maximum concentration (CMC) A water-quality standard; 
the highest single concentration of a water pollutant beyond 
which environmental impacts may be expected.
criteria pollutants Certain pollutants whose levels are used as a 
gauge for the determination of air (or water) quality.
criterion continuous concentration (CCC) A water-quality 
standard; the highest sustained concentration of a water pollutant 
beyond which undesirable impacts may be expected.
cultural eutrophication The process of natural eutrophication 
accelerated by human activities. (See eutrophication.)
dead zone A region of an aquatic ecosystem (usually a marine 
coastal area) where oxygen is low or absent from the bottom up 
well into the water column. Also called a hypoxic area.
emergent vegetation Aquatic plants whose lower parts are 
underwater but whose upper parts emerge from the water.
grit chamber A part of preliminary treatment in wastewater-
treatment plants; a swimming pool–like tank in which the velocity 
of the water is slowed enough to let sand and other gritty material 
settle.
inorganic chemical In classifying chemical pollutants, some are 
inorganic, such as the heavy metals (lead, mercury and so forth) 
and salts.
maximum contaminant level (MCL) A drinking water standard; 
the highest allowable concentration of a pollutant in a drinking 
water source.
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) An 
EPA-administered program that addresses point-source water 
pollution through the issuance of permits that regulate pollution 
discharge.
nonpoint sources Sources of pollution such as the general runoff of 
sediments, fertilizers, pesticides, and other materials from farms 
and urban areas, as opposed to specific points of discharge such 
as factories. Also called diffuse sources. (Contrast point sources.)
oligotrophic Nutrient poor and hence unable to support much 
phytoplankton (said of a body of water).
organic chemical In classifying pollutants, some are organic, 
synthetic chemicals that served some purpose but have been 
released into the environment and pose some serious problems.
pasteurization The process of applying enough heat to milk or 
some other substance to kill pathogens and sufficient other 
bacteria to extend the shelf life of the product.
pathogen An organism, usually a microbe, that is capable of 
causing disease. Such an organism is said to be pathogenic.
phosphorus, phosphate An ion composed of a phosphorus atom 
with four oxygen atoms attached. Denoted PO4
23, phosphate is 
an important plant nutrient. In natural waters, it is frequently the 
limiting factor; therefore, additions of phosphate to natural water 
are often responsible for algal blooms.
phytoplankton Any of the many species of photosynthetic 
microorganisms that consist of single cells or small groups of 
cells that live and grow freely suspended near the surface in bodies 
of water.
point sources Specific points of origin of pollutants, such as 
factory drains or outlets from sewage-treatment plants. (Contrast 
nonpoint sources.)
primary clarifier In a sewage-treatment system, a large tank that 
allows particulate matter to settle to the bottom before the water 
moves on to secondary treatment.
primary treatment The process that consists of passing the 
wastewater very slowly through a large tank so that the particulate 
organic material can settle out. The settled material is raw sludge, 
which is treated separately.
raw sewage (raw wastewater) The water from a sewer system as it 
reaches a sewage-treatment plant.
raw sludge The untreated organic matter that is removed from 
sewage water by letting it settle. Raw sludge consists of organic 
particles from feces, garbage, paper, and bacteria.
Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) of 1974 Legislation to protect 
the public from the risk that toxic chemicals will contaminate 
drinking water supplies. The act mandates regular testing of 
municipal water supplies.
sanitary sewer A separate drainage system used to receive all the 
wastewater from sinks, tubs, and toilets.
secondary clarifier In activated sludge sewage treatment, the tank 
where organisms and other particles settle out after the aeration 
tank.
secondary treatment Also called biological treatment. A sewage-
treatment process that follows primary treatment. Any of a 
variety of systems that remove most of the remaining organic 
matter by enabling organisms to feed on it and oxidize it through 
their respiration. Trickling filters and activated-sludge systems are 
the most commonly used secondary-treatment methods.
septic system An on-site method of treating sewage that is widely 
used in suburban and rural areas. Requires a suitable amount of 
land and porous soil.
sludge cake Treated sewage sludge that has been dewatered to 
make a moist solid.
sludge digesters Large tanks in which raw sludge (removed from 
sewage) is treated through anaerobic digestion by bacteria.
storm drains Separate drainage systems used for collecting and 
draining runoff from precipitation in urban areas.
glossaRy
Water Pollution and Its Prevention
570

Water Pollution and Its Prevention
trickling-filter system A system in which wastewater trickles over 
rocks or a framework coated with actively feeding microorganisms. 
The feeding action of the organisms in a well-aerated environment 
results in the decomposition of organic matter. Used in secondary 
or biological treatment of sewage.
windrows Piles of organic material extended into long rows to 
facilitate turning and aeration in order to enhance composting.
submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) Aquatic plants rooted in 
bottom sediments and growing underwater. Submerged aquatic 
vegetation depends on the penetration of light through the water 
for photosynthesis.
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) program An EPA-
administered program to address nonpoint-source water pollution 
that sets pollution limits according to the ability of a body of 
water to assimilate different pollutants.
treated sludge Solid organic material that has been removed from 
sewage and treated so that it is nonhazardous.
571

This page intentionally left blank 

Municipal 
Solid Waste: 
Disposal and 
Recovery
From Chapter 21 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.

T
he Commonwealth of massaChusetts has set a goal of generating 20% of its 
electricity from renewable energy by 2020 and has found a new way of getting 
there. The idea: use many of the 500 closed landfills in the state to support solar 
panels, converting otherwise unusable and treeless wastelands into money-making 
assets. Massachusetts joins a growing number of states that have discovered this new 
use for old landfills; similar projects are under construction or in operation in at least six 
other states.1 Closed landfills are ideally suited to become solar farms: They are usually 
municipally owned, sited away from residential areas, treeless, close to power lines, and 
abundant (more than 6,000 landfills have been closed in recent decades in the United 
States). Through a partnership with Boston-based Southern Sky Renewable Energy, 
the town of Canton is erecting an array of 24,000 solar 
panels on 15 acres of its capped Pine Street landfill. 
The solar array will generate 5.6 megawatts of 
power, enough to supply 5,600 homes, and 
some $16 million in revenues for the town 
over the next 25 years. Easthampton, 
 Massachusetts, is installing 
10,000 solar panels on its 
 Oliver Street landfill.
Flexible solar strips cover the top of the Tessman Landfill in San Antonio, Texas. Together with a 
biogas collection system, the landfill will generate enough energy to power 5,500 homes.
Learning Objectives
 1. Solid Waste: Landfills and 
 Combustion. Appraise the issues 
involved with the two-thirds of 
the municipal solid waste (MSW) 
that is combusted or disposed of 
in landfills.
 2. Better Solutions: Source 
 Reduction and Recycling. 
 Evaluate these two options for 
reducing the amount of MSW 
that must be managed.
 3. Public Policy and Waste Man-
agement. Compare the roles 
of federal, state, and local 
 governments in management  
of MSW; identify some desir-
able policy goals that would 
improve sustainability of MSW 
 management.
Municipal 
Solid Waste: 
Disposal and 
Recovery
1David Jonathan Ross. Construction of Solar Farms on Closed Landfills in Utah. 
M.S. Thesis,  Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering. Brigham Young 
University. 2011.
574

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
Canton’s Pine Street landfill is a lesson in land use that is 
being learned only slowly in the United States—and, for that 
matter, in the rest of the world. The lesson is that, if we could 
picture more effectively what 50 years can bring in the way of 
change, we could solve one of the most contentious problems 
facing local communities: what to do with municipal waste. As 
old dumps and landfills were closed because of environmental 
concerns, they created a temporary problem identified as the 
“solid-waste crisis” in the 1970s and 1980s. In fact, closed land-
fills may be sustainable energy goldmines, where solar arrays and 
wind turbines are added to landfill gas power. Other important 
uses for closed landfills include playing fields, nature preserves, 
and golf courses (Fig. 1).
stiLL a crisis? In some ways, the solid-waste crisis is still 
with us, as we will see when we examine the problem of interstate 
trash movement. It is commonly said that we are running out of 
space to put our trash and garbage. Perhaps we are, but if so, it is 
because we are happy to purchase the goods displayed so promi-
nently in our malls and advertised in the media, but we are reluc-
tant to accept the consequences of getting rid of them responsibly.
This chapter is about solid-waste issues. We examine 
current patterns of disposal—landfills, combustion, and 
 recycling—and look for sustainable solutions to our solid-waste 
problems. The ideal would be to imitate natural ecosystems and 
reuse everything. Some solutions do well in conforming to this 
principle, whereas others do not—and possibly cannot.
Figure 1 From landfills to playing fields. Thomas W. Danehy Park in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, a former landfill that has been recycled into a recrea-
tional park. In addition to playing fields, the park features a half-mile “glassphalt” 
pathway (built with recycled glass and asphalt), shown in the  foreground.
1  Solid Waste: Landfills and 
Combustion
The focus of this chapter is municipal solid waste (MSW), 
 defined as the total of all the materials (commonly called 
trash, refuse, or garbage) thrown away from homes and 
smaller commercial establishments and collected by local 
governments. MSW is different from hazardous waste and 
nonhazardous industrial waste. The latter is no small mat-
ter: Industrial facilities generate and manage 7.6 billion tons 
of nonhazardous industrial waste annually. Included in the 
category are wastes from demolition and construction op-
erations, agricultural and mining residues, combustion ash, 
sewage-treatment sludge, and wastes generated by industrial 
processes. The states oversee these wastes because Congress 
has not delegated any authority to the Environmental Pro-
tection Agency (EPA) to regulate them as it has for MSW 
and hazardous waste. The EPA Office of Solid Waste does, 
however, provide annual reports on municipal solid waste in 
the United States, and we make full use of the latest reports 
in this chapter.
Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
Over the years, the amount of MSW generated in the 
United States has grown steadily, in part because of a grow-
ing population, but also because of changing lifestyles and 
the increasing use of disposable materials and excessive  
packaging. In 1960, the nation generated 2.7 pounds  
(1.2 kg) per person per day. In 2010, we generated a total 
of 250 million tons (230 million metric tons) of MSW, 
an average of 4.4 pounds (2 kg) per person per day and 
enough waste to fill 95,000 garbage trucks each day. The 
solid-waste problem can be stated simply: We generate 
huge amounts of MSW, and it is increasingly expensive to 
 dispose of it in ways that are environmentally responsible 
and  protective of human health.
The refuse generated by municipalities is a mixture 
of materials from households and small businesses, in 
the proportions shown in Figure 2. However, the propor-
tions vary greatly, depending on the generator (commercial 
Figure 2 U.S. municipal solid-waste composition. The  composition 
of municipal solid waste in the United States in 2010.
(Source: Data from EPA, Office of Solid Waste, Municipal Solid Waste in the United States: 
2010 Facts and Figures (Washington, DC: EPA, November, 2011).)
28.5%
9.0%
12.4%
13.9%
4.6%
6.4%
3.4%
13.4%
8.4%
Paper, paperboard
Metals
Plastics
Food wastes
Glass
Wood
Other
Yard waste
Rubber, leather, textiles
575

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
steady increase. The pattern is different in countries where 
population densities are higher and there is less open space 
for landfills. High-density Japan, for instance, combusts 
78% and landfills 13% of its MSW. The pattern in Europe is 
mixed, ranging from 35% combustion and only 1% of MSW 
going to landfills in Germany, to 48% of nonrecycled wastes 
going to the landfills (with 12% combusted) in the United 
Kingdom, to 90% landfilled MSW in Eastern Europe. The 
entire EU is under strict directives to reduce wastes going to 
landfills, with increasingly severe penalties (fines) for nonat-
tainment.2  
Landfills
In a landfill, the waste is put on or in the ground and is cov-
ered with earth. Because there is no burning and because 
each day’s fill is covered with at least six inches of earth, air 
pollution and populations of vermin are kept down. Unfor-
tunately, aside from those concerns and the minimizing of 
cost, no other factors were given real consideration when the 
first landfills were opened. Municipal waste managers gener-
ally had little understanding of ecology, the water cycle, or 
what products decomposing wastes would generate, and they 
had no regulations to guide them. Therefore, in general, any 
cheap, conveniently located piece of land on the outskirts of 
town became the site for a landfill. Frequently, this site was a 
natural gully or ravine, an abandoned stone quarry, a section 
of wetlands, or a previous dump (Fig. 4). Once the munici-
pality acquired the land, dumping commenced without any 
precautions. After the site was full, it would be covered with 
earth and ignored. Only recently have abandoned landfills 
been seen as a valuable open-space resource. 
Problems of Landfills. Landfills are subjected to biologi-
cal and physical factors in the environment and will undergo 
change over time as a consequence of the operation of those 
versus residential), the neighborhood (affluent versus poor), 
and the time of year (during certain seasons, yard wastes, 
such as grass clippings and raked leaves, add greatly to the 
solid-waste burden). Little attention is given to what peo-
ple throw away in their trash. Even if there are restrictions 
and prohibitions, they can be bypassed with careful packing 
of the trash containers. Thus, many environmentally detri-
mental substances—paint, used motor oil, electronic equip-
ment, and so on—are discarded, with the feeling that they 
are gone forever.
Whose Job? Customarily, local governments have had the 
responsibility for collecting and disposing of MSW. The local 
jurisdiction may own trucks and employ workers, or it may 
contract with a private firm to provide the collection serv-
ice. Traditionally, the cost of waste pickup is passed along to 
households via taxes. Alternatively, many municipalities have 
opted for a pay-as-you-throw (PAYT, as it is called) system, 
in which households are charged for waste collection on the 
basis of the amount of trash they throw away. Some munic-
ipalities put all trash collection and disposal in the private 
sector, with the collectors billing each home by volume and 
weight of trash. The MSW that is collected is then disposed 
of in a variety of ways, and it is at the point of disposal that 
state and federal regulations begin to apply.
Past Sins. Until the 1960s, most MSW was disposed of 
in open dumps. Older residents of smaller towns and cities 
can remember gathering at the dump, meeting there to look 
through discarded items and socialize. In most dumps, the 
waste was burned to reduce its volume and lengthen the life 
span of the dump site, but refuse does not burn well. Smol-
dering dumps produced clouds of smoke that could be seen 
from miles away, smelled bad, and created a breeding ground 
for flies and rats. Some cities turned to incinerators (or com-
bustion facilities, as they are called today): huge furnaces 
in which high temperatures allow the waste to burn more 
completely than in open dumps. Without controls, however, 
incinerators were prime sources of air pollution. Public ob-
jections and air pollution laws forced the phaseout of open 
dumps and many incinerators during the 1960s and early 
1970s. Open dumps were then converted to landfills.
In the United States in 2010, 54.2% of MSW was dis-
posed of in landfills, 34.1% was recovered for recycling and 
composting, and the remainder (11.7%) was combusted (Fig. 
3). Over the past 10 years, the landfill and combustion com-
ponents have been declining, while recycling has shown a 
2European Environment Agency. Diverting Waste from Landfill: Effectiveness of 
Waste-Management Policies in the European Union. EEA Report No. 7/2009. 
 Copenhagen, 2009.
Figure 3 U.S. municipal solid-waste disposal. Disposal of solid waste 
to landfills, combustion, and recycling, 2010. An additional 20 million tons were 
composted.
(Source: Data from EPA, Office of Solid Waste, Municipal Solid Waste in the United States: 
2010 Facts and Figures (Washington, DC: EPA, November 2011).)
34.1%, 65 million tons
250 million tons/year
54.2%, 136 million tons
11.7%, 29 million tons
Recycling
Total MSW
Landfills
Combustion
Figure 4 New Orleans dump. This burning dump, sited on wetlands, 
demonstrates the worst of the MSW disposal practices of the past.
576

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
heating more than 1.7 million homes (Fig. 5). For  example, 
Allied Waste Services is now mining the landfill gas from 
the Roosevelt Regional Landfill in Washington State, a huge 
working landfill. The methane is fed to seven combustion tur-
bines, with a generating capacity of 26 megawatts, enough to 
power 26,000 homes (average U.S. home use is 1 kW/day). 
The recovery of landfill gas has significant environmental 
benefits. It directly reduces greenhouse gas emissions because 
methane is a powerful greenhouse gas and landfills are the larg-
est anthropogenic source of methane emissions in the United 
States. Methane recovery also reduces the use of coal and oil, 
which are nonrenewable and highly polluting energy resources.
Incomplete 
Decomposition. The 
commonly 
used 
plastics in MSW resist natural decomposition because of 
their molecular structure. Chemically, they are polymers of 
 petroleum-based compounds that microbes are unable to di-
gest. Biodegradable plastic polymers have been developed from 
sources such as cornstarch, cellulose, lactic acid, and soybean 
protein as well as petroleum. As oil prices rise, plant-based bio-
degradable plastics are beginning to make economic inroads. 
Two kinds of bioplastics based on corn sugars—polyhydroxy-
alkanoate and polylactic acid—are in commercial production; 
a recent estimate from NatureWorks indicates a coming de-
mand for up to 50 billion pounds of bioplastics a year in the 
next five years. Currently, bioplastics are more expensive than 
petroleum-based plastics and tend to be used by companies 
manufacturing natural and certified organic products. They 
are indeed biodegradable, but some of the corn-based plastics 
must go to a commercial composting plant to be decomposed.
A team of “garbologists” from the University of Arizona, 
led by William Rathje, has been carrying out research on old 
landfills. The research has shown that even materials for-
merly assumed to be biodegradable—newspapers, wood, and 
so on—are often degraded only slowly, if at all, in landfills. 
In one landfill, 30-year-old newspapers were recovered in a 
readable state, and layers of telephone directories, practically 
intact, were found marking each year. Because paper mate-
rials are 28% of MSW, this is a serious matter. The reason 
paper and other organic materials decompose so slowly is 
factors on the waste that is deposited. Several of the changes 
are undesirable because, if they are not dealt with effectively, 
they present the following problems:
 • Leachate generation and groundwater contamination
 • Methane production
 • Incomplete decomposition
 • Settling
Leachate Generation and Groundwater Contami-
nation. The most serious problem by far is groundwater 
contamination. As water percolates through any material, 
various chemicals in the material may dissolve in the water 
and get carried along in a process called leaching. The water 
with various pollutants in it is called leachate. As water per-
colates through MSW, a noxious leachate is generated that 
consists of residues of decomposing organic matter combined 
with iron, mercury, lead, zinc, and other metals from rust-
ing cans, discarded batteries, and appliances—all generously 
“spiced” with paints, pesticides, cleaning fluids, newspaper 
inks, and other chemicals. The nature of the landfill site and 
the absence of precautionary measures can funnel this toxic 
brew directly into groundwater aquifers.
All states have some municipal landfills that currently 
are, or soon will be, contaminating groundwater, but Florida 
has some unique problems. Flat and with vast areas of wet-
lands, much of the state is only a few feet above sea level 
and rests on water-saturated limestone. No matter where 
Florida’s landfills were located, they were either in wetlands 
or just a few feet above the water table. As a result, more 
than 145 former municipal landfill sites in Florida appear on 
the Superfund list. (Superfund is the federal program with 
the responsibility for cleaning up sites that are in imminent 
danger of jeopardizing human health through groundwater 
contamination.) All landfills in Florida are now required to 
have state-of-the-art landfill liners.
Methane Production. Because it is about two-thirds 
organic material, MSW is subject to natural decomposi-
tion. Buried wastes do not have access to oxygen, however, 
so their decomposition is anaerobic. A major by-product of 
the process is biogas, which is about two-thirds methane and 
one-third hydrogen and carbon dioxide, a highly flammable 
mixture. Produced deep in a landfill, biogas may seep hori-
zontally through the soil and rock, enter basements, and even 
cause explosions if it accumulates and is ignited. Homes at 
distances up to 1,000 feet from landfills have been destroyed, 
and some deaths have occurred as a result of such explosions. 
Also, gases seeping to the surface kill vegetation by poison-
ing the roots. Without vegetation, erosion occurs, exposing 
the unsightly waste.
There is a thriving industry in 46 states that is exploit-
ing the problem by installing “gas wells” in old and existing 
landfills. The wells tap the landfill gas, and the methane is 
purified and used as fuel. There are now more than 550 land-
fill gas energy projects in the United States, with 510 more 
in the planning stage. In 2011, commercial landfill gas in the 
nation produced 1,500 megawatts of electricity and 100 bil-
lion cubic feet of gas for direct-use applications, powering or 
Figure 5 Landfill Gas Project. A well collects biogas from the Smith 
Creek landfill in St. Clair County, Michigan. There are now more than 550 landfill 
gas energy systems in operation in the U.S.
577

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
Dump truck
dumps refuse
Compactor
compacts
refuse
Earth mover
covers refuse
Monitoring
well
Refuse
cells
Groundwater
Compacted
clay
Leachate
drainage
system
pumps 
leachate to
surface
Leachate
drainage
system
Plastic
Gravel
Compacted
dirt
Protective
casing
Cement seal
Well screen
topsoil and then seeded. The cap and the pyramidal shape 
help the landfill shed water. In this way, water infiltration 
into the fill is minimized, and less leachate is formed.
 • The entire site is surrounded by a series of groundwater-
monitoring wells that are checked periodically, and such 
checking must go on indefinitely.
These design features are summarized in Figure 6. Most land-
fills currently in operation have these improved technologies, 
which protect both human health and the environment. 
The landfill pyramids may well last as long as the Egyp-
tian pyramids. Fortunately, the creative siting and construc-
tion of landfills have the potential to address some highly 
significant future needs, because abandoned landfills can be-
come attractive golf courses, recreational facilities, wildlife 
preserves, or renewable energy sites.
Siting New Landfills. Between 1988 and 2009, the 
number of municipal landfills declined from around 8,000 
to 1,908. Because the size of landfills has increased and be-
cause recycling is on the rise, the EPA does not believe that 
landfill capacity is a problem. However, as the agency puts 
it, “regional dislocations” may be expected. These are due 
to the one problem associated with landfills that gets more 
attention than any other: siting. It is not that landfills take 
up enormous amounts of land. One particular landfill occu-
pying 230 acres (Central Landfill) serves the entire state of 
Rhode Island, and Fresh Kills, once the largest landfill in the 
world, served much of New York City and its environs for 
many years and was only 2,200 acres. But as old landfills are 
closed, it has become increasingly difficult to find land for 
the new ones needed to take their place.
the absence of suitable amounts of moisture. The more water 
percolating through a landfill, the better paper materials bi-
odegrade. Unfortunately, the more percolation there is, the 
greater the amount of toxic leachate produced.
Settling. Finally, waste settles as it compacts and decom-
poses. Luckily, this eventuality was recognized from the be-
ginning, so buildings are never put on landfills. Settling does 
present a problem in landfills that have been converted to 
playgrounds and golf courses because of the creation of shal-
low depressions (and sometimes deep holes) that collect and 
hold water. This problem can be addressed by continually 
monitoring the facility and using fill to restore a level surface.
Improving Landfills. Recognizing the foregoing prob-
lems, the EPA upgraded siting and construction requirements 
for new landfills, based on the Resource Conservation and 
 Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA) and subsequent amendments. 
Under current regulations,
 • New landfills are sited on high ground, well above the 
water table, not in a geologically unstable area, and 
away from airports (because of bird hazards).
 • The floor is contoured so that water will drain into a 
tile leachate-collection system. The floor and sides are 
covered with a plastic liner and at least two feet of com-
pacted soil. With such a design, any leachate percolat-
ing through the fill will move into the leachate-collection 
system. Collected leachate can be treated as necessary.
 • Layer upon layer of refuse is positioned such that the fill 
is built up in the shape of a pyramid. Finally, it is capped 
with at least 18 inches of earthen material and a layer of 
Figure 6 Features of a  modern landfill. The landfill is sited on a high location, well above the water table. The bot-
tom is sealed with compacted soil and a plastic liner, overlaid by a rock or gravel layer, with pipes to drain the leachate. Refuse 
is built up in layers as the amount generated each day is covered with soil, so the completed fill has a pyramidal shape that 
sheds water. The fill is provided with wells for monitoring groundwater.
578

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
Park, with soccer fields, mountain bike and jogging trails, 
natural areas, and possibly a golf course (Fig. 7). Gas from 
the huge landfill is providing the area with a new energy 
source. Currently, New York City exports its MSW outside 
of the city by truck, barge, and rail. 
With spreading urbanization, few suburban areas are 
not already dotted with residential developments. Practically 
any site selected, then, is met with protests and legal suits. 
The problem has been repeated in so many parts of the coun-
try (and globe!) that it has given rise to some inventive acro-
nyms: LULU (“locally unwanted land use”), NIMBY (“not 
in my backyard”), NIMTOO (“not in my term of office”), 
and BANANA (build absolutely nothing anywhere near any-
thing)! You can well imagine how these attitudes apply to the 
landfill-siting problem.
Outsourcing. The siting problem has some undesirable 
consequences. First, it drives up the costs of waste disposal, as 
alternatives to local landfills are invariably more expensive. Sec-
ond, it leads to the inefficient and equally objectionable practice 
of the long-distance transfer of trash as waste generators look 
for private landfills whose owners are anxious to receive trash 
(and cash). Often, this transfer occurs across state and even na-
tional lines, leading to resentment and opposition on the part 
of citizens of the recipient state or nation. Led by Pennsylva-
nia, 11 states import more than 1 million tons of MSW a year 
(Table 1), while 13 states export more than 1 million tons per 
year, led by New York. Not surprisingly, the heaviest importing 
states are adjacent to the heaviest exporting states. 
People in residential communities (where the MSW 
is generated) invariably reject proposals to site landfills 
 anywhere near where they live, and those who already live 
close to existing landfills are anxious to close them down. 
Weary of the odor and heavy truck traffic, residents of 
Staten Island, New York, pressured the city of New York 
to shut down the huge Fresh Kills landfill, once the recipi-
ent of 27,000 tons of garbage per day. The city fulfilled its 
promise to phase out the landfill in 2001, and Staten Is-
landers are now anticipating the development of Fresh Kills 
Figure 7 Fresh Kills today. This 2,200-acre landfill on Staten Island 
served the city of New York until 2001. It has been closed and secured and is 
being developed for recreation, natural areas, and renewable power facilities.
FPO
tabLe 1 Largest Interstate Transfers of MSW, 2005 (most recent date available)
Exporting States and Provinces
Exported MSW  
(millions of tons)
 
Importing States
Imported MSW  
(millions of tons)
New York
7.2
Pennsylvania
7.9
New Jersey
5.8
Virginia
5.7
Illinois
4.4
Michigan
5.4
Ontario, Canada
4.0
Indiana
2.4
Missouri
2.4
Wisconsin
2.1
Maryland
2.0
Illinois
2.1
Massachusetts
2.0
Oregon
1.8
Washington
1.7
Georgia
1.7
Minnesota
1.1
New Jersey
1.7
North Carolina
1.1
Ohio
1.7
Indiana
1.1
South Carolina
1.2
District of Columbia
1.1
Florida
1.0
Total, all exports
42.8
Total, all imports
42.2
Source: James E. McCarthy. Interstate Shipment of Municipal Solid Waste: 2007 Update, CRS Report for Congress RL34043 (Washington, DC: Congressional Research 
Service, June 13, 2007).
579

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
WTE facilities, making this much less of a problem than 
it once was. For example, dioxin emissions (dioxin is a 
highly toxic substance given off when many organic sub-
stances are combusted) have been reduced by 99% and 
mercury emissions by 90%. Odor pollution is best con-
trolled by isolating the plant from residential areas.
 • Combustion facilities are expensive to build, and their 
siting has the same problem as that of landfills: No one 
wants to live near one. Most combustion facilities are 
located in industrial areas for this reason.
 • Combustion ash is often loaded with metals and other 
hazardous substances and must be disposed of in secure 
landfills.
 • To justify the cost of its operation, the combustion facility 
must have a continuing supply of MSW. For that reason, 
the facility enters into long-term agreements with munici-
palities, and these agreements can lessen the flexibility of 
the community’s solid-waste management options.
 • Even if the combustion facility generates electricity, the 
process wastes both energy and materials unless it is 
augmented with recycling and recovery.
An Operating Facility. Let us look at the operation of a 
typical modern WTE facility, which might serve a number 
of communities or a large metropolitan area. Servicing a 
 population of 1 million or more, the plant receives about 
3,000 tons of MSW per day. The waste comes in by rail and 
truck, and the communities pay tipping fees (the costs as-
sessed at the disposal site) that average $68 per ton. Waste 
processing is efficient because, overall, about 80% of the 
MSW is burned for energy, 12% is recovered, and 8% is put 
in landfills. The process, pictured in Figure 8, is as follows: 
1. Incoming waste is inspected, and obvious recyclable and 
bulky materials are removed.
2. Waste is then pushed onto conveyers that feed shredders 
capable of reducing the width of waste particles to six 
inches or less.
3. Strong magnets remove about two-thirds of ferrous 
 metals for recycling before combustion.
4. The waste is then blown into boilers, where light materi-
als burn in suspension and heavier materials burn on a 
moving grate.
5. Water circulated through the walls of the boilers pro-
duces steam, which drives turbines for generating elec-
tricity.
6. After the waste is burned, the bottom ash is conveyed to 
a processing facility, where further separation of metals 
may occur in a process that recovers brass, aluminum, 
gold, copper, and iron. In some facilities, this process 
nets $1,000 a day in coins alone!
7. Combustion gases are passed through a lime-based 
spray dryer/absorber to neutralize sulfur dioxide and 
other noxious gases. Then the gases go through electro-
static precipitators that remove particles. The resulting 
One positive impact of the siting problem is that it en-
courages residents to reduce their waste and recycle as much 
as possible. (This alternative is discussed in Section 2) An-
other impact is that the problem stimulates the use of com-
bustion as an option for waste disposal.
Combustion: Waste to Energy
Because it has a high organic content, refuse can be burned. 
Currently, 86 combustion facilities are operating in the 
United States, burning about 29 million tons of MSW 
 annually—11.7% of the waste stream. This process is really 
waste reduction, not waste disposal, because after incinera-
tion the ash must still be disposed of.
Advantages of Combustion. The combustion of MSW 
has real advantages:
 • Combustion can reduce the weight of trash by more 
than 70% and the volume by 90%, thus greatly extend-
ing the life of a landfill (which is still required to receive 
the ash).
 • Toxic or hazardous combustion products are con-
centrated into two streams of ash, which are easier to 
handle and control than the original MSW. The fly ash 
(captured from the combustion gases by air-pollution 
control equipment) contains most of the toxic sub-
stances and can be safely put into a landfill. The bottom 
ash (from the bottom of the boiler) can be used as fill in 
some construction sites and roadbeds. Some combustion 
facilities process the bottom ash further to recover met-
als and then convert the remainder into concrete blocks.
 • No changes are needed in trash collection procedures or 
people’s behavior. Trash is simply hauled to a combus-
tion facility instead of to the landfill.
 • Most combustion facilities are waste-to-energy (WTE) 
facilities equipped with modern emission-control tech-
nology that brings the emissions into compliance with 
Clean Air Act regulations.
 • When burned, unsorted MSW releases about 35% as 
much energy as coal, pound for pound. WTE facilities 
produce 2,700 megawatts of electricity annually, enough 
to meet the power needs of 2.7 million homes. Advocates 
of WTE point to the wasted energy going to  landfills—
equivalent to 9.4 billion gallons of diesel oil a year.
 • Many of these facilities add resource recovery to 
their waste processing, in which many materials are 
separated and recovered before (and sometimes after) 
 combustion.
Drawbacks of Combustion. Combustion has some draw-
backs, too:
 • Air pollution and offensive odors are two problems that 
the public associates with combustion facilities. Large 
reductions in air pollutants have resulted from compli-
ance with stringent air-pollution regulations applied to 
580

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
With the closing of the Fresh Kills landfill, the total cost (in-
cluding sanitation vehicles and workers) of disposing of New 
York City’s MSW rose to $260 a ton. At 12,900 tons per day, 
this amounts to more than $1 billion a year.
Getting rid of all trash is becoming more expensive, 
and one sad consequence of this increasing expense is ille-
gal dumping. Some towns are charging up to $5 a bag for 
MSW disposal, and it now costs several dollars to get rid of 
an automobile tire and $30 or more to dispose of a refrig-
erator. As a result, tires, refrigerators, yard waste, car parts, 
and construction waste are appearing all over the landscape. 
Institutions and apartments that operate with dumpsters 
often must put padlocks on them in order to prevent their 
unauthorized use by people trying to avoid disposal costs. 
Many states have established a corps of environmental police 
to track down midnight dumpers and bring them to justice.
2  Better Solutions: Source 
Reduction and Recycling
Our domestic wastes and their disposal represent a huge 
stream of material that flows in one direction: from our re-
source base to disposal sites. Just as natural ecosystems de-
pend on recycling nutrients, we can move in the direction of 
sustainability only if we also learn to recycle more of our 
wastes. There is strong evidence that we are moving in this 
air emissions are significantly lower in pollutants than 
those of an energy-equivalent coal-fired power plant.
8. The fly ash and bottom ash residues are put into landfills.
An appreciation for the impact of such a facility can be 
gained from looking at the outcome of a year’s operation. 
In one year, 1 million tons of MSW are processed, 40,000 
tons of metal are recycled, and 65 megawatts of power are 
 generated—the equivalent of more than 60 million gallons 
of fuel oil and enough electricity to power 65,000 homes. All 
this comes from stuff that people have thrown away!
However, because of the drawbacks mentioned previ-
ously, WTE facilities are strongly opposed during the siting, 
permitting, and construction phases. Opponents cite public-
health concerns about air pollutants like dioxins and mer-
cury as well as traffic and property value concerns.
Costs of Municipal Solid-Waste Disposal
The costs of disposing of MSW are escalating, and not just 
because of the new design features of landfills. More and 
more, they reflect the expenses of acquiring a site and provid-
ing transportation. Landfill tipping fees average about $44 a 
ton (they are lower than those at WTE facilities because of 
the high capital costs at WTE facilities). The waste collector 
must recover this cost, as well as transportation costs to the 
site, and generate a profit (if the facility is privately operated). 
Figure 8 Waste-to-energy combustion facility. Schematic flow for the separation of materials and 
combustion in a typical, modern WTE combustion facility. Numbers refer to steps in the process as described in the 
text.
Fly ash
Tipping floor
Ferrous metals
to market
Inspection
station
Shredder
Magnet
Ferrous metals
Electrostatic
precipitator
Lime 
reagent
Steam piped to
turbine generator
Electric power
to utility
Steam drum
Turbine
generator
Vibrating
feeder
To metals
recovery system
Boiler ash
Spray
dryer
Induced 
draft fan
Stack
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
7
581

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
technology; and aluminum cans contain only two-thirds 
as much aluminum as they did 20 years ago.
 • The Information Age may be having an impact on the 
use of paper. Electronic communication, data transfer, 
and advertising are increasingly performed on personal 
computers, now present in most homes in the United 
States. The growth of the Internet as a medium for in-
formation transfer has been phenomenal. These devel-
opments have the potential to reduce paper waste. The 
U.S. Postal Service reports declining mail volume, while 
Internet advertising is increasing.
 • Source reduction includes reuse. Many durable goods 
are reusable, and indeed, the United States has a long 
tradition of resale of furniture, appliances, and car-
pets. Many goods may be donated to charities and put 
to good use. The growing popularity of yard sales, flea 
markets, consignment clothing stores, and other markets 
for secondhand goods (Fig. 10) is an encouraging devel-
opment. 
 • The Internet has become a major player in reuse. All 
sorts of used goods are offered for sale on eBay® and 
Craigslist, two Internet services that link private sellers 
and buyers. U-Exchange promotes bartering, while free 
goods can be advertised and acquired on the Freecycle 
Network™, a concept that has grown to 5,000 groups 
with 8.8 million members in 120 countries. There is 
probably a chapter in your city!
 • Lengthening a product’s life can keep that product out 
of the waste stream. If products are designed to last 
longer and to be easier to repair, consumers will learn 
that they are worth the extra cost. (You get what you 
pay for; cheap products usually take the shortest route 
to the waste bin.)
 • We are all on bulk mailing lists because these lists are 
sold and shared widely, so we are guaranteed to receive 
increasing volumes of advertising. To stay off such lists, 
simply inform mail-order companies and other organi-
zations involved that you do not want your name and 
direction, but the best strategy of all is to reduce waste at its 
source—called source reduction. In EPA’s waste management 
hierarchy, Source Reduction is right at the top (Fig. 9). 
Source Reduction
Source reduction is defined by the EPA as “the practice of de-
signing, manufacturing, purchasing, or using materials (such 
as products and packaging) in ways that reduce the amount 
or toxicity of trash created.” Source reduction accomplishes 
two goals: It reduces the amount of waste that must be man-
aged, and it conserves resources by preventing the use of 
virgin materials. It is noteworthy that, after rising rapidly 
during the latter decades of the 20th century, the amount of 
waste per capita in the United States peaked at 4.5 pounds 
in 1990 and has since leveled off. (We still lead the world in 
this dubious statistic, however.) The leveling off is a signal 
that some changes in lifestyle may be occurring that have an 
impact on waste generation.
Source reduction is difficult to measure because it means 
trying to measure something that no longer exists. The EPA 
measures source reduction by measuring consumer spending, 
which reflects the goods and products that ultimately make 
their way to the trash bin. For example, after 1990, consumer 
spending continued to grow, but the MSW stream slowed 
down. If the MSW had grown at the same pace as consumer 
spending, some 287 million tons would have been generated 
in 2000 instead of 232 million. Thus, some 55 million tons 
never made it into the waste stream in 2000, and the EPA 
considers this to be due to source-reduction activities.
Source reduction can involve a broad range of activities 
on the part of homeowners, businesses, communities, manu-
facturers, and institutions. Consider the following examples:
 • Reducing the weight of many items has reduced the 
amount of materials used in manufacturing. Steel cans 
are 60% lighter than they used to be; disposable dia-
pers contain 50% less paper pulp, due to absorbent-gel 
Figure 9 EPA waste management hierarchy. This inverted triangle 
shows the preferable waste management options from most preferred at the top 
to least at the bottom.
(Source: EPA. Non-Hazardous Waste Managaement Heirarchy. www.epa.gov/epawaste/
nonhaz/municipal/wte/nonhaz.htm. March 19, 2012.)
Waste Management Hierarchy
Source reduction & reuse
Recycling/Composting
Energy recovery
Treatment &
disposal
Most preferred
Least preferred
Figure 10 Waste reduction by reuse. Yard sales and flea markets are 
keeping many materials from becoming MSW after a single use.
582

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
 • Metals can be remelted and refabricated. Making alu-
minum (36% recovery) from scrap aluminum saves up 
to 90% of the energy required to make aluminum from 
virgin ore. In addition, aluminum ore is imported and 
represents part of the mounting U.S. trade deficit. Na-
tional recycling of aluminum saves energy, creates jobs, 
and reduces the trade deficit.
 • Yard wastes (leaves, grass, and plant trimmings—57.5% 
recovery) can be composted to produce a humus soil 
conditioner.
 • Textiles (16.5% recovery) can be shredded and used to 
strengthen recycled paper products.
 • Old tires (35% recovery) can be remelted or shredded 
and incorporated into highway asphalt. Not included 
in the 35% figure are more than a million tons of tires 
burned annually in special waste-to-energy facilities.
Recycling is both an environmental and an economic 
issue. Many people are motivated to recycle because of en-
vironmental concern, but the use of recyclable and recycled 
materials is also driven by economic factors. The Global Re-
cycling Network (www.grn.com) is an Internet information 
exchange that promotes the trade of recyclables from MSW 
and the marketing of “ecofriendly” products made from re-
cyclable materials.
Municipal Recycling
Recycling is probably the most direct and obvious way that 
most people can become involved in environmental issues. 
If you recycle, you save natural resources from being used 
(trees, in the case of paper), and you prevent landfills from 
becoming “landfulls.”
Recycling’s popularity is well established: Virtually every 
state has specific recycling goals, met with varying degrees 
address shared. Several organizations are available to 
help you accomplish this: Direct Marketing Association 
(www.dmachoice.org) helps you get rid of email and 
snail mail advertising; Catalog Choice™ and stopthe-
junkmail.com perform a similar service.
The Recycling Solution
In addition to reuse, recycling is an obvious solution to the 
solid-waste problem, right after source reduction in EPA’s 
hierarchy. More than 75% of MSW is recyclable material. 
There are two levels of recycling: primary and secondary. In 
primary recycling, the original waste material is made back 
into the same material—for example, newspapers recycled 
to make newsprint. In secondary recycling, waste materi-
als are made into different products that may or may not 
be recyclable—for instance, newspapers recycled to make 
cardboard.
Why Recycle? Recycling is a hands-down winner in terms 
of energy and resource use and pollution:
 • It saves energy and resources. One ton of recycled steel 
cans saves 2,500 pounds of iron ore, 1,000 pounds of 
coal, and more than 5,400 Btus of energy. One ton of 
papers recycled saves 17 trees, 6,953 gallons of water, 
463 gallons of oil, and 4,000 kilowatt-hours of energy.
 • It decreases pollution. Making recycled paper requires 
64% less energy and generates 74% less air pollution 
and 35% less water pollution than does using wood 
from trees. For every ton of waste processed, a thorough 
recycling program will eliminate 620 pounds of carbon 
dioxide, 30 pounds of methane, 5 pounds of carbon 
monoxide, 2.5 pounds of particulate matter, and smaller 
amounts of other pollutants.
What Gets Recycled? The primary items from MSW that 
are currently being actively recycled are cans (both alumi-
num and steel), bottles, plastic containers, newspapers, and 
yard wastes. Yet there are many alternatives for reprocess-
ing various components of refuse, and people are coming 
up with new ideas and techniques all the time. A few of the 
major established techniques, together with their current per-
centages of recovery by recycling, are as follows:
 • Paper and paperboard (53% recovery) can be remade 
into pulp and reprocessed into recycled paper, card-
board, and other paper products; finely ground and sold 
as cellulose insulation; or shredded and composted.
 • Most glass (33% recovery) that is recycled is crushed, 
remelted, and made into new containers; a smaller 
amount is used in fiberglass or “glassphalt” for highway 
construction.
 • Some forms of plastic (13.5% recovery) can be remelted 
and fabricated into carpet fiber, outdoor wearing 
 apparel, irrigation drainage tiles, building materials 
(Fig. 11), and sheet plastic. 
Figure 11 Deck made from Trex® decking and railing. Trex is 
made primarily with recycled plastic grocery bags, reclaimed pallet wrap, and 
waste wood.
(Source: www.trex.com)
583

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
5. Drop-off sites are provided for bulky goods like sofas, 
appliances, construction and demolition materials, and 
yard waste.
6. Recycling goals are ambitious, yet clear and feasible. 
Some percentage of the waste stream is targeted, and 
progress is followed and communicated.
Nevertheless, municipalities experience very different 
recycling rates. New York City, for example, has made great 
progress—from recycling only 5% to recycling 16%—by 
mandating curbside recycling for all of its 3 million house-
holds. Boston, by contrast, with only 13% recycling (with 
voluntary curbside pickup), has been holding Massachu-
setts back in its goal to achieve 56% recycling by 2010 (it 
was only 28% in 2008, and so the state has adopted a new 
goal: reduce total disposal 30% by 2020, through vary-
ing means). Worcester, farther to the west in the state, has 
achieved a commendable 43% recycling rate. The national 
prize goes to San Francisco, a city that has achieved a recy-
cling rate of 77%.
Economics of Recycling. Recycling has its critics, who 
base their arguments primarily on economics. If the costs of 
recycling (from pickup to disposal of recyclable components) 
are compared with the costs of combusting waste or plac-
ing it in landfills, recycling frequently comes out second best. 
Markets for recyclable materials fluctuate wildly, and resi-
dents often end up subsidizing the recycling effort. Competi-
tion between landfills and combustion facilities often lowers 
tipping fees, creating an even greater disincentive to recycle. 
Thus, critics of current recycling practices argue that, unless 
recycling pays for itself through the sale of the materials re-
covered, it should not be done.
However, a true environmental assessment should com-
pare the energy costs of recycling with the energy costs of 
landfill or combustion disposal, as well as comparing the en-
ergy costs of making products from recyclable goods with 
the energy costs of making new products from scratch—
called a life-cycle analysis. Performed this way, the energy 
saved by recycling aluminum, for example, is 96%; for 
newsprint, 45%; for two kinds of plastic, 76–88%; and for 
glass, 21%.
of success. EPA sources report that only 6.4% of MSW was 
recycled in 1960 versus 34.1% in 2010 (Fig. 12). There is a 
great diversity of approaches to recycling in municipalities, 
from recycling centers requiring miles of driving to curbside 
recycling with sophisticated separation processes. The most 
successful programs have the following characteristics: 
1. There is a strong incentive to recycle where there are 
PAYT (pay-as-you-throw) charges for general trash and 
no charge for recyclable goods.
2. Recycling is not optional; mandatory regulations are in 
place, with warnings and sanctions for violations.
3. Residential recycling is curbside (Fig. 13), with free recy-
cling bins distributed to households. (Curbside recycling 
rose rapidly and then plateaued. Currently, 71% of the 
U.S. populace is served via 9,066 curbside programs.) 
4. The process employed is single-stream recycling, where 
all recyclable goods are mixed in a collection truck, al-
lowing residents to put all materials in a single container. 
Separation of materials for reuse then occurs at a materi-
als recovery facility (MRF) (see below).
Figure 13 Curbside recycling. Recyclable materials are picked up in 
a San Francisco neighborhood, where residents are issued three bins: one for 
 garbage, one for recycling, and one for compostable materials. The city now 
 recycles 77% of its waste.
Figure 12 MSW recycling in the 
United States. MSW recycled from 1960 
to 2010, as total waste and percentage recy-
cled.
(Source: EPA, Office of Solid Waste and Emergency 
Response, Municipal Solid Waste Generation, Recy-
cling, and Disposal in the United States: Facts and 
Figures for 2010 (Washington, DC: EPA, November, 
2011).)
90
80
Total MSW recycling
Percent recycling
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
0
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Total MSW recycling (million tons)
Percent of generation recycled
6.4%
5.6
6.2%
6.6%
6.5
8.0
7.3%
9.3
9.6%
14.5
10.1%
16.7
33.2
55.8
69.5
79.9
85.1
16.0%
25.7%
28.6%
31.6% 34.1%
584

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
Glass Recycling and Bottle Laws. The glass in MSW is 
primarily in the form of containers, most of which held bever-
ages. The average person drinks about a quart of liquid each 
day. Given that there are 312 million Americans, this daily 
consumption amounts to some 28 billion gallons of liquid per 
year for the nation as a whole. Much of this volume is pack-
aged in single-serving containers that are used once and then 
thrown away. Nonreturnable glass containers constitute 3.7% 
of the solid-waste stream in the United States and about 50% 
of the nonburnable portion; they also make up a large pro-
portion of roadside litter. Broken bottles along roads, beaches, 
and parklands are responsible for innumerable cuts and other 
injuries, not to mention flat tires. Both the mining of the ma-
terials and the process used to manufacture the beverage con-
tainers create pollution. All of these factors produce hidden 
costs that do not appear on the price tag of the item; however, 
we pay for them with taxes to clean up litter as well as with 
our injuries, flat tires, and environmental degradation.
In an attempt to reverse these trends, environmental 
and consumer groups have promoted bottle laws that fa-
cilitate the recycling or reuse of beverage containers. Such 
laws generally call for a deposit on all beverage contain-
ers, both reusable and throwaway and both glass and plas-
tic. Retailers are required to accept the used containers 
and pass them along for recycling or reuse. Bottle laws have 
Unfortunately, all recycling took a hit because of the re-
cent recession. Demand for recyclable products plummeted, 
reached bottom in 2009, and is now on the rebound as the 
economy recovers. Irrespective of these economic consid-
erations, the demonstrated support for recycling programs 
is strong. Experience has shown that at least two-thirds of 
households will recycle if presented with a curbside pickup 
program. The percentage goes up when recycling is com-
bined with a PAYT program or a program that rewards par-
ticipants for their participation, like RecycleBank. Dover, 
New Hampshire—a city of 26,000—was facing escalating 
costs of MSW collection and disposal after its landfill closed. 
The city instituted both a PAYT program and curbside recy-
cling in 1991 and saw per household trash plummet from 6 
pounds to 2.3 pounds per day in six years. At the same time, 
the cost per household dropped from $122 to $73 per year, 
and the recycling rate rose quickly to more than 50%. The 
city’s solid-waste management costs dropped 27% in spite of 
a population increase.
Paper Recycling. Newspapers are by far the most impor-
tant item that is recycled because of their predominance in 
the waste stream. It is a simple matter to tie up or bag house-
hold newspapers, and the amount recovered by recycling is 
increasing dramatically. Currently, far more newspaper is 
being recycled (72%) than discarded. Because more than 
25% of the trees harvested in the United States are used to 
make paper, recycling paper saves trees: A 1-meter stack of 
newspapers equals the amount of pulp from one tree.
The market for used newspapers has fluctuated greatly 
over the past several decades. During the late 1980s, the mar-
ket was saturated, and municipalities often had to pay to get 
rid of newspapers. In 1995, discarded papers were so valu-
able—up to $160 a ton—that thieves were stealing them off 
the sidewalks before the recycling trucks could pick them up. 
A year later, as more recycling programs came on line, the 
market collapsed again, and many cities once more paid as 
much as $25 a ton to have the newspapers hauled away—
but this is still less expensive than the tipping fees at land-
fills. Furthermore, there is a lively international trade in used 
paper (Fig. 14). Forest-poor countries in Europe and Asia pur-
chase wastepaper from the United States and other industrial 
countries in the Northern Hemisphere, where there contin-
ues to be a surplus of such paper. 
After the wastepaper is incorporated into a final product, 
the market becomes a critical factor. Is there a demand for 
recycled paper? The technology for producing high- quality 
paper from recyclable stock has improved greatly, to the 
point where it is virtually impossible to distinguish the recy-
cled product from “virgin” paper. There is often some confu-
sion about what is meant by “recycled paper.” The key is the 
amount of postconsumer recycled paper in a given product. 
In manufacturing processes, much paper is “wasted”; paper 
that is routinely recovered and rerouted back into process-
ing is called “recycled paper.” Thus, the total recycled content 
of a paper can be 50%, although the actual postconsumer 
amount recovered by recycling might be only 10% of the 
total amount of paper.
Figure 14 Wastepaper exports. Bales of wastepaper ready to be loaded 
for shipment overseas. China imports a third of the wastepaper being sold inter-
nationally.
585

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
Plastics Recycling. Plastics have a bad reputation in the 
environmental debate for several reasons. First, plastics 
have many uses that involve rapid throughput—for exam-
ple, packaging, bottling, the manufacture of disposable dia-
pers, and the incorporation of plastics into a host of cheap 
consumer goods. Second, plastics are conspicuous in MSW 
and litter. Ironically, most trash is disposed of in plastic bags 
manufactured just for that purpose. Finally, plastics do not 
decompose in the environment because no microbes (or any 
other organisms) are able to digest them. (Imagine plastics 
in landfills delighting archaeologists hundreds of years from 
now.) Therefore, the possibility of recycling at least some of 
the plastic in products—containers of liquid, for example—
interests the environmental community.
Bottled Water. Throughout the world, the number 
one “new” drink is bottled water. Health consciousness 
and suspicions about the safety of tap water have made 
the plastic water bottle the new symbol of healthy living. 
More than 9 billion gallons of bottled water were sold in 
the United States in 2011, making us the world leader in 
consumption of bottled water. As a consequence, a new 
form of litter along our highways and on our beaches is the 
discarded plastic water bottle. Only two states with bottle 
laws include bottled water and other noncarbonated bever-
ages. People often pay more for bottled water (almost half 
is only bottled tap water) than for gasoline and as much as 
10,000 times more than for water from the tap. Only one in 
six plastic water bottles is recycled, and the rest end up in 
litter, landfills, or combustion facilities.
For these and other reasons, opposition to bottled water 
is growing; more than 90 colleges and universities and sev-
eral states and municipalities have either banned or restricted 
distribution of bottled water. The opposition considers the 
use of bottled water wasteful, citing the millions of barrels 
of oil used for manufacture and distribution of a product 
that can be obtained at a small fraction of the cost. Indus-
try spokespersons counter by pointing out the role of bottled 
water in offering an alternative to the sugary drinks that con-
tribute to the obesity epidemic in the United States and as an 
essential component of disaster relief. The market for bottled 
water in the United States, Canada, and Europe has declined 
over the past three years, but the industry has compensated 
by selling much more of its product in developing countries, 
where safe water is much harder to find.
PETE and HDPE. If you look on the bottom of a plas-
tic container, you will see a number (or some letters) inside 
the little triangle of arrows that represents recyclability. The 
number or the letters are used to differentiate between and 
sort the many kinds of plastic polymers. The two recycla-
ble plastics in most common use are high-density polyethyl-
ene (HDPE, code 2) and polyethylene terephthalate (PETE,  
code 1). In the recycling process, plastics must be melted 
down and poured into molds, and some contaminants from 
the original containers may carry over, making it difficult to 
reuse some plastics for food containers. While this somewhat 
restricts uses for recyclable plastic, some interesting uses are 
appearing, with more in the development stage. PETE, for 
example, is turned into carpets, jackets, film, strapping, and 
been proposed in virtually all state legislatures over the past 
decade. Nevertheless, in every case, the proposals have met 
with fierce opposition from the beverage and container in-
dustries and certain other special-interest groups. The reason 
for their opposition is economic loss to their operations. The 
container industry contends that bottle laws will result in the 
loss of jobs and higher beverage costs for the consumer.
In most cases, the industry’s well-financed lobbying ef-
forts have defeated bottle laws. However, some states—11, as 
of 2012—have adopted bottle laws of varying types despite 
industry opposition (Table ,2). The experience of these states 
has proved the beverage and bottle industry’s claims false. In 
fact, more jobs are gained than lost, costs to the consumer 
have not risen, a high percentage of bottles are returned, and 
there is a marked reduction in the can and bottle portion of 
litter. A final measure of the success of bottle laws is contin-
ued public approval: Despite industry efforts to repeal these 
laws, no state that has one has repealed it. 
Repeated attempts have been made to get a national bot-
tle law through Congress—to date, unsuccessfully. Opponents 
(the same ones that oppose state-level bottle bills) argue that 
such a law will threaten the continued success of curbside re-
cycling, of which beverage containers represent an important 
source of revenue. However, as curbside recycling currently 
reaches only 71% of the U.S. population, a national bottle law 
would undoubtedly recover a greater proportion of beverage 
containers. (States with bottle laws report that 75% of con-
tainers are returned, a significant proportion from the curbside 
collections from people who don’t bother to redeem the con-
tainers.) Also, a national bottle law would be labor intensive, 
employing tens of thousands of new workers.
In 2010, recycling and bottle laws resulted in the recov-
ery of 33.4% of glass containers, 50% of aluminum contain-
ers, 67% of steel containers, and 29% of plastic containers, 
with an aggregate weight of 6.4 million tons.
tabLe 2 States with Bottle Laws
State
Year Passed
Connecticut
1972
Oregon
1972
Vermont
1973
Maine
1976
Michigan
1976
Iowa
1978
Massachusetts
1978
Delaware
1982
New York
1983
California
1991
Hawaii
2002
586

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
promoting natural biological decomposition. In dry re-
gions, water is added to maintain moisture in the windrows. 
After several months of this treatment, the compost may be 
screened for different final uses: finely screened for lawns or 
more coarsely for garden and landscape beds.
Small-scale composting can be done in backyards, using 
bins that are specially made for this use or simply piles or 
heaps (best to hide these from the neighbors). Instructions 
for managing compost are easily found on the Internet; virtu-
ally all of them will help you manage your compost to the 
end product of a very rich mulch that can do wonders for 
your garden or landscape plantings. All of them tell you to 
avoid putting too much food waste out, lest you attract un-
wanted four-legged visitors.
Regional Recycling Options
As landfills close down and MSW is transferred out of cities 
and towns, transfer stations are set up to receive the wastes 
from collection trucks and transfer them to larger vehicles 
for long-distance hauling to their final destination. It is an 
encouraging sign that a number of these transfer stations are 
being converted into materials recovery facilities, referred to 
in the trade as MRFs, or “murfs.” In 2010, there were 633 
MRFs operating in the United States, handling over 98,000 
tons of MSW a day.
More and more, these facilities are designed to receive 
the collections of single-stream recycling, where all possi-
ble recyclable components are “commingled.” Alternatively, 
some sorting takes place when waste is collected, either 
through curbside collection or by town recycling stations 
(sites to which residents can bring wastes to be recycled). 
In either case, the waste is trucked to the MRF, where it is 
moved through the facility by escalators and conveyor belts, 
tended by workers who inspect and sort the items collected 
(Fig. 15). The objective of the process is to prepare materials 
new PETE bottles; HDPE becomes irrigation drainage tiles, 
sheet plastic, and, appropriately, recycling bins.
Critics of the recycling of plastics argue that recover-
ing plastics is more costly than starting from scratch—that 
is, beginning with petroleum derivatives—and that manu-
facturers are getting involved mainly because environmen-
tally concerned consumers are demanding their involvement. 
Industry-supported critics also point out that plastics in 
landfills create no toxic leachate or “dangerous” biogas. 
Moreover, plastics in combustion facilities burn wonderfully 
hot and leave almost no ash. However, with the rising costs 
of petroleum and the many uses of recyclable plastic bottles 
(including new bottles), closing the loop to recover plastic 
bottles makes both economic and environmental sense.
Plastic Bags. Hanging from trees and bushes, blowing 
along highways, clogging sewer pipes, drifting on ocean cur-
rents, plastic bags are everywhere on the planet—everywhere, 
that is, but the trash or recycling barrel. They cause thou-
sands of deaths of marine mammals and turtles each year. 
Convenient? Indeed they are, as anyone who has shopped in 
a supermarket knows. A hundred billion of them are distrib-
uted in the United States every year, and close to a trillion are 
used annually worldwide. Made of low-density polyethylene, 
plastic bags are difficult to recycle and, like all petroleum-
based plastics, are virtually indestructible. China, once a user 
of 100 billion plastic bags a year, has cracked down on them, 
banning the production of ultrathin bags—bringing China in 
line with a number of other countries. In the United States, 
San Francisco initiated the first citywide ban on plastic gro-
cery bags in 2007; many other cities are instituting similar 
bans. Instead of the thin plastic bags, customers are encour-
aged to carry their own cloth bags or to use paper bags or 
larger, thicker reusable plastic bags that hold five times as 
much as the standard flimsy bag. The plastics industry is 
fighting back with lawsuits and information campaigns tout-
ing the benefits of the plastic bag. Perhaps someday soon 
the “national flower of South Africa,” as the bags have been 
called in that country, will become an endangered species.
The Composting Option. An increasingly popular way 
of treating yard waste and food residuals (currently 27% 
of MSW) is composting, especially as more and more states 
and municipalities are banning these materials from MSW 
collections. Composting, the natural biological decomposi-
tion (rotting) of organic matter in the presence of air, can 
be carried out in the backyard by homeowners, or it can be 
promoted by municipalities as a way of dealing with a large 
fraction of MSW. In addition to functioning as a way to di-
vert wastes away from landfills and combustion facilities, 
composting provides a product that can be used to amend 
poor soils, add fertilizer to yards and gardens, and promote 
higher yields to agricultural crops. In 2010, 57.7% of yard 
trimmings were recovered from the waste stream.
Large-scale composting is carried out by recycling fa-
cilities and municipalities. Wastes brought into the facility 
are usually ground up into smaller pieces and then placed 
outdoors into rows of long piles (windrows). The windrows 
are turned regularly to allow oxygen to penetrate the piles, 
Figure 15 Materials recovery facility. Single-stream recycling at a 
modern MRF in Baltimore. Its purpose is to sort a mixed stream of waste material 
(cans, bottles, newspapers, etc.) for eventual recycling.
587

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
regulations, again under the EPA’s jurisdiction. RCRA 
also required the states to develop comprehensive 
solid-waste management plans.
 • The Superfund Act of 1980  addressed abandoned 
hazardous-waste sites throughout the country, 41% of 
which are old landfills.
 • The Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984 
gave the EPA greater responsibility for setting solid-
waste criteria for all hazardous-waste facilities. Because 
even household waste must be assumed to contain some 
hazardous substances, this meant that the EPA had to 
determine and monitor all landfill and combustion crite-
ria more closely.
Largely in response to these federal mandates, the states 
have been putting pressure on local governments to develop 
integrated waste management plans, with goals for recycling, 
source reduction, and landfill performance.
Integrated Waste Management
It is not necessary to fasten onto just one method of handling 
wastes. Source reduction, waste-to-energy combustion, recy-
cling, materials recovery facilities, landfills, and composting 
all have roles to play in waste management. Different com-
binations of these options will work in different regions of 
the country. A system having several processes in operation is 
called integrated waste management.
Waste Reduction. The modern United States leads the 
world in per capita waste production and per capita energy 
consumption—we really are a “throwaway society.” How 
can we turn this situation around? True management of 
MSW begins in the home (or dorm room). Materialistic life-
styles, affluence, and overconsumption can pack our homes 
and our trash cans with stuff we simply do not need. Thou-
sands of public storage facilities with interesting names (Stor-
U-Self, for example) are packed with stuff that people can’t 
fit into their homes but can’t part with.
WasteWise. Several incentives have been put in place 
on the government level to encourage waste reduction. For 
example, the EPA sponsors the WasteWise program, target-
ing the reduction of MSW by establishing partnerships with 
not only local governments, schools, and organizations, but 
multinational corporations as well. WasteWise is a volun-
tary partnership that allows the partners to design their own 
solid-waste reduction programs. More than 2,700 organiza-
tions throughout the country have partnered with the EPA to 
reduce and recycle waste and, in a new focus of the program, 
to calculate their reductions of waste-related greenhouse gas 
emissions. The EPA regularly honors partner organizations 
that have achieved exemplary waste reduction. For example, 
NEC Electronics, Inc.’s Roseville, California, facility has been 
a WasteWise partner since 1994, winning seven WasteWise 
awards over the years. The facility has mastered waste diver-
sion, diverting 82% of its solid waste from landfills in 2008. 
Its efforts over the years have diverted more than 4,700 tons 
for the recyclable-goods market. Glass is sorted by color, 
cleaned, crushed into small pebbles, and then shipped to 
glass companies, where it replaces the raw materials that go 
into glass manufacture—sand and soda ash—and saves sub-
stantially on energy costs. Cans are sorted, flattened, and sent 
either to detinning plants or to aluminum-processing facili-
ties. Paper is sorted, baled, and sent to reprocessing mills or 
exporters. Plastics are sorted, depending on their color and 
type of polymer, and then sold. 
The facility’s advantages are its economy of scale and 
its ability to produce a useful end product for the recyclable-
materials market. Some MRFs have gone to high technology, 
replacing the manual sorting with magnetic pulleys, optical 
sensors, and air sorters. As the movement grows, this is likely 
the direction the technology will take to improve the effi-
ciency of operations and cut costs.
Less common than conventional MRFs are mixed-waste 
processing facilities, or so-called “dirty MRFs,” which re-
ceive unsorted MSW just as if it was going to a landfill or a 
WTE facility. The waste is loaded on a conveyer and is sorted 
for recovery of recyclable materials before being landfilled 
or combusted. Because of extensive contamination of poten-
tially recyclable waste, this method is less desirable and is not 
used as often.
3  Public Policy and Waste 
Management
The management of MSW used to be entirely under the con-
trol of local governments. In recent years, however, state and 
federal agencies have played an increasingly important role 
in waste management, partly through regulation and partly 
through encouragement and facilitation.
The Regulatory Perspective
At the federal level, the following legislation has been passed:
 • The first attempt by Congress to address the problem 
was the Solid Waste Disposal Act of 1965. The legisla-
tion gave jurisdiction over solid waste to the Bureau of 
Solid Waste Management, but the agency’s mandate was 
basically financial and technical rather than regulatory.
 • The Resource Recovery Act of 1970 gave jurisdiction 
over waste management to the newly created EPA and 
directed attention to recycling programs and other ways 
of recovering resources in MSW. The act also encour-
aged the states to develop some kind of waste manage-
ment program.
 • The passage of the Resource Conservation and Re-
covery Act (RCRA) of 1976 saw a more regulatory 
(command-and-control) approach to dealing with 
MSW, as the EPA was given power to close local dumps 
and set regulations for landfills. Combustion facilities 
were covered by air-pollution and hazardous-waste 
588

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
product at each stage of its “life cycle,” especially the end. 
EPR originated in Western Europe. Germany, the Nether-
lands, and Sweden have well-developed regulations that re-
quire companies to take back many items, that encourage 
the reuse of products, and that promote the manufacture of 
more durable products. In the United States, EPR is better 
known as product stewardship, a term that implies shared 
responsibility by producers, consumers, and municipalities. 
For example, Hewlett-Packard and Xerox make it easy for 
customers to return spent copier cartridges, and the two 
companies then recycle the components of the cartridges. 
Call2Recycle is another good example of this concept, 
where rechargeable batteries and cell phones are voluntar-
ily taken back by a nonprofit corporation, Rechargeable 
Battery Recycling Corporation. The program collects up to 
7 million pounds of batteries a year.
Again, the EPA is active in providing information to 
manufacturers and purchasing departments to help them de-
sign and buy more environmentally sound products.
Waste Disposal Issues. No human society can avoid gen-
erating solid waste. There will always be MSW, no matter 
how much we reduce, reuse, and recycle. Most experts see 
WTE combustion facilities holding their own, a decrease in 
the percentage of waste going to landfills, and a continued 
rise in recycling.
It will be important to break the gridlock at local and 
state levels on the siting of new landfills and WTE com-
bustion facilities. Landfills will still be needed, though they 
should last longer than in the past. Policy makers have long 
known about the landfill shortage, but have opted for short-
term solutions with the lowest political cost. One result of 
this choice is the long-distance hauling of MSW by truck 
and rail described earlier. If regions and municipalities are 
required to handle their own trash locally, as is the case in 
some states, they will find places to site landfills, regardless of 
NIMBY considerations. New landfills must use the best tech-
nologies, such as proper lining, leachate collection and treat-
ment, groundwater monitoring, biogas collection, and final 
capping. If these technologies are employed, a landfill will 
not be a health hazard. Also, sites should be selected with a 
view to some future use that is attractive.
With the closing of New York City’s huge Fresh Kills 
landfill, the city is now sending its MSW to other states. Yet 
most citizens in the other states object to being New York’s 
dumping ground, and there is the deeper stewardship issue 
of local responsibility for local wastes as well as the inef-
ficiency of long-distance waste hauling. It will take an act of 
Congress to give states or local jurisdictions the right to ban 
imports of waste because of the interstate commerce clause 
in the Constitution. The Solid Waste Interstate Transporta-
tion Act of 2009 (H.R. 274) was introduced in the 111th 
Congress, with bipartisan support, especially from states 
that are currently receiving waste from other states. The 
legislation would have given local and state governments 
the authority to limit or prohibit the transportation of out-
of-state wastes to landfills. The bill is a demand for fairness 
to states that are working hard to deal responsibly with 
of waste through waste prevention and recycling, saving the 
company more than $7 million. The company sponsored 
an e-Waste Day for its community, collecting more than 
54,000 pounds of e-waste (television sets, cell phones, moni-
tors, batteries, computers, etc.). This is a growing problem 
for MSW facilities in the United States and has become an 
international problem because of the practice of exporting  
e-waste to developing countries (see Stewardship, “Between 
the Cracks: E-Waste” ). 
PAYT. The EPA also brings attention to a national 
trend of unit pricing, or charging households and other 
customers for the waste they dispose of, with the agency’s 
PAYT program. Instead of using local taxes to pay for 
trash collection and disposal, which provides no incentive 
to reduce waste, communities levy curbside charges for all 
unsorted MSW—say, $1–$5 per container (Fig. 16). PAYT 
capitalizes on the common sentiment that people should 
pay their share of disposal costs based on the amount of 
waste they discard. This is catching on as cities and towns 
see the advantages of the practice; more than 7,000 cities 
and towns, serving 25% of the U.S. population, now em-
ploy the PAYT method. This practice is found extensively 
throughout Europe and Asia. A recent study of PAYT in 
New England communities3 found that curbside PAYT 
communities generated 49% less waste than other non-
PAYT communities. City managers love it because it saves 
money and creates jobs. As with the WasteWise program, 
the EPA’s role is that of a facilitator, not a regulator.  
EPR. Another means of bringing about waste reduc-
tion is to establish a program of extended producer re-
sponsibility (EPR), a concept that involves assigning some 
responsibility for reducing the environmental impact of a 
Figure 16 Pay-as-you-throw (PAYT) trash pickup. Curbside trash 
pickup in Hamilton, Massachusetts, features free pickup for single-stream recy-
cling (blue crate) and compost (kitchen scraps and yard trimmings, green bin); 
bags for other trash are purchased at local stores (blue trash bag) for $1.75.
3Environmental Protection Agency. “Pay-As-You-Throw Summer 2010 Bulletin.” 
Get Smart with Pay-As-You-Throw. EPA 530-N-09-001. 2010.
589

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
are authorized to turn back trucks with significant amounts 
of banned items. Massachusetts banned the disposal of cath-
ode ray tubes (CRTs) in landfills in 2000, becoming the first 
state to do so. Since then, a number of states have addressed 
the disposal of CRTs and other forms of e-waste. (See Stew-
ardship, “Between the Cracks: E-Waste.”)
Enacting a national bottle-deposit law would be a giant 
stride toward the reuse and recycling of beverage containers 
and would also greatly reduce roadside litter in states lacking 
bottle laws.
Finally, closing the “recycling loop” remains a significant 
action to be taken by governments to encourage recycling. A 
number of states have opted for one or more of the following 
approaches: (1) minimum postconsumer levels of recycled 
content for newsprint and glass containers; (2) requirements 
stating that purchases of certain goods must include recycled 
products even if they are more expensive than “virgin” prod-
ucts; (3) requirements that all packaging be reusable or be 
made (at least partly) of recycled materials; (4) tax credits 
or incentives that encourage the use of recycled or recyclable 
materials in manufacturing; and (5) assistance in the devel-
opment of recycling markets.  
their own wastes, only to see the unrestricted transport of 
wastes from other states. Despite having bipartisan support, 
this bill didn’t see the light of day because of its presumed 
restriction of interstate commerce. Similar bills have been 
introduced in every Congress since the 100th, and like this 
bill, they have never made it out of the House Committee 
on Energy and Commerce.
Recycling and Reuse. Recycling is certainly well estab-
lished now. It should not, however, be pursued in lieu of 
waste reduction and reuse. The move toward more-durable 
goods is an overlooked and underutilized option. In fact, 
waste reduction remains the most environmentally sound 
and least costly goal for MSW management, because wastes 
that are never generated do not need to be managed.
Banning the disposal of recyclable items in landfills and 
at combustion facilities makes very good sense. Many states 
have incorporated this regulation into their management 
programs. For example, Massachusetts phased out yard 
waste in 1991, metals and glass in 1992, and recyclable pa-
pers and plastic in 1994. Landfill and combustion-facility op-
erators are supposed to conduct random truck searches and 
STEWARDShIP
Between the Cracks: E-Waste
We all use them— 
televisions, computers,  
DVD players, cell 
phones, printers, copiers, 
video game systems. But 
what do we do when they are obsolete or bro-
ken? First, we store them—an estimated seven 
items per household in the United States, add-
ing up to 5 million tons. Then we get around 
to disposing of them. The chances are that we 
put them in the trash and hope they get picked 
up, or we take them to a transfer station and 
pay a small fee to turn in that old television 
or computer monitor. There are some better 
options: EcoSquid, a Web search program, 
helps consumers find places to take unwanted 
electronics, including options for resale; Best 
Buy, Staples, Radio Shack, and several other 
vendors accept electronic waste for a fee. This 
is no small matter, however. E-waste, as these 
devices are called once they are discarded, is 
growing far more rapidly than our ability to 
deal with it. The United States leads the world 
in e-waste, producing 3.3 million tons a year. 
One estimate puts the yearly global generation 
of e-waste at 50 million tons. To date, most of 
this e-waste is landfilled, with an increasing 
proportion recycled.
E-waste has numerous toxic components 
and is classified as hazardous waste. Cathode 
ray tubes (CRTs), which are the vacuum tubes 
that provide the video display on older televi-
sions and computer monitors, contain an aver-
age of four pounds of lead. Many other heavy 
metals—mercury, barium, chromium, arsenic, 
and copper, to name a few—are found in the 
wiring and circuit boards of electronic devices. 
In a landfill, these substances can leach into 
groundwater. If the e-waste is incinerated, 
they are sent into the air. Federal law regulates 
the transport, treatment, and disposal of such 
hazardous wastes under RCRA. However, RCRA 
does not apply to small businesses and house-
holds, so the disposal of this e-waste is left up 
to the states and municipalities. To date, 23 
states have implemented some kind of e-waste 
management, and there is broad consensus on 
the need for federal legislation to manage this 
waste (the Responsible Electronics Recycling 
Act has been introduced to Congress, with pas-
sage uncertain). The states that do have laws for 
e-waste are basically trying to make sure this 
waste is not landfilled or incinerated. The ideal 
destination for e-waste is a recycling company 
that will dismantle the devices, recover the use-
ful materials, and dispose of the rest according 
to RCRA rules.
E-waste contains valuable materials, like 
indium and palladium, which are quite scarce. 
Precious metals like gold, silver, and copper 
can also be recovered, but recovery of these 
materials is labor intensive. “Recycling” com-
panies may be found to take the products from 
transfer stations and consumers, but all too 
often, they are packing the e-waste into large 
containers and shipping it to China, India, or 
African countries. An estimated 80% of “re-
cycled” e-waste takes this route, ending up in 
any of thousands of small shops in developing 
countries, where laborers pull apart the de-
vices, burn wiring to recover copper, fry circuit 
boards to free the chips, and dip the chips in 
buckets of acid to extract gold and silver—and 
they are usually working without protection 
from the hazardous chemicals.
However, there are legitimate recycling 
companies. Recently, the nation’s largest 
electronics recycler, Electronics Recyclers Inter-
national, joined with the Electronics TakeBack 
Coalition and the Basel Action Network in the 
e-Stewards Initiative. This initiative certifies 
e-waste recyclers, assuring consumers and 
businesses that their e-waste will not be land-
filled, incinerated, or exported to developing 
countries. With a patchwork of state and local 
regulations for e-waste, the e-Stewards  
Initiative is a welcome and much-needed 
measure. However, federal legislation would 
be better, and given the huge volume of  
e-waste, it can’t come too soon. 
W
t
D
p
v
590

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
REvISITInG ThE ThEMES
sound science
The role of the EPA and its scientists is crucial. The agency 
sets the rules for landfill operations, as mandated by 
Congress, and then takes a proactive role in areas where 
it has no regulatory authority, encouraging source reduction, recycling, 
and state MSW management programs. WasteWise and the PAYT pro-
gram are two excellent examples of initiatives where the EPA plays a 
facilitating role. The greatest current public-policy needs are a national 
bottle law, e-waste legislation, and a law dealing with interstate waste 
transport.
sustainability
Sustainable natural systems recycle materials, but 
we create so many products that are difficult to 
recycle that it becomes necessary to be intentional 
about source reduction and product responsibility. The  greatest 
departure from sustainable living is the interstate transfer of 
trash, which wastes energy and allows cities and states to go for 
the cheapest immediate solution and avoid coming to grips with 
a  responsible approach to waste management. The most positive 
step toward sustainability is intentional source reduction, which 
both conserves resources and reduces the amount of waste that 
must be managed.
stewardship
Instead of allowing economic considerations to dictate 
MSW management choices, many municipalities and or-
ganizations are consciously choosing options that reflect 
(and often bear the name of) stewardship. Here is one  
 
possible stewardly waste management plan:
1. Emphasize source reduction wherever possible.
2. Employ mandatory curbside recycling and a PAYT collection program
3. If feasible, establish a MRF for efficient handling of recyclables (and 
possibly MSW).
4. Make sure all e-waste is delivered to a recycling company certified 
by e-Stewards.
5. Collect yard wastes for composting by a MRF or municipal facility.
6. Deposit residual materials in a local landfill.
7. Prohibit all interstate transfer of MSW.
This plan features local MSW management and local or regional 
recycling, composting, and landfilling. Every step of the plan involves 
decisions on the part of individuals and municipalities; these practices 
do not happen unless there are people who care enough to promote 
responsible stewardship of the “stuff” that all of us feel that we need.
s
I
M
g
(
s
S
w
r
about source r
s
T
s
C
it has no regula
RevieW QueStionS
1. List the major components of MSW.
 2. Trace the historical development of refuse disposal. What 
percentages now go to landfills, combustion, and recycling?
 3. What are the major problems with placing waste in land-
fills? How can these problems be managed?
 4. Explain the difficulties accompanying landfill siting and out-
sourcing. How can these processes be handled responsibly?
 5. What are the advantages and disadvantages of WTE com-
bustion?
 6. What is the evidence for increasing source reduction, and 
what are some examples of how it is accomplished?
 7. What are the environmental advantages of recycling?
 8. Describe the materials that are recycled and how recycling is 
accomplished.
 9. Discuss the attributes of successful recycling programs.
 10. Distinguish between MRFs, mixed waste processing, and 
single-stream recycling.
 11. What laws has the federal government adopted to control 
solid-waste disposal?
 12. What is e-waste, and how is it being managed?
 13. What is integrated waste management? What decisions 
would be part of a stewardly and sustainable solid-waste 
management plan?
thinking enviRonMentally
1. Compile a list of all the plastic items you used and threw 
away this week. Was it more or less than you expected? 
How can you reduce the number of items on the list?
 2. How and where does your school dispose of solid waste? 
 E-waste? Is a recycling program in place? How well does it 
work?
 3. Suppose your town planned to build a combustion facility 
or landfill near your home. Outline your concerns, and ex-
plain your decision to be for or against the site.
 4. Does your state have a bottle law? If not, what has pre-
vented such a bill from being adopted?
 5. Consider the stewardly waste management plan described 
in the “Stewardship” section of Revisiting the Themes. 
How many of these components does your city or town 
employ?
591

Municipal Solid Waste: Disposal and Recovery
Making a DiffeRence
 1. Investigate how municipal solid waste is handled in your 
school or community and what the future plans are for 
waste management. Promote curbside recycling if it is not 
happening, and investigate the possibility of adopting a 
PAYT system.
 2. Consider your consumption patterns. Live as simply as pos-
sible so as to minimize your impact on the environment. Buy 
and use durable products, and minimize your use of dispos-
ables.
 3. When you shop, bring your own reusable bags for your gro-
ceries. When buying small items that you can easily carry, 
ask that they not be put in a bag.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
cReDitS
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top right): Jack Plunkett/Bloomberg/Getty Images; (bottom right): imagestock/
iStockphoto; Photo © Cymie Payne, courtesy of Cambridge Arts Council; Van 
D. Bucher/Photo Researchers, Inc.; Jim West / Alamy; NYC Parks Department; 
D. Hurst/Alamy; Trex, Inc.; Justin Sullivan/Getty Images; John Griffin/The Image 
Works; Jim R. Bounds/Bloomberg/Getty Images; Richard T. Wright
Text Credits
Table 1: Source: “Interstate Shipment of Municipal Solid Waste: 2007 Update” by 
James E. McCarthy, from CRS Report for Congress, June 13, 2007; Figure 2: Source: 
data from Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste, Municipal Solid 
Waste in the United States: 2010 Facts and Figures; Figure 3: Source: data from 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste, Municipal Solid Waste 
in the United States: 2010 Facts and Figures; Figure 9: Data from EPA, Office of 
Solid Waste, Municipal Solid Waste in the United States: Non-Hazardous Waste 
Management Hierarchy; Figure 12: Source: data from the Environmental Protection 
Agency, Municipal Solid Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United 
States: Facts and Figures for 2010.
BANANA (“build absolutely nothing anywhere near anything”) 
An acronym expressing a common attitude about siting various 
facilities.
bottle law, bottle bill A law that provides for the recycling or reuse 
of beverage containers, usually by requiring a returnable deposit 
upon purchase of the item.
composting compost The process of letting organic wastes 
decompose in the presence of air. A nutrient-rich humus, or 
compost, is the resulting product.
e-waste Any of a broad array of electronic devices that are 
discarded and often are hazardous to handle and difficult to 
recycle.
landfill A site where municipal, industrial, or chemical wastes are 
disposed of by burying them in the ground or placing them on the 
ground and covering them with earth.
LULU (“locally unwanted land use”) An acronym expressing the 
difficulty in siting a facility that is necessary but that no one wants 
in his or her immediate locality.
materials recovery facility (MRF) A processing plant in which 
regionalized recycling is carried out. Recyclable municipal solid 
waste, usually presorted, is prepared in bulk for the recycling 
market.
municipal solid waste (MSW) The entirety of refuse or trash 
generated by a residential and business community. Distinct 
from agricultural and industrial wastes, municipal solid waste 
is the refuse that a municipality is responsible for collecting and 
disposing of.
NIMBY (“not in my backyard”) A common attitude regarding 
undesirable facilities such as incinerators, nuclear facilities, and 
hazardous-waste treatment plants whereby people do everything 
possible to prevent such facilities from being located near their 
residences.
NIMTOO (“not in my term of office”) An attitude expressing 
the reluctance of officeholders to make unpopular decisions on 
matters such as siting waste facilities.
primary recycling A form of recycling where the original waste 
material is made back into the same material.
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA) The 
cornerstone legislation to control indiscriminate land disposal of 
hazardous wastes.
secondary recycling Recycling processes wherein waste materials 
are made into different products than the starting materials, for 
example, wastepaper to cardboard.
source reduction According to the EPA, “the practice of designing, 
manufacturing, purchasing, or using materials in ways that reduce 
the amount or toxicity of trash created.”
WasteWise An EPA-sponsored program that targets the reduction 
of municipal solid waste by a number of partnerships.
gloSSaRy
592

H
ormones, or endocrines, are powerful chemicals that regulate many systems 
and functions in vertebrates. They are produced in the body by the endocrine 
glands, and they work at extremely low concentrations. Most hormones are 
released to the blood and bind to specific receptors on target organs or cells, where 
they turn on genes or cause other changes in cell function. The entire hormone bat-
tery in the body is called the endocrine system, and in the human body, some 50 
known hormones are produced by that system, controlling metabolism, growth, and 
reproduction. Disturbances to the endocrine system are not trivial matters—just 
think of diabetics, who lack the hormone insulin and would die if it were not supplied 
to them.
Not long ago, some very disturbing reports of abnormal sexual development in 
alligators and other wildlife gave credence to the possibility that very low levels of 
a number of synthetic chemicals released to the environment were acting to disrupt 
certain endocrine systems. In fact, the well-known effects of exposure to DDT by fish-
eating birds are the outcome of disruption of the birds’ reproductive sys-
tems, controlled by hormones. And it doesn’t stop there. Some chemical 
compounds widely used in foods and food containers 
have also been implicated as  endocrine disruptors, 
suspected of causing health problems in consum-
ers. One such compound is bisphenol A (BPA), 
a component of polycarbonate plastic 
Learning Objectives
 1. Toxicology and Chemical Hazards: 
Explain what toxicology is and 
how it applies to many of the 
chemicals in use in our society; 
identify the two most toxic chemi-
cal groups in use, and assess their 
involvement in food chains.
 2. Hazardous Waste Disposal: 
Describe the three methods 
employed in land disposal of 
hazardous wastes, and relate and 
give examples of what happened 
before land disposal came under 
regulation.
 3. Cleaning Up the Mess: Explain 
how the Superfund program put 
in place by Congress deals with 
abandoned toxic sites, brown-
fields, and leaking underground 
storage tanks.
 4. Managing Current Toxic Chemi-
cals and Wastes: Review the 
laws put in place to (a) prevent 
illegal disposal of toxic wastes, 
(b) reduce accidents and acci-
dental exposure, and (c) evalu-
ate new chemicals.
 5. Broader Issues: Discuss the issue 
of environmental justice, and 
review strategies that prevent 
toxic chemicals from being used.
Hazardous 
Chemicals: 
Pollution and 
Prevention 
A customer looks over shelves of canned goods, which are likely to be lined with an expoxy 
resin made with bisphenol A.
From Chapter 22 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edi-
tion. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, 
Inc. All rights reserved.

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
demanded that BPA be removed from food and drink packaging, 
especially those items that are used by small children, like baby 
bottles and sippy cups. Canada has declared BPA a toxic chemical 
and is moving toward an outright ban on the use of BPA in food 
containers. The European Commission banned its use in baby bot-
tles. Consumer advocacy groups are calling for application of the 
precautionary principle, which states that where there is not yet 
a scientific consensus, it is prudent to act as though a potentially 
harmful product is, in fact, harmful. 
On the Other hand . . . “Wait a minute!” say the 
manufacturers and chemical industry groups. They claim BPA is 
a very important product, in use globally at a rate of 12 billion 
pounds per year. Polycarbonate bottles are ubiquitous, and the 
epoxy can liners protect canned goods from spoilage and shelf-
life deterioration. Just because the NTP report said there is some 
concern shouldn’t hinder its usage. Similar statements, said one 
spokesman, could be made about anything; BPA is safe in all of 
its uses. Applying the precautionary principle to BPA would likely 
lead to a ban on a chemical that is very useful and is not harmful, 
according to its defenders. Despite this, in order to keep consum-
ers happy, manufacturers have replaced polycarbonate baby bot-
tles and sippy cups with other products. Public opinion has clearly 
made a difference here.
The broader concern about endocrine disruptors in food and 
the environment reached Congress, and the Food Quality Protec-
tion Act (FQPA) of 1996 directed the EPA to develop procedures 
for testing chemicals for endocrine disruption activity. Accordingly, 
the EPA established the Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program 
(EDSP) and has ordered manufacturers to screen an initial group of 
67 pesticide chemicals, recently adding a second group of 134. In 
the meantime, we are all exposed to BPA whenever we consume 
canned goods. To lower your blood BPA level, consumer advocates 
suggest turning to fresh fruits and vegetables.
Stories like this, and some that can only be called disasters, 
have convinced the public that significant dangers are associ-
ated with the manufacture, use, and disposal of many chemicals. 
Very few, however, would advocate giving up the advantages of 
the innumerable products that derive from our modern chemical 
industry. Better, instead, to learn to handle and dispose of chemi-
cals in ways that minimize the risks. Thus, over the past 35 years, 
regulations surrounding the production, transport, use, and dis-
posal of chemicals have mushroomed. Where it once had almost 
no controls at all, the chemical industry is now heavily regulated, 
though some would say not very effectively.
This chapter focuses on hazardous chemicals—their nature 
and how they are investigated. An overview of laws and regula-
tions designed to protect human and environmental health is 
presented, and the strengths and weaknesses of those measures 
are examined.
 containers and the epoxy resin food- and beverage-can liners 
(Fig. 1). BPA leaches from these containers into the contents and 
is routinely ingested. A recent study found BPA in the urine of 
93% of people in the United States Children tested showed the 
highest levels of exposure. 
bPa = estrOgen? BPA is known to have estrogenic ac-
tivity; that is, it simulates the effects of estradiol, one of the most 
important reproductive hormones in the human body. It does this 
by binding to the estrogen receptors found in many parts of the 
body. Animal tests have shown that BPA can have significant ef-
fects, such as weight gain, increased aggressiveness, altered sexual 
behavior, changes in the uterus and ovaries, and even disturbance 
of glucose metabolism that could lead to diabetes. As the results of 
these studies have become known, a rising tide of concern about 
BPA has led to its evaluation by the National Toxicology Program 
(NTP) Center for the Evaluation of Risks to Human Reproduc-
tion.1 That evaluation led the Food and Drug Administration to 
state that there was “some concern” about the possible effects 
of BPA on fetal and child health. The National Institute of Health 
(NIH) has targeted $30 million that will be directed to related 
research on BPA and other endocrine disruptors. Consumers have 
Figure 1 Bisphenol A and estradiol. The chemical structures of BPA 
and estradiol are shown; BPA is a known disruptor of estradiol.
Bisphenol A
Estradiol
1U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Center for the Evaluation of 
Risks to Human Reproduction. NTP-CERHR Monograph on the Potential 
Human Reproductive and Developmental Effects of Bisphenol A. NIH Publication 
No. 08-5994. September 2008. 
594

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
certain levels of many substances without suffering ill effects. 
The level below which no ill effects are observed is called 
the threshold level. Above this level, the effect of a substance 
depends on both its concentration and the duration of expo-
sure to it. Higher levels may be tolerated if the exposure time 
is short. Thus, the threshold level is high for short exposures 
but gets lower as the exposure time increases (Fig. 2). In other 
words, it is not the absolute amount, but rather the dose, that 
is important. 
Where carcinogens are concerned, the EPA generally 
takes a zero-dose, zero-response approach. That is, there is 
no evidence of a discrete threshold level for any carcinogenic 
chemical. However, the lower the dose, the more likely it is 
that the response cannot be distinguished from the back-
ground level of cancers in a population. In such cases, the 
risk becomes very low and drops below the level for which 
regulatory action is needed.
These are just some basics of toxicology. The field is well 
established and is the most important source of sound sci-
entific information supporting the regulatory efforts of the 
FDA and the EPA. The NTP was established in 1978 to pro-
vide this kind of information and has become the world’s 
leader in assessing chemical toxicity and carcinogenicity. We 
turn our attention now to the chemicals themselves.
The Nature of Chemical Hazards: HAZMATs
A chemical that presents a certain hazard or risk is known as 
a hazardous material (HAZMAT). The EPA categorizes sub-
stances on the basis of the following hazardous properties:
 • Ignitability: substances that catch fire readily (e.g., gaso-
line and alcohol)
 • Corrosivity: substances that corrode storage tanks and 
equipment (e.g., acids)
 • Reactivity: substances that are chemically unstable and 
that may explode or create toxic fumes when mixed 
1  Toxicology and Chemical 
Hazards
Toxicology is the study of the harmful effects of chemicals 
on human health and the natural environment. A toxicolo-
gist might, for example, investigate the potential for phenol-
phthalein (a common chemical laboratory reagent that has 
also been used in over-the-counter laxatives) to cause health 
problems. The toxicologist might study the acute toxicity ef-
fects that could occur upon ingestion of the chemical or upon 
its contact with the skin, as well as the effects of chronic ex-
posure over a period of years, and, finally, the carcinogenic 
(cancer-causing) potential of phenolphthalein. Indeed, such 
studies have shown that phenolphthalein causes tumors in 
mice, and because of this finding, the Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) canceled all laxative uses of phenolphthalein, 
which is now listed as “reasonably anticipated to be a human 
carcinogen.”
Data on toxic chemicals are made available to health 
practitioners and the public via a number of sources, includ-
ing the National Toxicology Program (NTP) Chemical Re-
pository and the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences (NIEHS), the latter of which provides an annual up-
dated Report on Carcinogens, with a complete list of carci-
nogenic agents. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
also makes available data on toxic chemicals in its Integrated 
Risk Information System (IRIS). All of these sources of infor-
mation are on the Internet. Green Media Toolshed uses these 
and other data sources in its Scorecard, an exhaustive Web-
based profile of 11,200 chemicals, including information on 
their manufacture and uses (see http://scorecard.goodguide 
.com/).
Dose Response and Threshold
In our discussion of risk assessment, we introduced the concepts 
of dose response and exposure. When investigating a suspect 
chemical, a toxicologist would conduct tests on animals, 
investigate human involvement with the chemical, and present 
information linking the dose (the level of exposure multiplied 
by the length of time over which exposure occurs) with the 
response (some acute or chronic effect or the development 
of tumors). For example, studies of phenolphthalein toxicity 
indicate that the LDL0 (lowest dose at which death occurred 
in animal testing) was 500 milligrams/kilogram. This is a 
low toxicity, so concern about the chemical would center on 
chronic or carcinogenic issues.
Human exposure to a hazard is a vital part of its risk 
characterization, and such exposure can come through the 
workplace, food, water, or the surrounding environment. 
For example, the NTP Chemical Repository gives the vari-
ous uses of phenolphthalein, followed by both precautions to 
take in handling it and the symptoms of exposure (there are 
many!). Getting an accurate determination of human expo-
sure is often the most difficult area of risk assessment.
Threshold Level.  In the dose-response relationship, there 
is usually a threshold. Organisms are able to deal with 
Figure 2 The threshold level. The threshold level for harmful effects of 
toxic pollutants becomes lower as the exposure time increases. It is also different 
for different chemicals.
Threshold level
Harmful effects
No harmful effects
0
Time of exposure
Concentration of chemical
595

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
materials, the finished product, or wastes. Finally, what are 
the risks of breathing hair spray? What happens to the con-
tainer that still holds some of the hair spray when you throw 
it into the trash because the propellant is used up?
Multiply these steps by all the hundreds of thousands of 
products used by millions of people in homes, factories, and 
businesses, and you can appreciate the magnitude of the situ-
ation. More than 80,000 chemicals are registered for com-
mercial use within the United States. At every stage—from 
the mining of raw materials through manufacturing, use, and 
final disposal—various chemical products and by-products 
enter the environment, with consequences for both human 
health and the environment (Fig. 4). 
The use of many products—pesticides, fertilizers, and 
road salts, for example—directly introduces them into the 
environment. Alternatively, the intended use may leave a frac-
tion of the material in the environment—the evaporation of 
solvents from paints and adhesives, for instance. Then there 
are the product life cycles of materials that are used tan-
gentially to the desired item. Consider lubricants, solvents, 
cleaning fluids, and cooling fluids, with whatever contami-
nants they may contain. Likewise, there are the product life 
cycles of gasoline, coal, and other fuels that are consumed for 
energy. In addition to the unavoidable wastes and pollutants 
produced, in every case there is the potential for accidental 
releases, ranging from minor leaks from storage tanks to the 
release of toxic gas from a pesticide plant in Bhopal, India, in 
1984 that killed more than 15,000 people.
Toxics Release Inventory. The introduction of chemi-
cals into the environment may occur in every sector, from 
major industrial plants to small shops and individual homes. 
Whereas single events involving large amounts of one chemi-
cal may constitute a disaster and make headlines, the total 
amounts entering the environment from millions of homes 
and businesses are far greater and present much more of a 
health risk to society. Some idea of the quantities involved 
can be obtained from the Toxics Release Inventory (TRI).2 
The Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know 
Act of 1986 (EPCRA) requires industries to report releases 
of toxic chemicals to the environment, and the Pollution Pre-
vention Act of 1990 mandates collection of data on toxic 
chemicals that are released to the environment, treated on-
site, recycled, or combusted for energy. (The TRI does not 
cover small businesses, such as dry-cleaning establishments 
and gas stations, or household hazardous waste.) The TRI is 
disseminated on the Internet and provides an annual record 
of releases of almost 650 designated chemicals by some 
21,000 industrial facilities. For 2010, the TRI reveals the fol-
lowing information about toxic chemicals: 
 • Total production-related toxic wastes: 21.8 billion pounds
 • Releases to air: 860 million pounds
 • Releases to water: 230 million pounds
with water (e.g., explosives, elemental phosphorus [not 
phosphate], and concentrated sulfuric acid)
 • Toxicity: substances that are injurious to health when 
they are ingested or inhaled (e.g., chlorine, ammonia, 
pesticides, and formaldehyde)
Containers in which HAZMATs are stored and vehicles 
that carry HAZMATs are required to display placards iden-
tifying the hazards (flammability, corrosiveness, the potential 
for poisonous fumes, and so on) presented by the material 
inside (Fig. 3). 
Radioactive materials are probably the most hazard-
ous of all and are treated as an entirely separate category.
Sources of Chemicals Entering the 
Environment
To understand how HAZMATs enter our environment, we 
need to look at how people in our society live and work. 
First, the materials making up almost everything we use, 
from the shampoo and toothpaste we use in the morning to 
the television we watch in the evening, are products of chem-
ical technology. Our use constitutes only one step in the total 
product life cycle, a term that encompasses all steps, from 
obtaining raw materials to finally disposing of the product. 
Implicit in our use of hair spray, for example, is that raw ma-
terials were obtained and various chemicals were produced 
to make both the spray and its container. Chemical wastes 
and by-products are inevitable in production processes. In 
addition, consider the risks of accidents or spills occurring in 
the manufacturing process and in the transportation of raw 
Figure 3 HAZMAT placards. These are examples of some of the placards 
that are mandatory on trucks and railcars carrying hazardous materials. Numbers 
in place of the word on the placard or on an additional orange panel identify the 
specific material. Placards alert workers, police, and firefighters to the kinds of 
hazards they face in case an accident occurs.
2U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2010 Toxics Release Inventory: National 
Analysis Overview. January 5, 2012. http://www.epa.gov/tri.
596

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
 • Releases to land disposal sites and underground injec-
tion: 2,430 million pounds
 • Total environmental releases: 3.93 billion pounds 
(18.0% of all production-related toxic wastes; the 
remainder are recycled or treated on- or off-site)
Add to the last figure the estimated 3 billion pounds of 
household hazardous waste released each year and an un-
known quantity coming from small businesses (facilities do not 
have to report releases under 500 pounds), and you have some 
idea of the dimensions of the problem. The good news is that 
over the 25 years since the TRI has been in effect, the quantities 
of virtually all categories of toxic waste have been going down 
(Fig. 5), and total releases have declined by 62%. 
The Threat from Toxic Chemicals
All toxic chemicals are, by definition, hazards that pose a 
risk to humans. Fortunately, a large portion of the chemicals 
introduced into the environment are gradually broken down 
and assimilated by natural processes. After that, they pose 
no long-term human or environmental risk, even though they 
may be highly toxic in high-level, short-term exposures.
Two major classes of chemicals do not readily degrade 
in the environment, however: (1) heavy metals and their 
Figure 4 Total product life 
cycle. The life cycle of a product 
begins when the raw materials are 
obtained and ends when the used-
up product is discarded. At each 
step—or in transport between 
steps—wastes, by-products, or the 
product itself may enter the en-
vironment, causing pollution and 
creating various risks to human 
and environmental health.
Use of bulk chemicals to produce
consumer products generates waste,
by-products, and pollution.
Mining raw materials generates waste,
by-products, and pollution
Refining raw
materials
into bulk chemicals
generates
waste, by-products,
and pollution
Transportation
and accidental spills
generate pollution
Use of
products
Pollution
Landfill
pollution
Household
pollution
Use of bulk chemicals to produce
consumer products generates waste,
by-products, and pollution.
Mining raw materials generates waste,
by-products, and pollution
Refining raw
materials
into bulk chemicals
generates
waste, by-products,
and pollution
Transportation
and accidental spills
generate pollution
Use of
products
Pollution
Landfill
pollution
Household
pollution
Figure 5 Toxics Release Inventory, 2001–2010. There has been a 
30% reduction in releases of chemicals since 2001 and a total reduction since 
1986 of 62.5%. The increase in 2010 is due largely to increases  
in the metal mining sector (Source: EPA, 2010 Toxics Release Inventory, 
January, 2012.)
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
2001
'02
'03
'04
'05
'06
'07
'08
'09
'10
Year
Millions of pounds
25,000
30,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5000
0
Number of facilities
Total off-site disposal or
other releases
On-site land disposal or
other releases
On-site underground injection
On-site surface water discharges
On-site air releases
Number of facilities
597

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
compounds useful: We wouldn’t want fungi and bacteria 
attacking and rotting the tires on our cars, and paints and 
wood preservatives function only insofar as they are both 
nonbiodegradable and toxic to decomposer organisms.
These compounds are toxic because they are often 
readily absorbed into the body, where they interact with 
particular enzymes, but their nonbiodegradability prevents 
them from being broken down or processed further. When 
a person ingests a sufficiently high dose, the effect may be 
acute poisoning and death. With low doses over extended 
periods, however, the effects are insidious and can be muta-
genic (mutation causing), carcinogenic, or teratogenic (birth 
defect causing). Synthetic organic compounds also may cause 
serious liver and kidney dysfunction, sterility, and numerous 
other physiological and neurological problems.
Dirty Dozen. A particularly troublesome class of syn-
thetic organics is the halogenated hydrocarbons, organic 
compounds in which one or more of the hydrogen atoms 
have been replaced by atoms of chlorine, bromine, fluorine, 
or iodine. These four elements are classed as halogens—
hence, the name (Fig. 6). Of the halogenated hydrocarbons, 
the chlorinated hydrocarbons (also called organic chlorides) 
are by far the most common. Organic chlorides are widely 
used in plastics (polyvinyl chloride), pesticides (DDT, Ke-
pone, and mirex), solvents (carbon tetrachlorophenol and 
tetrachloroethylene), electrical insulation (polychlorinated 
biphenyls), and many other products. Twelve persistent or-
ganic pollutants (called POPs, Table 1) have been banned or 
highly restricted globally as a result of the Stockholm Con-
vention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, which was signed 
by 162 countries and entered into force in May 2004. Most 
of these are halogenated hydrocarbons. All are toxic to vary-
ing extents, and most are known animal carcinogens. Many 
are also suspected endocrine disruptors at very low levels. 
The treaty was recently expanded to add nine more halogen-
ated hydrocarbons, most of which are no longer in use. 
PERC. Let us consider one of the halogenated hy-
drocarbon compounds, tetrachloroethylene (Fig. 6). This 
compounds and (2) synthetic organics. If sufficiently diluted 
in air or water, most of these compounds do not pose a haz-
ard, though there are some notable exceptions.
Heavy Metals. The most dangerous heavy metals are lead, 
mercury, arsenic, cadmium, tin, chromium, zinc, and cop-
per. These metals are used widely in industry, particularly in 
metalworking or metal-plating shops and in such products 
as batteries and electronics. They are also used in certain 
pesticides and medicines. In addition, because compounds of 
heavy metals can have brilliant colors, they once were heav-
ily used in paint pigments, glazes, inks, and dyes. Millions of 
children have been treated for lead poisoning because of the 
heavy use of lead-based paint. The paint was banned in the 
United States in 1978, but many older painted surfaces still 
hold lead and are a hazard.
Heavy metals are extremely toxic because, as ions or 
in certain compounds, they are soluble in water and may 
be readily absorbed into the body, where they tend to com-
bine with and inhibit the functioning of some vital enzymes. 
Even very small amounts can have severe physiological 
or neurological consequences. Mercury, in particular, has 
 contaminated rivers, lakes, and streams in the United 
States because of its release into the air by coal- and oil-
fired power plants (mercury is present in fossil fuels in trace 
quantities). Using its authority under the Clean Air Act, the 
EPA issued in 2011 a new rule requiring a 90% reduction 
in the mercury released from power plants, bringing long-
sought relief to the wildlife and people affected by this toxic 
metal pollutant.
Organic Compounds Petroleum-derived and synthetic 
organic compounds are the chemical basis for all plastics, 
synthetic fibers, synthetic rubber, modern paint-like coat-
ings, solvents, pesticides, wood preservatives, and hundreds 
of other products. Because of their chemical structure, many 
synthetic organics are resistant to biodegradation. Ironically, 
this resistance is an important part of what makes many such 
Figure 6 Halogenated 
hydrocarbons. These are organic 
(carbon-based) compounds in which 
one or more hydrogen atoms have been 
replaced by halogen atoms (chlorine, 
fluorine, bromine, or iodine). Such 
compounds are particularly hazardous to 
health because they are nonbiodegradable 
and they tend to bioaccumulate. Shown 
here are tetrachloroethylene and 
1,2-dibromoethane.
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
H
H
H
H
C
C
H
H
C
C
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
C
C
Br
H
H
Br
Natural organic compound
Ethane
Synthetic halogenated counterpart
1,2-dibromoethane
Substitute
bromine
for
hydrogen
Substitute
chlorine
for
hydrogen
Ethylene
Tetrachloroethylene
598

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
The EPA has issued rules that would phase out PERC use 
(by 2020) in dry-cleaning shops in residential buildings; crit-
ics wonder why it should take so long and why just in a se-
lect few shops if, as the EPA maintains, PERC is harmful to 
human health. The rules for PERC are currently under re-
view by the EPA. PERC is used by 85% of U.S. dry-cleaning 
establishments. 
Involvement with Food Chains
The trait that makes heavy metals and nonbiodegradable 
synthetic organics particularly hazardous is their tendency to 
accumulate in organisms. 
Minamata. A tragic episode in the early 1970s, known 
as Minamata disease, revealed the potential for biomagni-
fication of mercury and other heavy metals. The disease is 
named for a small fishing village in Japan where the episode 
occurred. In the mid-1950s, cats in Minamata began to show  
spastic movements, followed by partial paralysis, coma, and 
death. At first, this was thought to be a syndrome peculiar to fe-
lines, and little attention was paid to it. However, when the same 
symptoms began to occur in people, concern escalated quickly. 
substance, also called perchloroethylene, or PERC, is color-
less and nonflammable and is the major substance in dry-
cleaning fluid. It is an effective solvent and is used in all 
kinds of industrial cleaning operations. It can also be found 
in shoe polish and other household products. PERC evapo-
rates readily when exposed to air, but in the soil, it can enter 
groundwater easily because it does not bind to soil particles. 
Human exposure can occur in the workplace, especially in 
connection with dry-cleaning operations. It can also occur 
if people use products containing PERC, such as dry-cleaned 
garments. PERC enters the body most readily when breathed 
in with contaminated air. Breathing PERC for short periods 
can bring on dizziness, fatigue, headaches, and unconscious-
ness. Over longer periods, PERC can cause liver and kidney 
damage.
Laboratory studies also show PERC to be carcinogenic 
to rats and mice, and it is listed in NTP’s 2011 Report on 
Carcinogens3 as “reasonably anticipated to be a human 
carcinogen.” Studies have shown a higher risk of cancer, as 
well as neurological impairment, in dry-cleaning employees. 
tabLe 1 The “Dirty Dozen” Persistent Organic Pollutants
Chemical Substance
Designed Use
Major Concerns
Aldrin
Pesticide to control soil insects and to protect 
wooden structures from termites
Toxic to humans, probable carcinogen
Chlordane
Broad-spectrum insecticide to protect crops
Biomagnification in food webs, carcinogenic
DDT
Widely used insecticide, malaria control
Biomagnification in food webs, probable carcinogen
Dieldrin
Insecticide to control termites and crop pests
Toxic, biomagnification in food webs, probable 
carcinogen
Endrin
Insecticide and rodenticide
Toxic, especially in aquatic systems
Heptachlor
General insecticide
Toxic, carcinogenic
Hexachlorobenzene
Fungicide
Toxic, carcinogenic
Mirex
Insecticide to control ants
High toxicity to aquatic animals, carcinogenic
Toxaphene
General insecticide
High toxicity to aquatic animals, carcinogenic
PCBs
Variety of industrial uses, especially in transformers 
and capacitors
Toxic, teratogenic, carcinogenic
Dioxins
No known use; by-products of incineration and 
paper bleaching
Toxic, carcinogenic, reproductive system effects
Furans
No known use; by-products of incineration,  
PCB production
Toxic, especially in aquatic systems
Source: IPCS Assessment Report: L. Ritter, et al., Persistent Organic Pollutants: An Assessment Report on DDT, Aldrin, Dieldrin, Endrin, 
Chlordane, Heptachlor, Hexachlorobenzene, Mirex, Toxaphene, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Dioxins, and Furans, International Programme on 
Chemical Safety, December 1995. Available at http://www.chem.unep.ch/Pops/alts02.html.
3U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, National 
Toxicology Program, Report on Carcinogens, 12th ed. (Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, 2011).
599

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
disorders to disruption of their hormone systems and, over 
time, to cancer. The latest impact has been a serious imbal-
ance in births, where twice as many girls are born as boys 
in many Arctic villages. Scientists from the Arctic Monitor-
ing and Assessment Program, an international body that ad-
vises the governments of the eight Arctic nations, measured 
levels of man-made chemicals in women’s blood that were 
high enough to trigger changes in the sex of unborn children 
during their first few weeks of gestation. This transboundary 
pollution by chemicals is exactly why the UN Convention 
has banned them; hopefully, this action will eventually clear 
the Arctic air of the POPs.
2  Hazardous Waste Disposal
The Clean Air and Clean Water Acts, passed in the early 
1970s, put an end to the widespread disposal of hazardous 
wastes in the atmosphere and waterways. However, their 
passage left an enormous loophole. If you can’t vent wastes 
into the atmosphere or flush them into waterways, what do 
you do with them? Industry turned to land disposal, which 
was essentially unregulated at the time. Indiscriminate air 
and water disposal became indiscriminate land disposal. 
Thus, in retrospect, we see that the Clean Air and Clean 
Water Acts, for all their benefits in improving air and water 
quality, also succeeded in transferring pollutants from one 
part of the environment to another.
Methods of Land Disposal
In the early 1970s, there were three primary land disposal 
methods: (1) deep-well injection, (2) surface impoundments, 
and (3) landfills. With the conscientious implementation of 
safeguards, each of these methods has some merit, and each 
is still heavily used for hazardous-waste disposal. Without 
adequate regulations or enforcement, however, contamina-
tion of groundwater is virtually guaranteed.
Deep-Well Injection. Deep-well injection involves drilling 
a borehole thousands of feet below groundwater into a po-
rous geological formation. A well consists of concentric pipes 
and casings that isolate wastes as they are injected and pipes 
that are sealed at the bottom to prevent wastes from back-
ing up. Over time, the wastes often undergo reactions with 
naturally occurring material that make them less hazardous. 
This method is presently used for various volatile organic 
compounds, pesticides, fuels, and explosives. Currently, 143 
hazardous-waste deep wells are in operation, mostly in the 
Gulf Coast region. The EPA’s Underground Injection Con-
trol Program regulations require that the wells be limited 
to geologically stable areas so that the hazardous-waste liq-
uids pumped into the well remain isolated indefinitely. The 
total amount of deep-well injection (230 million pounds in 
2010) has declined over the years, but the technique remains 
useful because it has a greater potential than other methods 
for keeping toxic wastes from contaminating the hydrologic 
cycle and the food web.
Additional symptoms, such as mental impairment, insanity, and 
birth defects, were also observed. Scientists and health experts 
eventually diagnosed the cause as acute mercury poisoning.
A chemical company near the village was discharging 
wastes containing mercury into a river that flowed into the 
bay where the Minamata villagers fished. The mercury, which 
settled with detritus, was first absorbed by bacteria and then 
biomagnified as it passed up the food chain through fish to 
cats or to humans. Cats had suffered first and most severely 
because they fed almost exclusively on the remains of fish. 
By the time the situation was brought under control, some 
50 persons had died, and 150 had suffered serious bone and 
nerve damage. Even now, the tragedy lives on in the crippled 
bodies and disabled minds of some Minamata victims.
Arctic POPs. Much to research scientists’ surprise, fish, 
birds, and mammals all over the Arctic are showing elevated 
body burdens of a number of persistent organic pollutants—
in particular, DDT, toxaphene, chlordane, PCBs, and dioxins. 
Moreover, because the Inuit people of the far north depend 
on these animals for food, they, too, are carrying high loads 
of POPs—some of the highest in the world (Fig. 7). 
The real mystery is how these chemicals—all of which 
are toxic—get to such remote and pristine environments. No 
one is spraying pesticides there, and there are no industries 
to produce PCBs and dioxins. The key to the presence of 
such chemicals can be found in several factors that charac-
terize POPs: persistence, bioaccumulation, and the potential 
for long-range transport. Added to these factors is the unique 
climate of the Arctic, where the extreme cold promotes a 
process called cold condensation. POPs are volatile chemicals 
carried in global air patterns to the Arctic, where they con-
dense on the snowpack and are then washed into the water 
with the spring thaw. Once in the lakes and coastal waters, 
the chemicals are picked up by plankton and passed up the 
food chain through bioaccumulation and biomagnification.
A Canadian government study found that three-fourths 
of Inuit women have PCB levels up to five times above those 
deemed safe. The potential health effects of the chemical load 
carried by the Arctic residents range from immune-system 
Figure 7 An Inuit hazard. This woman is cutting the meat of a seal in Ser-
milik Fjord, Greenland. Seals and other animals used for food by the Inuit harbor 
high levels of persistent organic pollutants. 
600

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
to off-site landfills. Only 21 landfills in North America are 
licensed to receive off-site hazardous wastes, and these are 
owned by just a few waste management companies.
If a landfill is properly lined, supplied with a system to 
remove leachate, provided with monitoring wells, and appro-
priately capped, it may be reasonably safe and is referred to 
as a secure landfill (Fig. 9). The various barriers are subject to 
damage and deterioration, however, requiring adequate sur-
veillance and monitoring systems to prevent leakage. 
Mismanagement of Hazardous Wastes
Because early land disposal was not regulated, in numer-
ous instances not even the most rudimentary precautions 
were taken. Indeed, in many cases, deep wells were injecting 
wastes directly into groundwater, abandoned quarries were 
sometimes used as landfills with no additional precautions 
being taken, and surface impoundments frequently had no 
seals or liners whatsoever. Even worse, considerable amounts 
of waste failed to get to any disposal facility at all.
Midnight Dumping and Orphan Sites.  The need for 
alternative methods to dispose of waste chemicals created 
an opportunity for a new enterprise: waste disposal. Many 
reputable businesses entered the field, but—again in the 
absence of regulations—there were also disreputable op-
erators. As stacks of drums filled with hazardous wastes 
“mysteriously” appeared in abandoned warehouses, vacant 
Surface 
Impoundments. Surface 
impoundments 
are 
simple excavated depressions (ponds) into which liquid 
wastes are drained and held. They are the least expensive—
and, hence, the most widely used—way to dispose of large 
amounts of water carrying relatively small amounts of 
chemical wastes. The impoundments may be used to carry 
out wastewater treatment prior to discharging the wastes. 
As waste is discharged into the pond, solid wastes settle and 
accumulate, while water evaporates (Fig. 8). If the bottom 
of the pond is well sealed and if the loss of water through 
evaporation equals the gain from input, impoundments may 
receive wastes indefinitely. However, inadequate seals may 
allow wastes to leach into groundwater, exceptional storms 
may cause overflows, and volatile materials can evaporate 
into the atmosphere, adding to air pollution problems. To 
prevent these problems, hazardous waste surface impound-
ments are required to be constructed with a double liner 
system, a leachate collection and removal system, and a leak 
detection system. The 2010 TRI reports 833 million pounds 
of toxics released to on-site surface impoundments. (On-site 
refers to disposal by manufacturers or institutions on their 
own facilities; off-site means that the wastes have been trans-
ferred to a waste-treatment or disposal facility.) 
Landfills.  RCRA sets rigid standards for the disposal of 
hazardous wastes in landfills. When hazardous wastes are in 
a concentrated liquid or solid form, they are commonly put 
into drums, typically collected by a waste management com-
pany (for a hefty fee!), and then treated in accordance with 
their chemical and physical characteristics. Treatment stand-
ards for wastes are established by the EPA and characterized 
as best-demonstrated available technologies (BDATs). These 
standards apply to all solid and liquid hazardous wastes and 
have the effect of reducing their toxicity and mobility. The 
BDAT technologies include stabilization and neutralization 
of sludges, soils, liquids, powders, and slurries; chemical oxi-
dation of organic materials; and various specific techniques 
applied to metal-bearing wastes that convert them to an 
insoluble solid material for landfill disposal. Some 350 mil-
lion pounds of hazardous wastes were delivered to on-site 
landfills in 2010, and an additional 253 million pounds went 
Figure 8 Surface impoundment. Surface impoundments are often used 
for preliminary treatment of liquid wastes. Shown here is an impoundment at a 
paper manufacturer in Alabama.
Figure 9 Secure landfill. These drums of low-level nuclear waste are 
being buried in a secure landfill at the Hanford Nuclear Reservation near Richland, 
Washington.
601

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
Canal, near Niagara Falls, New York. The area was occu-
pied by a school and a number of houses, all of which were 
perched on top of a chemical waste dump that had been cov-
ered over. The surface of the dump began to collapse, ex-
posing tanks and barrels of chemical wastes (Fig. 12). Fumes 
and chemicals began seeping into cellars. Ominously, peo-
ple began reporting serious health problems, including birth 
defects and miscarriages. An aroused neighborhood, led 
by activist Lois Gibbs, began demanding that the state do 
something about the problem. Following confirmation of the 
contamination by toxic chemicals, President Jimmy Carter 
signed an emergency declaration in 1978 to relocate hun-
dreds of residents. The state and federal governments closed 
the school and demolished a number of the homes nearest 
the site. In all, more than 800 families moved out of the area 
because of the fear of damage to their health from the toxic 
chemicals. 
Occidental? The absence of public policy for dealing 
with the disposal of hazardous chemicals contributed to 
the situation at Love Canal. Hooker Chemical and Plastics 
Company had purchased an abandoned canal near Niagara 
Falls in 1942 and proceeded to fill it with an estimated 
21,000 tons of hazardous wastes. Hooker covered the 
canal over with a clay cap and sold it to the school board 
for a small sum, reportedly after warning the board that 
there were chemicals buried on the property. Subsequent 
construction penetrated the clay cap, and rain seeped in 
and leached chemicals in all directions. Hooker Chemical’s 
parent company, Occidental Petroleum, eventually spent 
more than $233 million on the cleanup and subsequent 
lawsuits.
As both government and independent researchers began 
surveying the extent of the problem, bad disposal practices 
were found to be rampant. The World Resources Insti-
tute estimated that, in the United States in the early 1980s, 
there existed 75,000 active industrial landfill sites, along 
with 180,000 surface impoundments and 200 other special 
lots, or municipal landfills, it became clear that some op-
erators simply were pocketing the disposal fee and then 
unloading the wastes in any available location, frequently 
under cover of darkness—an activity termed midnight 
dumping (Fig. 10). Authorities trying to locate the individu-
als responsible would learn that they had gone out of busi-
ness or were nowhere to be found. 
Some companies or individuals simply stored wastes on 
their own properties and then went out of business, aban-
doning the property and the wastes. These locations became 
known as orphan sites—hazardous-waste sites without a re-
sponsible party to clean them up. As drums containing haz-
ardous chemicals corroded and leaked, there was great danger 
of reactive chemicals combining and causing explosions and 
fires. One of the most infamous abandoned sites is the “Valley 
of the Drums” (VOD) in Kentucky (Fig. 11). 
Scope of the Mismanagement Problem. The mounting 
problem of unregulated land disposal of hazardous wastes 
was brought vividly to public attention by the events at Love 
Figure 10 Midnight dumping. Hazardous wastes were often left on re-
mote or unoccupied properties by unscrupulous haulers.
Figure 11  “Valley of the Drums,” an orphan waste site. Thou-
sands of drums of waste chemicals, many of them toxic, were unloaded near 
Louisville, Kentucky, around 1975 and left to rot, seriously threatening the sur-
rounding environment, waterways, and aquifers.
Figure 12 Love Canal. A bulldozer uncovers one of the tanks holding toxic 
waste buried beneath the residential area of Love Canal.
602

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
groundwater and if such groundwater is threatening water 
supplies, all is not yet lost. Groundwater remediation is a de-
veloping and growing technology. Techniques involve drilling 
wells, pumping out the contaminated groundwater, purifying 
it, and injecting the purified water back into the ground or 
discharging it into surface waters. Cleaning up the source of 
the contamination is mandatory. If, however, the contamina-
tion is extensive, remediation may not be possible, and the 
groundwater must be considered unfit for use as drinking 
water.
Superfund for Toxic Sites
Probably the most monumental hazardous waste task is the 
cleanup of the tens of thousands of toxic sites resulting from 
the years of mismanaged disposal of toxic materials. Prompted 
by the public outrage over the Love Canal fiasco, Congress 
enacted 
the 
Comprehensive 
Environmental 
Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), 
popularly known as Superfund. Through a tax on chemical 
raw materials, this legislation provided a trust fund for the 
identification of abandoned chemical waste sites, protection 
of groundwater near the sites, remediation of groundwater 
if it has been contaminated, and cleanup of the sites. The 
Superfund program was greatly expanded by the Superfund 
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA). 
Superfund, one of the EPA’s largest ongoing programs, works 
as described in the next several subsections. 
Setting Priorities. Resources are insufficient to clean up 
all sites at once. Therefore, a system for setting priorities has 
been developed:
 • Wherever facilities were still operating, pressures were 
brought to bear on the operators to clean up the sites. 
Many operators who could not afford to do so, however, 
simply declared bankruptcy, and the sites joined those 
already abandoned. As sites are identified—note that 
many abandoned sites had long since been forgotten—
their current and potential threats to groundwater sup-
plies are initially assessed by taking samples of the waste, 
determining its characteristics, and testing groundwater 
around the site for contamination. If it is determined 
that no immediate threat exists, nothing more may be 
done.
 • If a threat to human health does exist, the most expedi-
ent measures are taken immediately to protect the pub-
lic. These measures may include digging a deep trench 
around the site, installing a concrete dike, recapping it 
with impervious layers of plastic and clay to prevent 
infiltration, and securing the area with a robust fence. 
Thus, the wastes are isolated, at least for the short term. 
If the situation has gone past the threat stage and con-
taminated groundwater is or will be reaching wells,  
remediation procedures are begun immediately.
 • The worst sites (those presenting the most immediate 
and severe threats) are put on the National Priorities 
facilities that were or could be sources of groundwater con-
tamination. In most cases, the contaminated area was rela-
tively small—200 acres (80 hectares) or less—but in total, 
the problem was immense and affected every state in the 
country. As studies and tests proceeded, thousands of indi-
vidual wells and some major municipal wells were closed be-
cause they were contaminated with toxic chemicals.
Many cases of private-well contamination caused by care-
less disposal were discovered only after people experienced 
“unexplainable” illnesses over prolonged periods. While these 
incidents did not receive the media attention of Love Canal, 
they were nevertheless devastating to the people involved. 
Even more important than the damage already done was the 
recognition that the problem was ongoing.
The problems concerning toxic chemical wastes can be 
divided into three areas:
 • Cleaning up the “messes” already created, especially 
where they threaten drinking water supplies
 • Regulating the handling and disposal of wastes currently 
being produced, so as to protect public and environmen-
tal health
 • Reducing the quantity of hazardous waste produced
Each of these problems is addressed in the sections that 
follow.
3 Cleaning Up the Mess
A major public health threat from toxic wastes disposed of 
on land is the contamination of groundwater used for drink-
ing. In dealing with groundwater contamination, the first pri-
ority is to ensure that people have safe water. The second is 
to clean up or isolate the source of pollution so that further 
contamination does not occur.
Ensuring Safe Drinking Water
To protect the public from the risk of toxic chemicals con-
taminating drinking water supplies, Congress passed the 
Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) of 1974. Under this 
act, the EPA sets national standards to protect the public 
health, including allowable levels of specific contaminants. 
If any contaminants are found to exceed maximum con-
taminant levels (MCLs), the water supply should be closed 
until adequate purification procedures or other alternatives 
are adopted. The act was amended in 1986, and the EPA 
now has jurisdiction over groundwater and sets MCLs for 
94 contaminants. States and public water agencies are re-
quired to monitor drinking water to be sure that it meets 
the standards. The contaminants represent a host of chemi-
cals that are known pollutants and are regarded as danger-
ous to human health (see the EPA Web site for a description 
of the MCLs and why they are being regulated).
Groundwater Remediation. If dumps, leaking stor-
age tanks, or spills of toxic materials have contaminated 
603

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
further movement of contaminants by erosion, and extract-
ing the contaminants by direct uptake from the soil. After full 
growth, the plants are removed and treated as toxic-waste 
products. However, this is a slow process and can be used 
only at sites where the contaminants and their concentrations 
are not toxic to plants. Nevertheless, scientists have found 
sunflowers that will capture uranium, poplar trees that soak 
up dry-cleaning solvents and mercury, and ferns that thrive 
on arsenic. Phytoremediation is now used at a level above  
$100 million a year.
Evaluating Superfund. Of the literally hundreds of thou-
sands of various waste sites, more than 47,000 have been 
deemed serious enough to be given Superfund status. Over 
time, the EPA judged that about 33,000 of these sites did not 
pose a significant public-health or environmental threat. Such 
sites were accordingly assigned to the category “no further 
removal action planned” (NFRAP). Still, more than 11,300 
sites remain on the master list—a figure that, it is assumed, 
now includes most (if not all) of the sites in the United States 
that pose a significant risk. Interestingly, some of the worst 
that have come to light are on military bases, the result of 
what many characterize as the totally heedless and uncon-
scionable discarding of toxic materials from military opera-
tions (13% of the NPL sites are “federal facilities”).
Progress. As of 2012, 1,305 sites were still on the NPL 
(Fig. 13). Additions are made to the list as sites from the 
master list are assessed, and subtractions are made when re-
mediation on a site is complete. Since 1980, when CERCLA 
went into effect, about 1,123 sites have received all the 
necessary cleanup-related construction, and 359 of these 
have been deleted from the list (Love Canal was removed in 
2004). Cleanup of these sites takes an average of 12 years, 
at an average cost of $20 million. Total cleanup often takes 
that long because groundwater remediation is a slow proc-
ess. The other NPL sites are in various stages of analysis, 
remediation, and construction. (An example of a Superfund 
site and its cleanup is presented in Stewardship, “Woburn’s 
Civil Action.”) 
Who Pays? CERCLA is based on the principle that 
“the polluter pays.” However, the history of a waste-dis-
posal site may go back 50 years or more, and users may 
have included everything from schools, hospitals, and small 
businesses to large corporations, all of which mount legal 
defenses to disclaim responsibility. When liability is difficult 
to track down or the responsible parties are unable to pay, 
the Superfund trust fund kicks in. However, more than 70% 
of the cleanup costs to date have been paid by the polluters 
(the PRPs). Funds collected for a specific site go into “spe-
cial accounts” and are held there until the site cleanup is 
finished.
Over the years, the EPA has gained a great deal of ex-
perience in dealing with Superfund sites. The technology has 
become quite sophisticated, and many hazardous-waste re-
mediation companies have become established. A great deal 
of progress has been made; however, the American public 
still rates contamination by toxic waste at the top of the list 
of major environmental issues.4 
List (NPL) and scheduled for total cleanup. A site on this 
list is reevaluated to determine the most cost-effective 
method of cleaning it up, and finally, cleanup begins 
with efforts to identify “potential responsible parties” 
(PRPs)—namely, industries in which the wastes origi-
nated. The industries are “invited” to contribute to the 
cleanup, and they do so either by contributing finan-
cially or by participating in cleanup activities.
Cleanup Technology. If chemical wastes are contained in 
drums, the drummed wastes can be picked up, treated, and 
managed in proper fashion. For the VOD site (Fig. 11), the 
EPA cleanup started with the removal of some 4,200 drums 
for off-site treatment and disposal. The bigger problem for 
many sites is the soil (often millions of tons) contaminated 
by leakage. One procedure is to excavate contaminated soil 
and run it through an incinerator or kiln assembled on the 
site to burn off chemicals; synthetic organic chemicals can 
be broken down by incineration, and heavy metals are con-
verted to insoluble, stable oxides. Another method is to drill 
a ring of injection wells around the site and a suction well 
in the center. Water containing a harmless detergent is in-
jected into the injection wells and drawn into the suction 
well, cleansing the soil along the way. The withdrawn water 
is treated to remove the pollutants and is then reused for 
 injection.
The VOD site was situated in a poorly drained shale and 
limestone deposit. No local use was made of the ground-
water. The EPA determined that the most feasible (BDAT) 
treatment was simply to contain the contaminated soil and 
groundwater, so the agency installed a clay cap, a perime-
ter drainage system, monitoring wells, and a security fence. 
The remedial work was completed in 1989, at a total cost of  
$2.5 million, and the site was deleted from the NPL in 1996. 
The third five-year review indicated that the cap was func-
tioning well, the site was still undeveloped, and no human 
uses were being made of the groundwater.
Bioremediation. Another rapidly developing cleanup 
technology is bioremediation. In many cases, the soil is con-
taminated with toxic organic compounds that are biodegrad-
able. The problem is that they do not degrade because the 
soil lacks the necessary organisms, oxygen, or both to aid 
in biodegradation. In bioremediation, oxygen and organisms 
are injected into contaminated zones. The organisms feed on 
and eliminate the pollutants (as in secondary sewage treat-
ment) and then die when the pollutants are gone. Consid-
erable research is being done to find and develop microbes 
that will break down certain kinds of wastes more readily. 
Bioremediation, which may be used in place of detergents 
to decontaminate soil, is a rapidly expanding and develop-
ing technology that is applicable to leaking storage tanks and 
spills as well as to waste-disposal sites.
Plant Food? When the soil contaminants are heavy 
metals and nonbiodegradable organic compounds, phyto-
remediation has been employed with some success. Phyto-
remediation uses plants to accomplish a number of 
desirable cleanup steps: stabilizing the soil, preventing 
604

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
Figure 13 Map of 
Superfund sites in the 
contiguous United 
States. Brown shows sites 
currently on the National 
Priorities List, yellow is 
sites proposed for the list, 
and green is those sites 
that have been cleaned up 
and deleted. (Source: Data 
from U.S. EPA CERCLIS 
database; map by skew-t, 
licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Share 
Alike 3.0 Unported http://
creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en).
Final National Priority List
Proposed
Deleted/cleaned up
STEWARDSHIP
Woburn’s Civil Action
One of the earliest Super-
fund sites to appear on 
the NPL is known as the 
Industri-Plex 128 site, in 
Woburn, Massachusetts. 
By the time of its official listing by the EPA in 1981, 
the Industri-Plex site had already become notori-
ous. Starting in the mid–19th century, Woburn 
Chemical Works built a huge industrial complex of 
90 buildings on 400 acres in the city of Woburn. 
Among the products of the complex were arsenic-
based insecticides, sulfuric and acetic acids, glue 
from raw animal hides, chromium-tanned hides, 
and organic chemicals such as phenol, benzene, 
and toluene. The company continued to operate 
until the late 1960s. When a developer attempted 
to excavate the site for redevelopment in the 
1970s, the uncovered land yielded decaying animal 
hides and buried chemical waste deposits, all of 
which gave off vile odors.
In the 1960s, the city of Woburn had installed 
two wells slightly downstream of the buried 
wastes, and these became the subject of a civil 
action when a cluster of childhood leukemia cases 
appeared in the city. Lawyer Jan Schlichtmann7 
acted on behalf of eight families who sued W. R. 
Grace & Co. and Beatrice Corporation, allegedly the 
parties responsible for polluting the groundwater 
with toxic wastes. The suit, which eventually ended 
in an out-of-court settlement, was portrayed in the 
1998 film A Civil Action, in which John Travolta 
played the part of Schlichtmann. In spite of many 
inaccurate depictions in the film, Woburn residents 
were pleased to see their story told and the 
chemical companies exposed.
The EPA identified a number of “potential 
responsible parties,” who took a financial role 
in the cleanup. The cleanup involved removing 
drums of chemical wastes, treating highly 
contaminated groundwater, and constructing 
permanent caps over some 105 acres of 
contaminated soils and sediments. By 1996, 
the EPA was entering into agreements with 
prospective purchasers of parcels on the site, 
and currently the area is fully involved in an 
economic renewal of the city of Woburn. The site 
now accommodates a regional transportation 
center, an interstate exchange on I-93, a retail 
development, an office park, and, next to the 
former waste site, a new mall and hotel. Woburn 
receives more than $20 million in tax revenue 
from businesses on the site. Although it is still 
on the NPL list, the Industri-Plex site has been 
transformed from a noxious waste area to a 
thriving commercial complex—exactly what the 
Superfund program is intended to accomplish.
O
f
t
I
W
7See Jonathan Harr, A Civil Action (New York: Vintage Books, 
1996).
FPO
Anderson Regional Transportation Center. Built on the Woburn Industri-Plex 128 site, 
this new transportation center is one of several new facilities on the site, part of an economic 
renewal of Woburn and responsible for some $20 million in tax revenues.
605

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
$5.2 million smokehouse that employs 100 workers. Fre-
quently, the rehabilitation of brownfield sites provides in-
dustries and municipalities with centrally located, prime 
land for facilities that would otherwise have been carved 
out of suburban or greenfield lands (land occupied by 
natural ecosystems). A further advantage is that the new 
developments go back on the tax rolls, turning a liability 
into a community asset that lightens the load of residential 
taxpayers.
Leaking Underground Storage Tanks (LUSTs). One 
consequence of our automobile-based society is the mil-
lions of underground fuel-storage tanks at service sta-
tions and other facilities. Putting such tanks underground 
greatly diminishes the risk of explosions and fires, but it 
also hides leaks. Underground storage tanks were tradi-
tionally made of bare steel, so they had a life expectancy 
of about 20 years before they began leaking and contami-
nating groundwater. By 2011, more than 501,000 failures 
had been reported, with 6,000 new “releases” in 2011. 
Without monitoring, small leaks can go undetected until 
nearby residents begin to smell fuel-tainted water flowing 
from their faucets.
Underground storage tank (UST) regulations, part 
of RCRA, now require strict monitoring of fuel supplies, 
tanks, and piping so that leaks are detected early. When 
leaks are detected, remediation must begin within 72 hours  
(Fig. 14). Rules now also require all USTs to be upgraded with 
interior lining and cathodic protection (to retard electro-
lytic corrosion of the steel), and new tanks must be provided 
with the same protection if they are steel. Many service sta-
tions are turning to fiberglass tanks, which do not corrode. 
A LUST trust fund, financed by a 0.1-cent-per-gallon tax on 
motor fuel, pays for federal activities involved with oversight 
and cleanup. The states are required to have UST programs, 
and they implement the federal regulations—sometimes add-
ing more stringent requirements. By 2011, some 413,000 
cleanups were completed, with a backlog of 88,000. The 
states have reported that LUSTs are the most common source 
of groundwater contamination. 
4  Managing Current Toxic 
Chemicals and Wastes
The production of chemical wastes will no doubt con-
tinue as long as modern societies persist. It follows that 
human health and natural ecosystems can be protected 
only if we have management procedures to handle and 
dispose of wastes safely. We have already noted that the 
Clean Water Act and the Clean Air Act limit discharges 
into water and air, respectively. When problems regard-
ing the disposal of wastes on land became evident in the 
mid-1970s, Congress passed RCRA in 1976 in order to 
control land disposal. Any company producing hazard-
ous wastes in the United States today is regulated by these 
three major environmental acts.
Critics. The Superfund program gets its share of criti-
cism. Industries claim that they are unfairly blamed for pol-
lution that reaches back to activities that were legal before 
the enactment of CERCLA. Many feel that overly stringent 
standards of cleanup are costing large sums of money with-
out providing any additional benefit to public health. Con-
gress refused to renew the tax on industry at the end of 
1995; the trust fund had a balance of $4 billion at the time. 
Since that time, the trust fund has been supported by mon-
ies in the special accounts and yearly appropriations by 
Congress (the special accounts had more than $1.1 billion 
in 2011, in 819 accounts). The Obama administration has 
proposed reinstating the tax on oil and chemical producers, 
but can do so only if Congress authorizes it. Congress did 
appropriate $600 million for EPA’s Superfund program as 
a component of the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of 2009, aimed at creating jobs and speeding up the 
cleanup of NPL sites. Some 51 sites have been addressed by 
these funds.
Brownfields. One highly successful recent Superfund 
development is the brownfields program. Brownfields are 
abandoned, idled, or underused industrial and commercial 
facilities where expansion or redevelopment is complicated 
by contamination by hazardous wastes. It has been esti-
mated that environmental hazards not serious enough to be 
put on the Superfund NPL impair the value of $2 trillion 
worth of real estate in the United States. Bipartisan sup-
port led to passage of the Brownfield Act in 2002, which 
provides grants for site assessment and remediation work 
and authorized $250 million/year for the program. Previ-
ously authorized under CERCLA, the brownfields pro-
gram now stands on its. The legislation limits liability for 
owners and prospective purchasers of contaminated land, 
thus clearing the way for more cleanup of the estimated 
450,000 sites that would qualify as brownfields. Since its 
inception, the program has leveraged more than $16 bil-
lion in cleanup and redevelopment funding and more than 
75,000 jobs. States are also moving on this issue. One of 
the nation’s most successful brownfields programs is in 
Massachusetts, which has provided a brownfields redevel-
opment fund managed by MassDevelopment, the state’s 
economic development agency. More than 450 projects 
have been redeveloped or are in the development pipeline 
under the program.
Many brownfield sites lie in economically disadvan-
taged communities, and their rehabilitation contributes 
jobs and exchanges a functional facility for an unsightly 
blight on the neighborhood. For example, the city of  Chicago 
recently acquired and cleaned up a former bus barn in 
west Chicago that was becoming an illegal indoor garbage 
dump. The Illinois EPA cleared the site for reuse, and it 
was acquired by Scott Peterson Meats, which erected a 
4Lydia Saad. Water Issues Worry Americans Most, Global Warming Least. March 
28, 
2011. 
http://www.gallup.com/poll/146810/Water-Issues-Worry-Americans-
Global-Warming-Least.aspx.
606

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
permits is then made contingent on reducing pollutants to meet 
certain standards within certain periods. Standards are being 
made continually stricter as technologies for pollution control 
improve. Some manufacturing firms discharging wastewater 
into municipal sewer systems are required to pretreat such 
water to remove any pollutant that cannot be removed by 
sewage-treatment plants—that is, nonbiodegradable organics 
and heavy metals.
Nevertheless, even this restriction does not end all water 
pollution. Certain amounts of wastes are still legally dis-
charged under permits, and although they may account for 
a low percentage of total emissions, they still add up to large 
The Clean Air and Clean Water Acts
The Clean Air Act of 1970, the Clean Water Act of 1972, 
and their various amendments make up the basic legislation 
limiting discharges into the air or water. Under the Clean 
Water Act, any firm (including facilities such as sewage-
treatment plants) discharging more than a certain volume into 
natural waterways must have a discharge permit (specifically, a 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System, or NPDES, 
permit). Discharge permits are a means of monitoring who 
is discharging what. Establishments are required to report all 
discharges of substances listed in the TRI. The renewal of the 
Figure 14 Leaking underground storage tank remediation. (a) Typical subsurface contamina-
tion from a leaking fuel tank at a gas station. (b) After the leak has been repaired, the vacuum-extraction process 
causes gasoline and residual hydrocarbons in the soil and on the water table to evaporate and then removes 
the vapors, preventing further contamination of the groundwater. (c) Contaminated groundwater is pumped out, 
treated, and returned to the ground. (d) Soil vapor extraction system removing volatile organic compounds in soil 
at an abandoned gasoline station.
Gasoline
vapors
Leak
repaired
Water
table
Aquifer
Contaminated
water contains
gasoline
Storage
tank
Contaminated water
containing dissolved
gasoline
Mobile vacuum
decontamination unit
Decontamination unit
Return
water
Pool of
gasoline
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
607

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
transferred are accurate. Copies of their signed forms go 
to the EPA. All phases are subject to unannounced EPA in-
spections. The generator remains responsible for any waste 
“lost” along the way or any inaccuracies in reporting. This 
provision of RCRA thus ensures that generators will deal 
only with responsible parties and curtails midnight dumping.
Reduction of Accidents and Accidental 
Exposures
A significant risk to personal and public health lies in ex-
posures that occur as a result of leaks, accidents, and the 
misguided use of hazardous chemicals in the home or work-
place. A considerable number of laws bear on reducing the 
probability of accidents and on minimizing the exposure of 
both workers and the public if accidents should occur.
Department of Transportation Regulations. Transport 
is an area that is particularly prone to accidents. As mod-
ern society uses increasing amounts and kinds of hazardous 
materials, the stage is set for accidents to become wide-scale 
disasters. To reduce this risk, Department of Transportation 
regulations (DOT regs) specify the kinds of containers and 
methods of packing to be used in the transport of various haz-
ardous materials. Such regulations are intended to reduce the 
risk of spills, fires, and poisonous fumes that could be gener-
ated from mixing certain chemicals in case an accident occurs.
In addition, DOT regs require that every individual con-
tainer and the outside of a truck or railcar carry a standard 
placard identifying the hazards (flammability, corrosiveness, 
the potential for poisonous fumes, and so on) presented 
by the material inside (Fig. 3). Such placards enable police 
and firefighters to identify the potential hazard and respond  
appropriately in case of an accident. You may also see high-
way HAZMAT signs restricting truckers with hazardous 
materials to using particular routes or lanes or to using a 
highway only during certain hours.
numbers, as we have seen. Moreover, small firms, homes, 
and farms are exempt from regulation and contribute an un-
known quantity of toxics to the air and water. Further still, a 
great deal of pollution comes from nonpoint sources such as 
urban and farm runoff.
The Resource Conservation and Recovery 
Act (RCRA)
The 1976 RCRA and its subsequent amendments are the 
cornerstone legislation designed to prevent unsafe or illegal 
disposal of all solid wastes on land. RCRA has three main 
features. First, it requires that all disposal facilities, such 
as landfills, be sanctioned by permit. The permitting proc-
ess requires that these facilities have all the safety features 
mentioned in Section 2, including monitoring wells. This 
requirement caused most old facilities to shut down—many 
subsequently became Superfund sites—and new high-quality 
landfills with safety measures to be constructed.
Second, RCRA requires that toxic wastes destined for 
landfills be pretreated to convert them to forms that will not 
leach. Such treatment now commonly includes biodegrada-
tion or incineration in various kinds of facilities, including 
cement kilns (Fig. 15). Biodegradation involves the use of sys-
tems similar to those used for secondary sewage treatment 
and perhaps new species of bacteria capable of breaking 
down synthetic organics. If treatment is thorough, there may 
be little or nothing to put in a landfill. That is the ultimate 
objective. 
For whatever is still going to disposal facilities, the third 
major feature of RCRA is the requirement of “cradle-to-
grave” tracking of all hazardous wastes. The generator (the 
company that originated the wastes) must fill out a form 
detailing the exact kinds and amounts of waste generated. 
Persons transporting the waste—who are also required to 
be permitted—and those operating the disposal facility must 
each sign the form, vouching that the amounts of waste 
Figure 15 Cement kiln to destroy haz-
ardous wastes. A cement kiln is a huge rotating 
“pipe,” typically 15 feet in diameter and 230 feet long, 
mounted on an incline. (a) Solid wastes fed in with 
raw materials are fully incinerated and made to react 
with cement compounds as they gradually tumble 
toward the combustion chamber. (b) Flammable liquid 
wastes added with the fuel and air impart fuel value 
as they are burned. (c) Waste dust is trapped and  
recycled into the kiln.
(a)
(b)
(b) Fuel and air
      input
Preheater
(a)
(c)
Dust
collector
Clinker
cooler
Kiln
608

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
contingency plan for every case. This means everything from 
having firefighters trained and properly equipped to fight 
particular kinds of chemical fires, to having hospitals stocked 
with medicines to treat exposures to the particular chemi-
cals, to implementing procedures to follow for the different 
emergencies. Thus, there can be an immediate and appropri-
ate response to any kind of accident. Information required 
by the act, together with the information in the TRI, enables 
communities to draw up a chemical profile of their local area 
and encourages them to initiate pollution-prevention and 
risk-reduction activities.
Evaluating New Chemicals
In the past, new synthetic organic compounds were 
introduced for a specific purpose without any testing of 
their potential side effects. For example, in the 1960s, a new 
compound known as TRIS was found to be an effective 
flame retardant and was widely used in children’s sleepwear. 
It was only later discovered that TRIS was a potent 
carcinogen. Treated sleepwear was immediately withdrawn 
from the market. It is not known how many children (if any) 
developed cancer from TRIS, but this and other such cases 
revealed a hole in the systems of protection.
Worker Protection: OSHA and the “Worker’s Right to 
Know.” In the past, it was not uncommon for industries to 
require workers to perform jobs that entailed exposure to haz-
ardous materials without informing the workers of the haz-
ards involved. This situation is now addressed by amendments 
to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSHA). 
These amendments make up the hazard communication stan-
dard, or “worker’s right to know.” Basically, the law requires 
businesses, industries, and laboratories to make available both 
information regarding hazardous materials and suitable pro-
tective equipment. One form in which this information is pre-
sented is the material safety data sheet (MSDS), which must 
accompany more than 600 chemicals when they are shipped, 
stored, and handled. These sheets contain information about 
the reactivity and toxicity of the chemicals, with precautions 
to follow when one is using the chemical. Notably, however, 
the responsibility to read the information and exercise proper 
precautions remains with the worker.
Community Protection and Emergency Preparedness: 
SARA, Title III. In 1984, an accident at a Union Carbide 
pesticide plant in Bhopal, India, caused the release of more 
than 40 tons of methyl isocyanate, an extremely toxic gas 
(Fig. 16). An estimated 600,000 people in communities sur-
rounding the plant were exposed to the deadly fumes. Within 
days, more than 5,000 people died, and more than 10,000 
subsequently died from gas-related diseases. At least 50,000 
people suffered various degrees of visual impairment, respi-
ratory problems, and other injuries from the exposure, and 
many more have experienced chronic illnesses related to the 
disaster. An Indian investigation of the accident found that 
the disaster likely happened because Union Carbide officials 
had scaled back safety and alarm systems at the plant in 
order to cut costs. Ironically, most of the deaths and inju-
ries could have been avoided if people had known that me-
thyl isocyanate is highly soluble in water, that a wet towel 
over the head would have greatly reduced one’s exposure, 
and that showers would have alleviated aftereffects. Unfor-
tunately, neither the people affected nor the medical authori-
ties involved had any idea of what chemical they confronted, 
much less the way to protect or treat themselves. 
After the Bhopal disaster, Congress passed legislation to 
address the problem of accidents. For expediency, the meas-
ure was added as Title III to a bill reauthorizing Superfund: 
the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 
(SARA). Title III of SARA is better known as the Emergency 
Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA), which 
we have already encountered in connection with the TRI.
EPCRA requires companies that handle in excess of 
five tons of any hazardous material to provide a “complete 
accounting” of storage sites, feed hoppers, and so on. The 
information goes to a local emergency planning committee, 
which is also required in every government jurisdiction. The 
committee is made up of officials representing local fire and 
police departments, hospitals, and any other groups that 
might be involved in case of an emergency, as well as the 
executive officers of the companies in question.
The task of the committee is to draw up scenarios for 
accidents involving the chemicals on-site and to have a 
Figure 16 Toxic chemical disaster, Bhopal, India. Officials view 
some of the victims of a deadly gas release at a Union Carbide plant in 1984. At 
least 10,500 died, and many more suffered injuries.
609

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
REACH. A new player in this field comes from the European 
Union (EU): REACH (Registration, Evaluation and Autho-
rization of Chemicals). Recently authorized by the EU mem-
ber states, the REACH regulation has resulted in a process of 
registering and classifying all potentially hazardous chemi-
cal substances in use in European societies. Each chemical 
must be provided with a chemical safety report, which in-
volves human health and environmental hazard assessments, 
as well as information on how the chemical is used once it 
is sold. Many chemicals not currently tested in the United 
States will be included. The approach, from screening to reg-
ulation, is based on the precautionary principle; the respon-
sibility for managing the risks from chemicals and providing 
safety information lies with industry rather than the govern-
ment (as it is in the United States). REACH has left U.S. trade 
representatives and many industries concerned about the 
$20 billion in chemical products the United States exports to 
Europe each year, as they are claiming that the costs of test-
ing would be prohibitive. However, the European chemical 
industry is facing the same costs, which should make for a 
level playing field.
Laws applying to hazardous wastes are summarized 
graphically in Figure 17. It is noteworthy that nongovern-
mental consumer advocate groups have been a major force 
behind the passage of these laws as well as regulations 
 requiring ingredients to be labeled on all products. Citizen 
action does make a difference! 
Toxic Substances Control Act. Congress responded by 
passing the Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 (TSCA), 
which requires that, before manufacturing a new chemical in 
bulk, manufacturers submit a “pre-manufacturing notice” to 
the EPA, in which the potential environmental and human 
health impacts of the substance are assessed (including those 
that may derive from the ultimate disposal of the chemical). 
Depending on the results of the assessment, a manufacturer 
may be required to test the effects of the product on living 
things. Following the results of testing, the EPA may restrict 
a product’s uses or keep it off the market altogether. The law, 
however, also tells the EPA to use the “least burdensome” 
approach to regulation and to compare the costs and ben-
efits of regulation. TSCA also authorizes the EPA to develop 
an inventory of the chemicals already in use at the time the 
legislation was passed and to require testing whenever there 
are indications of potential risks. More than 80,000 chemical 
substances are currently on the inventory.
There is serious concern over the effectiveness of TSCA. 
A huge loophole allows chemical companies to keep their 
chemical recipes confidential, claiming they are trade secrets. 
The EPA has required testing for only 200 of the chemicals 
in commerce and has actually developed regulations for only 
five of the existing chemicals. The Government Account-
ability Office (the investigative arm of Congress) has labeled 
TSCA as a failed program, largely due to the restrictions the 
act places on the EPA’s ability to regulate.
Figure 17 Major hazardous-waste laws. Summary of the major laws pertaining to the protection of 
workers, the public, and the environment from hazardous materials.
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
dc
j h
hjd
 h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
 d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
dc
j h
hjd
 h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
 d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
dc
j h
hjd
 h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
 d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
dc
j h
hjd
 h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
 d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
dc
j h
hjd
 h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
 d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
dc
j h
hjd
 h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
 d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 d
cj 
hhj
d h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 d
cj 
hhj
d h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 d
cj 
hhj
d h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 d
cj 
hhj
d h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  d
hh
cfk
 h
dj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 d
cj 
hhj
d h
sj
d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dl
jf
d  
fhj
df j
dk
sll
sj
lj
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
dh
hcf
k h
dj
d 
TSCA
(Toxic Substance 
Control Act)
Requires new 
chemicals to be
shown safe for 
specific uses
DOT (Department of Transportation 
Regulations) Assures safe transport
Superfund: Provides for cleanup of abandoned
hazardous waste sites
SDWA (Safe Drinking Water Act)
Sets standards for drinking water
Disposal
 facility
CAA (Clean Air Act) Limits discharges into the air
EPCRA (Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-know Act)
Informs public about storage and releases of toxic substances
OSHA
(Occupational
Safety and
Health Act)
Protects
workers'
health and
safety
RCRA (Resource 
Conservation and
Recovery Act)
Assures that wastes
         get to suitable
         disposal facilities
CWA 
(Clean Water Act)
Limits discharges
into waterways
610

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
Environmental Justice (EJ) Program, put in place early in 
1998, to capture the intent of Executive Order 12898 and 
to further a number of strategies already established by the 
EPA’s Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response. For 
example, in connection with the EPA’s Brownfields pro-
gram, communities are putting abandoned properties back 
into productive use. Many EJ efforts are directed toward ad-
dressing justice concerns before they become problems. The 
Obama administration recently coordinated commitments by 
16 federal agencies to address EJ issues and implement new 
strategies to combat injustices to minority communities.6 
International EJ. One form of trade the developing countries 
can do without is the international trade in toxic wastes. Some 
countries or local jurisdictions in search of ready cash have 
found a source in the form of toxic-waste shipments, which 
invariably come from more developed countries and are often 
illegal. Close to home, some 20% of spent vehicle batteries 
(20 million in 2011) are exported from the United States to 
Mexico, likely because environmental and safety regulations 
are more relaxed there. The result is worker lead exposure 
levels far exceeding levels allowed in the United States.
The Basel Convention is an international agreement that 
bans most international toxic-waste trade, while a more re-
cent amendment, the Basel Ban Amendment, would prohibit 
all exports of hazardous waste from developed to developing 
countries; however, the amendment is not yet in force and 
the United States opposes it. The Basel Action Network, an 
NGO, is vigilant in publicizing and coordinating legal chal-
lenges to incidents involving toxic-waste shipments and has 
made it clear that this trade is a matter of international envi-
ronmental justice.
Pollution Prevention for a Sustainable 
Society
Pollution control and pollution prevention are not the same. 
Pollution control involves adding a filter or some other device 
at the “end of the pipe” to prevent pollutants from entering the 
environment. The captured pollutants still have to be disposed 
of, and this entails more regulation and control. Pollution pre-
vention, by contrast, involves changing the production process, 
the materials used, or both so that harmful pollutants won’t 
be produced in the first place. For example, adding a catalytic 
converter to the exhaust pipe of your car is pollution control, 
whereas redesigning the engine or switching to a hybrid car so 
that less pollution is produced is pollution prevention.
Pollution prevention often results in better product or ma-
terials management—that is, less waste. Thus, pollution pre-
vention frequently creates a cost savings. For example, Exxon 
Chemical Company added simple “floating roofs” to tanks 
storing its most volatile chemicals, thereby reducing evapo-
rative emissions by 90% and gaining a savings of $200,000 
per year. That paid for the cost of the roofs in six months. 
As another example, United Musical Instruments in Nogales, 
5 Broader Issues
Before we leave the topic of hazardous wastes, we still need to 
address two important broader issues: the problem of environ-
mental justice and the movement toward pollution prevention.
Environmental Justice and  
Hazardous Wastes
 • The largest commercial hazardous-waste landfill in the 
United States is located in Emelle, Alabama. African 
Americans make up 90% of Emelle’s population. This 
landfill receives wastes from Superfund sites and every 
state in the continental United States.
 • Residents of Arizona’s Navajo Nation reservation are 
exposed to uranium and radium through airborne dust 
and contaminated water, a consequence of 520 open 
uranium mines abandoned by private companies that 
operated the mines under government contracts.
 • A recent study found that 870,000 U.S. federally sub-
sidized housing units are within a mile of factories that 
have reported toxic emissions to the EPA. Most of the 
occupants of these apartments are minorities.
The issue is environmental justice. The EPA defines environ-
mental justice as:
The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all 
people regardless of race, color, national origin, or in-
come with respect to the development, implementation, 
and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, 
and policies. Fair treatment means that no group of 
people, including racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic group 
should bear a disproportionate share of the negative en-
vironmental consequences resulting from industrial, mu-
nicipal, and commercial operations or the execution of 
federal, state, local, and tribal programs and policies.5 
Several recent studies have shown that, all across the 
United States, waste sites and other hazardous facilities are 
more likely than not to be located in towns and neighbor-
hoods where most of the residents are non-Caucasian. These 
same towns and neighborhoods are also less affluent, a fur-
ther element of environmental injustice. The wastes involved 
are generated primarily by affluent industries and the afflu-
ent majority, but somehow the wastes tend to end up well 
away from where they were generated and in the backyards 
of people of color. It seems fair to assume that the siting of 
hazardous facilities is a matter of political power, and those 
with the power would like to have the sites well away from 
their own backyards.
Federal Response. The federal government has taken this 
problem seriously. In 1994, President Clinton issued Execu-
tive Order 12898, focusing federal agency attention on en-
vironmental justice. The EPA’s response was to establish an 
5Environmental Protection Agency, Final Guidance for Incorporating Environmen-
tal Justice Concerns in EPA’s NEPA Compliance Analyses (April 1998). Available 
at www.epa.gov.
6Environmental News Service. “Obama Administration Strengthens Environmen-
tal Justice Efforts.” February 27, 2012. www.ens-newswire.com/ens/feb2012/2012-
02-27-091.html.
611

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
You, the Consumer. Finally, pollution avoidance can 
also be applied to the individual consumer. So far as you 
are able to reduce or avoid the use of products containing 
harmful chemicals, you are preventing those amounts of 
chemicals from being released into the environment. You 
are also reducing the by-products that result from produc-
ing those chemicals. The average American home contains 
as much as 100 pounds of hazardous household waste 
(HHW)—substances such as paints, stains, varnishes, bat-
teries, pesticides, motor oil, oven cleaners, and more. These 
materials need to be stored safely, used responsibly, and dis-
posed of properly if they are not to pose a risk of injury or 
death and a threat to environmental health. (Many commu-
nities hold regular HHW collection days; if yours doesn’t, 
you could initiate one!)
Increasingly, companies are gradually beginning to pro-
duce and market green products, a term used for products 
that are more environmentally benign than are their tradi-
tional counterparts. For example, Method Products and 
Clorox-based Green Works are now marketing nontoxic 
cleaners in Target, Costco, and other large retailers. How 
fast and to what degree these green products replace tradi-
tional products will in large part depend on how we behave 
as consumers. In other words, your buying power can be an 
extremely potent force.
In conclusion, there are four ways to address the prob-
lems of pollution by hazardous chemicals: (1) pollution 
prevention, (2) recycling, (3) treatment (breaking down or 
converting the material to harmless products), and (4) safe 
disposal. The first three of these methods promote a mini-
mum of waste, in harmony with the principles of sustain-
ability. There is every reason to believe that we can have the 
benefits of modern chemical technology without destroying 
the sustainability of our environment by polluting it. 
Arizona, worked with the Arizona Department of Environmen-
tal Quality’s Pollution Prevention Unit to install a closed-loop 
system that reduced water use by 500,000 gallons per year. The 
system also reduced hazardous waste by 58% in three years 
and saved the company $127,000 in its first year alone. Both 
are examples of the minimization or elimination of pollution.
Green Chemistry. A second angle on pollution avoid-
ance is substitution—finding nonhazardous substitutes for 
hazardous materials. This is known as green chemistry. For 
example, the dry-cleaning industry, which uses large quanti-
ties of toxic organic chemicals, is exploring the use of water-
based cleaning, or “wet cleaning.” Preliminary results from 
some entrepreneurs indicate that wet cleaning is quite com-
parable in cost and performance to dry cleaning. There are 
now more than 150 wet cleaners in North America, and the 
number is growing.
The American Chemical Society (ACS) and the EPA have 
been cooperating to promote green chemistry, particularly 
for undergraduate and graduate chemistry courses. Case 
studies and laboratory modules have been developed by this 
cooperation, available on the ACS Web site.
Reuse. A third approach is reuse—cleaning up and recy-
cling solvents and lubricants. Some military bases, for ex-
ample, have been able to distill solvents and reuse them, 
instead of discarding these solvents in a manner that re-
leases them into the environment. This approach has in-
creased greatly during the past decade, as measured by the 
TRI data. Indeed, all three approaches have been employed 
increasingly by industries handling hazardous chemicals, 
and all have contributed to significant reductions in haz-
ardous-waste releases into the environment. (See Fig. 5.) 
The public disclosure of TRI data is judged to have played 
a crucial role in these reductions. The EPA holds that the 
system has been “one of the most effective environmental 
programs ever legislated by Congress and administered 
by EPA.”
612

REvISITING THE THEMES
sound science
Research is under way to evaluate the impacts of bisphe-
nol A and other potential endocrine-disrupting chemicals 
on humans and wildlife. It took the work of many environ-
mental scientists to uncover the pathways by which some 
toxic chemicals entered ecological food webs and made their way into 
some of the most remote regions of Earth, the Arctic. This work has led 
to the banning of many persistent organic compounds.
Toxicology is a well-established and crucial branch of science that 
has helped us to develop a thorough inventory of hazardous chemicals 
and their health effects. Federal agencies and NGOs have made certain 
that this information is available to the public via the Internet (through 
the NTP, IRIS, NIEHS, and Scorecard), an excellent wedding of sound sci-
ence and social needs. The “green chemistry” movement is an outcome 
of the efforts of chemists (and their sponsors) who are determined to 
design products that are nontoxic yet effective.
sustainability
In our recent past, society was on an unsustainable course 
in dealing with hazardous chemicals. More and more 
sites were being contaminated, and we were seeing ris-
ing rates of cancer and other health problems. Although the connection 
between hazardous-waste sites and actual cancer cases has been dif-
ficult to prove, the rising tide of hazardous chemicals in the environment 
was certainly a prime suspect. The legislation and programs discussed 
in this chapter have turned the situation around, and the move toward 
pollution prevention and the recycling of hazardous chemicals indicates 
that we are moving in a sustainable direction in our dealings with toxic 
chemicals.
stewardship
One vital task of stewardship is to protect fellow human 
beings from unnecessary risks. We were not doing well 
with this responsibility, and a few wake-up calls led 
to stewardly action on the part of people such as Lois Gibbs, Jan 
 Schlichtmann, and others who put their lives and reputations on the 
line to bring some sanity to our permissive dealings with toxic-waste 
dumps. As a result, our society stopped simply accepting contamina-
tion as the “price of progress,” and after a great deal of public outcry, 
Congress responded with legislation to address the many problems. 
We have made real progress in cleaning up the Superfund sites, the 
leaking underground storage tanks, and the brownfield sites. Indus-
tries can no longer release products without testing their potential 
for doing harm. The TRI, in particular, has provided the incentive for 
industry to clean up its act. It is not the time, however, to let down our 
guard. Injustice to minority groups, pressures by industries to ease up 
on the regulations, and the attitude that hazardous wastes no longer 
pose a threat indicate that this issue requires constant surveillance 
and repeated pressure on Congress and the EPA. New chemicals are 
constantly  appearing, and old ones have not yet been thoroughly 
 researched; the Superfund program is still far from completion.
s
O
b
w
to stewardly ac
s
I
i
s
ing rates of can
s
R
n
o
m
Review Questions
1. How do toxicologists investigate hazardous chemicals? How 
is this information disseminated to health practitioners and 
the public?
 2. What four categories are used to define hazardous 
chemicals?
 3. Define total product life cycle, and describe the many stages 
at which pollutants may enter the environment.
 4. What are the two classes of chemicals that pose the most 
serious long-term toxic risk, and how do they affect food 
chains?
 5. What kind of chemicals are the “dirty dozen” POPs? Why 
are they on a list?
 6. What two laws pertaining to the disposal of hazardous 
wastes were passed in the early 1970s? Describe how the 
passage of the laws shifted pollution from one part of the 
environment to another.
 7. Describe three methods of land disposal that were used in 
the 1970s. How has their use changed over time?
 8. What law was passed to cope with the problem of aban-
doned hazardous-waste sites? What are the main features of 
the legislation?
 9. What is being done about leaking underground storage 
tanks and brownfields?
 10. What law was passed to ensure the safe land disposal 
of hazardous wastes? What are the main features of the 
legislation?
 11. What laws exist to protect the public against exposures 
resulting from hazardous-chemical accidents? What are the 
main features of the legislation?
 12. What role does the Toxic Substances Control Act play in the 
hazardous-waste arena?
 13. Why does the EPA have an Environmental Justice Program?
 14. Describe the advantages of pollution-prevention efforts.
Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
613

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
Making a DiffeRenCe
 1. Read labels and become informed about the potentially 
hazardous materials you use in the home and workplace. 
Whenever possible, use nontoxic substitutes. If you use toxic 
substances, make sure that you dispose of them properly.
 2. Flammable products, such as gasoline, kerosene, propane 
gas, and paint thinner, should be stored in approved contain-
ers in a garage, shed, or similarly separate, well-ventilated 
area—never inside the house.
 3. To avoid ingesting bisphenol A, eat fresh fruits and vegetables 
and avoid using bottles that have the recycle codes 3 or 7.
 4. Use up your paint—try to buy only the amount of paint that 
you need, and then finish it. If possible, use only latex-based 
paint, which can be disposed of in household wastes. Do not 
put oil-based paints in the trash; save them for a household 
hazardous-waste collection.
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
tHinking enviRonMentally
 1. Select a chemical product or drug you suspect could be haz-
ardous and investigate it, using the resources made available 
on the Internet by federal agencies and Scorecard.
 2. Before the 1970s, it was not illegal to dispose of hazard-
ous chemicals in unlined pits, and many companies did so. 
Should they be held responsible today for the contamination 
those wastes are causing, or should the government (taxpay-
ers) pay for the cleanup? Give a rationale for your position.
 3. Use the Toxics Release Inventory on the Internet to investi-
gate the locations and amounts of toxic chemicals released 
in your state or region.
 4. Check out the American Chemical Society Green Chemistry 
Web site, and find out if your college or university is on the 
list of schools with green chemistry programs. If not, you 
could ask your chemistry department to look into it.
CReDits
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): M.Sobreira/Alamy; (bottom): Gresei/Fotolia; imagebroker / Alamy; (top 
right): AP Photo/Jackie Johnston; (bottom left): U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency Headquarters; (bottom right): Joe Traver/Liaison/Getty Images; (top 
left): Nancy J. Pierce/Photo Researchers, Inc.; (bottom left): Van Bucher/Photo 
Researchers, Inc.; (bottom left): Richard T. Wright; (center right): Tetra Tech EM 
Inc; BEDI/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom
Text Credits
Source: data from Environmental Protection Agency, Final Guidance for 
Incorporating Environmental Justice Concerns in EPA’s NEPA Compliance 
Analyses; Table 1: “The “Dirty Dozen” Persistent Organic Pollutants,” from Report 
on DDT, Aldrin, Dieldrin, Endrin, Chlordane, Heptachlor, Hexachlorobenzene, 
Mirex, Toxaphene, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Dioxins, and Furans, International 
Programme on Chemical Safety. Copyright © 1995 by United Nations. Reprinted 
with permission. All rights reserved; Figure 5: Source: “2010 Toxics Release 
Inventory” from the Environmental Protection Agency, January 2012; Figure 08: 
“U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Headquarters.”
acute A reaction to a disease or chemical pollutant that brings on 
life-threatening reactions within hours or days.
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery 
Act) Legislation that provided money for a variety of programs, 
intended to stimulate the economy during the recent recession. 
Some $90 billion was directed into clean energy programs.
Basel Convention An international agreement that bans most 
international toxic-waste trade.
best-demonstrated available technologies (BDATs) Treatment 
standards for hazardous wastes that have the effect of reducing 
their toxicity and mobility.
bioremediation The use of microorganisms for the decontamination 
of soil or groundwater. Usually involves injecting organisms or 
oxygen into contaminated zones.
brownfields Abandoned, idled, or underused industrial and 
commercial facilities whose further development is inhibited 
because of real or perceived chemical contamination.
carcinogen, carcinogenic Having the property of causing cancer, at 
least in animals and, by implication, in humans.
chlorinated hydrocarbons Synthetic organic molecules in which 
one or more hydrogen atoms have been replaced by chlorine 
atoms. Chlorinated hydrocarbons are hazardous compounds 
glossaRy
614

Hazardous Chemicals: Pollution and Prevention 
that are often toxic; for example, DDT, PCBs, and dioxin are 
persistent organic pollutants. Such chemicals may remain present 
in the environment for periods of years.
phytoremediation The use of plants to accomplish the cleanup of 
some hazardous chemical wastes.
Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 A law that mandates collection 
of data on toxic chemicals that are released to the environment, 
treated on site, recycled, or combusted. See Toxics Release 
Inventory.
precautionary principle The principle that says that where there 
are threats of serious or irreversible damage, the absence of 
scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing 
cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.
REACH 
(Registration, 
Evaluation 
and 
Authorization 
of 
Chemicals) The European Union’s new, rigorous approach to 
screening hazardous chemicals for toxicity.
risk characterization The process of determining the level of a 
risk and its accompanying uncertainties after hazard assessment, 
dose-response assessment, and exposure assessment have been 
accomplished.
Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) of 1974 Legislation to protect 
the public from the risk that toxic chemicals will contaminate 
drinking water supplies. The act mandates regular testing of 
municipal water supplies.
SARA (Title III) A section of the Superfund Amendments and 
Reauthorization Act that addresses hazardous waste accidents 
and promulgates community right-to-know requirements. Also 
known as the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-
Know Act of 1986 (EPCRA). (See Toxics Release Inventory 
(TRI).)
secure landfill A landfill with suitable barriers, leachate drainage, 
and monitoring systems such that it is deemed secure against 
contaminating groundwater with hazardous wastes.
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants An 
international treaty that works toward the banning of most uses 
of the persistent organic pollutants.
Superfund The popular name for the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA). 
This act is the cornerstone legislation that provides the mechanism 
and funding for the cleanup of potentially dangerous hazardous-
waste sites and the protection of groundwater.
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 
(SARA) Amendments that strengthened the Superfund program 
for identifying and cleaning up hazardous waste sites.
threshold level The maximum degree of exposure to a pollutant, 
drug, or some other factor that can be tolerated with no ill 
effect. The threshold level varies, depending on the species, the 
sensitivity of the individual, the length of exposure, and the 
presence of other factors that may produce synergistic effects.
total product life cycle The sum of all steps in the manufacture of 
a product, from obtaining the raw materials through producing, 
using, and, finally, disposing of the product. By-products and the 
pollution resulting from each step are taken into account in a 
consideration of the total product life cycle.
toxicology The study of the impacts of toxic substances on human 
health and the pathways by which such substances reach humans.
Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) An annual record of releases 
of toxic chemicals to the environment and the locations and 
quantities of toxic chemicals stored at all U.S. sites. Required by 
the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 
1986 (EPCRA). See SARA.
Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 (TSCA) A law requiring 
the assessment of the potential hazards of a chemical before the 
chemical is put on the market.
underground storage tanks (USTs) Tanks used to store petroleum 
products at service stations, now subject to mandated protection 
against leakage. (See UST legislation.)
because they tend to be nonbiodegradable and therefore to 
bioaccumulate; many have been shown to be carcinogenic. Also 
called organochlorides.
chronic A reaction to infection or pollutants that leads to a 
gradual deterioration of health over a period of years.
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) See Superfund.
Department of Transportation regulations (DOT regs) Regulations 
intended to reduce the risk of spills, fires, and poisonous fumes by 
specifying the kinds of containers and methods of packing to be 
used in transporting hazardous materials.
discharge permit (technically called an NPDES permit) A permit 
that allows a company to legally discharge certain amounts or 
levels of pollutants into air or water.
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 
(EPCRA) See SARA.
endocrine See hormone.
endocrine disrupters Any of a class of organic compounds, often 
pesticides, that are suspected of having the capacity to interfere 
with hormonal activities in animals.
endocrine system The collection of all of the hormones and glands 
that produce them in animal bodies; they control metabolism, 
growth, and reproduction.
environmental justice The fair treatment and meaningful 
involvement of all people, regardless of race, color, national origin, 
or income, with respect to the development, implementation, and 
enforcement of environmental laws and regulations.
Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA) Passed in 1996, this act 
amended existing laws governing pesticide use and residues on 
foods, including the Delaney clause.
green 
products Manufactured 
products 
that 
are 
more 
environmentally benign than their traditional counterparts.
groundwater remediation The repurification of contaminated 
groundwater by any of a number of techniques.
halogenated hydrocarbon A synthetic organic compound 
containing one or more atoms of the halogen group, which 
includes chlorine, fluorine, and bromine.
hazard communication standard The outcome of amendments 
to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, this law 
guarantees the workers’ right to know about hazardous materials 
they encounter.
hazardous material (HAZMAT) Any material having one or more 
of the following attributes: ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, and 
toxicity.
hormones Natural chemical substances that control the 
development, physiology, and behavior of an organism. 
Hormones are produced internally and affect only the individual 
organism. Hormones are coming into use in pest control. (See 
also pheromones.)
material safety data sheets (MSDS) Documents that contain 
information on the reactivity and toxicity of more than 600 
chemicals and that must accompany the shipping, storage, and 
handling of these chemicals.
maximum contaminant level (MCL) A drinking water standard; 
the highest allowable concentration of a pollutant in a drinking 
water source.
midnight dumping The illicit dumping of materials, particularly 
hazardous wastes, frequently under the cover of  darkness.
National Priorities List (NPL) A list of the chemical waste sites 
presenting the most immediate and severe threats. Such sites are 
scheduled for cleanup ahead of other sites.
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSHA) The act 
protecting the rights of workers to know about hazards in their 
workplace.
orphan site The location of a hazardous waste site abandoned by 
former owners.
persistent organic pollutants (POPs) Any members of a class 
of organic pollutants that are resistant to biodegradation and 
615

This page intentionally left blank 

From Chapter 23 of Environmental Science: Toward a Sustainable Future, Twelfth Edition. Richard T. Wright, Dorothy F. Boorse. 
Copyright © 2013 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
Sustainable 
Communities 
and Lifestyles

Atlanta, Georgia
Learning Objectives
 1. Urban Sprawl: Explain the 
connections between urban 
sprawl, car dependency, and 
highway construction; examine 
the ways in which “smart 
growth” can prevent further 
urban sprawl.
 2. Urban Blight: Summarize the 
factors leading to urban blight 
in older cities of the developed 
world; describe the reasons why 
cities of the developing world 
are also experiencing urban 
blight and vast slums.
 3. Moving Toward Sustainable 
Communities: Examine the 
steps that can make cities more 
livable and attractive and even 
make them more ecologically 
sustainable than the suburbs.
 4. Lifestyles and the Common Good: 
Evaluate some good things that 
can happen to move our society 
toward greater sustainability, 
and include an assessment of 
lifestyle options open to people 
who want to be responsible 
stewards.
Sustainable 
Communities 
and Lifestyles
T
he word beltline conjures up images of a megalane highway that runs around 
the outskirts of a major metropolitan area, facilitating commuting and stimu-
lating a ring of industries, all of which guarantees that not long after such a 
highway is built, it will become congested. Atlanta, Georgia, has such a belt, Inter-
state Route 285, a notorious 10-lane highway built at first to allow through traffic to 
avoid the city, but now heavily used by commuters between the expanding suburbs 
and the corporations that have located along the highway. This is the Atlanta Belt-
way. The Atlanta BeltLine (http://beltline.org) is something else altogether, an 
ambitious makeover of an abandoned rail and industrial corridor that loops around 
the heart of Atlanta, well inside the Beltway (see photo above). One writer has called 
it “the country’s most ambitious smart growth project.”1
We’ll talk 
about what smart 
growth means later, 
but this project 
is a remarkable 
visionary effort 
that will provide 
parks, trails, transit 
system, brownfields 
remediation, 
revitalization of 
distressed city 
neighborhoods, 
and much more. 
The BeltLine loop 
will be linked by 
1Kaid Benfield. “The Atlanta BeltLine: The Country’s Most Ambitious Smart 
Growth Project.” Natural Resources Defense Council Switchboard. July 26, 
2011. http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/kbenfield/the_countrys_most_ambitious_
sm.html. February 29, 2012.
Atlanta BeltLine Rail
Atlanta BeltLine Rail
MARTA
Interstate
Path Trails
Parks (exisisting)
Parks (planned)
Landmarks
Atlanta 
BeltLine
285
INTERSTATE
Legend
Martin Luther King Jr.’s birth house in the Old Fourth Ward, on the 
east side of the BeltLine.
618

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
a 22-mile trail system that will include pedestrian-friendly rail-
based transit segments, with spur segments that will extend into 
neighborhoods and existing parks and trails around the BeltLine. 
The east side of the BeltLine connects with the Old Fourth Ward, 
a neighborhood that includes the birth site of Dr. Martin Luther 
King, Jr., and Ebenezer Baptist Church, where King and his father 
served as pastors. Those buildings are now part of the Martin Luther 
King, Jr., National Historic Site. As part of the BeltLine project, the 
17-acre Historic Fourth Ward Park has recently been completed. It 
has dramatically transformed a blighted neighborhood into a lovely 
public space connected to a small lake (Fig. 1).
HistOry. The “Belt Line” was originally a loop of tracks 
that provided rail transportation to local industry and commerce 
in post–Civil War Atlanta. When trucks and highways came on 
the scene, most of the rail tracks were abandoned. The new 
BeltLine concept was the brainchild of Georgia Tech graduate 
student Ryan Gravel, who, in 1999, proposed a new transit 
system that would link the inner city neighborhoods. Gravel’s 
concept quickly attracted grassroots attention, and soon the 
BeltLine plan included parks, trails, affordable housing, and 
neighborhood renewal. Public support grew as more and more 
civic organizations enthusiastically endorsed the BeltLine plan. 
Input from more than 10,000 citizens helped craft the first 
five-year work plan, and with funding from private and public 
sectors, work began in 2006. The total price tag is estimated at 
$2.8 billion, but considering the potential benefits for the city of 
Atlanta, that seems like a bargain.
Future. In concept, the Atlanta BeltLine will create:
 • 2,000 acres of parks, all linked by the multi-use trail and  
transit loop
 • 33 miles of continuous trails
 • a 22-mile light rail transit system that will connect to Atlanta’s 
regional transit network
 • the cleanup and redevelopment of 1,100 acres of contaminated 
brownfield sites
 • 5,600 units of workforce housing
 • 30,000 permanent jobs and thousands of temporary construction 
jobs
 • a $20 billion increase in the city’s tax base over the next  
25 years
 • the connection to and renewal of some 40 city neighborhoods
Many obstacles remain before Atlanta BeltLine reaches 
completion. Some key right-of-way parcels of land must be 
acquired for the transit system, and much of the funding is 
uncertain. It is now in the hands of Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., a body 
created by the city to oversee implementation of the project; 
Atlanta BeltLine Partnership is a sister organization responsible 
for fundraising and outreach. Several parks and pieces of the 
trails have been built, and master plans have been completed for 
10 segments of land the BeltLine comprises. There is no doubt 
that the Atlanta BeltLine will be years in the making, but when it 
is finished, it will represent a monumental improvement in urban 
Atlanta, making the city more livable and viable. Atlanta, with its 
BeltLine, joins a bevy of cities intent on transforming unused and 
blighted neighborhoods into showplaces of urban renewal: New 
York’s High Line, Chicago’s Millennium Reserve, Boston’s Public 
Market, Los Angeles’ River of Dreams, and Seattle’s waterfront, 
among others.
Our objective in this chapter is first to show how urban 
sprawl and urban blight are related and how they can be rem-
edied. Then we will consider the global and national efforts being 
undertaken to forge sustainable cities and communities. Finally, 
we will look at some ethical concerns and personal lifestyle is-
sues as we consider the urgent needs of people and the environ-
ment in this new millennium.
Figure 1 Historic Fourth Ward Park. This park, one of the new features 
of the Atlanta BeltLine, has replaced a drab urban landscape with a mix of green 
space, lakes, jogging paths, and playgrounds.
1 Urban Sprawl
What is urban sprawl? Sprawl’s signature manifestation 
is a far-flung urban-suburban network of low-density 
residential areas, shopping malls, industrial parks, and 
other facilities loosely laced together by multilane highways. 
The word sprawl is used because the perimeters of the city 
have simply been extended outward into the countryside,  
one development after the next, with little plan as to where 
the expansion is going and no notion as to where it will 
stop. Almost everywhere we go near urban areas, we are 
confronted by farms and natural areas giving way to new 
subdivisions being built, new highways being constructed, 
and 
old 
roadways 
being 
upgraded 
and 
expanded  
(Fig. 2). In fact, cars and sprawl are codependent; they need 
each other!
619

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
The Origins of Urban Sprawl
Until the end of World War II, a relatively small percentage of 
people owned cars. Cities had developed in ways that allowed 
people to meet their needs by means of the transportation 
that was available—mainly, walking. Every few blocks 
had small groceries, pharmacies, and other stores as well 
as professional offices integrated with residences. Often, 
buildings had stores at the street level and residences above 
(Fig. 3). Schools were scattered throughout the city, as were 
parks for outdoor recreation or relaxation. Walking distances 
were generally short, and bicycling made going somewhere 
even more convenient. For more specialized needs, people 
boarded public transportation—electric trolleys, cable cars, 
and buses—that took them from neighborhoods to the 
“downtown” area, where big department stores, specialty 
shops, and offices were located. Public transportation did 
not change the compact structure of cities, because people 
still needed to walk to the transit line. At the outer ends of 
the transit lines, cities gave way abruptly to natural areas 
and farms, which provided most of the food for the city. The 
small towns and villages surrounding cities—the original 
suburbs—were compact for the same reasons and mainly 
served farmers in the immediate area. At the end of World 
War II, this pattern began to change dramatically.
Despite the many advantages of urban life, many peo-
ple found cities less-than-pleasant places to live. Especially 
in industrial cities, poor housing, inadequate sewage systems, 
inadequate refuse collection, pollution from home furnaces 
and industry, and generally congested, noisy conditions were 
common. Hence, many people had the desire—the “Ameri-
can dream”—to live in their own house, on their own piece 
of land, away from the city.
Suburbs. Because of the massive production of war mater-
iel, consumer goods were in short supply during World War II.  
As a result, when the war ended, there was a pent-up de-
mand for consumer goods. When mass production of cars 
resumed at the end of the war, people flocked to buy them. 
With private cars, people were no longer restricted to living 
within walking distance of their workplaces or transit lines. 
They could move out of their cramped city flats and into 
homes of their own outside the city. Their cars would allow 
them to drive back and forth easily to their jobs, shopping, 
recreation, and so on.
Housing Boom. Returning veterans and the accom-
panying baby boom created a housing demand that rapidly 
exhausted the existing inventory. Developers responded 
quickly to the demand for private homes. They bought farm-
lands and natural areas outside the cities and put up houses. 
The government aided this trend by providing low-interest 
mortgages through the Veterans Administration and the 
Federal Housing Administration, and interest payments on 
mortgages and local property taxes were made tax deduct-
ible (rent was not). These financial factors meant that, for 
the first time in history, making monthly payments on one’s 
own home in the suburbs was cheaper than paying rent for 
equivalent or less living space in the city.
Thus, the mushrooming development around cities did 
not proceed according to any plan; rather, it happened wher-
ever developers could acquire land (Fig. 4). No governing 
body existed to devise—much less enforce—an overall plan. 
Cities were usually surrounded by a maze of more or less 
autonomous local jurisdictions (towns, villages, townships, 
and counties). Local governments were quickly thrown into 
the catch-up role of trying to provide schools, sewers, water 
systems, other public facilities, and, most of all, roads to ac-
commodate the uncontrolled growth. Local zoning laws kept 
residential and commercial uses separate. It became more 
difficult to walk to a grocery store or an office.
Rust Belt. Pittsburgh, Cleveland, Youngstown, Gary—
these and many other cities of the Midwest can be counted as 
full-fledged representatives of what has been called the Rust 
Belt. Once known as the “Foundry of the Nation,” these cities 
and their outskirts had specialized in heavy manufacturing 
of industrial and consumer products up to the mid-20th 
Figure 2 New-highway construction. The hallmark of development 
over the past several decades has been the construction of new highways, which, 
however, have only fed the environmentally damaging car-dependent lifestyle.
Figure 3 The integrated city. Before the widespread use of auto mobiles, 
cities had an integrated structure. A wide variety of small stores and offices on 
ground floors, with residences on upper floors, placed everyday needs within 
walking distance. This scene is from a historic section of Philadelphia.
620

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
legislation placed a tax on gasoline and earmarked the 
revenues to be used exclusively for building new roads.
Ironically, the Highway Trust Fund perpetuates devel-
opment. A new highway not only alleviates existing conges-
tion, but also encourages development at farther locations, 
because time, not distance, is the limiting factor for commut-
ers. (When people describe how far they live from work, it 
is almost always put in terms of minutes, not distance.) The 
average person is willing to spend 20 to 40 minutes each way 
on a daily commute. With cars and expressways, people can 
live many miles from work and still get there in an accept-
able amount of time.
Vicious Cycle. New highways that were intended to re-
duce congestion actually fostered the development of open 
land and commuting by more drivers from more distant lo-
cations (Fig. 6). Soon traffic conditions became as congested 
as ever. Average commuting distance has doubled since 1960, 
but average commuting time has remained about the same. 
The increase in commuting distance, however, requires more 
fuel, which generates more money for the Highway Trust 
Fund. Thus, the whole process is repeated in a continuous 
century. Then a combination of factors contributed to a 
decline in the Rust Belt: the migration of manufacturing to 
southern states where labor was less costly, the globalization 
of trade that gave foreign manufacturers with their far 
lower labor costs access to U.S. markets, the expansion of 
free trade agreements, and the outsourcing of jobs and 
factories because of these two developments. The result was 
a wholesale loss of the economic foundations of cities of the 
Rust Belt during the latter half of the 20th century, and this 
loss added to the mass migration of people from the cities to 
the suburbs. The term “Rust Belt” is a consequence of the all-
too-common images of rusting and crumbling buildings and 
factories (Fig. 5).
Highways. The influx of commuters into previously rural 
areas soon resulted in traffic congestion, creating a need 
for new and larger roads. To raise money to build and 
expand highways, Congress passed the Highway Revenue 
Act of 1956, which created the Highway Trust Fund. This 
Figure 4 Urban sprawl. Prime land is being sacrificed for development 
around most U.S. cities and towns. The locations of developments are determined 
more by the availability of land than by any overall urban planning. Here we see 
sprawl surrounding the fastest-growing major city in the United States: Las Vegas, 
Nevada.
Figure 5 Rust Belt image. This abandoned factory is symbolic of many 
such relics of the heavy manufacturing that once took place in large midwestern 
cities.
Figure 6 The new-highway traffic-congestion cycle.  
(a) Growing traffic congestion creates the need for new and upgraded highways. 
(b) However, upgraded highways encourage development in more distant locations, 
thus creating more traffic congestion and, hence, the need for more highways.
(a)
(b)
621

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
organization) worked for several years on a comprehensive 
effort to define, measure, and evaluate sprawl and its im-
pacts. The research team labeled sprawl as “the process in 
which the spread of development across the landscape far 
outpaces population growth.”2 The team members described 
four dimensions characterizing sprawl and used them to ana-
lyze metropolitan regions in order to create a sprawl index:
 • Population widely dispersed in low-density develop-
ment; thus, measure residential density.
 • Sharply separated homes, stores, and workplaces; thus, 
measure neighborhood mix of these three.
 • A network of roads marked by poor connections and 
huge superblocks that concentrate traffic onto a few 
routes; thus, measure accessibility of the street networks.
 • A general lack of well-defined downtowns and activity 
centers; thus, measure strength of activity centers and 
downtowns.
Each of the preceding four dimensions was standardized 
numerically so as to give 100 points as the average of the 
factor; higher means less sprawl, and lower means more. 
Scores for each factor were combined into a total sprawl 
score that also averaged 100. The team analyzed 83 
metropolitan areas, representing almost half of the U.S. 
population. The results ranged from 14 to 178 (Fig. 7), with 
the Riverside–San Bernardino, California, metropolitan 
area the most sprawled and New York City the least. The 
10 most sprawling metropolitan regions are ranked in  
Table 2. The Smart Growth America authors pointed out 
that, even though an area ranks higher on the sprawl score, 
this does not mean that sprawl is not a problem. Each of the 
four dimensions and the overall score were used to examine 
a range of travel- and transportation-related outcomes as the 
authors examined the impacts of sprawl on daily life.
tabLe 1 Decline in Population of American Cities, 1950–2009
Population (thousands)
Percent Change, 
1950–2009
City
1950
1970
1990
2000
2005
2009 
Baltimore, MD
950
905
736
651
640
637
−33
Boston, MA
801
641
574
589
597
645
−19
Buffalo, NY
580
463
328
293
278
270
−53
Cleveland, OH
915
751
505
478
450
431
−53
Detroit, MI
1,850
1,514
1,028
951
921
911
−51
Minneapolis, MN
522
434
368
383
375
385
−26
Philadelphia, PA
2,072
1,949
1,586
1,517
1,460
1,547
−26
St. Louis, MO
857
662
396
348
353
357
−58
Washington, DC
802
757
607
572
582
600
−25
U.S. population (millions)
151
218
249
281
296
307
+103
Source: Data from Population Division, U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2012.
cycle. As a result, government policy, as an unintended conse-
quence, helped support and promote sprawl.
Residential developments are inevitably followed (or 
sometimes led) by shopping malls, industrial parks, big-box 
stores, and office complexes. These commercial centers are 
usually situated in such a way that the only possible access to 
them is by car. This situation, in turn, has only changed the 
direction of commuting: Whereas, in the early days of sub-
urban sprawl, the major traffic flow was into and out of cit-
ies, it is now between suburban centers. Multilane highways 
connecting suburban centers are perpetually congested with 
traffic going in both directions.
Exurbs, Too. In broad perspective, then, urban sprawl is 
a process of exurban migration—that is, a relocation of resi-
dences, shopping areas, and workplaces from their traditional 
spots in the city to outlying areas. The populations of many 
eastern and midwestern U.S. cities, excluding the suburbs, have 
been declining over the past 60 years as a result of exurban mi-
gration and the loss of large-scale manufacturing around Rust 
Belt cities (Table 1). At the same time, the suburban population 
has increased from 35 million in 1950 to 150 million in 2010, 
half of the U.S. population. Exurban migration is continuing in 
a leapfrog fashion as people from older suburbs move to ex-
urbs (communities farther from cities than suburbs are).
The “love affair” with cars is not just a U.S. phenom-
enon: Around the world, in both developed and developing 
countries, people aspire to own cars and adopt the car- 
dependent lifestyle. Consequently, urban sprawl is occurring 
around many developing-world cities as people become af-
fluent enough to own cars. Love of the car-dependent life-
style, however, is insufficient to make it sustainable. In fact, 
this lifestyle is at the crux of a number of the unsustainable 
trends.
Measuring Sprawl
A team of researchers from Rutgers University, Cornell  
University, and Smart Growth America (a nongovernmental 
2Reid Ewing, Rolf Pendall, and Don Chen, Measuring Sprawl and Its Im-
pact (Washington, DC: Smart Growth America, 2002). Available at www. 
smartgrowthamerica.org/research/measuring-sprawl-and-its-impact.
622

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
by the prospect of ownership of properties that would sim-
ply increase in value, as housing had done in the late 1900s 
and early 2000s. (Between 1997 and 2006, typical Ameri-
can home prices rose by 124%.) They were further encour-
aged by banks and mortgage companies that extended loans 
(called subprime mortgages) to many high-risk buyers. A 
high percentage of these loans were adjustable-rate mort-
gages (ARMs), in which the interest rates were low for the 
first few years but in time went up. Many loans required lit-
tle or no down payment. At the same time, financial firms 
bought up the subprime mortgages and used these to offer 
securities to investors. Speculation by buyers and investors 
was the primary engine that fed this financial bubble.
Bubble Burst. Eventually, the building boom led to a sur-
plus of unsold homes, and housing prices began to decline in 
2006. The ARMs were soon reset to higher interest rates, and 
homeowners were not able to refinance at lower rates. Thou-
sands, and eventually millions, of owners of the new proper-
ties defaulted on their loans. Property values declined, and 
fully one-fourth of all homes in the United States were worth 
less than their mortgaged amount (called underwater mort-
gages). Foreclosures soon followed in epidemic numbers. 
This resulted in the precipitous decline in value of securities 
backed by the bad loans, and the crisis extended to other 
sectors of the economy. Job layoffs and business failures fol-
lowed, and unemployment numbers rose. The country, and 
indeed the global community, was plunged into a deep reces-
sion, with huge investment losses and financial crises that are 
still reverberating around the global economy.
Recovery. It is significant that areas with the most booming 
housing markets before the recession are now areas with the 
most underwater mortgages—regions in California, Florida, 
and the Southwest.3 For example, the Las Vegas–Paradise 
metropolitan area in Nevada has 64% of mortgaged homes 
underwater; 35% of the homes were built since 2000, and 
17% of homes there are now vacant. The unemployment rate 
there is 14%, and housing prices have dropped 60% from 
prerecession values. Although recovery from the recession is 
under way, the housing market is going to take a long time 
to recover because of the high inventory of foreclosed homes. 
Most of these homes are in the suburbs—and in sprawling 
subdivisions.
Environmental Impacts of Urban Sprawl
In addition to its contribution to the decline in home values 
and the recession, urban sprawl affects the quality of life and 
the environment in numerous ways. The environmental im-
pacts of urban sprawl are many and serious, as the following 
discussion indicates.
Energy Resources. Shifting to a car-dependent lifestyle has 
created an ever-increasing demand for petroleum, with many  
Sprawl and the Recession
The expansion of the suburbs and exurbs in recent years 
has been remarkable. Builders and developers embarked 
on the creation of subdivisions of large, expensive homes  
(McMansions, as they are called), and new buyers were lured 
Figure 7 Sprawl scores for 83 metropolitan regions. The “spraw-
lometer” shows rankings of numerous metropolitan areas (each round dot repre-
sents a separate area). Low scores mean high sprawl, and vice versa.
(Source: Measuring Sprawl and Its Impact, 2002, Smart Growth America.)
Sprawlometer
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
New York
San Francisco
Portland, OR
Philadelphia
Los Angeles
Birmingham, AL
Oxnard-Ventura, CA
Bridgeport, CT
Atlanta
Greensboro, NC
Riverside, CA
tabLe 2  Ten Most Sprawling Metropolitan 
Regions
Overall Sprawl 
Index Score
Rank
Riverside–San Bernardino, CA
14.2
1
Greensboro–Winston-Salem–
High Point, NC
46.8
2
Raleigh–Durham, NC
54.2
3
Atlanta, GA
57.7
4
Greenville–Spartanburg, SC
58.6
5
West Palm Beach–Boca 
Raton–Delray Beach, FL
67.7
6
Bridgeport–Stamford–
Danbury, CT
68.4
7
Knoxville, TN
68.7
8
Oxnard–Ventura, CA
75.1
9
Forth Worth–Arlington, TX
77.2
10
Source: Reid Ewing, Rolf Pendall, and Don Chen. Measuring Sprawl and 
Its Impact (Washington, DC: Smart Growth America, 2002).
3Michael B. Sauter and Charles B. Stockdale. “American Cities with the Most  
Underwater Mortgages.” 24/7 Wall Street, December 28, 2011.
623

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
consequences. From 1950 to 2010, U.S. oil consumption 
tripled, while population doubled—a 63% increase in per 
capita consumption. Transportation accounts for 28% of 
the U.S. greenhouse gas emissions that are causing climate 
change.
Air Pollution. Despite improvements in pollution control, 
many cities still fail to meet desired air quality standards.  
Vehicles are responsible for an estimated 80% of the air pol-
lution in metropolitan regions. The higher use of gasoline 
produces greater amounts of carbon dioxide, the most seri-
ous anthropogenic greenhouse gas.
Water Resources. All the highways, parking lots, drive-
ways, and other paved areas associated with urban sprawl 
lead to a substantial increase in runoff, resulting in increased 
flooding and erosion of stream banks. Also, water quality is 
degraded by the runoff of fertilizer, pesticides, crankcase oil 
(the oil that drips from engines), pet droppings, and so on. 
These nonpoint-source pollutants are the leading cause of 
water quality problems, according to the EPA.
Loss of Agricultural Land. Perhaps most serious in the 
long run is the loss of prime agricultural land. In the United 
States, the National Resources Inventory shows that crop-
land is declining at a rate of 1.1 million acres per year. Most 
of the food for cities used to be locally grown on small, di-
versified family farms surrounding the city. With so many of 
these farms turned into housing developments, it is estimated 
that food now travels an average of 1,000 miles (1,500 km) 
from where it is produced—mostly on huge commercial 
farms—to where it is eaten. The loss is not just the locally 
grown produce, but also the social interactions and ties with 
the farm community.
Loss of Landscapes and Wildlife. New developments 
are consuming land at an increasing pace. According to the 
National Resources Inventory, 1.7 million acres a year were 
developed from 1997 to 2007, compared with 1.4 million 
acres a year from 1982 to 1992 (Fig. 8). The result is the 
sacrifice of aesthetic, recreational, and wildlife values in 
metropolitan areas—the very places where they are most 
important.
The fragmentation of wildlife habitat due to urban 
sprawl has led to marked declines in many species, ranging 
from birds to amphibians. A 2005 report4 found that the 35 
fastest-growing metropolitan areas are home to nearly one-
third of the nation’s rarest and most endangered species of 
plants and animals.
Impacts of Sprawl on Quality of Life
Urban sprawl can also have major negative impacts on quality 
of life for people in the surrounding areas.
Higher Vehicle Ownership and Driving Mileages 
Cars are driven greater distances per person in high-sprawl 
areas. In Atlanta (sprawl score of 58), for example, daily 
use per person was 34 miles each day, while in Portland, 
Oregon (sprawl score of 126), it was only 24 miles each 
day. In the top 10 sprawl areas, there were 180 vehicles per 
100 households, while in the lowest 10, there were 162. 
Chauffeuring kids to and from school or after-school activ-
ities requires more driving in sprawl areas. As these values 
for miles driven and cars owned aggregate over many met-
ropolitan areas, they add up to millions more miles driven 
and cars on the road as well as higher gas costs for fami-
lies. The higher rates of vehicle use also lead to more high-
way fatalities. In Riverside, California, at the top of the 
sprawl index, 18 of every 100,000 people die each year in 
highway accidents. In the eight lowest areas on the index, 
fewer than eight of 100,000 residents die annually on the 
highways.
Less Physical Activity and Greater Health Risks. The 
percentage of commuter trips by mass transit in the 10 highest- 
 sprawl areas was 2% compared with 7% in the 10 lowest-
sprawl areas. Similar trends are found for people walking 
to their workplace. People living in high-sprawl areas drive 
more, while those in more compact communities walk and 
take mass transit more. Walking and other moderate physi-
cal activities have many health benefits. The study of sprawl 
and its health effects found a highly significant correlation 
between the degree of sprawl, on the one hand, and weight, 
obesity, and high blood pressure, on the other.
Congestion and Higher Costs. There is no difference in 
commute times between high- and low-sprawl areas. This 
indicates that moving out to the suburbs or exurbs to get 
4Reid Ewing and John Kostyack, with Don Chen, Bruce Stein, and Michelle Ernst. 
Endangered by Sprawl: How Runaway Development Threatens America’s Wildlife 
(Washington, DC: National Wildlife Federation, Smart Growth America, and 
NatureServe, January 2005).
Figure 8 Conversion of land to developed uses. The buildup of 
developed land in the United States is shown. From 1982 to 2007, 40 million  
acres were converted to developed uses from natural lands and farmlands. 
(Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2007 National Resources Inventory, Natu-
ral Resources Conservation Service, Washington, DC, and Center for Survey Statis-
tics and Methodology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa. July 2009.)
71 total
45
50.5
57.1
75.3
66.9
81.8
21.3
21.3
21.4
21.6
21.9
22.2
4.7
5.1
5.4
6.1
6.8
7.2
20
Large urban and built-up areas
Rural transportation
Small built-up areas
Million acres
40
60
80
100
120
104 total
1982
2002
1997
1992
1987
2007
0
76.9 total 
94.6 total
111.2 total 
83.9 total 
DEVELOPED LAND, 1982—2007
624

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
sprawl and its impacts believe that the costs of sprawl out-
weigh the benefits. They feel it is worth the effort to bring 
sprawl under control. The key to controlling sprawl is to 
provide those quality-of-life benefits that attract people, but 
to do it without incurring the serious environmental and so-
cial costs that are clearly associated with sprawl. This is what 
“smart growth” intends to do.
Reining in Urban Sprawl: Smart Growth
The way to curtail urban sprawl might appear to be simply 
to pass laws that bring exurban development under control. 
Indeed, a number of European countries and Japan have 
such laws. However, laws cannot be passed without the sup-
port of the public. In the United States, the strong sentiment 
favoring the right of a property owner to develop property as 
he or she sees fit has made such restrictions, with few excep-
tions, politically impossible to pass.
Yet there are signs that a sea change is occurring in the 
attitudes of Americans toward uncontrolled growth. For ex-
ample, the recently emerged concept of smart growth is in-
viting communities and metropolitan areas to address sprawl 
and purposely choose to develop in more environmentally 
sustainable ways. The concept recognizes that some growth 
will occur and focuses on economic, environmental, and com-
munity values that together will lead to more sustainable 
communities. Table 3 presents the basic principles of smart 
growth. Zoning laws are being changed in many localities, 
and a new generation of architects and developers is begin-
ning to focus on creating integrated communities, as opposed 
to disassociated facilities. By directing growth to particular 
places, smart growth provides protection for sensitive lands. 
Early indications in the marketplace—the final determining 
factor—are that the new communities are a great success.
away from traffic congestion does not work. As more people 
move to the suburbs, the car traffic increases, and the con-
gestion reaches out farther. Thus, metropolitan regions can-
not sprawl their way out of congestion. The developments 
in outlying regions of metropolitan areas also all have to be 
serviced with schools, sewers, water, electricity, roads, and 
other infrastructure elements, often forcing county and town 
budgets (and, therefore, taxes) to escalate. More compact 
forms of development are less expensive to service.
The Benefits of Urban Sprawl
With all of these undesirable effects of sprawl, one might 
question why people put up with it. The answer is that peo-
ple perceive that it is better to live in such areas, so they move 
there. There are benefits to sprawl, and it is important to ex-
amine them and compare them with the costs. This compari-
son was made in a study sponsored by the Federal Transit 
Administration.5
Quality-of-life issues tend to be decisive for most peo-
ple, and these issues seem to be heavily weighted in favor of 
sprawl. In general, sprawl involves lower-density residential 
living, larger lot sizes (often 2 acres or more), larger single-
family homes, better quality public schools, lower crime 
rates, better social services, and greater opportunity for par-
ticipation in local governments. As people move farther out 
from an urban center, housing costs often decline, and com-
munities tend to be more homogeneous. Given these actual 
or perceived benefits, it is no wonder that sprawl is the domi-
nant form of growth occurring in major metropolitan areas.
Net Benefits? As we have seen, there is little or no advan-
tage in commute times or traffic congestion and actually 
greater distances to drive for those in the outlying suburbs 
and exurbs. With gasoline prices approaching $4 a gallon, 
the commuting distance exacts a major cost to families (close 
to $15,000 a year for many suburban regions). Also, the traf-
fic fatality rate is worse because speed alone allows people to 
drive greater distances and achieve an equivalent commuting 
time. Several of the perceived benefits of sprawl have serious 
negative side effects for society as a whole. People move to 
the exurbs to live in neighborhoods with lower crime rates, 
to have access to better schools, or to live in more homoge-
neous communities. In one way or another, these choices are 
often exclusionary in their effects. The result of thousands 
of people making these choices is to accentuate the concen-
tration of poorer people in high-density, inner-city, or aging 
suburban communities.
Common Good? The environmental costs of sprawl are 
very real, but these are seldom perceived as decisive by the 
people moving to the sprawling suburbs. These costs are 
more a matter of the common good, and people tend to 
make choices based on personal good rather than the com-
mon good. On the whole, most observers who have studied 
5Robert W. Burchell, George Lowenstein, William R. Dolphin, and Catherine 
C. Galley. The Costs of Sprawl—2000. Washington, DC: National Academies  
Press, 2002.
tabLe 3 Principles of Smart Growth
Create a range of housing opportunities and choices for people  
of all income levels.
Create walkable neighborhoods.
Encourage the collaboration of citizens, corporations, businesses, 
and municipal bodies within communities.
Foster distinctive, attractive communities with a strong sense 
of place, setting standards for development that respond to 
community values.
Make development decisions predictable, fair, and cost effective.
Mix land uses to provide a more attractive and healthy place to 
live.
Preserve open space, farmland, natural beauty, and critical 
environmental areas.
Provide a variety of transportation choices.
Strengthen and direct development toward existing communities 
(called infilling).
Take advantage of compact building design instead  
of conventional land-hogging development.
625

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
Twenty-First Century (TEA–21) in 1998. Then the Safe, Ac-
countable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act—A 
Legacy for Users (SAFETEA–LU) was passed in 2005. This 
act authorized $244 billion for 2005–2009 for the highway 
and transit programs, a significant increase over TEA–21 
funding; mass transit has received 18% of these funds.
However, the Highway Trust Fund is not bringing in 
enough to sustain this level; SAFETEA-LU has expired, and 
the programs have been continued through short-term ex-
tensions, at lower funding levels. A new transportation act is 
long overdue. However, the economic stimulus package (the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009) contained 
$64 billion for roads, bridges, rail, and transit, and mass tran-
sit has been receiving much of this money, given President 
Obama’s expressed desire to promote projects that will coun-
teract urban sprawl and reduce our dependence on oil.
Highway Trust Fund monies are only part of the reason for 
the resurgence of mass transit; the high gasoline costs of 2008 
drove many commuters to buses, trains, and subways, and mass 
transit ridership has remained high. Mass transit issues fared 
well in the 2008 election, with voters approving initiatives that 
would infuse $75 billion into transportation systems.
Fixing Suburbia. The recession and its accompanying im-
pacts on suburbs have created a unique opportunity to rede-
velop suburbs in more desirable patterns. Two recent books 
provide some key guidelines for repairing suburban sprawl.6 
A recent survey7 found that most Americans prefer a walk-
able neighborhood to a large house, especially the Baby 
Boomers (largely empty nesters now) and many Gen Y peo-
ple (20s and 30s) who are looking for places where they can 
socialize. The books Retrofitting Suburbia by Ellen Dunham-
Jones and June Williamson and Sprawl Repair Manual by 
Galina Tachieva are for planners and developers, providing 
specific examples of what can be done to abandoned malls 
and poorly designed suburban streets and roadways to con-
vert them to more desirable neighborhoods with places to 
walk and village centers and greenery. For example, a 100-
acre mall in Lakewood, Colorado, has been replaced with 
22 blocks of green buildings and public streets, creating a 
real downtown for the suburban town. The authors of both 
books state that sprawl has many faces, and some of them 
are more amenable to makeover than others.
Another key strategy for reducing sprawl is to revitalize 
the cities. This means coping with urban blight.
2 Urban Blight
In the developed world, the other end of the exurban mi-
gration is the city from which people are moving. Exur-
ban migration is the major factor underlying urban decay, 
Initiatives. Smart-growth initiatives are appearing on the 
ballot in many states and municipalities. These initiatives in-
volve several key strategies:
1. Setting boundaries on urban sprawl. Oregon led the 
way in passing a land-use law in the 1970s that requires 
every city to set a boundary beyond which urban growth 
is prohibited. The boundary is a line permitting expected 
future growth—but controlled growth. Portland has had 
great success with this strategy, and today it is a highly 
desirable place to live and work.
2. Saving open space. The best way to preserve open space 
is to own it or the development rights to it, and states 
are enacting programs to acquire crucial remaining open 
spaces. For example, in 2004 (before the recession), vot-
ers approved 162 state and local ballot measures to pro-
vide $4.1 billion for the protection of natural areas.
3. Developing existing urban space. In 1997, Maryland’s 
General Assembly passed the Smart Growth and Neigh-
borhood Conservation initiative, which includes meas-
ures to channel new growth to community sites where 
key infrastructure is already in place. Abandoned and 
brownfield sites in metropolitan areas are already well 
served with roads, electricity, water, and sewerage and 
can be developed into communities with new homes, 
workplaces, and shopping areas.
4. Creating new towns. A key to developing sustainable 
communities is changing zoning laws to allow stores, 
light industries, professional offices, and higher-density 
housing to be integrated. Affordable and attractive hous-
ing can be created around industrial parks and shopping 
malls for the people who work and shop in those places. 
Safe bicycle and pedestrian access can be provided be-
tween residential areas and workplaces. Reston, Virginia; 
Columbia, Maryland; and Valencia, California, were 
established as self-contained towns along these lines in 
the 1960s, and they are still highly desirable as business 
and residential locations. Fairfax County, Virginia (next 
to Washington, DC), by contrast, is now almost 100% 
covered by sprawl-type development. It is estimated that 
if Fairfax had pursued smart-growth policies, the county 
would still be 70% open space and would be far less 
congested and less polluted.
Raiding the Fund. In addition to the foregoing key strate-
gies, there have been successful moves to break the cycle cre-
ated by the Highway Trust Fund, by allowing revenues to be 
used for purposes other than the construction of more high-
ways. People live too far from where they work, and there are 
often better ways to get to work than driving automobiles. 
The first significant inroad was made in 1991 with the pas-
sage of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act 
(ISTEA). Under this act, a substantial amount of the money 
levied by the Highway Trust Fund was eligible to be used 
for other modes of transportation, including cycling, walk-
ing, and mass transit. The objectives of ISTEA were extended 
with the passage of the Transportation Equity Act for the 
6Ellen Dunham-Jones and June Williamson. Retrofitting Suburbia: Urban Design 
Solutions for Redesigning Suburbs. Hoboken, NJ. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2011. 
Galina Tachieva. Sprawl Repair Manual. Washington, DC. Island Press. 2010.
7Belden Russonello and Stewart LLC. “The 2011 Community Preference Survey: 
What Americans Are Looking for When Deciding Where to Live.” March 2011. 
www.Brspoll.com. Washington, DC.
626

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
a government jurisdiction that is separate from those of the 
surrounding suburbs.
Economic Dysfunction. Because of the preceding three 
characteristics of local government, exurban migration has 
the following consequences: By the economics of supply and 
demand, property values in the suburbs escalate with the 
influx of affluent newcomers. Thus, suburban jurisdictions 
enjoy increasing tax revenues with which they can improve 
and expand local services. At the same time, property 
values in the city decline because of decreasing demand. 
The lower property taxes create a powerful disincentive 
toward maintaining property. Many properties end up being 
abandoned by the owner for nonpayment of taxes. The city 
“inherits” such abandoned properties, but they are a liability 
rather than a source of revenue (Fig. 10). The declining tax 
revenue resulting from falling property values is referred to 
as an eroding, or declining, tax base, and it has been a serious 
handicap for most U.S. cities since the exurban migration 
started in the late 1940s. Adding to the problem is the fact 
that many immigrants tend to settle in the inner cities, drawn 
there by ethnic bonds and the hope of employment. The result 
or blight, that has occurred over the past 60 years. A com-
pletely different set of factors is responsible for urban blight 
in the developing world. In that case, people are moving to 
the cities at a rate that far exceeds the capacity of the cities 
to assimilate them. The result is urban slums that surround 
virtually every city in the poorer developing countries. UN–
HABITAT estimates that more than 800 million people live 
in urban slums in the developing world, often under condi-
tions so squalid that they defy description.
We look first at urban blight in the developed countries, 
with the United States as our focus.
Economic and Ethnic Segregation
Historically, U.S. cities have included people with a wide di-
versity of economic and ethnic backgrounds. However, mov-
ing to the suburbs required some degree of affluence—at 
least the ability to manage a down payment and mortgage 
on a home and the ability to buy and drive a car. Therefore, 
exurban migration often excluded the poor, the elderly, and 
persons with disabilities. The poor were mostly minorities 
because a history of racial discrimination had kept them 
from good education and well-paying jobs and because 
many had recently immigrated to the United States and were 
still at the bottom of the social order. Discriminatory lending 
practices by banks and dishonest sales practices by real estate 
agents (called redlining) kept minorities out of the suburbs 
even when money was not a factor. Civil rights laws passed 
in the 1960s made such practices illegal, but there is evidence 
that they still persist in various forms. Even without racial 
segregation, economic segregation continues to exist and has 
even intensified.
In short, exurban migration and urban sprawl have led 
to segregation of the population into groups sharing com-
mon economic, social, and cultural backgrounds. Moving 
into the new suburban and exurban developments (often 
labeled white flight) were the economically advantaged, 
whereas many areas of the cities and older suburbs were  
effectively abandoned to the economically depressed, who in 
large part were ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities, 
and the elderly (Fig. 9).
The Vicious Cycle of Urban Blight
Affluent people moving to the suburbs set into motion a vi-
cious cycle of exurban migration and urban blight that con-
tinues today. To understand how this downward cycle occurs, 
we must note several points about local governments. First, 
local (usually city or county) governments are responsible for 
providing public schools, maintaining local roads, furnishing 
police and fire protection, collecting and disposing of refuse, 
maintaining public water and sewers, and providing welfare 
services, libraries, and local parks. Second, a local govern-
ment’s major source of revenue to pay for these services is 
local property taxes, a yearly tax proportional to the mar-
ket value of the property and home or other buildings on 
it. If property values increase or decrease, property taxes are 
adjusted accordingly. Third, in most cases, the central city is 
Figure 9 Segregation by exurban migration. Exurban migration, 
the driving force behind urban sprawl, has also led to segregation of the popula-
tion along economic and racial lines. In (a) an area of suburbia and (b) an area of 
inner-city Baltimore, you see the contrast.
(b)
(a)
627

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
people who remain in the inner city poor from the outset, 
but also the cycle of exurban migration and urban decay has 
now led to their economic exclusion from the mainstream. 
As a result, drug dealing, crime, violence, and other forms of 
deviant social behavior are widespread in such areas.
To be sure, in the past two decades, many cities have re-
developed core areas. Shops, restaurants, hotels, convention 
and entertainment centers, office buildings, residences, and 
places for walking and relaxing are all combining to bring 
a new spirit of life and hope, as well as the practical assets 
of taxes and employment, back into cities (Fig. 11). This is 
an encouraging new trend, so far as it goes. However, walk 
a few blocks in any direction from the sparkling, revitalized 
core of most U.S. cities, and you will find urban blight con-
tinuing unabated.
Urban Blight in Developing Countries
Two million residents of Nairobi, Kenya’s capital, live in 
slums consisting of flimsy shacks made of scrap wood, 
metal, plastic sheeting, rocks, and mud (Fig. 12). The slum 
neighborhoods of Nairobi surround the outskirts of the city. 
Burning trash and charcoal cooking fires cloud the air, and 
the lack of sewers adds to the smell. People get water from 
private companies because the city does not provide water 
or any other public amenities. There is no land ownership 
because the settlements are built on public land or on private 
land where landowners exact high rents. Crime and disease 
are endemic, and AIDS and tuberculosis spread readily in 
such slums.
Similar slum neighborhoods can be found around most 
of the developing-world cities; UN–HABITAT estimates 
that one out of every three people in the developing-world 
cities lives in slums. Yet in spite of the conditions, the cities 
are expected to continue growing well into the middle of 
the century. The continued rapid growth is a function of 
both natural population growth (which is high in many 
developing countries) and migration into the city from rural 
is that many inner-city dwellers require public assistance of 
one sort or another. Thus, besides the declining tax revenues, 
cities bear a disproportionate burden of welfare obligations.
The eroding tax base forces city governments to cut 
local services, increase the tax rate, or, generally, both. 
Hence, the property tax on a home in a city is often two to 
three times greater than that on a comparably priced home 
in the suburbs. At the same time, schools, refuse collection, 
street repair, libraries, parks, and other services and facilities 
deteriorate from neglect. Increasing taxes and deteriorating 
services cause yet more people to leave the city and become 
part of urban sprawl, even if the car-dependent lifestyle is not 
their primary choice. However, it is still only the relatively 
more affluent individuals who can make this move; thus, the 
whole process of exurban migration, a declining tax base, 
deteriorating real estate, and worsening schools and other 
services and facilities is perpetuated in a vicious cycle. This 
downward spiral of conditions is referred to as urban blight 
or urban decay. It is made worse by the manufacturing losses 
in Rust Belt cities.
Economic Exclusion of the Inner City. The exurban mi-
gration includes more than just individuals and families: The 
flight of affluent people from the city removes the purchas-
ing power necessary to support stores, professional establish-
ments, and other enterprises. Faced with declining business, 
merchants and practitioners of all kinds are forced either to 
go out of business or to move to new locations in the sub-
urbs. Either way, vacant storefronts are the result, and people 
remaining in the city lose convenient access to goods, serv-
ices, and, most importantly, jobs because each business also 
represents employment opportunities.
Unemployment rates run at 50% or more in depressed 
areas of inner cities, and the jobs that do exist are mostly at 
the minimum wage. By contrast, the new jobs being created 
are in the shopping malls and industrial parks in the outlying 
areas, which are largely inaccessible to inner-city residents 
for lack of public transportation. Therefore, not only are 
Figure 10 Abandoned buildings. Many cities’ ills are caused by too lit-
tle population, not too much. When the exurban migration causes a city’s popula-
tion to drop below a certain level, businesses are no longer supported. The result 
is abandonment and urban blight. Shown here is a section of Baltimore only a few 
blocks from the redeveloped Inner Harbor seen in Figure 11.
Figure 11 Inner Harbor, Baltimore. High population densities 
help make a city, not destroy it. Redeveloping key areas of cities with 
heterogeneous mixtures of office buildings, shopping, restaurants, residences, 
and recreational facilities—all of which attract people—has helped to bring new 
life back into the cities.
628

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
The people in the shantytowns also need more jobs, and 
again, local governments could provide employment at low 
cost to accomplish many improvements in their own neigh-
borhoods and elsewhere—collecting trash, building sewers, 
composting organic wastes, and growing food. Providing 
cheap transportation is another need. People need to get to 
where the jobs are and could often do so if they had bicycles 
or could afford to ride public transportation. Perhaps the 
greatest need of people living in the informal neighborhoods 
of city slums is government representation. Their voices are 
seldom heard because they are among the poorest and most 
powerless in a society. They are often plagued by government 
corruption, wherein nothing gets done unless accompanied 
by bribes (which these people can ill afford).
In some regions, however, community organizations are 
emerging to deal with the basic issues of the city slums. People 
are organizing and demanding their rights as citizens. Shack/
Slum Dwellers International (SDI) now represents these com-
munities to institutions like the World Bank and city govern-
ments and even held its first international conference in 2006. 
Change can happen, and people are learning how to make it 
happen. As cities devote energy and resources to providing 
the essential services and infrastructure to the informal slums 
that surround them, they will only be strengthened. The cities, 
and even the slums, will then become more livable.
3  Moving Toward Sustainable 
Cities and Communities
The environmental consequences of urban sprawl and the 
social consequences of urban blight are two sides of the 
same coin. A sustainable future will depend on both reining 
in urban sprawl and revitalizing cities. The urban blight of 
cities in the developing world requires deliberate policies to 
address the social needs of the people flocking to the shanty-
towns. UN–HABITAT reports that half of the world’s peo-
ple now live in cities, with 3 million people added weekly 
to  developing-world cities. Looking to the future, the only 
possible way to sustain the global population is by having 
viable, resource-efficient cities, leaving the countryside for 
agriculture and natural ecosystems. The key word is viable, 
which means livable. No one wants to, or should be required 
to, live in the conditions that have come to typify urban 
blight and urban slums.
What Makes Cities Livable?
Livability is a general concept based on people’s response to 
the question “Do you like living here, or would you rather 
live somewhere else?” Crime, pollution, and recreational, 
cultural, and professional opportunities, as well as many 
other social and environmental factors, are summed up in 
the subjective answer to that question. Although many peo-
ple assume that the social ills of the city are an outcome of 
high population densities, crime rates and other problems in 
U.S. cities have climbed while populations have dwindled as 
a result of the exurban migration.
areas. The economies of rural areas, often based only on 
subsistence farming, simply do not provide the jobs needed 
by a growing population. So people move to the cities, where 
they at least have the hope of employment. The city housing 
supply is overwhelmed by the influx of migrants, who could 
not afford the rents even if housing was available. The slums 
actually represent a great deal of entrepreneurial energy, 
because the residents build the dwellings and erect their 
own infrastructure, usually including food stands, coffee 
shops, barber shops, and, in some cases, schools for their 
children. Indeed, the slum residents are of necessity amazing 
entrepreneurs, engaging in a widespread informal economy. 
The signature of this economy is the umbrella that covers a 
booth by the side of the road where goods are exchanged or 
sold—hence the term “umbrella people.”8
The Needs 
The vast slums, or shantytowns, surrounding the cities are a 
tremendous challenge to the institutional structure of devel-
oping countries. Because slum areas are unauthorized, cities 
rarely provide them with electricity, water, sanitation facili-
ties, and other social amenities. Yet the slums often represent 
a workforce essential to the city, taking the low-paying jobs 
that keep the city and its inhabitants functioning. A great 
need in such neighborhoods is home security. People live in 
fear of bulldozers coming at any time and leveling the shan-
tytown. In Brazil, governments are providing legal status to 
existing slums (favelas), granting lawful titles to the land. 
Peru has undertaken a huge titling program, giving recog-
nition to some 1 million urban land parcels in a four-year 
period. Providing this level of security to the inhabitants is 
often the key to mobilizing further assets, such as acquiring 
access to credit and negotiating with the city government for 
utilities or additional services. People will improve their liv-
ing conditions if they are given the assurance that they can 
stay where they are.
Figure 12 Shantytown in Nairobi, Kenya. More than half of Nairobi’s 
residents live in such slums, where conditions defy description.
8Robert Neuwirth. “Global Bazaar: Shantytowns, Favelas and Jhopadpattis Turn 
Out to Be Places of Surprising Innovation.” Scientific American 305: 56–63. 
September 2011.
629

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
Lerner, who, while serving as mayor for many decades, guided 
development with an emphasis on mass transit rather than 
cars. The space saved by not building highways and park-
ing lots has been put into parks and shady walkways, caus-
ing the amount of green area per inhabitant to increase from  
4.5 square feet in 1970 to 450 square feet today.
Charinkos. In Tokyo, millions of people ride charinkos, 
or bicycles (Fig. 15), either all the way to work or to subway 
stations from which they catch fast, efficient trains to their 
destination. Tokyo residents own more than 9 million 
bicycles. By sharply restricting development outside certain 
city limits, Japan has maintained population densities within 
cities and along metropolitan corridors that ensure the 
viability of commuter trains. Japan’s cities have maintained 
a heterogeneous urban structure that mixes small shops, 
professional offices, and residences in such a way that a large 
portion of the population meets its needs without cars. In 
maintaining an economically active city, it is probably no 
coincidence that street crime, vagrancy, and begging are 
Looking at livable cities around the world, we find that 
the common denominators are
1. Maintaining a high population density;
2. Preserving a heterogeneity of residences, businesses, 
stores, and shops; and
3. Keeping layouts on a human dimension so that people 
can meet, visit, or conduct business informally over cof-
fee at a sidewalk café or stroll on a promenade through 
an open area.
In short, the space is designed for, and devoted to, 
people (Fig. 13). In contrast, city development of the past  
60 years has focused on accommodating automobiles and 
traffic. Two-thirds of the land in cities that have grown up 
in the era of the automobile is devoted to moving, parking, 
or servicing cars, and such space is essentially alien to the 
human psyche (Fig. 14). William Whyte, a well-known city 
planner, remarked, “It is difficult to design space that will not 
attract people. What is remarkable is how often this has been 
accomplished.”9
A Matter of Design. The world’s most livable cities are 
not those with “perfect” auto access between all points. In-
stead, they are cities that have taken measures to reduce 
outward sprawl, diminish automobile traffic, and improve 
access by foot and bicycle in conjunction with mass tran-
sit. For example, Geneva, Switzerland, prohibits automobile 
parking at workplaces in the city’s center, forcing commuters 
to use the excellent public transportation system. Copenha-
gen bans all on-street parking in the downtown core. Paris 
has removed 200,000 parking places in the downtown area. 
Curitiba, Brazil, with a population of 1.6 million, is cited 
as the most livable city in all of Latin America. The achieve-
ment of Curitiba is due almost entirely to the efforts of Jaime 
Figure 15 Bicycles in Tokyo. Most people in Tokyo do not own 
automobiles and instead ride bicycles or walk to stations from which they take 
fast, efficient, inexpensive subways to reach their destinations.
9William H. Whyte. “The Design of Spaces,” in The City Reader, 3rd ed., Ed. Richard 
T. LeGates (New York: Routledge, 2003), 432.
Figure 13 Livable cities. The key to having a livable city is to provide a 
heterogeneity of residences, businesses, and stores and to keep layouts on a 
human dimension so that people can meet or conduct business incidentally over 
coffee in a sidewalk café or stroll on a promenade through an open area. In short, 
the space is designed for, and devoted to, people. Shown here is Quincy Market, 
Boston.
Figure 14 Car-centered cities. In contrast to what is required  
for livability, city development of the past several decades has focused on 
moving and parking cars and creating homogeneity. Note the sterility of 
parking lots surrounding buildings in the foreground of this photograph of  
Los Angeles.
630

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
economic opportunities for women, access to health services, 
and less need for children’s household labor—work to reduce 
fertility rates in urban populations versus rural populations.
Beyond these basics, housing can be retrofitted with 
passive solar space heating and heating for hot water. 
Landscaping can provide cooling . A number of cities are 
developing vacant or cleared areas into garden plots (Fig. 17), 
and rooftop hydroponic gardens are becoming popular. Such 
gardens do not make cities agriculturally self-sufficient, but 
they add to urban livability, provide an avenue for recycling 
compost and nutrients removed from sewage, give a source 
of fresh vegetables, and have the potential to generate 
income for many unskilled workers. All of these factors have 
virtually unknown in the vast expanse of Tokyo, despite the 
seeming congestion.
Bicycles are a growing feature of many cities. In ex-
change for making special lanes, safe bikeways, and secure 
parking for bicycles, cities gain a great deal: decreased pol-
lution and congestion and better health for their people be-
cause of increased physical activity. Because of its pro-biking 
policies, the city of Amsterdam in the Netherlands holds the 
record for large cities in the developed countries; fully 38% 
of trips within the city are made on bicycles. To be sure, cy-
clists are at risk of accidents with motor vehicles, but the 
data show that cities with the highest cycling rates have the 
best safety records.10
Portland. Portland, Oregon, is a pioneering U.S. city 
that has taken giant steps to curtail automobile use. The first 
step was to encircle the city with an urban growth bound-
ary, a line outside of which new development was prohibited. 
Thus, compact growth, rather than sprawl, was ensured. Sec-
ond, an efficient light-rail and bus system was built, which 
now carries 45% of all commuters to downtown jobs. (In 
most U.S. cities, only 10% to 25% of commuters ride pub-
lic transit systems.) By reducing traffic, Portland was able to 
convert a former expressway and a huge parking lot into the 
now-renowned Tom McCall Waterfront Park. Portland is 
now ranked among the world’s most livable cities and has 
been recognized by SustainLane (see below) as the most sus-
tainable city in the United States.11
The Big Dig. Other U.S. cities are discovering hidden 
resources in their inner core areas. Expressways, which were 
built with federal highway funds to speed vehicles through 
the cities, frequently dissected neighborhoods, separating 
people from waterfronts and consuming existing open space. 
Now, with federal help, many cities are removing or burying 
the intruding expressways. Boston, for example, has recently 
put the finishing touches on the “Big Dig,” a $15 billion 
project that has moved its central freeway below ground, 
added parks and open space, and reconnected the city to its 
waterfront (Fig. 16). The waterfronts themselves are often the 
neglected relics of bygone transportation by water and rail. In 
recent years, cities such as Cleveland, Chicago, San Francisco, 
and Baltimore have redeveloped their waterfronts, turning 
rotting piers and abandoned freight yards into workplaces, 
high-rise residences, and public and entertainment space.
Livable Equals Sustainable. Even though cities are con-
centrations of energy use, resource use, and pollution, there 
are certain environmental benefits to urbanization. De-
creased auto traffic and a greater reliance on foot and public 
transportation reduce energy consumption and pollution. If 
the cities effectively provide the basic infrastructure needs—
clean water, solid-waste and sewage disposal, electricity—the 
economies of scale greatly reduce per capita resource con-
sumption in comparison with suburbs and rural areas. For 
example, urban populations use half as much electricity 
per capita as those in the suburbs. A number of factors— 
Figure 16 Boston, Massachusetts. The Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy Green-
way, on land once covered by an elevated expressway, is a series of four parks 
made up of gardens, plazas, and tree-lined promenades. The “Big Dig” project has 
revitalized the core city of Boston by replacing the central freeway with an under-
ground tunnel system that allows traffic to flow to and through the city without 
disrupting city life above.
(Source: Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy Greenway Conservancy.)
10Gary Gardner. “Power to the Pedals.” World Watch 23: 6–11. July/August 2010.
11www.sustainlane.com/us-city-rankings.
631

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
By making urban areas more appealing and economi-
cally stable, we not only improve the lives of those who 
choose to remain or must remain in cities, but also spare sur-
rounding areas. Our parks, wildernesses, and farms will not 
be replaced by exurbs and shopping malls, but rather will 
be saved for future generations. In the past decade, some re-
markable developments have begun to accelerate the move-
ment toward building sustainable communities. We turn to 
these developments now.
Sustainable Communities
The 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Develop-
ment (UNCED) created the Commission on Sustainable 
Development. This new body was given the responsibility 
of monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the 
agreements that were made at UNCED—in particular, those 
related to sustainability. Following Agenda 21, one of the ac-
cords signed at UNCED, countries agreed to work on sus-
tainable-development strategies and action plans that would 
put them on a track toward sustainability. Some 106 coun-
tries have now developed national sustainable-development 
strategies that lay out public-policy priorities. Most of these 
countries are actively engaged in transforming the policies 
into action plans, and we will investigate one of the out-
comes of these activities: the sustainable communities move-
ment.
Revitalizing urban economies and rehabilitating cit-
ies requires coordinated efforts on the part of all sectors of 
society. In fact, such efforts are beginning to occur. What 
is termed a sustainable communities movement is taking 
root in cities around the United States and elsewhere. In the 
United States, the Department of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment sponsors the Sustainable Communities and Develop-
ment program, providing grants to foster the development 
of more-livable urban neighborhoods. The Internet resources 
Sustainable Communities Online and Smart Communities 
Network provide a cornucopia of information, help, case 
studies, and linkages, demonstrating that the movement is 
gaining ground throughout the nation. Chattanooga, Tennes-
see, is now regarded as a prototype of what can occur with 
such a movement.
Chattanooga. Forty years ago, Chattanooga, which strad-
dles the Tennessee River, was a decaying industrial city with 
high levels of pollution. Employment was falling and resi-
dents were fleeing to the suburbs, leaving abandoned proper-
ties and increasing crime. In 1969, the EPA presented the city 
with a special award for “the dirtiest city in America.” Then 
Chattanooga Venture, a nonprofit organization founded by 
community leaders, launched Vision 2000, the first step of 
which was to bring people from all walks of life together to 
build a consensus about what the city could be like. Literally 
thousands of ideas were gradually distilled into 223 specific 
projects. Then, with the cooperation of all sectors—including 
government, businesses, lending institutions, and average 
 persons—and an investment of more than $800 million, work 
on the projects began, providing employment in construction 
the important added advantage of reducing the per capita 
use of fuel and energy, important in the battle against climate 
change.
SustainLane. In the United States, the 50 most populous 
cities have been ranked for sustainability by the organization 
SustainLane. The organization’s Web site is a great source 
of advice, personal accounts, local business and product 
reviews, and news about sustainability lifestyles. Its most 
prominent product, however, is a ranking of cities based 
on 16 criteria, including transit ridership, street congestion, 
air and water quality, green building, local food and agri-
culture, energy and climate change, and green economy. At 
the top of the ranking was Portland, Oregon, followed by 
San Francisco, Seattle, Chicago, New York, Boston, Minne-
apolis, Philadelphia, Oakland, and Baltimore. At the bottom 
were Las Vegas (#47), Tulsa, Oklahoma City, and Mesa. The 
goal of the process has been “not to shame, but to inspire, 
to facilitate the sharing of best practices, and to see all cities 
continually raise the bar on their efforts,” in the words of 
SustainLane CEO James Elsen.12
To the Point. The preceding discussion of urban issues 
may seem to have strayed far from nature and environmen-
tal science. However, there is a close connection between the 
two: The decay of our cities is hastening the degradation of 
our larger environment. As the growing human population 
spreads outward from the old cities in developed countries, 
we are co-opting natural lands and prime farmlands and 
ratcheting up the rate of air pollution and greenhouse gases. 
Similarly, as increasing numbers in the developing world 
stream into the cities, they are degrading the human and so-
cial resources that are vital to all environmental issues. Thus, 
without the creation of sustainable human communities, 
there is little chance for the sustainability of the rest of the 
biosphere.
Figure 17 Urban gardens. Urban garden plots on formerly vacant lots 
in Philadelphia. Urban gardening is becoming recognized as having sociological, 
economic, environmental, and aesthetic benefits.
12“Green-City Ranking Group SustainLane Explains Its Methodology,” Grist,  
May 12, 2008.
632

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
Vision 2000 left off. Revision 2000 identified an additional 
27 goals and more than 120 recommendations for further 
improving Chattanooga. The city’s experience demonstrates 
that visioning and change must occur and continue in order 
to successfully create and maintain sustainable community 
development. Although Chattanooga Venture is no longer in 
operation, its past work has built an expectation throughout 
the city that public projects will involve the public and that 
the process will produce results. The latest manifestation of 
this expectation was Recreate 2008, in which hundreds of 
people engaged in a visioning process that created a plan for 
revitalizing the city’s park system.
4  Lifestyles and the Common 
Good
Sound Science, Stewardship, and Sustainability—these are 
the three strategic themes that have kept our eyes on the 
basics of how we must live on our planet. Sound science 
is the basis for our understanding of how the world works 
and how human systems interact with it, stewardship is the 
actions and programs that manage natural resources and 
human well-being for the common good, and sustainability 
is the practical goal that our interactions with the natural 
world should be working toward. Are we making progress 
in incorporating these concepts into our society?
Our Dilemma
Our intention in this text has been to avoid dwelling on 
the bad news and instead to raise the hope—indeed, the 
 certainty—that all environmental problems can be addressed 
successfully. Throughout the text, we have pointed to poli-
cies and possibilities that can help move human affairs in a 
sustainable direction. There is much at stake. When 2015 ar-
rives, will we be able to say that we have met all the Millen-
nium Development Goals, alleviating much of the developing 
world’s grinding poverty and its consequences? Will we re-
duce our use of fossil fuels to halt global warming and the 
rising sea level? Can we feed the billions who will join us by 
midcentury and simultaneously reduce the malnutrition and 
hunger that still plague more than 900 million people?
Human Decisions. As the late Nobel Laureate Henry  
Kendall said, “Environmental problems at root are human, 
not scientific or technical.”13 Even though our scientific un-
derstanding is incomplete and our grasp of sustainable de-
velopment is still tentative, we know enough to be able to 
act decisively in most circumstances. Therefore, it is human 
decisions, at both the personal and the societal levels, that 
can bring about change, and it is these decisions that define 
our stewardship relationship with Earth.
for more than 7,300 people and permanent employment for 
1,380. Among the projects were the following:
 • With the support of the Clean Air and Clean Water Acts, 
local government clamped down hard on industries to 
control pollution.
 • The Chattanooga Neighborhood Enterprise fostered the 
building or renovation of more than 4,600 units of low- 
and moderate-income housing.
 • A new industry to build pollution-control equipment 
was spawned, as was another industry to build electric 
buses, which now serve the city without noise or pollu-
tion.
 • A recycling center employing adults with mental disabil-
ities to separate materials was built.
 • An urban greenway demonstration farm, which school-
children may visit, was created.
 • A zero-emissions industrial park utilizing pollution-
avoidance principles was built.
 • The river was cleaned up, and a 22-mile Riverwalk re-
claimed the waterfront, with parks, playgrounds, and 
walkways built along the riverbanks.
 • Theaters and museums were renovated, and freshwater 
and saltwater aquariums were built.
 • All facilities and a renovated business district were made 
pedestrian friendly and accessible.
Revision. With these and numerous other projects, many 
of them still ongoing, Chattanooga has changed its reputa-
tion from one of the worst to one of the best places to live  
(Fig. 18). Chattanooga Venture developed a step-by-step 
guide to assist community groups in similar efforts to build 
sustainable communities, and the city’s experience is being 
modeled in other cities throughout the United States as well 
as internationally. Recently, Chattanooga sponsored Revision 
2000, with more than 2,600 participants taking up where 
Figure 18 Chattanooga, Tennessee. With numerous projects to reduce 
pollution and traffic and to provide attractions and amenities for people, Chat-
tanooga, Tennessee, has changed its reputation from one of the worst to one of 
the best places to live in the United States.
13Union of Concerned Scientists. Keeping the Earth: Scientific and Religious 
Perspectives on the Environment, videotape transcript (Pittsburgh, PA: New 
Wrinkle, 1996), p. 4.
633

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
to act to promote the common good? We can identify a 
number of values that can be the basis of stewardship and 
help us in our decisions involving both public policies and 
personal lifestyles:
 • Compassion for those less well off, or those suffering 
from extreme poverty or other forms of deprivation—
making compassion a major element of our foreign 
policy, which would energize our country’s efforts in 
promoting sustainable development in the countries that 
are most in need. Compassion can motivate young peo-
ple to spend two years of their life in the Peace Corps or 
a hunger relief agency, for example.
 • Concern for justice—working to make just policies the 
norm in international economic relations. A concern for 
justice can move people to protest the placement of haz-
ardous facilities in underprivileged communities.
 • Honesty, or a concern for the truth—keeping the laws 
of the land and openly examining issues from different 
perspectives.
 • Sufficiency—simplifying lifestyles rather than ever in-
creasing our consumption; using no more than is neces-
sary of Earth’s resources.
 • Humility—instead of demanding our rights, being will-
ing to share and even defer to others.
 • Neighborliness—being concerned for other members 
of our communities (even the global community), such 
that we do not engage in activities that are harmful to 
them, but instead make positive contributions to their 
welfare.
To achieve sustainability, we will have to couple values 
like these with the knowledge that can come from our under-
standing of how the natural world works and what is hap-
pening to it as a result of human activities. For this to work, 
people must be willing to grapple with scientific evidence and 
basic concepts and to develop a respect for the consensus 
that scientists have reached in areas of environmental con-
cern. It has been our objective to convey that consensus to 
you in this text. Recall also that sustainable solutions have 
to be economically feasible, socially desirable, and ecologi-
cally viable. This applies directly to the political decisions 
that are shaping our future in so many of our environmental 
concerns.
The good news is that many people are engaging 
environmental 
problems—working 
with 
governments 
and industries, bringing relief to people in need, and 
making exactly the kinds of decisions that are needed for 
effective stewardship. (See Stewardship, “The Tangier 
Island Covenant.”) Community groups are organizing 
around sustainable principles, providing models of larger-
scale changes that will be essential if we are to achieve a 
sustainable world. Traditional environmental organizations, 
as well as people from other sectors of society, are working 
together on the many issues that we have highlighted in this 
text, bringing about policy changes as well as changes in 
personal lifestyles.
However, making stewardly decisions is not a simple 
task. Decision making is affected by our personal values and 
needs, and competing values and needs exist at every turn. 
One group wins, and another loses. If we stop all destruction 
of the rain forests, the peasant who needs land to farm will 
not eat. If we force a halt to the harvesting of shrimp because 
of concerns about the bycatch, thousands of shrimpers will 
be out of work. Making decisions means considering com-
peting needs and values and reaching the best conclusion in 
the face of the numbing complexity of demands and circum-
stances. It is the nature of our many dilemmas that business 
as usual resolves only a very small fraction of them. Even 
though public policies at the national and international levels  
are absolutely essential elements of our success in turning 
things around, these in the end are the outcome of decisions 
by very human people; and even if thoughtful decisions are 
made by those in power, they will fail unless they are sup-
ported by the people who are affected by them.
Here are a few examples of significant changes at the 
level of governments, municipalities, and industries:
 • The EPA has established the Green Power Partnership, 
a program that encourages organizations to buy green 
power. The number one purchaser is Intel Corp., buying 
more than 2.5 billion kilowatt-hours of green power 
annually.
 • Transition Towns (connected by the Transition Network)  
are more than 400 communities that are working  
together to respond to the challenges of peak oil and 
climate change.
 • The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 
(the stimulus package) has invested more than $43 bil-
lion in green energy initiatives.
 • The World Business Council for Sustainable Develop-
ment is a network of more than 200 global companies 
promoting greater resource productivity and sustainable 
product manufacture.
 • Mayors from more than 1,000 cities in the United States 
have signed the U.S. Mayors’ Climate Protection Agree-
ment, which pledges the cities to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions to 1990 levels or below (in the absence of a 
federal commitment).
 • Australia led the way in 2007 to eliminate incandescent 
lightbulbs, an action that has been followed by the Eu-
ropean Union nations and other countries; U.S. action 
to remove them was put on hold by congressional con-
servatives, but the industry is moving ahead to switch to 
compact fluorescents and LEDs.
 • California established the Million Solar Roofs initiative 
and hit the 250,000 mark (more than 1 gigawatt) at the 
beginning of 2012. The state’s target now is 12 gigawatts 
of local green energy by 2020.
The Common Good. We defined the common good in 
the context of public policy: to improve human welfare 
and to protect the natural world. What compels people  
634

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
Lifestyle Changes
What are some of the lifestyle changes that are needed, 
and are they in fact occurring? We should be encouraged 
and inspired by the literally millions of people in all walks 
of life who are acutely aware of the problems and who 
are making outstanding efforts to bring about solutions. 
Every pathway toward solutions that we have mentioned 
represents the work of thousands of dedicated professionals 
and volunteers, ranging from scientists and engineers to 
businesspeople, lawyers, and public servants. Indeed, we 
are all involved, whether we recognize it or not. Simply by 
our existence on the planet, everything we do—the cars 
we drive, the products we use, the wastes we throw away, 
STEWARDSHIP
The Tangier Island Covenant
The Chesapeake Bay, the 
largest estuary in the 
United States, is famous 
for its blue crabs and 
the unique “watermen” 
who fish for the crabs and other marine animals. 
Watermen are independent fishermen who have 
lived on the bay for generations and who defend 
their way of life fiercely. In recent years, the wa-
termen of Tangier, a small island in the Virginia 
part of the eastern shore of the bay, have been in 
frequent battles with the Chesapeake Bay Foun-
dation and the state regulators over crab and 
oyster laws that restrict when and where they 
can harvest. The watermen skirted restrictions 
by keeping undersized crabs and dredging clams 
and oysters out of season. They were also accus-
tomed to throwing their trash overboard, causing 
the shores of the island to be littered with debris.
In 1997, the island community of Tangier 
became part of an unusual, but significant, proc-
ess called values-based stewardship, a form 
of conflict resolution that requires parties to 
work within the value system of the community 
to bring about sustained changes in behavior 
toward the environment. Susan Drake, a doc-
toral candidate in environmental science at the 
University of Wisconsin, came to the island to 
carry out her thesis research on how conflicts are 
dealt with in homogeneous communities such 
as Tangier. Originally attracted to the project be-
cause of the highly religious community present 
on the island—the two churches are the center 
of life and authority there—Drake knew that 
most of the watermen considered themselves the 
beneficiaries of a rich bounty in an environment 
created by God. After working with watermen on 
their boats and spending time in their churches 
and with their families, Drake became concerned 
about the apparent lack of a connection between 
what the God-fearing watermen believed and 
what they actually did in their profession.
Convinced that she might be able to 
intervene in a positive way, Drake requested 
permission from her thesis committee to engage 
in “participatory action research,” wherein the 
researcher may enter the conflict and attempt 
to bring about a resolution. Working within 
the value system of the community—in this 
case, a value system based on faith—Drake 
addressed a joint meeting of the two churches 
on the island one Sunday morning. Referring 
to an image of Jesus standing behind a young 
fisherman at the wheel of a boat in rough seas 
that almost all Tangier watermen displayed in 
the cabins of their vessels, Drake addressed 
the issues of dumping trash overboard and 
skirting the laws. She showed the picture to the 
congregation and then put paper blinders over 
the eyes of Jesus as she listed the ways in which 
the watermen were disobeying the law. The day 
of her sermon coincided with a very high tide 
that gathered the debris from around the shores 
of the island and washed it up into the streets 
and people’s yards.
The meeting ended with a call by Drake to 
the watermen to adopt a covenant she had 
drafted earlier with the help of some of the 
island’s women. Fifty-six watermen went to the 
altar and promised to abide by the following 
covenant: 
The Watermen’s Stewardship Covenant 
is a covenant among all watermen, regard-
less of their profession of religious faith. As 
watermen, we agree to (1) be good stewards 
of God’s creation by setting a high standard 
of obedience to civil laws (fishery, boat, and 
pollution laws) and (2) commit to brotherly 
accountability. If any person who has com-
mitted to this covenant is overtaken in any 
trespass against this covenant, we agree to 
spiritually restore such a one in a spirit of 
gentleness. We also agree to fly a red ribbon 
on the antennas of our boats to signify that 
we are part of the covenant.
The next day, scores of watermen began fly-
ing red ribbons, taking trash bags out on their 
boats, and fishing according to the laws. Trucks 
began to pick up the trash on the island early 
in the morning. The two churches proceeded to 
work with the entire island community to draft 
a plan for the future sustainability of the island 
and its way of life. They formed the Tangier 
Watermen’s Stewardship for the Chesapeake 
in order to implement the plan, which is far 
reaching and involves the women of the island 
lobbying the state legislature and opening up 
lines of communication with scientists and gov-
ernment regulators involved in overseeing the 
bay’s health. In recent years, Tangier Islanders 
have implemented cleanup, waste reduction, 
and recycling campaigns; environmental educa-
tion programs; and a Coastal America Project for 
shoreline and wetland restoration. Island stew-
ardship leaders also contacted a faith-based 
farming community in Pennsylvania, located on 
a tributary of the Chesapeake Bay watershed. 
After meeting with the watermen, the farmers 
decided to do all they could to prevent runoff 
from their farmlands that could make its way 
into the bay. The full story of the original cove-
nant and later contact with the farm community 
is documented in a recent film.14
Values-based stewardship is a call to life-
changing stewardship, put within the value 
system of a community. In this case, putting the 
call within the context of the faith of the water-
men resulted in the establishment of structures 
within the community that show great promise 
in helping to bring the entire island toward a 
sustainable future.
T
la
U
f
t
14Center for Law and Culture. When Heaven Meets Earth. 2012. www.whenheavenmeetsearth.org.
The Tangier Island Covenant.  
Susan Drake Emmerich.
635

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
ranger and park manager. Many lawyers, journalists, teach-
ers, research scientists, engineers, medical personnel, agricul-
tural extension workers, and others are focusing their talents 
and training on environmental issues or hazards. Business and 
job opportunities exist in pollution control, recycling, waste 
management, ecological restoration, city planning, environ-
mental monitoring and analysis, nonchemical pest control, 
the production and marketing of organically grown produce, 
the manufacture of solar and wind energy components, and 
so on. Some developers concentrate on rehabilitation and the 
reversal of urban blight, as opposed to contributing more to 
urban sprawl. Some engineers are working on the develop-
ment of pollution-free vehicles to help solve the photochemi-
cal smog dilemma of our cities. Indeed, it is difficult to think 
of a vocation that cannot be directed toward promoting solu-
tions to environmental problems.
Human society is well into a new millennium, and it 
promises to be an era of rapid changes unprecedented in 
human history. Will we just survive, or will we thrive and 
become a sustainable global society? We are engaged in an 
environmental revolution—a major shift in our worldview 
and practice from seeing the natural world as resources to 
virtually every choice we make and action we take—has a 
certain environmental impact and a certain consequence for 
the future. Therefore, it is not a matter of choosing to have 
an effect, but a matter of what and how great that effect will 
be. It is a matter of each of us asking ourselves: Will I be part 
of the problem or part of the solution? The outcome will 
depend on how each of us responds to the challenges ahead.
There are a number of levels on which we can partici-
pate to work toward a sustainable future:
 • Individual lifestyle choices
 • Political involvement
 • Membership and participation in nongovernmental en-
vironmental organizations
 • Volunteer work
 • Career choices
Lifestyle choices may involve such things as switching 
to a more fuel-efficient car or walking or using a bicycle for 
short errands; recycling paper, cans, and bottles; retrofitting 
your home with solar energy; starting a backyard garden 
and composting and recycling food and garden wastes into 
your soil; putting in time at a soup kitchen to help the home-
less; choosing low-impact recreation, such as canoeing rather 
than jet-skiing; and living closer to your workplace.
Political involvement ranges from supporting and voting 
for particular candidates to expressing your support for par-
ticular legislation through letters or phone calls. In effect, you 
are exercising your citizenship on behalf of the common good.
Membership in nongovernmental environmental or-
ganizations can enhance both lifestyle changes and political 
involvement. As a member of an environmental organiza-
tion, you will receive, and can help disseminate, information, 
making you and others more aware of specific environmental 
problems and things you can do to help. Also, your member-
ship and contribution serve to support the lobbying efforts of 
the organization. A lobbyist representing a million-member 
organization that can follow up with thousands of phone calls 
and letters (and, ultimately, votes) can have a powerful impact.
In cases where enforcement of the existing law has been 
the weak link, some organizations, such as the Public Interest 
Research Groups, the Natural Resources Defense Council, 
and the Environmental Defense Fund, have been highly influ-
ential in bringing polluters or the government to court to see 
that the law is upheld. Again, this can be done only with the 
support of members.
Another form of involvement is joining a volunteer or-
ganization. Many effective actions that care for people and 
the environment are carried out by groups that depend on 
volunteer labor. Political organizations and virtually all 
NGOs depend highly on volunteers. Many helping organiza-
tions, such as those dedicated to alleviating hunger and to 
building homes for needy families (Fig. 19), are adept at mo-
bilizing volunteers to accomplish some vital tasks that often 
fill in the gaps left behind by inadequate public policies.
Finally, you may choose to devote your career to imple-
menting solutions to environmental problems. Environmental 
careers go far beyond the traditional occupations of wildlife 
Figure 19 Habitat for Humanity volunteers. By using charitable 
contributions and volunteer labor, Habitat for Humanity creates quality homes—
more than 500,000 built throughout the world by 2012—that needy families can 
afford to buy with no-interest mortgages, enabling the money to be recycled to 
build more homes. Prospective home buyers participate in the construction and 
may gain valuable skills in the process.
636

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
No one could make a greater mistake than he who did 
nothing because he could do only a little.
Edmund Burke, Irish orator, philosopher, 
and politician (1729–1797)
be exploited to seeing it as life’s supporting structure that 
needs our stewardship. You are living in the early stages of 
this revolution, and we invite you to be one of the many who 
will make it happen. We close with this quote:
REVISITING THE THEMES
sound science
City planners and highway engineers have a new set of 
challenges as our society makes the changes that will 
move us toward greater sustainability. Creating sustain-
able cities and towns requires the dedicated work of social scientists, 
natural scientists, engineers, and many average people as they meet to 
provide a vision of what they would like their future to look like and then 
carry out that vision. Many scientific careers are great avenues for work 
on green solutions.
sustainability
The story of urban sprawl is a story of poor or nonexistent 
public policy. Land use is traditionally under local control (if 
it is under any control at all), and absent any public policy 
dealing with land use, sprawl happens. In fact, public policy fed sprawl, as 
the Highway Trust Fund taxed gasoline sales in order to build roads and 
highways. Crafting effective policy to deal with sprawl means recognizing 
why people choose to live on the suburban fringes in low-density houses 
and changing the way we organize our communities. It requires changing 
public policy to do this, but smart-growth initiatives are taking root in state 
after state. Reining in sprawl and redesigning suburbia are essential moves 
toward greater sustainability of our urban surroundings.
Urban blight, too, was the outcome of poor or nonexistent public 
policy. Cities stood by helplessly and watched the flight of wealthier 
people and businesses out to the suburbs and even out of the country. In 
a similar way, developing-world cities are simply watching the poor flock 
in. It often takes people with compassion and a vision to bring about 
change in these situations. Frequently, change can be brought about 
at the grassroots level, but it helps immensely to have leaders who 
care about the poor in their midst. Whether in developed or developing 
countries, addressing urban blight will make cities more livable and, 
therefore, more sustainable.
Sustainable solutions are becoming more mainstream, in the United 
States and around the world. Cities and towns are making an effort 
to respond to global climate change and limited resources as they 
engage in community efforts to promote sustainability and encourage 
sustainable lifestyle changes in their people.
stewardship
The stewardship ethic includes a concern for justice. 
“White flight” into the suburbs has left minorities 
trapped in the inner cities, held down by racial and 
economic discrimination. Equally important is the migration of rural 
people into the cities of the developing world, where they are forced to 
live in slums and are unjustly denied ordinary social and environmental 
services. Both of these developments have energized many individuals 
and numerous NGOs to make common cause with those who are 
suffering the injustice and to help them mobilize their human and 
social resources to bring about change. A similar motivation to bring 
about change led Ryan Gravel to propose the Atlanta BeltLine, and 
Chattanooga Venture to begin the visioning process that eventually 
turned that city around. This is exactly what stewards should be doing. 
It is a fact that every one of us is given many opportunities to work 
together to create a truly sustainable society, and stewardship is the 
ethic that is there to guide our actions.
s
T
“
t
economic discr
s
T
p
it
d
li
ith l
s
C
c
m
able cities and t
9. How do exurban migration, urban sprawl, and urban decay 
become a vicious cycle?
10. What is meant by economic exclusion? How is it related to 
the problems of crime and poverty in cities?
11. What are the reasons for urban blight in the cities of many 
developing countries? What do the people in the shanty-
towns need most?
12. What are some characteristics of livable cities?
13. What is the Sustainable Communities Program? How does 
Chattanooga illustrate the program?
14. What are some stewardship virtues, and what role could 
they play in fostering sustainability?
15. State five levels at which people can participate in working 
toward a sustainable future.
 1. What is the Atlanta BeltLine, and how does it propose to 
change urban Atlanta?
 2. How did the structure of cities begin to change after World 
War II? What factors were responsible for the change?
 3. Why are the terms car dependent and urban sprawl used to 
describe our current suburban lifestyle and urban layout?
 4. What federal laws and policies tend to support urban sprawl?
 5. Compare the costs and benefits of urban sprawl, looking at 
the environmental impacts and the impacts on quality of life.
 6. What is smart growth? What are four smart-growth strate-
gies that address urban sprawl?
 7. What services do local governments provide, and what is 
their prime source of revenue for these services?
 8. What is meant by erosion of a city’s tax base? Why does it 
follow from exurban migration? What are the results?
Review QueStionS
637

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
social problems are evident? Are they still going on? Are 
efforts being made to correct them?
 3. Identify nongovernmental organizations in your region that are 
working toward reining in urban sprawl or toward preserving 
or bettering the city. What specific projects are under way in 
each of these areas? What roles are local governments playing 
in the process? How can you become involved?
 1. Interview an older person (say, 75 years of age or older) 
about what his or her city or community was like before 
1950 in terms of meeting people’s needs for shopping, 
participating in recreation, getting to school or work, and so 
on. Was it necessary to have a car?
 2. Do a study of your region. What aspects of urban sprawl 
and urban blight are evident? What environmental and 
thinking enviRonmentaLLy
Go to www.masteringenvironmentalscience.com for practice quizzes, Pearson eText, videos, current events, and more.
making a DiffeRenCe
 1. Analyze your environmental impacts as a consumer. What 
modes of transportation do you use, where do you shop, 
what foods do you consume or throw away, what appliances 
do you own, how do you heat or cool your home, and how 
much water do you use? Consider especially your impact on 
the four leading consumption-related environmental prob-
lems: air pollution, global climate change, changes in natural 
habitats, and water pollution.
 2. Investigate land-use planning and policies in your region. Is 
urban sprawl or urban blight a problem? Become involved 
in zoning issues, and support zoning and policies that will 
promote, rather than hinder, ecologically sound land use 
(smart growth).
 3. Contact local conservation organizations or land trusts, and 
offer your help in protecting and preserving open land in 
your region.
 4. Find out if there is a Habitat for Humanity project or group 
in your area, and if there is, volunteer some time to support 
its work.
CReDitS
Credits are listed in order of appearance.
Photo Credits
(top left): Curtis W. Richter/Getty Images; (bottom right): Reinhold Foeger/
Shutterstock; (top right): JRC, Inc./Alamy; (bottom): Age Fotostock/SuperStock; 
ERIK S. LESSER/EPA/Landov Media; (top left): Richard Thornton/Shutterstock; 
(center left): Esbin-Anderson/The Image Works; (top left): MaxFX/Shutterstock; 
(bottom left): Johnny Stockshooter/Alamy; (center right): Shaun Cunningham / 
Alamy; (bottom right): asterix0597/iStockphoto; (top right): Cameron Davidson 
/Getty Images; (center right): Bernard J. Nebel; (top left): Bernard J. Nebel; (top 
right): altrendo travel/Getty Images; Marcia Chambers /dbimages / Alamy; (top 
left): Medioimages/Photodisc/Getty Images; (top right): steinphoto/iStockphoto; 
(bottom right): Warwick Kent/Photolibrary/Getty Images; Andrew Murphy/Alamy; 
(bottom left): Chattanooga Area Convention and Visitors Bureau; (center right): 
Jeffrey Pohorski; Ilene MacDonald / Alamy
Text Credits
“Map of Atlanta BeltLine,” from Atlanta Beltline 2010 Annual Report. 
Copyright © 2010 by Atlanta BeltLine. Reprinted with permission. All 
rights reserved; The Waterman’s Stewardship Covenant by Susan Drake 
Emmerich. Copyright © by Dr. Susan D. Emmerich. Reprinted with permis-
sion. Table 1: Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Table 2: “Ten Most Sprawling 
Metropolitan Regions,” by Reid Ewing, Rolf Pendall, and Don Chen, adapt-
ed from Measuring Sprawl and Its Impact. Copyright © 2012 by Smart 
Growth America. Reprinted with permission; Source: Edmund Burke, Irish orator,  
philosopher, and politician (1729–1797); Figure 7: “Sprawl scores for 83 metro-
politan regions,” adapted from Measuring Sprawl and Its Impact. Copyright © 
2012 by Smart Growth America. Reprinted with permission; Figure 8: Source: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. 2007 National Resources Inventory, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Washington, D.C. and Center for Survey Statistics and 
Methodology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa. July 2009; Figure 16: “Boston, 
Massachusetts Map,” from Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy Greenway Conservancy. 
Reprinted with permission.
638

Sustainable Communities and Lifestyles
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery 
Act) Legislation that provided money for a variety of programs, 
intended to stimulate the economy during the recent recession. 
Some $90 billion was directed into clean energy programs.
declining tax base The loss of tax revenues that occurs when afflu-
ent taxpayers and businesses leave an area and property values 
subsequently decline. Also referred to as an eroding tax base.
exurban migration The pronounced trend since World War II of 
relocating homes and businesses from the central city and older 
suburbs to more outlying suburbs.
exurbs New developments beyond the traditional suburbs, from 
which most residents still commute to the associated city for work.
Highway Trust Fund The monies collected from the gasoline tax 
and designated for the construction of new highways.
Rust Belt Cities and their outskirts, often in the Midwest, that 
once specialized in heavy manufacturing and have since suffered 
a decline, characterized by abandoned factories and crumbling 
buildings.
Smart Growth A movement that addresses urban sprawl by 
protecting sensitive lands and directing growth to limited areas, 
creating attractive, sustainable communities.
Sustainable Communities and Development Program in the United 
States that provides grants to encourage the development of more 
livable urban neighborhoods.
urban blight/decay The general deterioration of structures and 
facilities such as buildings and roadways, in addition to the 
decline in quality of services such as education, that has occurred 
in inner-city areas.
gLoSSaRy
639

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
Page references followed by "f" indicate illustrated
figures or photographs; followed by "t" indicates a
table.
A
A horizon, 288, 292
Aa, 64, 160
Abiotic, 57, 59-60, 77-80, 84, 87, 92, 96-98, 104-105,
111, 113, 120-123, 125-126, 128, 135-137,
351, 391
Abiotic environment, 57, 77, 79
Abiotic factors, 57, 60, 79-80, 84, 96-98, 104-105, 111,
120-123, 126, 128, 136, 351, 391
Absorbed dose, 426
abstinence, 252
Accelerated eutrophication, 563
Acetic acids, 605
Acid deposition
buildings and, 524
coal and, 372
controlling, 512
crops and, 538
impact of, 518, 522, 530
lakes and, 523, 530-531
sources of, 517, 530, 538-539
streams and, 530-531
weathering and, 524
Acid leaching, 425, 516
Acid mine drainage, 550-551
Acid neutralizing capacity, 523, 530, 540
acid rain, 2, 12, 39, 74-75, 110, 126, 216, 300-301,
425, 511-512, 515-516, 522, 529-531, 540,
553
Acid Rain Program, 529-531
Acid Rain Reduction Program, 530
acidification
atmospheric deposition, 518
liming, 523
acids
acetic, 517, 605
amino, 79, 327, 337
nitric, 511, 515-517, 541, 550
sulfuric, 511, 515-517, 541, 550, 605
Action thresholds, 357
activated sludge, 555-557, 570
Activated-sludge system, 555-556, 570
active management, 182, 560
Active safety, 432, 440
Active solar systems, 399
Actual risk, 466
acute exposure, 347, 518
acute toxicity, 595
adaptation, 91-92, 96-99, 228, 281, 390, 444, 476,
492-493, 498-500, 502
adaptation strategies, 492, 498
Adaptive management, 269
Adiabatic cooling, 259, 281
Adiabatic warming, 259, 281
administrative agencies, 13, 27
Advance Fuel Cycle Initiative, 435
Advanced boiling-water reactors, 432
Aeration, 287, 291-293, 295, 297, 306-307, 556-557,
564, 570-571
Aerosols
sulfate, 75, 480-481, 499, 535
Affluence, 14, 199, 210, 212-213, 216, 226, 228, 588,
627
Afghanistan
conflicts in, 330
population data, 211, 236
Africa
climate change and, 471
East, 33, 119, 165, 202, 232, 260, 264, 294, 311,
314, 324, 377, 380, 483, 485
erosion in, 302
population growth in, 213, 223, 246
African Americans, 46, 611
African Plate, 101
Age structure, 199, 201, 218, 228
Agency for International Development, 329
Agenda, 10, 250, 632
aggregates, 292, 295, 307
Agricultural ecosystems, 128
Agricultural land ownership, 213
agricultural practices
deforestation, 71, 299
agricultural revolution
cost of, 313, 335
agriculture
agroforestry, 311
alternative, 132, 344, 352, 367
biodiversity and, 182, 334
development of, 202-203, 205, 228, 267, 272, 279,
310-311, 315, 320, 344, 360, 367, 632
ecological, 36, 75, 128, 132-133, 136, 144, 168,
173, 193, 197, 243, 271-272, 302, 343,
404, 469
erosion and, 148, 181, 297, 301-302, 305, 565
history of, 344
industrial, 75, 129, 148, 202-204, 213, 228, 268,
309, 312, 315, 322, 332-333, 335-336,
367, 447, 464, 487, 540, 632
industrial agriculture, 204, 315, 332, 335-336
jobs and, 333
management, 21, 33, 105, 132-133, 136, 181-182,
193, 197, 249, 256, 262, 271, 273, 279,
294, 297, 302, 305-306, 315, 331, 343,
447, 469, 565
monocultures, 322, 335, 352
no-till, 297, 305, 307, 322
organic, 6, 72, 78, 129, 136, 288-289, 291, 297,
301, 306-307, 309, 313, 333-336, 344,
540, 629
pesticide use, 322, 343, 360
potatoes, 317
production, 21, 72, 128-129, 142, 181-182, 197,
200, 202-203, 205, 213-214, 239,
255-256, 266, 271-273, 276, 279, 297,
300-302, 304, 306, 309-313, 315, 317,
320-322, 324-325, 327-328, 331-337,
340, 487, 522, 540
shifting cultivation, 311
slash-and-burn, 288, 311
small-scale, 213, 249, 302, 331, 333
subsidies and, 6, 304, 498
subsistence, 133, 182, 213, 236, 249, 306,
309-311, 315, 328, 335, 337, 629
sustainable, 6, 132-133, 144, 148, 181-182, 197,
204, 213, 228, 234, 255, 268, 273, 279,
297, 301-302, 304-306, 309-311,
324-325, 331-337, 624, 629, 632, 638
traditional, 133, 143, 213, 236, 275, 300-301,
305-306, 310-313, 315
urban, 36, 129, 158, 204, 239, 294, 305, 309,
332-334, 337, 340, 565, 624, 629, 632,
638
Agroforestry, 311
Air conditioning, 198, 371, 390
Air handler, 411-412
Air pollutants
impacts of, 37, 503, 506, 511, 518
primary, 503, 506, 511-513, 515, 518, 524-525,
538, 540-541
secondary, 506, 511-512, 515, 518, 524, 538, 541
Air pollution
carbon monoxide, 460, 509, 511, 519, 524-525,
540, 583
Clean Air Act and, 24, 506, 525, 539
disasters, 12, 322, 461, 510, 518, 521, 538
emissions, 14, 24, 152, 386, 402, 425, 518-519,
521, 523-525, 529, 531, 538-540, 580,
624
emphysema and, 520
environment and, 24, 322, 461, 576, 632
essentials, 506-507
formaldehyde, 460
gasoline and, 367
health and, 12, 24, 231, 453, 459, 461, 506, 538
hydrologic cycle and, 265
indoor, 12, 16, 455, 459-461, 519
motor vehicles and, 521
natural, 2, 12, 322, 425, 461, 506-507, 509, 518,
523-524, 529, 538-540, 576, 583, 624,
632, 638
nitrogen oxides, 386, 507, 509, 511, 518-519, 524,
538, 540
outdoor, 24, 460, 507, 524, 583
overpopulation and, 152
ozone, 12, 14, 16, 506-507, 509, 511, 518-522,
524-525, 529, 531, 538-540
photochemical smog, 506, 509-511, 538
precipitation and, 540
radon, 460
rural, 2, 12, 231, 522, 624
secondary pollutants, 506, 511, 538
smog, 2, 506-507, 509-511, 529, 538, 540
visibility and, 524
volatile organic compounds, 460, 507, 509, 511
Air pressure, 259, 473, 503
Air quality standards, 514-515, 524-525, 527, 539-541,
624
Air toxics, 511-512, 521, 525-526, 539-541
Alaska pipeline, 377
Albania, 207, 241
albedo, 479-480, 488, 502
Aldrin, 599, 614
Alfisols, 288-289
algae
blue-green, 73, 561, 566
brown, 113
distribution, 122, 315, 333-335
green, 73, 113, 315, 335, 551, 561-562, 566
harmful algal blooms, 546, 562
microscopic, 36, 57, 113, 546, 561
overgrowth of, 72, 75
pesticides and, 348
phytoplankton and, 561, 569
red, 113, 189, 546
zooxanthellae, 189, 198
algal bloom, 545
Algal blooms, 545-546, 562, 566, 568, 570
Alkaline, 291, 516
Alkalinity, 291, 307, 541
Allergic disorders, 461
Alligators, 122, 347, 593
Altitude
temperature and, 117, 119
aluminum, 72, 216, 288-289, 301, 445, 469, 516,
522-523, 580, 582-584, 586, 588
Ambient concentrations, 513
Ambient standards, 524, 528, 540
Amensalism, 88, 94, 107
American Association of Poison Control Centers, 346
American bald eagle, 162
American chestnut tree, 103
American Land Rights Association, 161
American Lung Association, 526
American Meteorological Society, 476, 489
American Petroleum Institute, 17
American Wind Energy Association, 406
Amino acids, 79, 327, 337
ammonia, 73, 79, 412, 517-518, 556, 596
Ammonium compounds, 72-73
Ammonium ions, 72
amphibians
declines in, 150, 164, 624
diversity of, 119, 146-147, 150
Anaerobic, 70, 115, 136, 316, 374, 406-407, 487, 550,
557-558, 570, 577
Anaerobic bacteria, 558
641

anaerobic conditions, 374, 407
Anaerobic digestion, 406-407, 558, 570
Andisols, 289
Androscoggin River, 567
Anemones, 91
Angle of incidence, 398
Angola, 11, 207, 329
Animal farming, 309, 315-316, 335
animal husbandry, 142, 181, 202, 288-289, 310, 335,
360
Animal testing, 347, 463-464, 469, 595
Animals
game, 133, 153, 157, 166
grazing, 39, 69, 94, 97, 115-116, 125, 174, 298,
315
nuisance, 157-158, 168, 340, 564
origins, 203, 344
Annan, Kofi, 195, 197
Annapolis Tidal Generating Station, 412
Anoxic, 557
Antarctic, 101, 265, 477-478, 483-484, 490, 532, 534,
536
Antarctic Bottom Water, 265
Antarctic Ice Sheets, 490
Antarctic ozone hole, 536
Antarctic Plate, 101
anthropology, 42
antibiotics, 38, 203, 213, 315, 342-343, 359, 448
Antifreeze, 398, 411
Ants, 103, 148, 150, 599
Apfelbaum, Steven, 132
Appel, Brian, 409
applications
of science, 400
Aquatic ecosystems
coastal, 36, 171
examples of, 123
oceans, 36, 72
productivity of, 121
wetlands, 36, 171, 544
Aquatic photosynthesizers, 562
aquatic plants, 116, 151, 256, 550, 552-553, 561, 564,
570-571
Aquatic succession, 124-125
Aquatic vegetation, 124, 552, 561-563, 568, 571
aquifers
fossil, 271
Arabian Plate, 101
Arabian Sea, 118, 233, 259
arable land, 313, 499
Archaea, 146
archaeology, 481
Arctic Circle, 259
Arctic fox, 99
Arctic foxes, 119
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, 387
Arctic Ocean
sea ice in, 483
temperatures, 483, 490
Area sources, 528
Argentina, 235, 288, 323, 395, 420, 437
Argon, 507
Aridisols, 289
Arizona, 176, 271, 277, 285, 315, 402, 404, 569, 577,
611-612
Arkansas, 271, 312, 382, 567
Army Corps of Engineers
Everglades and, 194
Arrhenius, Svante, 485
Arrow, 4
Arsenic, 203, 261, 274, 344, 364, 550, 553-554, 590,
598, 604
Artifacts, 12, 512, 524
Artificial aeration, 564
artificial wetlands, 561
asbestos, 455, 512
Asia, 33, 101, 119, 148, 151, 153, 173, 206, 223, 228,
231-232, 234, 237-238, 240-241, 247, 267,
273, 297, 311, 314, 323-324, 327-329, 354,
377, 380, 384, 432, 453, 481, 485, 510-511,
540, 585, 589
Asian black carp, 151
aspect, 42, 99, 251, 297, 357, 438, 481, 549
Aspirin, 145
Assumptions, 32, 41-42, 49, 128, 200, 217, 219, 359,
489
Asthma, 10, 460-461, 469, 510, 519-520, 529, 538,
540
Aswan High Dam, 271
Atchafalaya River, 545
Atlantic Ocean
erosion, 302
Atlantic salmon, 151
atmosphere
anthropogenic, 258, 264, 476, 479-482, 485-489,
494, 507, 509, 511, 517-518, 538
climate and, 120, 265, 389, 474, 481
composition, 445
density, 59, 478
early, 15-16, 36, 389, 481-482, 485, 600-601
greenhouse effect, 35, 316, 471, 479-481, 486-487
layers of, 261, 281, 473, 490, 508
movement, 65, 70-71, 79, 257, 260-262, 264-265,
279, 281-282, 473, 478, 502, 517
oceans and, 256, 259, 474, 478, 502
pressure, 15, 65, 110, 259, 279, 281, 366, 386,
389, 409, 418, 430, 473-475, 479,
502-503, 508, 524, 533
profile, 473
properties of, 61, 516
structure of, 471
temperature, 35, 59, 73, 78-79, 110, 120, 189,
257-258, 264, 282, 291, 396, 409, 416,
418, 472-482, 487, 489-490, 492,
494-496, 501-503, 508-509, 533, 541
temperature profile of, 473
tides, 265
weather and, 317, 471-474, 502, 507
Atmosphere-ocean general circulation models, 488
Atmosphere-Ocean General Circulation Models
(AOGCMs), 488
Atmospheric brown clouds, 510, 538
Atmospheric cleansing, 265, 506-508
atmospheric CO2, 34-36, 50, 316, 396, 476, 484-487,
490, 500
atmospheric pressure, 259, 281, 479, 502
atmospheric science, 538
Atom, 15, 61-64, 71, 78-79, 419, 421-422, 435, 440,
485, 508, 533-534, 540, 570
Atomic bombs, 430, 438
Atomic Energy Commission, 419
Atomic oxygen, 64, 514-515
Atomic theory, 42-43
Atomic weapons, 428
Atoms, 43, 61-67, 69-70, 74, 76-77, 79, 400, 416,
421-423, 425, 436, 440, 485, 502, 508, 516,
533-534, 540, 570, 598, 614-615
atrazine, 346-347
autotrophs, 111, 113, 136
avian flu, 155, 315, 443, 446, 458
Axis, 100, 287, 473-474
B
B horizon, 288
Baba Gurgur oil field, 379
baby boom, 218-219, 221, 620
Baby bust, 218-219
Bacillus thuringiensis, 317, 355
background extinction rate, 148
Background radiation, 427
bacteria
anaerobic, 115, 136, 550, 557-558, 570
chemosynthetic, 111, 113, 116
coliform, 549
cyanobacteria, 73, 561
fermenting, 115
general, 111, 146, 546, 570
nitrogen-fixing, 73
soil, 57, 72-75, 79, 114, 137, 146, 261, 277,
291-292, 301, 315, 359, 409, 558-559,
561, 567, 570
Bald eagle, 31, 38, 162, 347-348
Baltic Sea, 562
Bamboo, 55, 59-61, 63, 65, 67, 69-70, 77, 155
Bamboo lemur, 155
Banking genes, 143
Bar screen, 555, 570
Bark beetles, 31, 356
Barrier islands, 122, 194
Barter economies, 248
Basel Action Network, 590, 611
Basel Convention, 611, 614
bases
acids and, 516-517
ethical, 47
Basins, 268, 383, 565
Bass, 270, 551
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, 81
Bay of Fundy
tidal power, 412
Beach
pollution, 549
Bears, 55, 86, 90, 119, 156-158, 193, 236
Beatrice Corporation, 605
Beaufort Sea, 112
Beavers, 102, 154
Bed load, 551-553, 570
Bedrock, 258, 286
Beetles, 31, 82-83, 103, 148, 154, 340, 342, 346,
353-354, 356
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, 465
Belgium, 207, 406, 420, 452
Belize, 183, 207
Beluga whale, 112
benches, 303
Beneficial insects, 319
benthic invertebrates, 112
Benthic plants, 561-562, 570
Benzene, 453, 460, 512, 514, 521, 540, 605
Bering Sea, 90
Best management practices, 105, 565
Beta carotene, 321
Beta particles, 425
Beyer, Peter, 321
Bhutan, 207
Bible, 145
bicarbonate, 517
bicycle, 415, 626, 630, 636
Bighorn sheep, 160
bioaccumulation, 347-348, 362, 364, 469, 521, 600
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), 550, 570
biocontrol, 104
Biodegradable plastics, 577
biodiversity
and forestry, 12, 144
conservation of, 148, 155-156, 163-164
ecosystem services and, 6, 144, 154
extinction and, 150, 155
food and, 141-142, 181-182, 189, 321
genetic variation, 99, 142
levels of, 12, 134, 163
urban areas, 158
value of, 11, 49, 51, 134, 137, 139-140, 142, 145,
162, 166, 196
Biodiversity informatics, 165
Biodiversity Treaty, 164
Biofuels
meat and, 317, 332
Biogas, 407, 414, 558, 570, 574, 577, 587, 589
biological control
of pests, 351
biological evolution, 96, 107
Biological hazards, 448, 469
Biological nutrient removal (BNR), 556-557, 570
Biological systems, 105, 491, 564
Biological treatment, 556, 568, 570-571
Biological wealth, 140-141, 146-148, 164, 166, 168
biology
conservation, 136, 146, 150, 155, 161, 166
biomagnification, 348, 362, 364, 550, 599-600
Biomes
deciduous forest, 58, 117-118, 120-121, 137
desert, 59, 118-121, 171, 260
ecosystems and, 109, 130
grassland, 58, 117-118, 120-121, 128, 288
terrestrial, 58-59, 118-119, 124, 171
terrestrial biomes, 118-119
tropical rain forest biome, 137
tundra, 78, 117-121, 137, 171
Bioprospecting, 143
Bioremediation, 303, 604, 614
Biosolids, 558, 570
Biosphere
described, 7, 42, 67, 77
Biota, 23, 57, 70, 78, 100-101, 112, 127, 135, 140-144,
147, 168, 173-174, 177, 182, 198, 256, 279,
284, 292, 301, 303, 305, 486, 557
Biotic community, 57, 77-78, 99, 103, 117-118, 123,
145
Biotic factors, 78, 84, 105, 137
Biotic potential, 83-87, 98, 104-107, 174
Biotic structure, 90, 135
Bioturbation, 286
Birds
birds of prey, 162
carbofuran, 350
diazinon, 347
642

plumed, 158
seabirds, 122, 150
songbirds, 31, 38
Wild Bird Conservation Act, 153
Wild Bird Declaration, 153
birth rate, 224-225
Bison, 115, 119, 128, 141, 157, 191, 297
Bisphenol A (BPA), 593
Bitumen, 381, 391
“Black blizzards”, 284
black death, 201
Black Sea, 103
Black-market trade, 153
Blackout, 371-372
Blood pressure, 145, 454, 465, 624
Bloomberg, Michael, 456
Blue mussels, 546
Blue Ribbon Coalition, 191
Blue water, 257-259, 261-262, 272, 280-281
blue whale, 188
Blue whales, 113
Blue-green algae, 73, 561, 566
Bobo Diaulasso region, 301
Body heat, 69, 99
Body lice, 345, 352
bog, 125
Bogs, 122
Boiling point, 418
Bombs
atomic, 430, 438
hydrogen, 436, 438
nuclear, 430-431, 436, 438
Bonding
carbon, 62, 64
chemical, 62, 64
oxygen, 62, 64
sulfur, 64
boreal forest, 121, 381
Borlaug, Norman, 314
Boron, 64
Botanical gardens, 157
Botswana, 207
Bottle bills, 586
Bottle laws, 13, 585-586, 590
Bottled water, 268-269, 274, 276, 586
Bottom ash, 580-581
Bottom trawling, 186-187
Bottom-up regulation, 87
Boundaries
plate, 100
bowhead whale, 112, 188
Brackish, 259, 281
Brackish water, 259, 281
brass, 580
Brazil, 165, 174, 182, 207, 214-215, 225, 231,
234-236, 250, 311, 313, 317, 320, 323, 330,
340, 360, 405, 408, 420, 437, 449, 629-630
Brazilian Atlantic Forest, 194
Bread for the World’s Hunger Institute, 325
breakdown products, 348, 362
Breast cancer, 31, 347, 468
Breeder (fast-neutron) reactors, 435
Brine, 374, 391
Broad spectrum, 345
Broecker, Wallace, 478
bromine, 507, 535, 537-538, 598, 615
Bronchitis, 460, 519-520, 540
bronze, 524
Brown algae, 113
Brown clouds, 509-510, 538
brown pelican, 347
Browner, Carol, 456
Brownfield Act, 606
Brownfields, 593, 606, 611, 613-614, 618
brown-headed cowbird, 150
Brownouts, 371-372, 390
Bryde’s whale, 188
Bt corn, 319
Bt cotton, 318-320, 355
bubonic plague, 150
buffalo, 88, 94, 162, 297, 315, 622
Buffer, 192, 523, 540, 565
Buffer zones, 192
Buffering, 522, 524, 529
buffering capacity, 524
Buildings, 7-9, 27, 46, 50, 54, 161, 263, 272, 284, 352,
387-388, 399, 411-413, 416, 417, 430, 432,
452, 460-461, 471, 483, 509, 514, 524, 554,
578, 599, 605, 619-621, 626-628, 630, 639
Bulgaria, 207, 420, 437
Bullfrogs, 81
Bureau of Land Management (BLM), 298, 382
Bureau of Reclamation, 300
Bureau of Solid Waste Management, 588
Bureau of the Census, 622
Burke, Edmund, 637-638
Burkholder, Joanne, 546
Burkina Faso, 200, 206-209, 211-212, 214-215,
221-223, 225, 227, 294, 301, 303
Burrowing, 291, 340
Business Council for Sustainable Development, 48,
634
butane, 535
Butterflies, 36, 106, 128, 319, 350-351, 356
Butterfly fish, 92
Bycatch, 184, 187, 634
C
C horizon, 288
cabbage, 302
cacti, 59, 113, 119
Cadmium, 401, 598
Cairo agreement, 248
calcium, 64, 71-72, 189, 198, 259, 261, 288, 290, 300,
319, 327, 347, 502, 517, 522-523, 530, 550,
553, 557
Calcium carbonate, 189, 198, 261, 502, 523
California
sewage, 38, 272, 277, 546, 560, 569
California condor, 85, 98
California Floristic Province, 165
California Planning and Conservation League
Foundation, 17
calorie, 66, 78, 327
Cambridge University, 476, 480, 488-489, 491, 494,
498, 501
campaign contributions, 23
Campbell, Colin, 380-381
Canada
acid deposition in, 523
cities, 264, 270, 312, 546
cod, 112
economic growth, 244, 379
forest products, 181
groundwater, 181, 264
Kyoto Protocol, 496
Montreal Protocol, 15, 537
native plants, 167
oil sands, 381
waterfowl, 270
Cancer
breast, 31, 347, 468
esophageal, 2
lung, 455, 460, 469, 512, 519-520, 526
skin, 426, 533-534, 536, 595
stomach, 2
thyroid, 431
cane toad, 354
canola, 317-318, 320
Cap-and-trade system, 14, 540
Cape Cod, 189, 394
Capillary action, 281
Capillary water, 258, 261-262, 280-281
Capital, 2, 4-11, 25-27, 33, 41, 48, 66, 128-132, 134,
137, 140, 166, 170-171, 173-174, 176, 190,
196, 198, 243-245, 248-251, 256, 315, 335,
451, 471-472, 557, 568, 581, 628
Capital consumption, 8
Capital depreciation, 9-10
Capture fisheries, 34, 184-185, 197
Carbamates, 346, 350
carbohydrates, 63, 69, 73
Carbon bonding, 64
Carbon (C), 63
carbon capture, 386, 397, 413, 497
Carbon dioxide
atmospheric, 34-35, 51, 71, 75, 78, 198, 290, 316,
396, 413-414, 476, 485, 487, 501-502,
507-508, 511-512, 516, 520, 523, 527,
540
burning fossil fuels, 71, 476, 485, 497
global carbon cycle, 70-71
in seawater, 70
in the atmosphere, 70, 75, 79, 129, 291, 316, 368,
409, 476, 485, 487, 502, 507, 511, 516,
540, 556
increased concentrations, 476
plants and, 70, 79, 113, 116, 176, 203, 386, 391,
512, 523, 624
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
atmospheric concentrations of, 487
from fossil fuels, 396
monitoring, 485
Carbon sequestration, 34, 172
Carbon sinks, 180, 486, 496
carbon storage, 12, 291
Carbon tax, 414, 416, 497
Carbonates, 70
carbonic acid, 516-517
Carcinogenesis, 453-454
Carcinogenic potential, 464
Carcinogens, 361, 453-454, 460, 463-464, 512, 521,
595, 598-599
cardiovascular disease, 224, 512
Caribbean islands, 165
Caribbean Plate, 101
caribou, 119
carnivores, 88, 112-113, 115, 136, 152
Caroline Plate, 101
Carp, 151, 551
Cars
car-centered cities, 630
hybrid electric, 409, 413, 528
Carson, Rachel, 30-31, 38, 45, 49-50, 348, 362
Cartagena Protocol, 321-322, 337
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, 321, 337
Carter, Jimmy, 379, 391, 602
Cash economy, 248, 325
Castings, 291, 309
Catalyst, 384, 409-410, 414, 416, 432, 503, 527, 534,
540
Catalysts, 409, 527, 540
Catalytic converter, 527, 540, 611
Catch shares, 187, 198
caterpillar, 349, 353, 356
Catfish, 151
cathode ray tubes (CRTs), 590
cations, 71
cats, 103, 151-152, 156, 406, 599-600
Cattle egrets, 94
Cattle grazing, 16-17
Cattle ranching, 355
Caucasus, 237, 241
causation, 481
Caverns, 261, 272, 377
Caves, 429
Cell respiration, 68-72, 78-79, 114, 291, 556-557
cells, 19, 56, 59, 61, 67, 69-70, 79, 95, 116, 123, 137,
143, 221, 260, 282, 307, 344, 346-347, 364,
369, 395, 399-403, 407, 409-411, 414-415,
426-427, 443, 449-450, 454, 459, 461, 464,
474-475, 520, 561-562, 570, 578, 593
Cellular respiration, 54, 77, 79, 111, 203
Cellulose, 114-116, 136, 408, 577, 583
Cement kilns, 608
Census, 216-222, 227, 622, 638
Center for Public Justice, 23
Center for Watershed Protection, 263
Center-pivot irrigation, 271, 300, 306
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 158, 339,
447, 455, 469, 534
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
447, 469
Central America, 81, 119, 165, 206, 355, 380
Central Asia, 119, 232, 237, 241, 510, 540
Centrally planned economy, 4, 27
Cerulean warbler, 147
Chain, 10, 49, 69, 87, 90, 109, 111, 114, 116-117, 127,
134-135, 137, 139, 152, 154, 162, 165, 184,
187, 247, 332, 348, 364, 422-424, 432, 435,
440, 450, 550, 561, 600
chain reaction, 422-424, 432, 435, 440
Chalk, 389
Changing World Technologies, 409
Chapman, Kim, 132
Character displacement, 93, 95, 106
Charinkos, 630
Chattanooga Venture, 632-633, 637
Checks and balances, 44, 105, 157
Chelicerata, 146
Chelyabinsk, 431
Chemical energy, 65-68, 77, 79, 136
Chemical formulas, 516
chemical hazards, 452-453, 459, 469, 593, 595
Chemical pesticides, 37, 203, 313, 339-340, 342, 344,
346, 348, 351, 354, 363-364
Chemical pollutants, 544, 550, 568, 570
643

chemical pollution, 49
chemical potential energy, 65
Chemical reactions, 42, 61, 71-72, 79, 113, 421, 514,
527-528, 536, 541
Chemicals
inorganic, 77, 79, 113, 136, 307, 364, 550, 553,
570
pollution, 16, 22, 41, 49, 77, 171, 203, 216, 268,
274, 276-277, 300, 304, 345, 445-446,
453, 466, 468-469, 507, 512, 514,
521-522, 526, 531-533, 536-538,
540-541, 547, 550, 553, 557, 559, 565,
567, 569-570, 593-615
synthetic organic, 65, 79, 344, 346-350, 362, 445,
540, 598, 604, 609, 614-615
Chemistry
electron, 516
Chemosynthesis, 113, 136
Chemosynthetic bacteria, 111, 113, 116
Chen, Don, 622-624, 638
Chesapeake Bay, 194, 546, 566, 568, 635
chestnut blight, 102
Chestnut tree, 103
Chickens, 230, 309, 311
Children
malnourished, 233, 328
underweight, 327-329, 336, 454
Chile, 235, 534
China
populations by age group, 223
recycling in, 585
Sichuan Province, 54-55
Chinese star anise, 143
Chinook winds, 261
Chipko movement, 145
Chipmunks, 151
Chlordane, 346, 348, 360, 599-600, 614
chlorinated hydrocarbons, 346, 350, 557, 598, 614
Chlorine, 15, 64, 268, 461, 507, 533-538, 540, 548,
557, 559, 596, 598, 614-615
Chlorine catalytic cycle, 534, 540
Chlorine reservoirs, 535-536
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 15, 216, 486, 533, 540
Chlorophyll, 67, 69, 73, 77, 113, 136, 564
Cholera, 203, 329, 457, 548, 550
Christian traditions, 145
chromium, 590, 598, 605
chromosomes, 99
Chronic bronchitis, 520
Chronic exposure, 360, 519, 521, 534, 538, 595
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 519, 540
Chu, Steven, 438
Chytrid fungus, 81, 102, 105
Circumcision, 247
Cities
car-centered, 630
growing, 48, 203, 213, 215, 227, 239, 249,
255-256, 272, 274, 312, 448, 452, 457,
534, 589, 621, 624, 628-629, 631-632
inner, 448, 619, 627-628, 631, 637, 639
Citizen action, 51, 610
Clams, 147, 160, 635
Clarifier tank, 555-556
class, 1, 5, 27, 50, 212, 255, 288-289, 295, 333, 346,
364, 399, 456, 550, 598, 615
Classification, 57, 163, 190, 227, 286, 288-289
Clean Air Act of 1990, 14, 17
Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR), 529, 540
clean coal technologies, 386-387
Clean Coal Technology (CCT), 386
Clean Water State Revolving Fund, 566
Cleanup technology, 604
clear-cutting, 132, 182, 187, 198
climate
atmosphere and, 74, 120, 471, 473, 477, 479-480,
488, 492, 533, 600
Canada, 206, 236, 264, 372, 387, 437, 483, 490,
496, 536-537
latitude and, 117
climate change
agriculture and, 289, 310, 332, 335
Arctic and, 537
ecological effects, 74
forest fires, 480
global warming, 35, 256, 264, 418, 425, 435, 471,
475, 478-482, 487, 491-494, 499-500,
502, 532, 537
organisms and, 77
polar regions, 483, 502, 536, 538
responding to, 13, 490, 502, 537
Climate regulation, 8, 34, 51, 131, 172
Climates
role of, 117, 180
Climatologists, 48, 264, 480, 482, 488
Climax communities, 123
Climax ecosystem, 123, 125, 135-136
Clinton administration, 192-193
Clinton, Bill, 431
Clouds, 30, 42, 109, 257-259, 264, 329, 472-475, 477,
479-481, 486-488, 507, 509-510, 535-536,
538, 576
coal
combustion and, 509, 511, 541
formation of, 264, 506, 541
gasification, 386, 391
mining of, 596
reserves of, 374, 389, 488
types of, 264, 434
coal combustion, 386
Coal fires, 367, 385
coal mining, 276, 301, 366, 385, 387, 390
Coal power, 276, 385-386, 397, 402, 417, 424, 518
coalbed methane, 382
Coal-burning power plants, 369, 372, 386, 497, 511,
518-519, 521, 529-530, 541
Coastal marine waters, 545
Coastal ocean, 122, 171-172, 546
Coastal waters
estuaries, 546
loss of, 36
Pacific Ocean, 36
cobalt, 409, 425
Cocos Plate, 101
Cod, 112, 186-187, 189, 394
Cod fisheries, 186
Codeine, 145
Cohen, Joel, 205
Cohesion, 40, 242
Cohort, 218
Cold condensation, 600
Cold front, 260
Cold-blooded, 69, 116
Cold-blooded animals, 116
Collective agriculture, 213
Colombia, 81, 232, 380
Colonialism, 213
Colorado, 269, 271, 306, 349, 372, 382, 404, 414,
482-483, 485, 501, 626
Colorado potato beetle, 349
Colorado State University, 306
Columbia, 207, 269, 413, 451, 560, 566, 579, 626
Columbia River, 269, 451
Combined heat and power, 388
Combustion
MSW and, 575, 586
of fossil fuels, 34, 70, 73, 391, 407, 416, 485, 512
Command-and-control approach, 530
commensalism, 88, 94, 105, 107
Commission on Sustainable Development, 632
Common cause, 637
Common good
lifestyles and, 618, 633
Commoner, Barry, 374
Communal ownership, 176
communities
ecology, 56-57, 79, 102, 105, 107, 111
niche, 79, 82, 91-92, 100
pioneer, 123
scientific, 41, 45, 467, 530, 629, 633-634, 637
succession in, 123
transition, 41, 123, 246, 414, 447, 634
Community protection and emergency preparedness,
609
Community-based natural resource management, 133
community-supported agriculture, 333
Commuters, 378, 618, 621, 626, 630-631
compaction, 291, 297, 306-307
Compassion, 47, 634, 637
Competition
economic, 4, 6, 102
Competitive Enterprise Institute, 17
competitive exclusion, 92
Competitive exclusion principle, 92
Competitive relationships, 88, 123
competitors, 60, 85, 92, 94, 96
Complex phenomena, 44
compost, 73, 114, 290-291, 303, 306, 309, 561, 570,
587, 589, 592, 631
composting, 84, 291, 306, 558-560, 570-571, 576-577,
582, 587-588, 591-592, 629, 636
Composting toilet systems, 559
Composting toilets, 560
Compounds, 42, 61-65, 67, 70-75, 78-79, 94, 111, 113,
116, 129, 131, 203, 291, 319, 344, 347,
349-350, 356, 364, 409, 421, 425, 430, 440,
445-446, 460, 472, 480, 507, 509, 511-515,
519, 523, 528, 535, 538, 540-541, 554,
558-559, 564, 570, 577, 593, 598, 600, 604,
607-609, 613-615
Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan,
194-195, 198
Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan (CERP),
194, 198
concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs), 315
Concentrated solar power (CSP), 399, 402
Concepts, 11, 39-43, 47, 49, 51, 55, 67, 96, 110-111,
117, 121, 134-136, 148, 256, 336, 397, 461,
595, 633-634
concessions, 183
Condensation, 42, 63, 257-261, 274, 281, 474-475,
478, 516, 600
Condenser, 369, 372, 391, 424, 433
Conditions, 11, 15, 25, 34, 36, 42-44, 47, 51, 54-55,
57, 59-61, 77-80, 82-85, 88-89, 91-92,
98-99, 103, 107, 111, 117-120, 122-123,
125-126, 128, 133, 136-137, 142, 171, 173,
200, 202, 206, 211, 224, 227, 234-238, 240,
257, 261, 265, 291, 294, 303, 305, 315,
318-319, 329, 331-332, 346, 357, 362, 374,
391, 397, 407, 418, 432, 448, 458, 472, 475,
478, 484, 487-488, 491, 502, 506, 509-510,
518, 522, 527, 530, 535-536, 539-540, 550,
553, 561-562, 620-621, 627-629
condoms, 247
Condors, 98, 406
Conduction, 409
Confusion technique, 356
Congo, 33, 175, 235, 328-329, 449
Congress, 13, 16, 18, 20-21, 23-24, 31, 39, 47,
158-159, 161, 187, 193, 256, 269, 298, 304,
324, 331, 336, 359, 361, 377-378, 386, 388,
413-414, 428-429, 433, 456, 467, 493, 497,
523-524, 526-527, 530-531, 545, 547,
566-568, 575, 579, 586, 588-592, 593-594,
603, 606, 609-610, 612-613, 621
Coniferous forest biome, 118-119, 136
coniferous trees, 119, 136
connectedness, 47
conservation
community-based, 133, 164
hunting and, 157, 175
of energy, 66, 70, 78-79, 136, 148, 198, 276, 289,
374, 377, 387, 389, 391, 413-416, 440,
496-498
of soil, 55, 130, 148, 156, 182, 198, 284, 289, 297,
301-307, 565
of wetlands, 130, 289
Conservation International, 164, 167
Conservation of matter, 43, 61, 70, 78-79
Conservation Reserve Program, 14, 304, 306, 313,
337
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), 304, 306, 337
Conservation Security Program (CSP), 304
Conservation Stewardship Program, 298, 304-306,
337
Conservation tillage, 277, 565
Consultative Group on International Agricultural
Research, 314
Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest (CGAP), 243
Consumer tax credits, 387
Consumers
photosynthesis and, 70, 113
tertiary, 113
Consumptive use, 175, 183, 196-198, 322, 407
Containment building, 424, 427, 430, 432
contamination
of water, 303, 430, 549
Continental drift, 107
Contour farming, 297-298, 306, 565
Contour strip cropping, 305
contraception, 231, 235-236, 247-248, 251
contraceptives, 236-237, 247, 252
Contrails, 488
control, 1, 5, 13-14, 16-20, 22-26, 31, 33, 35, 37-39,
51, 54-55, 87, 89-90, 94, 102-104, 110,
126-128, 131, 142, 151, 154-156, 158, 167,
172, 176, 178, 183, 190, 194, 196, 205, 213,
644

216, 221, 232-233, 239, 247, 251, 256, 263,
266, 269-270, 275, 280, 297-298, 302-303,
310, 313, 336, 339-364, 372, 385-387, 391,
401, 404, 418, 421-424, 426, 430, 432-433,
440, 444-445, 447-449, 454-459, 461, 466,
468-470, 487, 494, 498-500, 506-507, 518,
524-530, 534, 537, 540-541, 545, 547-548,
564-565, 567, 580, 588, 591-592, 599-600,
606-607, 610-611, 613, 615, 624-625, 633,
636-637
Control rods, 422-424, 430, 433, 440
controlled burns, 132
Convection currents, 100, 260, 473-474, 502
Convention on Biological Diversity, 36, 140, 163-164,
166, 190
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species (CITES), 175
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES),
163
Conventional farming, 336
convergence, 493
Conversion losses, 372, 391
Conveyor system, 502
Cooling towers, 372, 424
copper, 64, 216, 364, 401, 564, 580, 590, 598
coral bleaching, 189, 198
coral reefs
diseases, 197
importance of, 164
Corals, 70, 85, 122, 147, 160, 171, 189, 198, 477
core, 19, 126, 191-192, 242, 357, 423-424, 430,
432-434, 436, 440, 485-486, 628, 630-631
Core meltdown, 432
corn, 74, 112, 142, 216, 290, 297, 302, 304, 312-313,
316-321, 323-324, 332, 348, 355, 361,
407-408, 413, 483, 522, 577
Cornell University, 332, 622
correlation, 234-236, 461, 624
corridors, 15, 150, 630
Corrosion, 20, 274, 434, 440, 524, 606
Corrosivity, 595, 615
COSECHA, 302, 305
Cosmetic spraying, 357, 362, 364
Costanza, Robert, 7, 131, 136
Cost-benefit analysis, 466-467
Cotton plants, 317
Council on Environmental Quality, 191
Countries
affluent, 211-212, 216, 576, 611, 622, 627-628
fertility rates in, 210, 217, 219, 221, 223, 236, 245,
631
low-income, developing, 206
middle-income, 9, 206, 208, 212, 215-216, 226,
234, 242, 323, 465
OPEC, 376-378, 380-381, 413
third-world, 208
wheat yields, 332
with rapid growth, 213
cover crops, 565
cows, 188, 233, 311, 316
Coyotes, 86-87, 119
crabgrass, 124, 351
Crabs, 147, 152, 635
cracking, 289
crayfish, 147, 550, 553
Credit associations, 249, 253
Crests, 395
Criteria maximum concentration, 553, 570
Criteria pollutants, 524-525, 539-540, 553, 568, 570
Criterion continuous concentration, 553, 570
Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund, 163-165
Critical habitats, 160, 406
Critical number, 85, 87, 105, 107
Crop rotation, 297, 304, 346, 352, 357, 565
cropland, 299-300, 304, 306, 313, 322, 337, 547, 624
Crops
genetically modified, 309, 317-322, 335-337,
355-356, 364
rotation, 297, 304, 346, 352, 357, 565
transgenic, 317-320
yields, 143, 173, 181, 203-204, 275-276, 293-294,
302, 304, 311-314, 319, 325-326,
331-332, 334-335, 342, 346, 357, 359,
522, 587
Crown fires, 126
Crude birthrate (CBR), 224, 226, 228
Crude death rate (CDR), 224, 226, 228
crude oil, 365, 367-368, 373-374, 377-379, 381-382,
389, 437
crust, 61, 79, 100-101, 107, 110, 296, 307, 421, 427
Crust, Earth’s, 61, 79, 100-101, 107, 110, 421, 427
Crustacea, 146
Cryosphere, 264, 479, 502
Cryptic coloration, 96
Cryptogamic crust, 296, 307
cryptosporidium, 152, 548
Cryptosporidium parvum, 548
Crystalline compounds, 63
Crystals, 63, 401
Ctenophores, 103
Cuba, 4, 207, 333-334
Cultivars, 142
Cultivation
overcultivation, 297, 299
under cultivation, 304, 313
Cultural control of pests, 352
Cultural hazards, 447-448, 469
Cumulus clouds, 507
Currents
deep, 265, 412, 478, 502
equatorial, 260, 474, 479, 502
surface, 100, 122, 260, 264-265, 345, 412,
473-474, 478-479, 482, 502
thermohaline circulation, 265, 478
upwelling, 122
Cuyahoga River, 547
Cyanide, 189-190, 196, 344, 349, 364
Cyanobacteria, 73, 561
Cycling, 54, 70, 127-129, 131, 154, 171-172, 176, 472,
486, 501, 539, 626, 631
Cyclones, 330
Cyprus, 207
Czech Republic, 420
D
Dams
flood control, 266, 269, 404
Glen Canyon Dam, 269, 279, 404
Hoover Dam, 404
hydroelectric, 242, 256, 263, 269, 403-404
in Canada, 270
irrigation, 2, 194, 256, 263, 266, 270, 272, 276,
281, 300, 302, 404
removing, 194, 263, 270, 272, 404
Three Gorges Dam, 263, 404
World Commission on Dams, 405
dandelion, 96
Dandelions, 85-86
Danehy Park, 575
Darwin, Charles, 91, 96, 107
Darwin’s finches, 93, 95, 106
Dating, 199
Dawn, 206, 546
day, 2, 31-34, 36, 45, 54, 60, 92, 100, 106, 114, 117,
140, 150, 170, 194, 200, 219, 233, 237-238,
240, 251-253, 263, 266, 274-275, 277, 284,
324, 326-328, 340, 365-366, 371, 377,
379-385, 387, 394, 402, 404, 406, 409, 418,
430, 435, 443, 454, 459, 467-468, 473-474,
479, 482, 489, 503, 509-510, 518, 527, 554,
561, 566, 575-581, 585, 587, 589-590, 624,
635
DDE, 347
DDT
ban on, 345
environmental effects, 340, 347
residues, 346-347, 350, 359, 361, 615
spruce budworm, 346
Dead zone, 152, 418, 544-545, 550, 562, 566, 568,
570
Dead zones
global, 75, 568
death
increases in, 213, 274, 431
death rate, 2, 201, 224-226, 228, 328, 337
Death rates, 201, 203, 213, 219, 224-225, 231-232,
246, 447
Death Valley, 260
Debris, 192, 261, 286, 385, 417, 430, 480, 554-555,
565, 568, 570, 635
Debt cancellation, 243-244, 251
Debt crisis, 241, 243, 251, 326
decay, 61, 65, 100, 136, 289, 291, 417-418, 421, 424,
427-428, 431-432, 440-441, 485, 502, 514,
524, 626, 628, 632, 637, 639
Deciduous forest, 58, 117-118, 120-121, 137
Deciduous forest biome, 118
Deciduous trees, 118-119, 137, 399
decomposers, 71-72, 76, 111, 113-114, 135-136, 286,
374, 445, 556, 558, 562-564
Decomposition, 36, 65, 126, 129, 135, 288, 316, 375,
558, 560, 571, 577, 587
Deep currents, 478
Deep-well injection, 600
Deer mice, 104, 151
Deffeyes, Kenneth, 381
Deforestation
in Haiti, 148-149
of tropical forests, 497
Degenerative diseases, 224, 455
degradation, 3, 6, 11-12, 20, 37, 48-49, 51, 71, 105,
132, 140, 144, 171, 173, 178, 198, 208,
210-211, 213, 233, 236-237, 250, 284-285,
294-297, 299-307, 322, 337, 469, 494, 496,
502, 585, 615, 632
Delaney clause, 361, 364, 615
Delhi, India, 205, 215, 233
demand, 4, 6, 20, 70, 72, 141-142, 212, 226, 272, 313,
317, 323-325, 329, 366, 368-369, 371,
373-378, 380-382, 384, 386-389, 391, 399,
402-405, 407-408, 413, 416, 420, 424, 434,
440, 488, 498, 529, 537, 540, 550, 557, 562,
564, 570, 577, 585, 589, 620, 623, 627
Democratic Republic of Congo, 235, 328
Demographers, 148, 200, 205, 210, 216, 219, 224,
226, 231-232, 251
Demographic dividend, 234, 251, 253
Demographic terms, 201
demographic transition
world regions in, 231
Demographic window, 234, 251
Demography, 200, 226, 228, 251
denitrification, 73, 79, 487, 545, 556
Denmark, 207, 244, 394, 405-406, 462, 469
Density
ice, 86, 89, 478
seawater, 478
Density dependence, 86, 105
Density independence, 86
Density-independent factors, 86
Department of Agriculture (USDA), 197, 545
Department of Energy (DOE), 395, 406, 419
Department of Health and Human Services, 447, 453,
469, 553, 594, 599
Department of Interior, 395
Department of the Interior, 160, 256, 298, 395
Department of Transportation, 608, 610, 615
Department of Transportation Regulations (DOT
Regs), 608, 615
Dependency ratios, 234
Depletion allowances, 497
Desalination, 256, 274, 279, 281
Desert biome, 118, 136
Desert lands, 171
Desert pavement, 295-296, 307
desertification
of farmland, 300
Deserts
climates, 117, 120, 180
Destruction, 15, 25, 45, 48, 86, 98, 100, 102, 105, 141,
148, 157, 168, 180, 190-191, 193, 196-197,
221, 263, 346, 357, 379, 425, 446, 451, 487,
499, 506, 508, 519, 531-535, 537-538, 540,
634
detergent, 564, 604
Detergents, 72, 521, 550, 553-554, 564-566, 604
detritivores, 70, 79
Detritus, 70, 76, 79, 111, 113-114, 124, 135, 285-286,
288, 290-294, 297, 301, 305-307, 374-375,
445, 550, 555-556, 562-564, 600
Detritus feeders, 76, 111, 113-114, 135, 285, 445, 550,
556
Detritus food web, 114, 286
Detritus-based ecosystem, 292, 306
Deuterium, 423, 436, 440
Developed countries
forest resources, 180, 250
mortality in, 221, 233, 246, 447
Developing countries
debt crisis in, 326
G-20, 6
HIV/AIDS and, 248
pesticides in, 346, 359, 361
urban blight in, 627-628, 637
water in, 266, 272, 274, 586
development
645

development aid, 241, 243-245, 251, 279, 316,
325, 335
promoting, 6, 23, 39, 182, 230, 233, 237, 250, 252,
299, 388, 406, 413, 498, 634, 636
rate of, 2, 11, 32, 198, 208, 221, 225-226, 233, 239,
244, 246, 249, 272, 382, 405, 428, 455,
566, 624, 632
social, 2-3, 6, 9-11, 27, 40, 44, 46, 48, 182,
212-213, 216, 224, 226, 228, 230-231,
235-237, 239, 241-246, 248-251, 328,
331, 624-625, 632
socioeconomic, 455, 611
Devil’s Hole pupfish, 159
Dew, 257, 516
Diatomaceous earth, 340
Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE), 347
Dickens, Charles, 509
Dieldrin, 346, 348, 599, 614
Diesel engines, 521, 526
Diffusion, 70, 232, 252, 291, 473
Diffusion exchange, 70
Digestion, 293, 406-407, 556, 558, 570
Dilution, 48, 431, 546
Dioxins, 362, 581, 599-600, 614
Diphtheria, 203, 449
direct effects, 91
directives, 18, 238, 361, 576
Disaster risk reduction strategies, 461
Discharge, 177, 385, 524, 547, 551, 554-556, 564,
567, 570, 607, 615
Discharge permit, 607, 615
Discount rate, 11, 27
Disease burden, 237, 454, 464-465, 469
Diseases
degenerative, 224, 455
environmental hazards and, 444-445, 447-450,
454-455, 457-458, 460-462, 467-468
global mortality from, 448
globalization of, 48
infectious, 203, 246, 329, 342, 444, 447-449, 454,
457-458, 461, 467-468, 546, 548
population growth and, 203, 215, 247
STDs, 247, 448
tropical, 12, 315, 318, 457-458
water pollution and, 12, 546, 548, 550
Disposal
of hazardous waste, 603
of nuclear waste, 425, 428, 439
Dissolved oxygen, 116, 122, 545-546, 550-551,
562-564
Distillation, 258, 274, 281
distribution
age, 106, 327, 329, 336, 447, 477, 519
uniform, 126
Distributive justice, 47, 251
District courts, 13
disturbance
and ecosystems, 132
diversity
genetic, 100, 142-143, 146, 164-166, 168, 322
species, 36-37, 40, 48, 90, 97, 100-101, 119-120,
125-127, 134, 140-144, 146-148, 150,
154, 163-168, 182, 190, 194, 196, 198
Diving, 106
DNA, 63, 95-96, 99, 143, 148, 161, 163, 166, 319,
337, 426-427, 454, 533
Dodder, 89
dogs, 91, 119, 161, 339
Doha Development Round, 6, 27
Doldrums, 260
Dolphins, 122, 139-140, 165-166, 546
Dombeck, Mike, 193
Dominican Republic, 148-149
Donor fatigue, 244, 253
Dose, 342, 426-427, 452, 463-464, 469, 595, 598, 615
Dose response, 595
Dose-response assessment, 463-464, 469, 615
dose-response relationship, 595
Double-loop design, 424
doubling time, 83, 226
Doubly Green Revolution, 332, 336
Douglas fir, 182
Downeast Lakes Land Trust, 193
Draft Report on the Environment 2003, 25
Drake, Susan, 635, 638
Drawdown, 304
drift
continental, 107
Drifting continents, 100-101
Drinking water, 22, 39, 88, 172, 203, 215-216, 230,
237, 240, 256, 265, 269, 272, 274, 276-279,
281, 347, 352, 383-384, 455, 457, 546,
548-549, 553-554, 562, 567-570, 603, 610,
615
Drinking Water Standards and Health Advisories, 553
Drip irrigation, 275, 300, 307
Drip irrigation system, 275
Drought
agricultural, 12, 131, 142, 202, 214, 255, 263, 274,
285, 294, 302, 315, 318, 322, 324,
328-329, 334, 342, 483, 490, 518
hydrologic, 255, 263, 274, 282
Drylands
ecosystems, 172, 285, 289, 294, 298-300, 302,
305, 307, 328
Ducks, 122, 157, 205, 350
Ducks Unlimited, 157
dumping, 2, 326, 347, 567, 569, 576, 581, 589,
601-602, 608, 615, 635
DuPont, 15-16, 537
DuPont Chemical Company, 537
Dust Bowl, 38, 284-285, 297, 305
dust storms, 264, 284, 329, 507
Dutch elm disease, 31, 346
Dynamic balance, 86, 123, 203, 293
Dysentery, 329, 548
E
E horizon, 288, 307
Eagles, 86, 116
Earth
cooling processes, 479
core of, 436
energy budget, 474, 485
fossil record, 148
four spheres of, 62
glaciation, 99, 477
hot spots, 140, 164-165
hydrosphere, 61-62, 79
life on Earth, 37, 62, 70, 95, 140, 146, 156
lithosphere, 61-62, 79, 100, 107
magnetic field, 436
measurements, 51, 95, 427, 481-482, 485, 487,
518, 534
near the surface, 509
orbit, 477, 479, 502
outer space, 61, 397, 427, 503
rotation of, 473-474
seasons, 106, 118, 135, 299, 474, 488, 490, 576
size, 36, 95, 98, 146, 148, 182, 202, 212, 244, 307,
436, 534, 536, 578
solar radiation, 264, 473, 475, 477, 479-481, 499,
502, 532-533
state of, 10, 107, 110, 134, 164, 180, 431, 436,
476, 484, 503, 578
structure, 31, 62, 95, 135, 140, 307, 412, 431, 473,
475, 502
weather, 107, 260, 282, 400, 451, 472-477, 479,
481, 488, 490, 499-500, 502-503, 507,
509, 518, 531-532, 534
weathering, 70, 74, 307
Earth Day, 31
Earthquakes
in Japan, 417, 451
worldwide, 434
earthworms, 57, 62, 84, 114, 291, 303, 501
East Africa, 165, 232, 264, 324, 483
Eastern Europe, 103, 206, 228, 368, 455, 576
Ebola virus, 458
Ecdysone, 356
Echolocation, 139
Ecological agriculture, 302
ecological change, 75
Ecological control, 343, 351, 362
ecological economics, 48, 211
Ecological economists, 7, 10, 25, 27
Ecological pest control, 343, 351, 364
ecological restoration, 125, 128, 130, 132, 195, 636
Ecological succession, 123, 125, 135-136
ecological sustainability, 133
ecological values, 173
Ecology
and the environment, 38, 76, 226, 269
carrying capacity and, 105
dynamic, 193
fire, 105, 126, 128, 185, 193, 202
hierarchy of, 54-56
individual organisms, 55
landscapes, 58, 79, 194
population, 55-58, 77, 79, 102, 105, 107, 111, 194,
198, 199-200, 202, 204, 206, 226-227,
457, 576
principles of, 77
restoration, 38, 102, 128, 166, 170, 178, 185,
193-194, 196, 198
restoration ecology, 38, 128, 166, 178, 185, 193,
196, 198
seascapes, 178
Ecology and Oceanography of Harmful Algal Blooms
(ECOHAB), 546
economic development, 2-3, 11, 16, 33, 40, 182,
224-225, 231-234, 236, 238, 242-243, 311,
367, 404, 606
Economic meltdown, 378
Economic Simplified Boiling Water Reactor (ESBWR),
432, 440
Economic systems, 3-5, 25, 27
Economics
environmental economics, 18
growth and, 6, 18
of pollution control, 19-20, 22, 25
Economies
high-income, 206, 208, 211, 244
low-income, 206, 208, 234, 244
EcoSan, 561
Ecosystem, 6-8, 10-12, 14, 25, 27, 32-35, 37, 41, 46,
49-51, 56-58, 70-71, 73, 75-79, 82-83,
86-87, 90, 92, 102-107, 109-111, 113-117,
123-137, 140, 144-145, 148, 152, 154-155,
162-166, 170-178, 182, 185, 187, 190-194,
196-198, 201, 205, 240, 243, 245, 249-251,
256, 266, 278-279, 285-286, 288, 291-294,
299, 303, 306, 315-316, 335, 343, 349, 351,
356-357, 359, 373, 407, 490, 498-499, 503,
552, 561-562, 566, 568-570
Ecosystem capital
degradation of, 132
ecosystem diversity, 154, 165
ecosystem ecology, 76-77, 111, 196
Ecosystem management, 132, 134-137, 192-193
Ecosystem resilience, 127, 135, 490
Ecosystem restoration, 193-194
Ecosystem services
cultural, 33-34, 131, 173, 182, 250
forests and, 133, 154, 173, 196, 335
functions of, 133, 182
global status of, 34
goods and, 6, 27, 32-34, 130, 132-134, 137, 176,
196, 198, 250, 335
provisioning, 33-34, 131, 173
regulating, 33-34, 173
supporting, 173
Ecosystems
abiotic components of, 135
and climate, 118, 126, 256, 332, 485
and productivity, 117, 194
aquatic, 36, 58-59, 70, 72-73, 104, 109, 113,
116-117, 119-125, 147, 168, 171-173,
175, 183-184, 256, 269, 278, 289, 516,
518, 523, 539, 544, 568
as natural resources, 173
buffering capacity of, 524
changes in, 35, 48, 67, 105, 107, 110, 126, 130,
133, 137, 154, 180-181, 192, 287, 296,
311, 523
characteristics of, 40, 58, 75, 79, 105, 109, 111,
204, 288-289
climax, 123-127, 135-137
communities and, 41, 57, 79, 146, 311, 629
components of, 8, 11, 48, 135, 287, 299, 305, 475
consumptive use of, 183
decline of, 40, 102, 146, 171, 175, 184, 201, 483
detritus-based, 292, 306
disturbances and, 132
energy in, 67, 113-114, 116
evolution and, 467, 469
fire climax, 126, 137
fire-adapted, 185
forests and woodlands, 153, 171, 179
Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, 134, 192
heterogeneous, 92
hierarchy, 54, 56
managing, 105, 110, 132-133, 137, 173, 176-177,
181, 192, 196, 198, 279, 303, 544, 606
ocean, 35-37, 58-59, 71, 107, 110, 116-119,
121-122, 171-172, 174, 178, 183-185,
187, 189-190, 197-198, 205, 259-260,
646

262-263, 269, 285, 302, 475, 483, 486,
490
prairie, 118-119, 125, 128, 130, 132, 185, 196, 285,
289
productive use of, 196-197
services from, 172, 285
soil ecosystem, 291, 293
solar energy, 70, 116, 475
stability and, 148
succession, 110, 123-127, 134-137, 154
transnational, 48
trophic levels, 111, 114-117, 127, 134-135
trophic structure, 126
Ecotone, 58, 77, 79, 125
ecotones, 58
ecotourism, 34, 131, 144, 168, 172
Ecuador, 206-207, 236, 302
Eddies, 303, 478
Edison International, 401
Education, 1, 9, 25, 29, 32-33, 53, 62, 81, 95, 101,
106, 109, 121, 126, 136, 139, 156, 169-170,
172, 199-200, 208, 216, 229, 233-236,
239-240, 244-248, 250-252, 255, 259, 262,
281, 283, 304, 309, 339, 365, 393, 417, 443,
455, 461-462, 471, 478, 498-499, 501, 505,
543, 565, 573, 593, 617, 627, 635, 639
efficiency
fuel, 24, 116, 198, 322, 372, 374, 377-378, 381,
387-389, 391, 395, 399, 405, 408-409,
413-416, 438, 497-498, 527-528
effluent, 557, 560-561, 565-566, 569-570
Effluents, 79, 278, 560, 564-566
Egrets, 94, 141, 158
Egypt, 48, 207, 211, 235, 247, 271, 332
Ehrlich, Anne, 129
Ehrlich, Paul, 210
Einstein, Albert, 421
El Niño, 189, 479, 500, 502
El Niño/La Niña, 479, 502
El Niño/La Niña Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 479,
502
Electric cars, 396, 438, 528
Electric generators, 368
Electrical demand cycle, 371, 424
Electrical power generation
nuclear share of, 420
Electricity
demand cycle, 369, 371, 424
solar production of, 399
Electrolysis, 409, 416
electromagnetic spectrum, 532
Electron, 115, 136, 293, 355, 409, 416, 516, 540
electronic waste, 590
Electrons, 61, 63, 67, 73, 368, 400, 409-410, 421, 426
Electrostatic precipitators, 512, 525, 580
element, 8-9, 22, 42, 61, 64, 74, 79, 132, 147, 155,
225, 234, 242, 245, 251, 398, 409, 421, 425,
431, 436, 440-441, 461, 469, 502, 521, 611,
634
Elephantiasis, 457
Elephants, 113, 154, 161, 163, 201
elk, 111, 119, 157, 192, 200
Eluviation, 288, 307
Embrittlement, 434, 440
Emergency cooling system, 430
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, 401
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
Act (EPCRA), 609
Emergent vegetation, 561-562, 564, 570
Emigration, 82, 86, 107, 228
Emission allowances, 529-530
Emphysema, 510, 519-520, 540
encephalitis, 458
endangered, 23-24, 39, 45, 47, 54-55, 81, 86-87, 111,
139, 147, 150, 152, 154, 156-163, 166-168,
170, 175, 188, 193-194, 278-279, 298, 347,
406, 561, 587, 624
Endangered Species Recovery Act (ESRA), 162
endemic, 147, 154, 444, 491, 550, 628
endemic species, 147, 491
Endocrine disruptors, 347, 468, 593-594, 598
endocrine system, 347, 593, 615
Endosulfan, 347
Energy
basics, 65, 76, 265, 417, 445, 631
biomass, 19, 68, 72, 115-117, 129, 134-136,
372-373, 375, 388, 394-396, 406-407,
411, 413-416, 540
conversions, 66, 70, 152
first law of thermodynamics, 79-80
flow of, 33, 70, 76-77, 109, 111, 116, 128, 265, 277,
368, 404, 430, 472, 474
forms of, 65, 72, 78-79, 216, 326, 367, 373, 379,
383, 397, 402-403, 406, 421, 441, 583,
590, 634
fossil fuels, 24, 34-37, 70, 77, 79, 129, 203-205,
313, 322, 332, 365-391, 394-397,
403-404, 407, 412-414, 416, 418-419,
421, 436-437, 440, 485-486, 488, 492,
496-498, 509
geothermal, 369, 373, 394, 396, 411-413, 415-416,
497
harnessing, 203, 414, 416
in ecosystems, 54, 79, 109-110, 116-117, 127, 129,
133-134, 137
kinetic, 65-67, 69, 77, 79, 257, 400
kinetic energy, 65-67, 69, 77, 79, 257, 400
law of conservation of energy, 66, 79
laws of thermodynamics, 43, 66, 70
making, 13, 18-19, 23, 43-44, 50-51, 69-70, 78, 88,
104, 106, 109, 126, 130, 134, 136, 148,
154, 198, 205, 212, 255-256, 269, 274,
276, 279, 281, 305, 315, 317, 322, 328,
366-367, 376, 387-388, 390, 395, 405,
414-415, 438-439, 498, 501-502, 574,
580, 583-584, 596, 614, 631-632, 634,
636
matter and, 43, 54-55, 60, 65, 67, 76-78, 109, 116
mechanical, 48, 368, 391
natural gas, 34, 216, 276, 365, 368-371, 373-375,
377, 380, 382-384, 387-389, 391, 397,
399, 409, 412, 418, 488, 498, 540
nature of, 41, 226, 445, 577, 634
oil, 34, 70, 152, 203, 216, 313, 317, 328, 365-371,
373-384, 386-389, 391, 394-396,
399-400, 402, 407-409, 411-414, 416,
418, 420, 437-438, 488, 497, 527, 540,
577, 580-581, 583, 614, 634
one-way flow of, 70
per capita consumption of, 216
potential, 16, 60, 65-69, 77, 79, 92, 96, 104, 106,
114, 125, 128-129, 198, 263, 274, 276,
281, 317, 328, 332, 368, 372, 374, 380,
382, 387, 394-395, 400, 403, 405,
407-408, 410-413, 415, 417, 421,
425-426, 430, 434-435, 437-438, 481,
488, 490, 502, 578, 582, 596, 631
potential energy, 65-69, 77, 79, 114
radiant, 397, 416, 480-481
renewable sources of, 395
second law of thermodynamics, 66-67, 69, 79-80,
368, 374, 397
transformations, 48
units, 61, 66, 69, 79, 119, 132, 368, 380, 388, 396,
411, 418-419, 421, 424, 434-435, 479
Energy carrier, 368, 391, 409, 411, 416
Energy conservation
efficiency, 213, 389, 391, 399, 413, 415-416,
497-498
Energy flow
appropriation of, 128
nutrient cycles and, 76
Energy footprint, 415
Energy Information Administration, 368-369, 371, 373,
376-377, 382, 419, 485, 501, 519
Energy policies, 365, 386, 394, 416, 438
energy production, 391, 406, 415, 430
Engines
diesel, 416, 521, 526
gasoline, 367, 416, 526, 624
internal combustion, 367, 409-410, 539
English yew tree, 143
Enrichment
nutrient, 172, 293, 545-546, 561-563
Entamoeba histolytica, 548
Entisols, 289
Entomologists, 354
Environment
abiotic, 57, 59-60, 77-79, 84, 92, 96, 98, 105, 111,
113, 123, 126, 135, 351
adaptations to, 96, 98-99, 105
chemistry and, 55, 61, 518
economics and, 1-3
humans and, 40, 145, 310, 345, 350, 425, 427-428,
464, 549, 613
organisms in, 51, 54-55, 86, 111, 113, 469, 556,
571
wealth and, 9, 26, 48, 166, 206, 211-212
Environmental accounting, 10, 14
environmental activists, 6
Environmental costs, 270, 335, 359, 379, 399, 437,
625
environmental hazards
biological, 443, 445, 447-448, 453, 469
diseases and, 447-448, 457
physical, 443, 445, 447, 450-451, 454, 462,
464-465, 469
public policy and, 462
risk assessment and, 443, 463, 466
risks and, 461
Environmental health
disease and, 445-447
Environmental impact statements, 382
Environmental income, 133, 141
environmental indicators, 25
Environmental justice, 23, 46, 49, 593, 611, 613-615
Environmental Justice program, 613
environmental legislation, 23, 494
Environmental movement, 23, 30-31, 37-39, 51, 348
environmental organizations
government agencies, 48
environmental policy
international, 2, 17-18, 24, 193
Environmental Policy Act, 31, 39, 193
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
creation of, 31
Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP), 304
Environmental racism, 46, 51
environmental refugees, 499
Environmental resistance, 83-87, 89-90, 92, 96,
103-107, 174, 203
Environmental revolution, 202, 204, 228, 636
environmental risks
cancer, 454
environmental science
applications of, 362
environmental sustainability, 40-41, 216, 240
Environmental Sustainability Index, 41
Environmental tipping points, 135
Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), 456
Environmentalism, 23, 38-39, 49, 51, 145
environmentalist, 23, 32, 34, 46, 51, 208
Environmentalists, 23, 39, 48, 150, 278, 280
Enzymes, 69, 291, 319, 408, 523, 540, 598
Epicenter, 54, 417
Epidemics, 203, 224, 447-448, 548, 550
Epidemiologic transition, 201, 224-225, 227, 246, 251,
447
Epidemiological studies, 463-464
Epidemiology, 225, 251, 447, 457, 468-469
Equator
region, 117-119, 137, 233, 260, 474
Equatorial regions, 117, 259
Equilibrium
system, 110, 123, 481, 494, 502
Equilibrium climate sensitivity, 490, 502
Equity, 11, 14-17, 25, 27, 40-41, 46, 51, 242, 494, 500,
502, 626
Equity principle, 17, 494, 500, 502
Erie, Lake, 154-155, 162, 166, 567
Eritrea, 207, 249, 329
Erosion
contour farming and, 298
control of, 352
geological, 263, 285
glacier, 289
rainfall and, 302
streams, 176, 192, 263, 295, 298-299, 550, 553,
567
Esophageal cancer, 2
Essential elements, 553, 634
e-Stewards Initiative, 590
Estuary, 121, 270, 281, 303, 546, 566, 635
ethane, 598
Ethanol
corn-based, 408
ethics
Land Ethic, 145
Ethiopia, 207, 236, 328-329, 449
Ethnobotany, 143
Eukarya, 146
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
432
European Union, 153, 164, 186, 199, 244, 330, 495,
576, 610, 615, 634
European Union (EU), 153, 199, 610
European Union Wild Bird Declaration, 153
647

Evaporation
latent heat of, 478
Evaporative water loss, 120, 290-291, 293, 297, 307
Evapotranspiration loop, 262
Even-aged management, 182
Everglades, 17, 75, 194-196, 198
Everglades National Park, 194
Everglades restoration, 194-196, 198
Evolution
fitness, 96, 107
natural selection, 81, 96, 99, 107, 349
speciation, 95, 99-100, 106-107
E-waste, 589-592
Ewing, Reid, 623, 638
Executive branch, 13, 27
executive orders, 18, 525
Exotic species, 48, 105, 132, 150-151, 174, 194, 214,
270
experiment, 6, 42-43, 51, 301, 499
experiments
controlled, 59, 132, 521
exploitation
Industrial Revolution and, 203
of fisheries, 177, 197-198
of workers, 5
public policies and, 3
exploratory drilling, 374
exponential growth, 82-84, 201
exposure
and toxicity, 609, 615
Exposure assessment, 463-464, 469, 615
Extended producer responsibility (EPR), 589
External costs, 18, 25, 315
extinction
colonization, 147
reasons for, 148, 154
Extinction rates, 143, 148
Extractive reserves, 183
Exurban migration, 622, 626-629, 637, 639
Exurbs, 622-625, 632, 639
Exxon Chemical Company, 611
F
Facilitation, 11, 123, 137, 251, 588
factory farms, 315
facts, 24, 32, 41, 237, 252, 575-576, 584, 592
Factual data, 42
Family planning, 24, 41, 46, 225, 232-234, 236, 239,
245, 247-248, 250-251, 325
Family-planning agencies, 247
famine, 142, 202, 239, 309, 322, 324-326, 328-330,
336-337
Famine Early Warning System Network (FEWS NET),
329
Faraday, Michael, 368
Farm policies, 301, 335
Farm Security and Rural Investment Act, 304
Farmer experimenters, 301-302
Farming
animal, 129, 309-310, 312, 315-316, 322, 335, 364,
565
contour, 297-298, 305-306, 565
wind farms, 406
Farmland
conversion, 322
Fats, 327, 347
fault, 100, 174, 316, 452
Fecal coliform test, 549
Fecal pellets, 545
Fecal wastes, 114, 116, 549
Federal Agricultural Improvement and Reform Act
(FAIR), 304
Federal courts, 13
Federal Housing Administration, 620
Federal Register, 13, 525
Federal regulations, 21, 360, 567, 576, 606
Federal Transit Administration, 625
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 547
Feedback
positive, 127, 137, 289, 486-488, 490, 502
Feedback loops, 127, 137
Feeding relationships
food chains, 111
food webs, 111
Feedlots, 544, 553, 565
Fermentation, 70, 114, 137, 317, 407, 409, 416, 550,
557
Fertility
replacement-level, 201, 210, 217, 223
fertility decline, 232
Fertility rates
contraception and, 236
decline in, 206, 217, 227, 232, 238, 247
total, 210, 217-219, 221, 226-227, 230, 232, 238,
245
Fertility transition, 201, 225, 227, 231-232, 234, 236,
239
Fertilizer, 72-73, 75, 78, 142, 203-204, 249, 290, 297,
306-307, 311, 313-315, 317, 320, 322, 324,
326, 328, 333, 335, 407-409, 445-446, 518,
545, 558-559, 561, 564-565, 569, 587, 624
Fetch, 266
Fiberglass, 583, 606
Fibers, 172, 176, 180, 198, 598
Fibrous root system, 96
Field scouts, 357, 364
Fiji, 101, 206-207
Fin whale, 188
Finches, 92-93, 95, 106
Finches, Galápagos, 95
Fire ants, 103, 150
Fire climax ecosystems, 126, 137
fire suppression, 132, 193
Fires
crown, 126
forest, 119, 125-126, 132, 181, 193, 450, 480
ground, 125-126, 367, 480, 526
wildfires, 193
First law of thermodynamics, 79-80
First level consumer, 114-115
First-generation biofuel, 408
First-generation pesticides, 344, 348, 364
Fish
mercury in, 521
speed, 130, 263
Fish ladders, 269, 404
fishing
factory, 2, 183
industrialized, 2, 233
trawling, 186-187
fission, 417-418, 421-428, 430, 434-436, 438-440
Fission products, 418, 421, 424, 426-428, 430, 440
fission reactions, 422, 430, 440
Fitness
survival of the fittest, 91
Fixation of nitrogen, 73
Fjord, 600
Flat-plate collectors, 398
flatworms, 457, 548
Flea markets, 582
Fleas, 150, 340, 352
Floating plants, 122
Floc, 556-557
Flood irrigation, 300, 307
Floodplains, 452
floods
50-year, 256
flash, 452
Florida
Whooping cranes and, 163
Florida Bay, 194
Florida Everglades, 194, 198
Florida Keys, 170
flounder, 186
Flowing air, 473
Flue gas desulfurization, 519
fluorine, 533, 540, 598, 615
Flush world, 277
flux, 70-71
fluxes, 71, 261-262, 486
Fly ash, 386, 580-581
Flyways, 165
Focus, 2, 7-8, 19, 25, 38-40, 57, 70-71, 111, 116, 126,
140, 142, 146-147, 165, 171, 188, 190, 194,
200, 208, 230, 233, 243, 245-247, 256, 259,
262, 278, 325, 327-328, 335, 361-362, 402,
413, 427, 435-436, 445, 447, 526, 545, 575,
588, 625, 627
Fog
evaporation, 257
valley, 506
Food aid, 310, 325-326, 330-331, 335-336, 483
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), 180, 243,
332
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), 90
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 321, 361, 595
food chains
insect, 181, 349, 552
Food distribution, 309, 322
Food production
biofuels and, 316, 335
major patterns of, 309-310
of grain, 313, 323
Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA), 347, 361, 364,
594, 615
Food security, 5, 295, 306, 309, 325-326, 329,
331-332, 335, 337, 498
Food trade, 276, 323, 359
Food webs
complex, 111
detritus, 70, 111
marine, 70, 112
Foods
global food crisis, 323
World Food Summit, 324
Footprint
energy, 78, 212, 277, 415
Ford Motor Company, 409
Foreign investment, 241, 244, 250, 311
Forest ecosystems, 179-180, 298, 340
Forest fires, 193, 450, 480
forest resources
in developing countries, 407
Forest Stewardship Council, 183, 198
forestry
and biodiversity, 142, 144, 182
new, 12, 132, 142, 144, 181-183, 192, 196, 198,
289, 301, 305, 565
plantation, 183
plantations, 183
watersheds, 192
Forests
as obstacles, 181
boreal, 118, 123, 180
deciduous, 58, 60, 78-79, 92, 102, 117-120, 124,
136
diseases in, 445
in U.S., 312
insects and, 60, 92, 146, 313
national, 8, 10, 12, 38, 47, 57, 78, 81, 111, 118,
123, 125-126, 130, 132-133, 136, 148,
157, 164, 175, 181, 183, 190-193,
197-198, 214, 243, 294, 299, 335, 364,
496-497, 521, 523, 539, 541, 634
net changes in, 180-181
ownership of, 134, 193, 198
planting of, 497
rain, 12, 58, 74, 78-79, 81, 111, 117-120, 122, 126,
136, 146, 148, 182, 196, 216, 260,
263-264, 288, 294, 299, 315, 490, 498,
512, 522-523, 530, 634
Formaldehyde, 460, 527, 596
fossil fuels
alternatives to, 381
carbon dioxide emissions from, 485
combustion of, 70, 73, 369, 512
consumption, 8, 228, 331, 367-368, 374-377, 379,
389, 396, 413
emissions from, 36, 484-485, 496
energy from, 70, 79, 203, 365-391, 395, 403, 413,
436
global carbon emissions from, 485
hydrocarbons, 382, 384, 509, 598
other, 11, 24, 34-36, 49, 70-71, 73-75, 79, 129,
203-205, 228, 300, 313, 316, 322,
331-332, 335, 367-373, 376-377,
379-383, 386-387, 391, 395-397,
403-404, 407, 412-414, 416, 418-419,
421, 436-437, 440, 476, 486, 492,
496-498, 500, 509, 598, 633
petroleum, 365, 367, 373-374, 376-377, 380, 382,
413, 598
Fourier, Jean-Baptiste, 479
Fourth Assessment Report (FAR), 35
Fox, 99, 112, 137, 161
Foxes
ancestral, 99
gray, 99
fragmentation, 148-149, 624
Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC),
494-495, 502
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC),
456
Free oxygen, 508, 533
Free trade, 6, 621
Fresh Kills Landfill, 579, 581, 589
648

freshwater systems, 71, 92, 564
Frogs
bullfrogs, 81
Leap of Faith: Saving Panama’s Golden Frogs, 82
Fronts
cold, 474
Frozen Ark Project, 143
Fuel cells, 407, 409-411, 415
fuel efficiency, 377-378, 381, 387, 527-528
Fuel loads, 193
Fuel rods, 417-418, 423-424, 439-440
Fuelwood, 129, 133, 142, 172, 180, 249, 406-407
Fundamental biological principle, 59
funding, 45-46, 156, 162-163, 194, 245, 247-249, 299,
303-304, 372, 388, 395, 413-414, 435, 438,
447, 456-457, 459, 467, 545, 567-568, 606,
615, 619, 626
fungi
species of, 79, 92, 114, 146, 163, 291
fungicides, 343, 364
Furans, 362, 599, 614
Fusion, 397, 417, 421, 436, 438-440
Fusion reaction, 421, 440
fusion reactions, 436
Fusion reactors, 436, 439
G
Gallflies, 104
Galápagos finches, 95
Galápagos Islands, 194
Game animals, 133, 157
Gamma rays, 425, 532
Ganges River, 139-140, 264, 548
Gases
dissolved gases, 63
volcanic, 37, 109, 289, 480
Gasohol, 408, 416
Gasoline engines, 367
Gasoline prices, 317, 378, 390, 414, 625
Gates, Bill, 456
Geese, 122, 350
Gelisols, 289
Gender equality, 32, 240
Gene pool, 96, 98
genera, 55
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), 6
General Electric, 419, 432, 440
genes
banking, 143
wild, 98, 142-143, 166, 168, 176, 319, 355
Genetic diversity, 143, 146, 168, 322
genetic modification, 274, 321
Genetic variation, 98-99, 142
genetics
terms, 96
Genocide, 233
genome, 99, 318, 321, 449
Genomes, 459
Genpact, 233
genus, 55, 100, 344, 449, 477
Geoengineering, 499
Geology, 37, 100, 374, 382
Georges Bank, 186, 196
Germany, 207, 214, 225, 321, 348, 355, 401, 406,
418, 420, 576, 589
Geysers, 411
Giardiasis, 548
Gibbs, Lois, 602, 613
Gigatons, 116, 484-485, 496
Gills, 69, 551
Glacial ice, 486
glaciers
tidewater, 484
Glass recycling, 585
Glassphalt, 575, 583
Gleick, Peter, 278
Global air circulation, 260
Global Assessment of Soil Degradation (GLASOD),
285
Global Biodiversity Information Facility, 165
Global Biodiversity Outlook, 36, 147, 164
Global carbon cycle, 70-71, 486
Global climate models, 264
Global community, 256, 325-326, 368, 472, 623, 634
Global environment, 12, 49, 77, 164, 306, 414, 469,
501, 518
Global financial crisis, 244
Global food aid, 330
Global food crisis, 323
Global Information and Early Warning System
(GIEWS), 329
Global nitrogen cycle, 73
Global nitrogen fertilization, 74
Global phosphorus cycle, 72
global population
megacities, 215
urbanization, 215
Global primary energy supply, 368
Global Recycling Network, 583
Global risk factors, 454, 465
Global surface temperature anomalies, 475
global warming
cooling and, 502
Globalization
developing countries and, 47
Glucose, 67-70, 79, 113-114, 136-137, 454, 465, 594
glyphosate, 317, 319, 346, 349, 564
Goats, 90, 249, 309, 311, 315-316, 328
gold, 436, 519, 580, 590
Golden Eagle Protection Act, 162
Golden frog (Atelopus zeteki), 81
Golden rice, 318, 321, 336
goods
and services, 1, 3-10, 12, 18, 27, 32-35, 37, 46,
48-49, 51, 110, 128, 130, 132-134, 137,
140-141, 147, 166, 170-172, 176, 183,
190, 195-196, 198, 214, 219-220,
225-226, 243, 248, 250-251, 256, 269,
335, 379, 475, 498, 531, 545, 568
GPI (genuine progress indicator), 10
GPU Nuclear, 430
GRACE, 484, 605
Grain, 8, 30, 302, 313-315, 317, 321, 323, 330,
332-333, 335, 367, 403, 408, 522
grain production, 330, 333, 522
Grameen Bank, 38, 248-249, 251, 253
Grand Canyon, 269
Grand Lake Stream, 193
Granite, 411
grants, 95, 106, 164, 242, 244, 324, 331, 333, 388,
493, 566-567, 606, 632, 639
Grasses
native, 106, 128, 132, 185
sea, 119, 122, 190, 561, 566
Grasshoppers, 111, 115
Grassland and prairie biomes, 118
Grasslands, 36, 57-58, 79, 119-120, 125-126, 128,
133, 141, 148, 153, 171, 174, 178, 181, 190,
249, 285, 297, 302, 304, 312, 408
Gravel, 123, 286-287, 292, 295, 554, 559, 578, 619,
637
Gravitational flow, 261
Gravitational water, 261, 280-281
Gray fox, 99
Gray squirrel, 151
gray whales, 188
Gray wolves, 57, 167
Grazing
permits, 297-298
Grazing animals, 97, 115-116
great auk, 157
Great Depression, 38, 218, 324
Great Lakes
toxic chemicals in, 567
Great Salt Lake, 259
Greater bamboo lemur, 155
Greater Yellowstone Coalition, 191-192
Green algae, 73, 561-562, 566
Green Belt Movement, 38, 45
green buildings, 626
Green chemistry, 39, 48, 612-614
green manures, 302
Green plants, 67, 73, 79, 92, 107, 111, 113, 136-137,
257, 293, 486
Green products, 6, 19, 612, 615
Green Revolution, 203-204, 213, 300, 309, 313-315,
317, 320, 322, 328, 332, 335-336
Green taxes, 278
Green water, 257-259, 261-262, 272, 274, 276, 280,
282, 551
Greenfield lands, 606
Greenhouse gases (GHGs)
carbon dioxide, 476
rising, 476
Greenhouse warming, 485, 487
Greenland, 188, 207, 265, 477-478, 483-484,
490-491, 514, 600
Greenland Ice Sheet, 483-484, 491
Grit chamber, 555, 570
Grizzly bears, 157-158
gross domestic product (GDP), 9, 32, 494
gross national product (GNP), 9
Ground fires, 126
Groundfish, 186-187
Groundwater
characteristics, 61, 79, 601, 603
overuse of, 335
pollution of, 22, 559
recharging, 299
Groundwater levels, 271
Groundwater loop, 262
Groundwater remediation, 603-604, 615
Grouper, 170-171
Growth rate
exponential, 82-84, 107, 201
Guam, 207
Guest workers, 220, 253
Gulf coast, 162, 366, 381, 600
Gulf of Mexico
dead zone, 152, 544-545, 550, 568
nitrogen and, 545, 564, 568
Gullies, 295, 307
Gully erosion, 295, 307
gypsum, 63, 301
Gypsy moths, 103
H
Habitat
destruction, 86, 98, 102, 105, 148, 157, 168, 191
wildlife, 60, 98, 102, 126, 140, 150, 152-154,
157-158, 160-161, 163, 166-168, 191,
304, 553, 561, 624, 636
Habitat for Humanity, 636, 638
habitat loss, 55, 81, 86, 98, 105, 148-149, 161
Habitats
change, 82, 91-92, 148, 152, 158, 256, 278, 638
critical, 85, 87, 160, 164-165, 170-171, 406
destruction of, 148, 157, 190
of endangered species, 157, 160
riparian, 278
Hadley cells, 260, 282, 474
Hail, 257
Half-life, 350, 427-428, 435, 440, 485
Halibut, 187
Halocarbons, 487, 502
Halogenated hydrocarbons, 598
Halogens, 533, 535, 537, 598
Halons, 535, 537
Handbook of National Accounting: Integrated
Environmental and Economic Accounting, 10
Hanford Nuclear Reservation, 601
Hansen, James, 501
Hard water, 259
Hardin, Garrett, 38, 178
Hares, 119
Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and
Control Act, 545
Harmful algal blooms, 545-546, 562
Harr, Jonathan, 605
harvesting
wheat, 312, 352
Hawaii, 35, 355, 412, 485, 586
Hawks, 119
Hazard assessment, 469, 615
Hazard communication standard, 609, 615
Hazardous chemicals
environmental justice and, 611
toxicology and, 593, 595
Hazardous waste
disposal of, 575, 590, 592, 593, 600-601, 603, 610
heavy metals and, 597
hazardous wastes, 12, 48, 403, 553, 590, 592, 593,
600-602, 606, 608, 610-611, 613-615
Hazardous-waste disposal, 600
Hazards, 37, 158, 344, 384, 417, 425, 427, 435,
438-439, 443-470, 578, 593, 595-597, 606,
608-609, 615, 636
health
and air pollution, 24, 231
ecosystem health, 145, 335, 343
environmental, 2, 12-14, 17-18, 20, 22-24, 26, 30,
45-49, 59, 74, 104, 132, 134, 145, 156,
174, 192, 198, 200, 204, 211-212, 216,
230, 233, 236-237, 240, 243, 251-253,
270, 288, 301, 310, 313, 315, 319, 322,
335, 339, 343-344, 346-348, 350-351,
359, 362-363, 386, 396, 425, 429-431,
649

437, 443-470, 499, 506, 518, 523-526,
528-531, 538-540, 544, 547, 553, 567,
569, 575, 577, 586, 589, 593-597,
603-604, 606, 610, 612-613, 615, 631,
635
improving, 20, 32, 34, 216, 240, 245-246, 251, 299,
455, 524, 557, 578, 600
public, 2, 9, 12-14, 17-18, 20-24, 26, 45-49, 157,
176, 179, 192, 198, 204, 212, 231, 237,
244-245, 247, 251, 270, 301, 305, 315,
339, 344, 347, 360, 386, 389, 413,
425-427, 431, 437, 444-447, 453,
455-458, 461-462, 464-469, 491, 498,
521, 525, 528, 531, 539-540, 544,
546-549, 553, 557, 566-568, 586,
594-595, 599, 602-604, 606, 608, 610,
612-613, 615, 631, 635
reproductive, 236-237, 240, 247-248, 253, 347,
593-594, 599
stewards of, 134, 305, 462, 465-467, 566, 635
Health effects
of air pollution, 511, 539
of pesticides, 346, 348, 362
of radiation, 426
Health Effects Institute, 519
Heart disease, 447, 455, 465, 467, 519, 521
Heat
body, 59, 63, 69-70, 99, 372, 570
latent, 478
sensible, 492
specific, 59, 69, 79, 373, 463, 527, 570, 638
Heat pumps, 411, 413, 533
Heat waves, 371, 450, 476, 483, 488, 490, 492
Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative, 243
Heavy metals, 344, 364, 453, 514, 523, 550, 554, 558,
570, 590, 597-599, 604, 607
Heavy water, 423
Hebrew Bible, 145
Heifer Project International, 316
Heinrich events, 478
helium, 397, 421, 433, 436, 507
Hemoglobin, 70, 512
Hepatitis, 448, 548
Hepatitis A virus, 548
Heptachlor, 348, 599, 614
Herbaceous vegetation, 128
Herbicides, 30, 297, 307, 317, 322, 342-343, 346-347,
364, 564
herbivores
bison, 115, 119
Herbivorous zooplankton, 112
Herbivory, 88, 111, 131
Heritage City, 233
Herring, 184
Hessian fly, 354
heterotrophs, 72-73, 111, 113, 116, 135-136
Hewlett-Packard, 589
Hexachlorobenzene, 599, 614
High blood pressure, 454, 465, 624
high-income countries, 208, 210-211, 213, 218, 244,
447, 465
Highway Revenue Act of 1956, 621
Highway Trust Fund, 621, 626, 637, 639
Highways, 7-8, 37, 129, 272, 340, 373, 377, 586-587,
619-622, 624, 626, 630, 637, 639
Himalayas, 100, 260
Hindu philosophy, 145
Hiroshima, 430
history, 11, 24, 31, 34, 37, 42, 55, 59, 82, 105-107,
109, 111, 128, 151, 155-156, 201-202,
204-206, 224, 226, 230, 233, 239, 284-286,
323, 344, 366-367, 371, 386, 389, 403, 406,
414, 417-419, 448, 457, 483, 494, 500-501,
530, 538, 604, 619-620, 627, 636
HMS Beagle, 95
Hodgkin’s disease, 143, 145
Holding ponds, 383
Holdren, John, 210, 482
Homo sapiens, 141
Honda FCX Clarity, 410-411
Honesty, 634
honeybees, 350-351
Hooker Chemical and Plastics Company, 602
hormones, 74, 152, 319, 347, 351, 356, 359, 364, 523,
593-594, 615
Horned beetle, 6
Horses, 109, 119
host, 13, 23-25, 39, 43, 88-89, 94, 104, 107, 220, 238,
292, 304, 315, 351-354, 364, 433, 450, 452,
470, 475, 499-500, 511, 525, 547, 586, 603
Hosts, 88-89, 105, 107, 448
Hot spots, 140, 164-165, 167, 294, 330, 491
“Hot spots”
biodiversity, 164
house mouse, 102, 151
House of Representatives, 13, 27
Houseflies, 86, 155, 340, 349, 457
Hubbert’s peak, 380-381, 389
Human activity
estuaries and, 74
Human capital, 8-9, 11, 27
Human Development Index, 32-33, 50, 208
Human Development Report, 32, 50, 208-209, 216
Human management
of ecosystems, 179
Human testing, 464
humans
nature and, 127-128, 130, 133
humidity
relative, 257-259, 282
humpback whale, 188
humpback whales, 189
Humus, 286, 288, 291-295, 298-300, 305, 307, 551,
558-559, 570, 583, 592
hunger
conflict and, 331
malnutrition, 215, 240, 275, 309-310, 314-315,
325-328, 330-331, 336-337, 633
root cause of, 328
undernutrition, 328
hunting and gathering, 175
Hurricanes
Atlantic, 194, 452, 490, 492
Katrina, 194
Rita, 194
Hussein, Saddam, 379
hybrid car, 611
Hybrid cars, 414, 528
Hybrid electric vehicles, 413
hydric, 289, 305
Hydrocarbon, 345, 348, 381-382, 384, 391, 409, 533,
541, 598, 615
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), 537
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), 537
hydrogen
activity, 136, 307
Hydrogen bomb, 436
hydrogen bombs, 436
Hydrogen bonding, 62, 257
Hydrogen bonds, 62, 64, 69, 78, 257
Hydrogen economy, 411, 416
Hydrogen gas, 409-410, 415-416, 418, 434
Hydrogen (H), 63
Hydrogen ions, 307, 410, 516, 523, 540-541
Hydrologic cycle
groundwater and, 263
human impacts on, 130, 255, 262
model, 42, 281, 486
hydrology, 281, 501
Hydropower, 256, 269, 273, 368, 387, 394, 396,
402-406, 413
Hydrosphere, 61-62, 64-65, 79
Hygiene, 12, 245-246, 454-455, 457, 461, 465, 469,
548, 559
Hyogo Framework for Action, 461
Hypotheses, 32, 34, 42-44, 51, 196, 251, 350
hypothesis, 32, 34, 42-44, 51, 380, 426, 461, 469
Hypoxia, 544-545
I
Ice
density of, 86, 89, 478
Ice age, 271, 477, 479, 490
Ice ages, 477
Ice caps, 256, 478, 482, 490
ice cover, 119, 477
ice sheets, 471, 477, 488, 490
Icebergs
calving, 483
Ignitability, 595, 615
Illegal immigration, 219
Illicit activities, 213-214
Illinois, 194, 381-382, 492, 518, 567, 579, 606
Illinois River, 194, 567
Illinois State Water Survey, 518
Illiteracy, 237
immune system, 343, 347, 426, 449-450, 453, 519,
521
Imperialism, 233
impoundments, 600-602
inaccuracies, 608
Inceptisols, 289
incineration, 580, 599, 604, 608
Income
employment and, 215, 248, 250
India
Gurgaon, 233
Kerala, 233, 237, 245
oil and, 395, 420, 437
Western Ghats, 165
Indicator organism, 549
indirect effects, 329
Indo-Burma, 165
industrial chemicals, 274, 550
Industrial fixation, 73-74
Industrial fixation of nitrogen, 73
Industrial pollution, 512
Industrial smog, 509, 511, 538, 540
industrial wastewater, 546
industrialization, 213, 232, 236, 367, 452
Industri-Plex 128 site, 605
Infant mortality, 40, 200-201, 221, 233, 235, 238,
245-246, 455
infanticide, 239
Infectious diseases, 246, 329, 342, 447-449, 454, 457,
461, 467-468, 546
Infectious hepatitis, 548
Infiltration, 258, 260, 263-264, 280-282, 287, 290-293,
295-297, 306-307, 565, 578, 603
Infiltration-runoff ratio, 260, 282
influenza, 48, 143, 443-444, 447, 449
Information Age, 582
Infrared radiation, 475-476, 479-480, 486-487, 532
Injection wells, 604
Inland wetlands, 122
Inner cities, 448, 627-628, 637
Inner core, 631
Inorganic, 64, 67, 70-71, 76-77, 79, 111, 113, 126,
136, 290-291, 297, 307, 364, 486, 550,
553-554, 570
Inorganic chemicals, 113, 136, 364, 550, 553
Inorganic compounds, 67, 79
Inorganic fertilizers, 290, 364
Inorganic molecules, 77
Inorganic nutrients, 76, 113, 136, 297
Insecticide-treated bed nets, 459
Insects
beneficial, 94, 319
larvae, 104, 313, 351, 354-357
Instrumental valuation, 173
Instrumental value, 141-142, 144, 154, 166, 168, 173
instrumental values, 144
insulin, 593
Insurance spraying, 356-357, 362, 364
Intangible capital, 8-9, 11, 25, 27
integrated pest management (IPM), 339, 343, 364
Integrated waste management, 588, 591
Intel, 634
Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation (IPO), 479, 502
interest groups, 13, 16-17, 23-25, 45, 192, 586
Interface, 400, 416
Intergenerational equity, 11, 25, 494
interglacial periods, 477
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
Fourth Assessment Report, 35
Interior Department, 162, 382
Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act
(ISTEA), 626
Internal combustion engine, 367, 409
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 437
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, 241-242, 252
International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), 233
International Development Association (IDA), 242
International Finance Corporation (IFC), 242
International Food Policy Research Institute, 317
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI),
317
International Society for Ecological Economics, 48
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor
(ITER), 436
international trade, 5-6, 47, 163-164, 175, 182, 326,
585, 611
International whaling, 187-188, 196
International Whaling Commission (IWC), 187
Internet, 1, 9, 33, 48, 50, 54, 84, 163, 165, 167, 197,
650

204, 212, 241, 306, 329, 368, 415, 457, 461,
464, 469, 491, 525, 582-583, 587, 595-596,
613-614, 632
Interpol, 153
interspecific competition, 88, 92, 94, 105, 107
Intragenerational equity, 11, 25
intraspecific competition, 88, 91-92, 94, 107
Invasive species
accidental introductions, 150-151
National Invasive Species Information Center, 104
Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG), 163
Inversion layer, 510
Inversions, 472, 509-510
invertebrates, 84, 112, 122, 146, 150-151, 270, 546
Inverters, 400-401
Iodine, 64, 425, 428, 430-431, 598
ionic bonds, 79
ionic compounds, 79
Ionizing radiation, 426-427
Ions, 63, 71-72, 79-80, 287, 290, 301, 307, 410, 426,
516, 522-523, 540-541, 598
Iowa, 303, 319, 382, 586, 624, 638
Iowa State University, 624, 638
IPAT formula, 210-211, 226, 228
Iraq
Kirkuk, 379
Ireland, 207, 320, 354, 456
iron, 1, 64, 70-72, 76, 78, 288, 321, 454, 457, 499,
550-551, 577, 580, 583
Iron deficiency, 321, 454, 457
Irrigation
drip irrigation, 275, 300, 307
flood, 34, 131, 176, 263, 266, 275, 300, 307, 404
methods, 275
salinization and, 300
sheet, 302, 307, 583, 587
Isle Royale, 89, 105
ISO New England, 371
Isotopes, 100, 421-422, 425-428, 436, 440-441, 477,
502
Italy, 19, 161, 211, 219, 227, 303, 328, 418, 456
Ivory, 153, 161, 163, 200, 215
Ivory Coast, 200, 215
J
Jaguars, 119
Japanese beetles, 103, 356
Japanese knotweed, 151
Jason, 390, 482
Jason-1, 482
J-curves, 83
Jefferson, Thomas, 165
Jellyfish, 103, 122
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 482
Jet stream, 474, 502
Jet streams, 474
Johannesburg World Summit, 185
Joules, 426, 481
Journal of Geophysical Research, 482
J-shaped curve, 107, 200-201, 204
Juan de Fuca Plate, 101
judicial branch, 13, 27
Junk science, 41, 45, 49-51
Justice
concern for, 40, 46, 634, 637
distributive, 47, 251
Juvenile hormone, 356
K
Kangaroos, 119
Kansas, 214, 271, 284, 334, 354, 382
Karachay, Lake, 431
Kazakhstan, 207, 235
Keeling, Charles, 485
Keita Project, 302
kelp
forests, 90
Kenya, 45, 207, 235-236, 276, 330, 360, 403, 411,
449, 628-629
Kerogen, 382, 391
Kesterson National Wildlife Refuge, 300
keystone species, 87, 90, 102, 107, 154
Kilocalories, 66, 78
Kinetic energy, 65-67, 69, 77, 79, 257, 400
Kirtland’s warbler, 150
knowledge, 9, 25, 27, 34, 41, 44, 78, 96, 132, 134,
155, 172, 178, 194, 196, 203, 228, 243, 250,
299, 301, 304, 311, 322, 343, 351, 374,
454-455, 461-462, 467, 500, 534, 553, 568,
634
Knowledge assets, 9, 27
Koran, 145
Kudzu, 103, 151
L
La Niña, 479, 482, 500, 502
Lacewings, 363
Lacey Act, 158, 162, 166, 168
Ladybugs, 363
Lag, 32, 34
Laherrère, Jean, 380
Lake Karachay, 431
Lake Okeechobee, 194
Lake Washington, 566, 568
Lake water, 261
Lakes, 39, 74, 79, 92, 103, 115, 119, 122, 124,
130-131, 144, 152, 190, 192-194, 256,
258-259, 261-262, 266, 268, 270, 272, 277,
282, 353, 512, 515, 521, 523, 530-531, 546,
553-554, 561-564, 566-569, 598, 600, 619
Lampreys, 88
Land ecosystems
dryland, 294, 297, 299-300, 302-303, 306
wetland, 289, 304
Land ethic, 145, 166
Land Institute, 334
Land ownership reform, 213
Land plants, 71, 291, 561
Land reform, 213, 455
Land subsidence, 272, 279, 282, 385
Land trust, 193, 198
Land Trust Alliance, 193
Landfills
features of, 486, 578, 581
problems of, 576
Lands
protected, 133, 157, 160, 170, 180, 190-191, 193,
198, 606
landscape level, 165
Landscapes, 37, 58, 79, 117, 120, 122, 132, 134, 148,
165, 192, 194, 277, 288, 337, 477, 624
Landscaping, 277, 282, 399, 631
Lassa fever, 445
Latent heat, 478
Latent heat of condensation, 478
Lava, 109, 123
Law of conservation of energy, 66, 79
Law of conservation of matter, 43, 61, 70, 79
Law of limiting factors, 59, 79, 205, 226-227
Law of the sea, 183, 360
Laws of thermodynamics
first, 43, 66
second, 43, 66
Leachate, 560, 577-578, 587, 589, 601, 615
Leachate-collection system, 578
Leaching, 72, 261, 288, 290, 292, 299-300, 307, 425,
428, 446, 516, 559, 565, 577
lead, 5, 22, 37, 42, 44, 48-49, 61, 73, 90, 92, 94, 96,
98, 100, 106-107, 126, 130, 132, 145,
153-154, 164-165, 178, 182, 189, 197, 203,
210, 216, 219, 221, 234, 244, 248, 264, 291,
296, 298, 301, 303, 305, 321, 327, 337, 344,
346, 349, 356, 402, 408, 419, 425-426, 443,
447, 449, 454, 459, 465, 469, 474, 476,
478-480, 491, 496-497, 499, 511-512,
514-515, 519, 521, 524-526, 528, 538-539,
541, 550, 568, 570, 577, 582, 590, 594, 598,
611, 624-625
lead poisoning, 98, 106, 598
leaf litter, 111, 119, 181, 262
Leaking underground storage tanks (LUSTs), 606
LED lights, 501
legislation, 13, 23, 31, 158, 160, 162, 167-168, 187,
190, 304, 345, 361, 386-387, 391, 416, 428,
438, 440, 494, 497-498, 500, 524, 527, 530,
539-540, 547, 566-567, 570, 588-592, 603,
606-610, 613-615, 621, 636, 639
Legislative branch, 13, 27
Legumes, 73-74
Lemmings, 119
Leopold, Aldo, 38, 125, 128, 130, 134, 145
leukemia, 143, 426, 431, 453, 521, 605
Levees, 194, 269-270, 272
Lice, 345, 352
Lichen, 94, 292
lichens, 88, 92, 119, 137, 160, 292, 296
Liebig’s law of minimums, 79
life, 1, 6-7, 11-12, 14-16, 22, 25-26, 30, 32-34, 37, 41,
46-48, 51, 54-56, 59, 62, 65, 70, 75, 79,
83-85, 91-92, 95, 105-107, 109, 116-117,
119, 122, 129, 132-133, 137, 140-141,
144-146, 148, 152, 156, 161, 166, 168, 171,
180, 184, 189, 198, 200-202, 205-206, 208,
212, 214-215, 220-221, 223, 225-226, 228,
230-231, 233, 235, 240, 243, 245-247, 253,
256-257, 301, 309, 316, 325, 327-328, 337,
343-345, 350-353, 356, 367, 390, 400, 406,
415, 427-429, 435, 438, 440, 445, 447,
449-450, 452, 454-455, 458-459, 461-462,
464-466, 468-469, 471, 479, 485, 499, 507,
514, 516, 518, 523, 533, 539, 546-547,
550-551, 553, 559, 562, 564, 570, 576, 580,
582, 584, 589, 596-597, 606, 613-615, 620,
622-625, 628, 631-632, 634-635, 637
Life expectancy, 6, 22, 32, 34, 48, 200, 202, 208, 212,
221, 223, 228, 230, 233, 245-247, 447, 455,
462, 469, 606
Life histories, 84-85, 106
life-cycle analysis, 584
Lightbulbs, 388, 390, 413, 415, 634
Lighting, 67, 198, 368, 373, 387-388, 403, 407, 413,
415, 497
Lightning, 39, 73, 126, 161, 303, 409, 517
Light-water reactors (LWRs), 423
Lime, 268, 523, 530, 557, 580-581
limiting factor, 59, 71-73, 75, 79, 118, 205, 291, 345,
367, 528, 545, 564, 570, 621
Limiting factors
phosphorus and, 553
Limits of tolerance, 59-60, 79
Linear contrails, 488
Lions, 90, 119, 122, 157, 546
lipids, 63, 347-348
Liquefied natural gas, 377, 384
Liquid state, 62, 281, 558
liquid wastes, 560, 601, 608
Liquid water, 62-63, 257-258, 264, 281
Literacy, 1, 32, 208, 231, 233, 237, 245-247, 361, 498
Lithosphere
earthquakes and, 100, 107
Little Ice Age, 477
Living Beyond Our Means: Natural Assets and Human
Well-Being, 133, 172, 174, 197
Living with Risk: A Global Review of Disaster
Reduction Initiatives, 461
Loam, 286-287, 292, 307
lobbying, 47, 164, 191, 359, 363, 586, 635-636
Locusts, 86
logging
salvage, 193
Logging roads, 181, 193
Logistic growth, 82-84, 86-87, 200
logistic growth curve, 83
Longevity, 217, 221, 228, 434, 466
Long-lived fission products, 428
Los Angeles, 277, 395, 509-510, 619, 623, 630
Loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA), 424, 440
Louisiana, 152, 162, 375, 377, 382
Love Canal, 39, 602-604
Lovelock, James, 15
Low-density polyethylene, 587
Low-impact recreation, 636
low-income countries, 9, 153, 208, 212-214, 216, 234,
238, 242, 244, 246, 447, 455, 465
Low-income, developing countries, 206
Low-till farming, 297, 307
López, Gabino, 301-302, 304
Lung cancer, 455, 460, 469, 512, 519-520
Lung disease, 455, 460, 518-520, 540
Lungs, 69, 450, 459, 512, 519-520, 526, 539
Lyman, John, 482
Lynx, 119
M
Maathai, Wangari, 38, 45-46, 49
MacArthur Foundation, 164, 309
Madagascar, 143-144, 165, 207, 235, 299
magnesium, 64, 259, 300, 522-523, 553
Magnesium salts, 522, 553
Magnuson Act, 183, 186-187, 197
Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and
Management Reauthorization Act, 187, 197
Maine
Androscoggin River in, 567
lobsters, 178
Yankee nuclear power plant, 435
651

maize, 142, 200, 302, 312, 320, 323, 356
Maize streak virus, 320
malaria, 49, 145, 167, 215, 238, 240, 247, 328, 340,
344-346, 357, 362, 445, 448-450, 457-459,
467-468, 498, 599
malathion, 346, 350, 361
Malaysia, 161, 207, 225, 230-231, 235, 250, 444
Malnutrition, 215, 231, 240, 275, 309-310, 314-315,
325-328, 330-331, 336-337, 454, 457, 633
management system, 133
Mandela, Nelson, 237
Mandibulata, 146
manganese, 64
Mangrove swamps, 122
Mangroves, 139, 173, 184, 190, 197, 249
manufactured goods, 37, 322-323, 387
Manure, 73, 114, 290, 302-303, 307, 311, 313,
315-316, 332, 340, 406-407, 486, 553, 558
Marble, 524
Marine ecosystems, 184, 197
Marine food webs, 70
Marine organisms
plankton, 345
marine pollution, 345
Marine protected areas, 187, 190
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs), 187, 190
Marine sanctuaries, 191
Marker-assisted breeding, 318, 337
Market economy, 4-5, 11, 27, 130, 175, 250, 323,
325-326, 331
marsh, 121-122
Marsh grass, 122
Marshes, 31, 44, 58, 115, 119-120, 122, 158, 346,
363, 452
marsupials, 100, 102
Maryland, 10, 124, 347, 546, 579, 626
Mass number, 421, 440
Mass transit, 497, 624, 626, 630
Massachusetts, 151, 157, 189, 394, 411, 574-575,
579, 584, 586, 589-590, 605-606, 631, 638
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 411
MassDevelopment, 606
Material safety data sheet, 609
Maternal health, 238, 240, 247
Maternal mortality, 240
Matter
biodegradable, 469, 550, 577
energy and, 55, 60-61, 67, 77, 114-115, 128, 134,
137, 172, 540, 583, 590
law of conservation of matter, 43, 61, 70, 79
particulate, 3, 12, 466, 512-513, 519, 526-527, 529,
540-541, 554-556, 558, 568, 570, 583
units of, 61, 66, 79, 132, 529
Mauna Loa Observatory, 35, 50, 476
Mauritius, 207
Maximum achievable control technology (MACT), 526,
541
Maximum contaminant levels (MCLs), 553, 603
Maximum sustainable yield, 176-177, 185, 187, 196,
198
maximum sustainable yield (MSY), 177, 198
McCall, Tom, 631
MDG Support Team, 238, 253
Mealybugs, 353
Meat
bush meat, 129, 175, 196-197, 249
meat consumption, 333
Mechanical energy, 368, 391
Medical revolution, 203
medicine, 10, 37, 89, 131, 143, 153, 180, 202-203,
205, 210, 221, 224-225, 232, 346, 427, 548
Mediterranean Basin, 165
Melanesian Islands, 165
Menhaden fish, 546
mercury poisoning, 600
mesosphere, 472-473, 503
Mesquite, 298
metals
use, 176, 216, 301, 344, 364, 453, 554, 558, 575,
577, 580-581, 583, 590, 597-599, 604
Meteorology, 473, 502
Methane
coalbed, 382
release of, 114, 129, 409, 486, 570
methane (CH4), 477, 486-487, 509
methoxychlor, 347
Methyl bromide, 535, 537
Methyl isocyanate, 609
methylmercury, 521
Mexico
Bosencheve, 296
Mexico City, 215, 232-233, 506
Mice, 102, 104, 111, 113, 119, 150-151, 340, 343, 349,
352, 463, 469, 595, 599
Michigan, 150, 209, 227, 268-269, 492, 577, 579, 586
Microbes, 64, 73, 92, 99-100, 102, 107, 114-115, 140,
147, 171, 301, 303, 364, 461, 469, 475, 556,
577, 586, 604
microclimate, 120, 137
Microclimates, 92, 120-121, 134-135
Microcredit Summit Campaign, 249
Microfiltration, 274, 281
Microhabitats, 92
Micronesia, 165
Microorganisms
in soil, 74, 79, 301
Middle East
animal husbandry and, 202
middle-income countries, 9, 206, 208, 212, 216, 226,
323, 465
Midnight dumping, 601-602, 608, 615
Midwest, 150, 190-191, 263, 270, 284, 312, 354, 406,
451, 492, 517-518, 523, 529, 545, 620, 639
Migration
remittances and, 244
replacement, 219
to cities, 215
Milankovitch cycles, 477
Millennium Development Goals Report, 237-238,
240-241, 252, 329, 336
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
Governing Board of, 133, 174
message of, 134
objective of, 132-133, 174
science and, 33-34, 49-50, 166
water and, 33, 49, 240, 279, 299
Millennium Project, 238, 241, 252-253
Millennium Seed Bank, 143
Million Solar Roofs Initiative, 634
Millipedes, 114, 291
Milorganite, 558
Minamata Disease, 599
Mineral nutrients, 69, 71, 114, 116, 289-291, 556, 561
Mineralization, 293, 297, 305, 307
mining, 23, 37, 39, 45-46, 72, 74-75, 185, 187, 192,
194, 276, 284-285, 301, 305, 365-366, 372,
382-387, 389-391, 402, 425, 437, 446, 550,
565, 567, 575, 577, 585, 596-597
mining residues, 575
minke whale, 188
Minnesota, 214, 271, 382, 387, 579
Mirage, 41
Mirex, 598-599, 614
Mississippi River, 152, 194, 265, 451, 544-545, 567,
569
Mississippi River Watershed, 544
Missouri, 271, 382, 408-409, 451, 579
Mites, 57, 113, 291, 313, 340, 352, 460, 519
Müller, Paul, 344
Moderator, 423-424, 430, 432, 434, 440
Mojave Desert, 402
Molecular oxygen, 64, 533-534
Molecules, 15, 61-65, 67-70, 75-77, 79-80, 111, 113,
116, 136, 257-258, 281-282, 287, 374, 409,
416, 426, 480, 508, 512, 533-534, 540, 614
Molina, Mario, 15-16, 25, 533
Mollisols, 288-289
Mollusca, 146
Mollusks, 184-185
molten rock, 100, 411
Molybdenum, 64, 428
Monarch butterflies, 319
Monkeys, 119, 174-175
Mono Lake, 277
monoculture
pests and, 342, 357
monocultures, 322, 335, 352
Monsoon
winds, 502, 511
Monsoons, 474
moose, 88-90, 105, 119, 154
Moral principles, 47
Moral rules, 47
Morbidity, 447, 455, 468-469
mortality
child, 6, 200, 205, 217, 219, 221, 235, 238,
240-241, 245, 454
infant, 40, 200-201, 210, 221, 224, 233, 235-236,
238, 245-246, 455, 548
maternal, 235, 238, 240, 246, 454
roadkill, 150
Mortality rates, 221, 228, 240, 246, 447, 458
mosquitoes, 44, 340, 344, 346, 350, 352, 357,
362-363, 449-450, 457-458
Mosses, 119, 123, 137, 296, 523
Moths, 103, 342, 351, 356
Mount Pinatubo, 109-110, 480
Mountain lions, 90, 157
Mountaintop removal, 385, 390-391
Mozambique, 207, 300, 329-330, 449, 561
MPOWER, 456-457
Mud flats, 99
Muir glacier, 484
Muir, John, 38
Municipal recycling, 583
municipal sewer systems, 607
municipal solid waste, 14, 573-592
municipal solid waste (MSW)
landfills and, 574-575
source reduction and, 574
municipal waste, 211, 575-576
Muriqui monkey, 174
Musharraf, Pervez, 216
Mussels
zebra, 103
mutations, 96, 99, 426, 441, 454
mutualism, 88, 92, 94, 105, 107
Mycorrhizae, 43, 292-293, 307
Myers, Norman, 304
MyPyramid, 336
N
Nagasaki, 430
Namibia, 329, 459
Nantucket Sound, 394
NASA, 119, 165, 180, 214, 227, 332-334, 336,
474-475, 482, 497, 501, 535-536, 540, 569
National Academy of Sciences (NAS), 433
National Action Programs, 299
National ambient air quality standards, 524-525,
539-541
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), 524,
541
National Atmospheric Deposition Program, 518, 540
National Audubon Society, 38, 147, 158
National Biological Service, 164
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants (NESHAPS), 525, 541
National Energy Act, 277
National energy policies, 394
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, 39
National forests, 47, 133, 191-193, 197
National Heritage Network, 147
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 391,
527
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
(NIEHS), 595
National Invasive Species Act, 104
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), 186
National Organic Standards Board (NOSB), 359
National Park Service, 132, 190, 198
national parks
Yellowstone National Park, 191
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES), 554, 564, 570
National Priorities List (NPL), 615
National Recommended Water Quality Criteria, 553
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 414-415
National Research Council, 130, 214, 321, 361, 427
National Resources Inventory, 624, 638
National Science Foundation, 126
National Toxicology Program (NTP), 594-595
National Wildlife Federation, 38, 167, 183, 624
National Wildlife Refuges, 190, 198
Native grasses, 106, 128, 185
Natural capital, 6, 8-11, 27, 130-131, 140, 171, 190
Natural capitalism, 8
Natural ecosystems
natural resources and, 41, 45, 51, 174
Natural eutrophication, 563, 570
Natural gas
extracting, 383, 389, 391
Natural goods, 34, 171-172, 198
Natural laws, 41-43, 51, 199, 204-205, 226
Natural organic compounds, 65, 79
natural predators, 90, 104-105, 157, 319, 358
Natural resources
652

as ecosystems, 198
natural ecosystems and, 173, 198
nonrenewable, 7, 10, 198
tragedy of the commons, 178, 196
Natural Resources Defense Council, 390, 494, 618,
636
Natural Resources Inventory, 297
Natural sciences, 42, 51
Natural services, 10, 172-174, 178-179, 190-191
Nature Conservancy, 147, 193, 303
Nazca Plate, 101
Nearshore, 185
Nebraska, 278, 319, 339, 382, 412, 552
Negative feedback, 127
negative feedback loops, 127
Nematoda, 146
nematodes, 146, 293, 342, 347
neolithic revolution, 202, 228, 310
Net domestic product, 10
Net GDP, 9-10
Net metering, 400
Net migration, 224
Net primary production, 128
Net primary productivity, 121-122, 483
neurotoxins, 361
Neutral, 61, 87-88, 94, 291, 307, 409, 516-517, 523,
541
Neutralizing capacity, 523, 530, 540
Neutrons, 61, 421-426, 430, 434-435, 440, 502
Nevada, 260, 301, 401, 404, 429, 621, 623
New broom, 25
New Caledonia, 165, 207
New England Fishery Management Council (NEFMC),
186
New food plants, 142
New Forestry, 192, 198
New Guinea, 101, 142, 175, 181, 183
New Hampshire, 241, 298, 523, 585
New lands, 110, 214
New Mexico, 271, 422, 429
New Orleans, 576
New World, 175, 322, 448
New York State, 146, 523, 531
New Zealand, 162, 165, 206-207, 228, 298, 323, 395,
411, 534
Newfoundland
fisheries, 186
niche
fundamental, 61
Niches, 60, 91-92
nickel, 550
Niger, 302-303
night, 60, 92, 102, 150, 344, 368, 398, 402, 404, 510
Nile River, 271
NIMBY (not in my backyard), 394
nitrate, 64, 72-73, 517, 556-557, 564
Nitrates, 79, 480, 511-512, 514, 541
Nitric acid, 73-74, 508-509, 511-512, 515-517, 541
Nitric acids, 515, 517, 541, 550
Nitric oxide, 512, 514-515
nitric oxide (NO), 512
Nitrogen cascade, 74, 79
Nitrogen cycle
nitrogen fixation, 73-74
nitrogen gas, 72-73, 556
Nitrogen dioxide, 509, 512-514, 525, 536
nitrogen fertilizer, 75
Nitrogen oxides, 73-74, 386, 396, 409, 418, 438, 507,
509, 511-519, 524, 526-527, 538, 540-541
Nitrogen oxides (NOx), 73, 509, 541
Nitrous oxide, 322, 332, 486-487, 502, 538
nitrous oxide (N2O), 487, 538
Nixon, Richard, 31
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 2, 153, 237
Nonindigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and
Control Act, 104
non-native plants, 152
Non-native species, 102, 150
Nonpersistent pesticides, 350, 362
Nonrenewable natural capital, 8
North America, 81, 87, 99-101, 119, 141, 147-148,
151-152, 155, 181, 185, 214, 224, 260, 265,
267-268, 270, 298, 323, 340, 380, 412, 415,
474, 485, 492, 514, 516-518, 523, 533, 536,
546, 601, 612
North American Plate, 100-101
North Atlantic Deep Water, 478, 502
North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW), 478, 502
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), 479, 502
North Dakota, 271, 320, 382, 386
North Korea, 4, 330
North Pole, 535
North Sea, 184, 186, 377
northern Australia, 119, 184
Norway, 143, 150-152, 163, 188, 207, 244, 456
Norway maple, 152
Norway rat, 150-151
No-till, 297, 305, 307, 318, 322
Nuclear accidents, 48, 100, 417, 439
Nuclear age, 419
Nuclear bomb, 421
nuclear energy
reactor safety, 432
nuclear fission, 417, 421, 426, 438
nuclear fuel cycle, 435
nuclear fusion, 397, 440
nuclear power
hazards of, 425, 435
in perspective, 417-418
opposition to, 436-437
policies, 391, 413, 416, 438, 440, 497
rebirth of, 437-438
safety and, 421, 432-433, 435, 438
terrorism and, 433
Nuclear power plants, 372, 391, 402, 417-421, 424,
428, 431-435, 437-440, 466
nuclear reactors
advanced, 417, 432, 438, 440
advanced boiling-water, 432, 440
ESBWR, 432, 440
fast-neutron, 417, 439-440
fusion, 417, 436, 438-440
LWRs, 432
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), 419
nuclear waste, 372, 402, 425, 427-429, 437, 439-440,
601
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, 429, 440
Nuclear weapons, 423, 428-429, 431, 435, 438
nucleic acids, 63, 72
Nuisance animals, 157-158
Nutrient cycles
phosphorus, 76
nutrient cycling, 127-129, 131, 154, 172
nutrient pollution, 134, 566
Nutrient-holding capacity, 287, 290-291, 293, 297,
299, 307
nutrients
inorganic chemicals, 113, 136, 364, 553
organic compounds, 71, 78-79, 111, 113, 129, 364
O
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 485
Obama administration, 24-25, 298, 372, 385-387, 389,
429, 498, 528, 606, 611
Obama, Barack, 24-25, 193, 366, 386
Obesity, 167, 327, 337, 448, 454-455, 465, 469, 586,
624
Observation, 41-44, 49, 59, 66, 79-80, 89, 91, 100,
143
Observations, 42-44, 51, 59, 96, 115, 265, 461,
476-477, 489, 492
Ocean
depth, 58, 119
living in, 110, 183, 212, 472
margins, 372
source of water, 259, 274, 478
Ocean currents, 100, 264-265, 478-479, 482, 502, 587
Ocean-atmosphere oscillations, 479
Oceans
carbon cycle and, 72
Earth’s surface and, 479
heat capacity of, 478
heat capture by, 481
open, 61, 122, 187, 479
resources in, 59, 198
seeding, 78
warming of, 265, 475, 481, 490
Odén, Svante, 515
Office of Management and Budget (OMB), 20
Official Development Assistance (ODA), 240, 244-245
Offshore, 36, 112, 178, 183, 365-366, 380, 387,
394-395, 400, 406, 412, 414, 417, 451-452
Offshore drilling, 366
offshore oil and gas, 387
Ogallala Aquifer, 271
Ohio, 154, 263, 303, 339, 372, 385, 431, 547, 579
Ohio State University, 154
oil
extraction of, 203
synthetic, 384, 386, 391, 395, 540, 547, 614
Oil sands, 381-382, 389
Oil shale, 381-382, 391
Oil wells, 386, 547
oils, 33, 69, 142, 172, 198, 316, 320, 324, 327, 337,
408-409
Oil-transportation problem, 413
Okeechobee, Lake, 194
Oklahoma City, 382, 632
Omnibus Public Lands Management Act, 190
omnivores, 113
On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural
Selection, 96
open dumps, 576
Open oceans, 122, 187
Open space, 14, 50, 193, 246, 560, 576, 625-626, 631
Open-ocean aquaculture, 185, 197
Opossums, 119, 158
Optimal population, 177, 187, 198
Optimal range, 59-60
Oral rehydration therapy, 246, 455, 458
order, 3, 10, 12, 18, 26-27, 30, 36, 47, 50, 57, 67, 69,
74, 76-78, 82, 84, 91, 99, 104, 106, 111,
113-116, 125, 132, 136, 140, 144, 155, 157,
163, 167, 173-176, 178, 180, 185, 188, 193,
195, 197-198, 213-214, 226-227, 231, 233,
239, 243-244, 248-249, 251-252, 274, 281,
288-289, 302, 306-307, 321, 328-329, 331,
333, 335-336, 345, 350, 356-357, 360, 363,
367, 376, 379-380, 387, 390, 396, 398, 404,
414-415, 418-419, 421, 436, 439, 452, 454,
461, 464, 466, 469, 472, 476, 489-490,
493-494, 501, 525, 530-531, 540-541, 554,
567, 569, 571, 581-582, 592, 594, 606, 609,
611, 614, 622, 627, 633, 635, 637-638
Oregon, 17, 36, 193, 405, 579, 586, 624, 626, 631-632
organ systems, 59, 464
Organic chemicals, 344, 347, 349, 445, 550, 557,
604-605, 612
organic compounds, 63-65, 71-72, 78-79, 111, 113,
129, 344, 364, 460, 507, 509, 511-515, 541,
558, 598, 600, 604, 607, 609, 613, 615
Organic deposits, 71
Organic farming, 65, 333-334, 364
Organic fertilizer, 290, 297, 307, 407, 558-559, 564
Organic fertilizers, 290, 363
Organic food, 334, 359, 362, 364
Organic Foods Protection Act, 359, 364
Organic materials, 577, 601
organic matter, 67, 76, 79, 113-114, 116, 126, 129,
136-137, 288, 290-291, 293, 297, 307, 365,
374-375, 407, 513, 546, 550, 555-558, 568,
570-571, 577, 587
Organic molecules, 67-70, 77, 79, 116, 374, 508, 533,
540, 614
Organic phosphates, 350
Organic wastes, 291, 544, 550, 568, 570, 592, 629
organisms
elements in, 63-64, 77, 427, 523
energy changes in, 67
in their environment, 54-55, 111
needs of, 51, 54-57, 59-65, 67, 69-70, 72, 77-80,
105, 144, 164-165, 277, 305, 307, 320,
337, 344, 553
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC), 376, 413
organs, 56, 59, 84, 152, 221, 450, 457, 468, 593
Oscillations
climatic, 477, 502
ocean-atmosphere, 479
Osmosis
example, 274, 291
Otters, 90, 122, 546
Outdoor recreation, 20, 143, 620
Outsourcing, 579, 591, 621
Overcultivation, 214, 284, 296-297, 299, 303
Overexploitation, 33, 107, 148, 152-153, 163, 168, 187
Overfishing, 33, 183, 187, 322
Overgrazing, 10, 83, 90, 102, 127, 132, 194, 284,
296-299, 303, 315
overharvesting, 37, 158
Overnourishment, 327, 337
Overpopulation, 152, 166, 211, 302
overshoot, 90, 105
Owls, 119
oxidants, 514-515, 541
Oxides, 73-74, 288, 384, 386, 396, 409, 418, 438,
460, 507, 509, 511-519, 524, 526-527, 538,
653

540-541, 604
Oxisols, 288-289, 299
oxygen
eutrophication, 74, 545, 554, 556, 562-564, 570
free, 115, 137, 508, 533-534
Oxygen (O)
molecular, 533
Oxygen sag curve, 551
Oysters, 35-36, 85, 345, 635
Ozone
hole, 15-16, 44, 535-536, 539-540
shield, 12, 25, 473, 502, 532-534, 536, 538-539,
541
stratospheric ozone, 14-15, 74, 506, 531-535, 537
ozone hole, 15-16, 535-536, 539-540
Ozone layer, 15, 19, 25, 39, 44, 48, 212, 216, 506,
532-538
Ozone losses, 536-537
P
Pacific coast, 100, 151
Pacific Gas & Electric Company, 411
Pacific Gas and Electric, 415
Pacific halibut, 187
Pacific Islands
jobs in, 33
Pacific Plate, 100-101
Pacific yew, 143
Pakistan, 11, 207, 215-216, 233-236, 243, 245-246,
264, 300, 328, 379, 420, 437, 449, 451-452
paleontology, 42
Panama, 81-82, 105, 148, 207, 235
Panda, 54-55, 59-60, 63, 65, 67, 70, 77, 85, 153
Pangaea, 100-101
Panthalassa, 101
Paper recycling, 585
Papua, 101, 175, 183, 207
paradigm, 7, 132-133, 137, 192-193, 274, 457,
478-479
Parallel, 10, 376
parasite, 88, 90, 111, 150, 340, 344, 350-351,
353-354, 357, 364, 450, 459, 470
parasites, 84-85, 88-90, 94, 96, 105, 107, 113, 142,
145, 150-151, 174, 203, 313, 344, 351-354,
364, 449-450, 457-458, 469, 548, 560
Parasitic wasps, 353
parasitism, 88, 107, 111, 364
parasitoids, 353
parathion, 346, 350
Particulate matter, 3, 12, 466, 512-513, 519, 526-527,
529, 540-541, 570, 583
Particulates, 22, 425, 446, 509, 511-512, 521,
523-526, 528, 531, 539, 541
passenger pigeon, 155, 157
Passenger pigeons, 141
Passive safety, 432, 438, 440
Passive solar water-heating system, 398
Past climates, 477
Pasteur, Louis, 203, 546
Pasteurization, 558, 570
Pastures, 141, 178, 181-182, 561
patches, 123, 125, 148, 150-151, 178, 534, 536
Pathogen pollution, 152, 559
Pathogens, 89, 105, 131, 145, 151, 185, 266-268,
315, 322, 340, 342, 350, 352-354, 444,
448-449, 458, 467, 469, 546, 548-550, 554,
556-559, 561, 568, 570
Peak oil, 365, 380-381, 383, 634
Pearson, Dean, 104
Peat, 128, 203, 289, 307
Peatlands, 289
Pebble-bed modular reactor (PBMR), 433
Pellet stove, 406
Pendall, Rolf, 622-623, 638
Pennsylvania
Centralia, 385
deer in, 157
Three Mile Island Nuclear Power Plant, 430
Per capita income
fertility rate and, 235
Percolation, 258, 261, 268, 271, 275, 280, 282, 559,
578
peregrine falcon, 162
Permafrost
behavior of, 137
Peroxyacetyl nitrates (PANs), 541
Persian Gulf, 366, 379-380, 387, 389, 391
Persian Gulf War, 379
persistence, 291, 346, 350, 600
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs), 615
Peru, 207, 550, 629
Pest control
alternative methods, 344
chemical treatment, 339, 343, 351, 356, 362, 364
need for, 302, 339-340, 344, 357
Pest management
cultural controls, 357
plant pests, 362
pesticides
organic pesticides, 346, 348-349, 357
organophosphate, 361
rodenticides, 343
synthetic pyrethroids, 344
Pest-loss insurance, 357
Pests
cultural control of, 352
Petagrams, 128
petroleum products, 377, 382, 550, 615
Pfiesteria, 546
pH (acidity), 59
pH scale
precipitation, 516-517
Philippines
Mount Pinatubo in, 480
philosophy, 145, 192, 322, 343, 433, 438
phosphate, 64, 71-72, 79, 290, 517, 557, 564-566,
568, 570, 596
Phosphates, 301, 350
Phosphorus
phosphorus cycle, 71-72, 78
Phosphorus cycle, 71-72, 78
Phosphorus (P), 63, 564
Photochemical smog, 506, 509-511, 513, 528, 538,
541, 636
photons, 400, 409
photosynthesis
oxygen and, 69, 79, 546, 562
Photovoltaic cells, 399
Phthalates, 468
phylum, 55
physical hazards, 450-451, 454, 469
physics, 37, 44, 55, 61, 265, 436, 518
Phytoremediation, 604, 615
Pigeon peas, 319
Pigeons, 141
pigs, 443-444, 469
Pilocarpine, 145
Pimm, Stuart, 129
Pinatubo, Mount, 109-110, 480
pioneer species, 123
Planktonic, 372, 546
Plant growth, 59, 72, 79, 285, 288-294, 297, 300, 307,
344, 522, 553, 564
Plant pests, 313, 360, 362
Plantae, 146
plantain, 342
Plantations of trees, 183
Plant-herbivore dynamics, 90
Plants
flowering, 94, 119, 146-147, 160
land, 39, 59, 70-71, 74-75, 90, 116, 122-124, 126,
128, 133, 156-157, 171, 176, 181, 203,
249, 256-258, 261, 263-264, 276, 282,
284-286, 288-293, 296, 298, 300-303,
305-307, 310, 313, 317-318, 333-334,
345, 385, 387, 397, 402-406, 408-409,
429, 475, 486, 507, 521, 530, 550, 561,
564-565, 567, 570, 592, 624
new food plants, 142
respiration, 64, 69-72, 78-79, 111, 114, 137, 203,
291, 306, 486, 512, 522, 550, 562, 570
Plant-soil-water relationships, 290
Plasma, 436
Plasmodium, 449-450, 458-459
Plastics, 17, 64, 79, 453, 550, 575, 577, 586-588, 598,
602
Plastics recycling, 586
Plate tectonics
evidence for, 100
Pangaea and, 100
plate boundaries, 100
volcanoes and, 100
platinum, 410
playgrounds, 578, 619, 633
Plumed birds, 158
Plutonium, 423, 428-429, 431, 435, 440
poachers, 106, 153
Poaching, 55, 98, 153, 161, 163, 175, 179, 214
point sources, 528, 547-548, 553, 564, 570
Polar bears, 156
Polar ecosystems, 490-491
Polar ice
melting of, 471, 478, 483
Polar ice caps, 256
Polar ozone depletion, 532, 536
Polar stratospheric clouds, 535-536
poliovirus, 548
Political involvement, 636
Pollination, 34, 92, 97, 131, 350
Pollutants
criteria, 14, 464, 513, 524-525, 539-541, 553-554,
568, 570
toxic, 22, 212, 344, 362, 453, 459, 463, 508,
511-512, 514, 521, 525-526, 540-541,
550, 553-555, 567, 570, 577, 580,
595-596, 598-600, 603-604, 611, 613-615
tracking, 513
pollution
air, 1-2, 10, 12, 14, 16-25, 27, 31, 38-39, 41, 72,
74-75, 77, 130, 134, 152, 172-173, 177,
203, 211, 231, 265, 322, 367, 386, 391,
402, 412, 425, 445-446, 453, 455,
459-461, 466, 469, 479, 502, 506-531,
533-541, 547, 550, 555-556, 558, 564,
570, 576, 580, 583, 588, 596-601,
606-608, 610, 615, 624, 632-633, 638
categories of, 11, 87, 445-446, 459, 468, 525, 539,
554, 568, 597
groundwater resources, 12, 280, 299
in food chains, 593
indoor air, 12, 16, 455, 459-461
nonpoint source, 553
of groundwater, 280, 304, 559, 600, 603, 606, 615
outdoor air, 460, 507
ozone depletion, 14, 16, 74, 532, 535-538, 540
PCBs, 550, 599-600, 615
point source, 565
prevention of, 12, 21, 131, 548, 556
radioactive waste, 425
sewage sludge, 558, 570
thermal, 373, 391, 402, 412, 425, 507
toxic chemicals and, 171, 276, 466, 514, 593, 606
waste heat, 274, 372-373, 391
Pollution prevention, 14, 596, 611-613, 615
Pollution-control devices, 527
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 550
polyculture, 332, 334, 337, 357
Polyethylene, 586-587
Polynesia, 165
Polyvinyl chloride, 598
Pombo, Richard, 161
Ponds, 58, 74, 122, 124, 151, 256, 261, 264, 268, 282,
333, 383, 523, 561-564, 569, 601
pool, 1, 37, 61, 70-71, 96, 98, 177-178, 196, 233, 249,
371, 428-429, 433, 461, 555, 570, 607
Population conferences, 232, 251
Population density, 59, 81, 85-86, 88-89, 107, 171,
236, 562, 630
Population ecology, 102, 199-200, 202, 204, 226-227
Population explosion, 32, 82-83, 107, 173
Population growth
human, 11, 32-34, 37, 40, 48, 50, 81, 86-87, 105,
148, 152, 199-201, 203-206, 208-209,
213-218, 223-227, 234, 239, 246, 252,
303, 310-311, 320
world, 5, 11, 32-33, 37, 40, 48, 84, 87, 148, 152,
182, 199-201, 203-206, 208-209,
213-218, 223, 225-227, 231-234, 236,
239, 245-248, 252, 302, 310-311, 320,
323, 490, 622, 628
Population growth curves, 82, 105
Population growth rate, 82, 107, 203, 216-217, 223,
227, 231
Population, human
growth, 252
Population momentum, 199, 201, 223, 226, 228
Population Reference Bureau, 32, 211, 219, 223-225,
227, 231, 236, 238, 252
Positive feedback, 127, 137, 289, 486, 502
potassium, 64, 70-71, 290, 300, 307, 517
Potato beetle, 349
poultry, 315, 317, 327, 340, 361, 443, 446
Poverty
risks of, 454
rural poor, 311
Poverty Index, 208-209, 266, 281, 501
Powder River Basin, 387
654

Powell, Lake, 269
Power grid, 371, 391, 400, 403, 416
Power plants, 2, 5, 274, 276, 345, 369-370, 372,
383-386, 391, 396-397, 401-404, 406-407,
411-412, 416, 417-421, 424, 428-429,
431-435, 437-440, 446, 466, 497-498, 511,
518-519, 521, 526, 529-531, 539, 541, 547,
598
Prairie dogs, 119
Prairie grasses, 96, 132
Praying mantises, 352, 363
Precautionary principle, 177, 179, 196, 198, 322, 337,
494, 500, 502, 594, 610, 615
Precipitate, 259-260, 557
Precipitation
and soil, 63, 258, 282, 299, 307
chemistry, 484, 515-516
Predation, 81, 84, 86-90, 92, 94, 96-97, 102-103, 105,
107, 111, 150, 364
Predator beetles, 353
predators
removal of, 87, 90, 102, 127, 184
Pregnancy, 235-236, 248, 321, 331, 450
Preservation, 20, 22, 82, 141, 143, 145, 174-175, 183,
190, 193, 196, 198, 202
prey, 43, 88-90, 94, 96, 105, 107, 111, 113, 116, 123,
127, 131, 134, 139, 150-151, 157, 162, 170,
174, 349
Primary clarifiers, 555-556
primary consumers, 76, 113-114, 137
Primary energy source, 368-369, 391, 509, 540
Primary energy use, 373, 389
primary pollutants, 511-515, 524
primary producers, 114, 116, 137
primary production
net, 116, 122, 128
primary sewage treatment, 570
Primary stakeholders, 133
Primary standard levels, 525
Private land trust, 193, 198
probability, 43, 217, 355, 374, 446, 454, 462-464, 469,
476, 608
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
501
Process, 5-8, 11, 13, 15-16, 18, 23, 27, 36, 40, 42-45,
51, 61, 63, 65, 67, 69-73, 75, 77, 79, 88, 96,
98-100, 107, 109-111, 113, 116, 123-125,
130, 133-134, 136, 142, 151, 154, 160, 167,
172, 174, 178, 182, 184, 193, 198, 203, 208,
221, 226, 231, 234-235, 238, 244, 253,
257-260, 269, 276, 281-282, 288, 290-292,
294-295, 297, 299, 301, 304-305, 307, 316,
319-321, 330, 349, 355-356, 359, 361, 364,
368, 381-386, 391, 395, 397, 404, 407-409,
416, 422-423, 426-427, 435-436, 443, 454,
462-464, 466-469, 473, 475, 479-480, 484,
496, 499, 502, 508, 510, 517, 525, 531, 533,
538, 540, 545, 550, 553, 556-558, 560-566,
568-570, 577, 580-581, 584-587, 592, 596,
600, 604, 607-608, 610-611, 615, 621-622,
628, 632-633, 635-638
Produced capital, 8, 11, 27
Producers, 67-69, 71-73, 76, 79, 111, 113-116,
134-137, 286, 293, 322, 340, 349, 370, 381,
390, 413, 530, 550, 589, 606
Productive use, 175, 196-198, 407, 611
productivity
agricultural production, 214, 299
and nutrients, 111, 180, 299
of plants, 111, 137, 289, 305
plant productivity, 180, 294
propane, 539, 614
Proteins, 63, 69-70, 72-74, 317, 320, 327, 521, 523
protists, 561
Protoctista, 146
Protons, 61, 410, 421, 436, 440
Protozoa, 348, 550
Protozoans, 57, 88-89, 113-114, 291-292, 448, 459,
556
Provisioning services, 33-34, 51, 172-173
Prugh, Thomas, 7
Pseudoephedrine, 145
Pseudoscorpion, 114, 292
Public health, 24, 48, 204, 231, 339, 444, 447, 453,
455-457, 462, 467-469, 498, 548-549, 553,
599, 603, 606, 608
Public Trust Doctrine, 157
Public-health risk assessment, 464
Pumped-storage power plants, 404
pure science, 144
purple coneflower, 128, 185
Q
Quinine, 145
Quran, 145
R
Rabbits
Australia and, 105
Rabies, 158
Raccoons, 119, 122, 158
Radar, 482, 532
Radiant energy, 397, 416, 480-481
radiation
inversion, 507, 541
Radiative forcing, 479, 481, 487-488, 500, 502
Radio waves, 532
Radioactive decay, 100, 417-418, 421, 424, 427-428,
440-441, 485, 502
Radioactive waste, 425-426, 429, 439
Radioactivity, 417-418, 425, 427-432, 434, 438, 440
Radioisotopes, 425-427, 429, 434, 440
Radon, 427, 460, 468, 512, 514
Rain, 2, 12, 39, 42, 56, 58, 72, 74-75, 78-79, 81-82,
84, 100, 110-111, 117-122, 126, 136-137,
146, 148, 182, 196, 216, 257-258, 260-265,
272-273, 276, 282, 288, 294, 299-301, 303,
306-307, 315, 332, 425, 490-491, 498, 502,
507-508, 511-512, 515-516, 522-524,
529-531, 538, 540, 553, 602, 634
Rain forests, 58, 78-79, 117, 119-120, 122, 136, 146,
182, 196, 260, 288, 299, 315, 490, 634
Rain shadow, 260-261, 282
Rainbow, 436
ranching, 271, 298, 355
Rangelands
management of, 133, 315
Raptors, 162
Rathje, William, 577
Rats, 102, 150-151, 340, 343, 352, 463-464, 469, 576,
599
Raw sludge, 555-558, 568, 570
RCRA (Resource Conservation and Recovery Act),
610
Reactive nitrogen, 72, 79
Reactor core, 423-424, 434
Reagan, Ronald, 18, 23
Real-life growth, 83
Recharge area, 261, 273, 280, 282
Reconstructed wetland systems, 561
recovery, 22, 24, 87, 110, 131, 154-155, 160-162, 274,
326, 374, 379, 383, 386, 388, 391, 413, 416,
441, 497, 523, 530-532, 551, 561, 566,
573-592, 606, 608, 610, 614, 623, 626, 634,
639
Recreational activities, 106, 131
Recreational vehicles, 191
recruitment, 84, 104, 107, 177
recycled paper, 583, 585
Recycling
technology, 19, 213, 580, 582, 585, 588, 612
Red List, 148, 156, 163
red tides, 546
Red-cockaded woodpecker, 159
Redefining Progress, 10, 26
reflection, 218, 480, 502, 511, 544
Reformulated gasoline, 526
Refugees, 215, 246, 248, 322, 472, 491, 494, 499
Regional climatic changes, 490
Regional recycling options, 587
regulation, 8, 14-15, 18-20, 22-23, 25, 33-34, 39, 51,
87, 89, 92, 103, 131, 134, 172, 178, 183,
186, 197, 277, 321, 348, 359-362, 366, 438,
462, 464, 466, 493, 526, 530, 541, 547, 588,
590, 593, 608, 610-611
Regulatory Right to Know Act, 20
reintroduction, 157
Relative acidity, 289, 291
relative humidity, 257-259, 282
Relocation, 622
Remittances, 244-245, 253
renewable energy
for transportation, 383, 394, 407, 415
fuel cells, 407, 409-411, 415
hydropower, 387, 394, 396, 402-406, 413
solar, 383, 388, 391, 394-403, 406, 409, 411,
413-416, 497, 574
wave power, 394, 412
wind power, 394-396, 402, 405-406, 415, 497
Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), 413, 416
replacement costs, 21
replacement fertility, 228
Replacement levels, 225
Replacement-level fertility, 201, 210, 217, 223
reproductive health care, 247-248
Reproductive strategies
k-strategists, 105
r-strategists, 84
reptiles, 36, 57, 113, 146-147, 150, 153, 160
Reserpine, 145
Reserves
mineral, 187, 190, 435
reservoir, 65-66, 70, 72, 79, 192, 263, 267-268, 280,
282, 290, 371, 374, 391, 404, 416, 483, 553
reservoirs, 131, 194, 256, 263, 266, 268-269, 271,
277, 299-300, 382, 404, 498-499, 521,
535-536, 564
residence time, 480, 487
resilience, 125-127, 135, 140, 142, 173, 178, 194,
461, 490
Resilience mechanisms, 126-127
resistance, 44, 83-87, 89-90, 92, 96, 103-107, 131,
142, 174, 176, 186, 203-204, 233, 314-315,
317-322, 328, 340, 344, 348-349, 351,
354-355, 358, 362, 364, 368, 432, 435,
458-459, 537, 598
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA),
588, 608
resource consumption, 226-227, 631
Resource management, 133, 153, 190, 245, 249-250,
262
Resource partitioning, 92-93, 96
Resource Recovery Act, 588
Resources for the Future, 11
Respiration, 54, 64, 68-72, 77-79, 110-111, 114, 137,
203, 291, 306, 485-486, 512, 522, 550,
556-557, 562, 570
Restoration ecology, 38, 128, 166, 178, 185, 193, 196,
198
reuse, 281, 575, 582-586, 589-590, 592, 606, 612
Reverse biomass pyramid, 117
Reverse osmosis, 274, 279
Revolution, 35, 129, 165, 202-204, 213, 228, 273, 281,
300, 309-310, 312-315, 317, 320, 322, 328,
332, 335-336, 367, 389, 396, 467, 469, 476,
485-486, 507, 509, 546, 636-637
Revolutions, 202-204
Rhinos, 153, 155
rice, 142, 173, 203, 214, 233, 275, 297, 310, 313-314,
317-321, 323-324, 326, 332-333, 336, 342,
350, 358-359, 486, 491, 518
Rice yields, 332
Ridges, 100
Rift valley, 445
right whale, 188
Right whales, 188
Rings, 477, 502, 523
Rio Declaration, 322, 494
Riparian habitats, 278
Risk assessment, 361, 443, 461-464, 466-469, 476,
554, 595
Risk characterization, 463-464, 466-467, 469, 595,
615
Risk communication, 467, 469
Risks
disaster risk reduction strategies, 461
infectious diseases and, 447
public-health risk assessment, 464
RNA, 63
Roaches, 155, 352
Roadkill, 150
Roadless controversy, 193
Robots, 44, 482
Rock
bedrock, 258, 286
crystalline, 63
sedimentary, 374, 382, 391
Rockefeller Foundation, 314, 332
Rocks
brittle, 79
Rocky Mountain Research Station, 104
Rodents, 102, 119, 203, 357, 463
Romania, 207, 232, 243, 420
Roosevelt, Theodore, 38
Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy Greenway, 631, 638
Rosy periwinkle, 143-145
655

Rotation, 182, 260, 280, 297, 304, 346, 352, 357,
473-474, 479, 502, 565
Rotavirus, 449, 470
roundworm, 457
Roundworms, 448, 457, 548
Rove beetle, 292
Rowland, Sherwood, 15-16, 25, 533
r-selected species, 84, 105, 201
Ruminants, 486
Runoff
stream, 261, 269, 282, 550, 553, 624
Rural poor, 154, 275, 311
Rural populations, 148, 310, 404, 631
Russia, 5, 27, 207, 288, 340, 347, 380, 429, 431,
435-436, 438, 440, 451-452, 490, 496, 517,
536
Rutgers University, 466, 622
Rwanda, 207, 329
S
Sachs, Jeffrey, 238
Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, 39
Safety
nuclear power and, 437
safe drinking water, 384, 567, 610, 615
Sahara, 207, 260, 302, 328-329
Sahara Desert, 302, 328
Sahel, 264, 302, 324, 328-329
Sahel region, 264, 324, 328
Salazar, Ken, 394
salinization, 259, 275, 289, 291, 299-301, 304-305,
313, 322
Salmon, 151, 184-185, 269-270, 317
Salmonella, 315, 449, 458, 548
Salmonella typhi, 548
Salt
desalination, 256, 274, 281
distillation, 274, 281
electrolysis, 409
reverse osmosis, 274
Salt marshes, 31, 44, 58, 120, 346
Salt water, 273, 471
salts
evaporative, 291
Saltwater encroachment, 282
Saltwater intrusion, 272-273, 282
Salvage logging, 193
San Andreas Fault, 100
San Francisco, 19, 270, 277, 395, 411-412, 584, 587,
623, 631-632
San Francisco Bay, 270
Sand dunes, 57
Sandstone, 382
sanitary sewers, 237, 554
Sargassum, 122
Saturation
light, 551
Saudi Arabia, 383, 485
Savannah River, 431
Savannas, 141, 171
Scandinavia, 206, 515, 524
Scavengers, 111, 113-114
schistosomiasis, 340, 448, 457
Schlichtmann, Jan, 613
Schooling, 235, 245-246, 328
science
historical, 463, 482, 591
paradigm, 132-133, 193, 457, 478
Scientific and Statistical Committee, 187
Scientific community, 44-45, 49, 226, 466-467, 491,
538
Scientific data, 196
scientific method
observations and, 42, 44, 51
scientific method and, 32
scientific process, 44
scientific values, 131
Scopolamine, 145
Screwworm flies, 355
Screwworm fly, 340, 355
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 35, 50
Scrubbers, 386, 425, 499, 518-519, 530, 540
Scuba, 170-171
S-curve, 82-83
Sea anemones, 91
Sea grasses, 190, 561, 566
Sea lions, 122, 546
Sea of Azov, 103
sea otter, 90
Sea otters, 90, 546
sea urchin, 90
Seabirds, 59, 120, 122, 150, 152
Seasonal changes, 382, 482, 485, 491, 533
Seawalls, 417, 498
Seawater
pH, 36, 484
Seaweed, 151, 170, 184
Second law of thermodynamics, 66-67, 69, 79-80,
368, 374, 397
Second level consumer, 114-115
secondary consumers, 76, 113, 137
Secondary detritus feeders, 76
Secondary pollutants, 506, 511-512, 514-515, 538
secondary production, 116
secondary sewage treatment, 570, 604, 608
Secondary stakeholders, 133
Secondary succession, 123-124, 126
Second-generation pesticides, 344
secondhand smoke, 456, 461
Sediment
sources, 131, 263, 374, 553, 565, 570
transport, 172
sedimentary rock, 374, 382, 391
sedimentation, 72, 565
Sediments, 59, 72-74, 115, 122, 126, 152, 190, 271,
286, 298-299, 365, 374, 404, 412, 431, 446,
477-478, 502, 544-545, 550, 553-554, 561,
564-566, 568, 570-571, 605
seed banks, 143
Seed dispersal, 97
Seeps, 261-262, 272, 282, 374, 514
Segregation, 627
sei whale, 188
selective breeding, 364
Selective cutting, 182, 198
Selective pressures, 95-96, 98-100, 105
Senate, 13, 23-24, 27, 161-162, 164, 387-388, 456,
497, 554
septic system, 558-559, 569-570
Septic tank and leaching field, 559
services, 1, 3-12, 14, 17-19, 25, 27, 32-35, 37, 46,
48-51, 109-110, 127-128, 130-134, 136-137,
140-141, 144, 147, 154, 158, 164, 166, 168,
170-176, 178-180, 182-183, 190-191,
195-196, 198, 199, 205, 212, 214-216,
218-220, 225-226, 233, 235-237, 243,
246-248, 250-251, 256, 269, 278, 285, 289,
294, 303-304, 307, 312, 335, 357, 373, 379,
415, 447, 453, 469, 475, 498, 531, 545, 553,
568, 577, 582, 594, 599, 625, 627-629, 631,
637, 639
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), 445
Sexually transmitted diseases, 247, 448
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), 247, 448
Seychelles, 207
Shadow pricing, 21-22
Shale, 365, 381-383, 390-391, 604
Shale oil, 381
Shantytowns, 215, 233, 629, 637
Sharks, 122, 140, 186, 345
Sheep, 90, 102, 132, 160, 315, 328
Sheet erosion, 295, 302, 307
Sheeting, 628
Shelterbelts, 297-298, 307, 352
shifting mosaic, 123
Shikimic acid, 143
Shoaling, 412
Shore
coastline, 417
shore, 183, 233, 412, 417, 431, 564, 635
Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant, 419
Short-lived fission products, 428
Shrimp, 6, 130, 152, 173, 184-185, 190, 634
shrimp farming, 173, 184
Shrimp farms, 130, 173
Shrimpers, 545, 634
Shrubs, 106, 119, 122-123, 128, 137, 180, 297, 484
sick-building syndrome, 460
Sierra Club
founded, 38
Sierra Nevada, 260
Silent Spring, 30-31, 38, 50, 348
Silicon, 395, 400-401, 409
Silt, 131, 286-287, 293, 295, 303, 307, 550-551, 570
siltation, 190
silver, 301, 340, 590
Silversword, 159
sinks, 100, 180, 262, 265, 277, 281, 475, 478, 486,
496, 500, 502, 554, 570
Skin cancer, 533-534, 536
Skunks, 119, 158
Slash-and-burn agriculture, 311
sleeping sickness, 356, 448
Sleet, 257
Sludge, 268, 359, 407, 551, 555-559, 567-571, 575
Sludge cake, 558-559, 570
Sludge digesters, 558, 570
Sludge worms, 551, 567
Slugs, 291, 340
Slums, 215, 237, 618, 627-629, 637
Slurry, 407
Smallpox, 203, 448
Small-scale agriculture, 213, 249
Smart grid, 372, 388-389, 391
Smart growth, 13, 41, 50, 618, 622-626, 637-639
Smart Growth America, 622-624, 638
smelters, 446, 512, 514, 521, 526, 541
smokestacks, 425, 519
smoking, 44, 447-448, 455-456, 460, 462-463, 467,
469, 519-520
Snail kite, 561
Snails, 103, 151, 160, 291, 313, 340, 457, 550
Snake River, 192
Snakes, 111, 113, 119, 122, 154, 166
snow cover, 479, 490
Snowy egrets, 158
Social capital, 9, 11, 27, 248
Social costs, 10, 130, 173, 494, 625
Social development, 228, 241, 250-251
social justice, 46, 250
Social modernization, 230, 239, 245, 250-251
Social security programs, 218
Society for Ecological Restoration, 128
Socioeconomic development, 455
Sociologists, 40-41, 48
sociology, 37, 251
Sodium, 64, 327, 517, 550, 557
Sodium hypochlorite (Clorox®), 557
Soil
acidity, 59, 289, 291, 307, 517, 541, 553
attributes, 8, 135, 285, 290-291, 294
dry, 119-121, 128, 133, 194, 256, 261, 263, 272,
276, 284, 288-289, 294, 296-297, 299,
302, 307, 340, 428, 558, 561, 569, 599,
604
fertility, 59, 75, 135, 198, 277, 288-291, 301-302,
307, 315
fertility of, 135, 315
horizons, 288-289, 305, 307
in urban areas, 570
moist, 120, 257, 261, 288, 306, 570
moisture, 57, 63, 79, 84, 92, 120-121, 123, 258,
261, 263, 282, 287, 291, 302, 306-307,
522, 561, 578
moisture content, 287
orders, 55, 148, 288-289, 305, 307
profiles, 284, 286, 288, 307
properties, 14, 135, 182, 272, 287, 299, 305, 307,
565
proportions, 286-287, 457
separates, 286
taxonomy, 156, 286, 288, 307
texture triangle, 287
Soil aeration, 291, 306
Soil bacteria, 72-73, 301, 559
Soil community, 288, 291
Soil conservation, 284, 297, 301-302, 304-305, 307,
565
Soil Conservation Service, 297, 307
Soil enrichment, 293
soil profile, 288, 292, 305, 307
Soil profiles, 284, 286, 288, 307
Soil science, 286, 294, 305
Soil structure, 286, 291-292, 297, 307
Soil texture, 286-287, 291-292, 305, 307
Soil texture triangle, 287
soils, 12, 33, 40, 71-74, 119-120, 126, 134, 177, 194,
275-276, 284-291, 294-296, 299-307, 344,
408, 486-487, 512, 514, 522-524, 530-531,
587, 601, 605
Solar building siting, 399
Solar collectors, 399, 497
Solar constant, 397, 416
Solar energy
electricity from, 395, 397
general concepts, 397
hydrogen and, 70, 409, 414, 416
656

indirect, 394, 402-403, 406
uses of, 406
Solar hot-water heating, 398
solar panels, 400-403, 414, 574
Solar space heating, 398, 631
solar system, 100, 398
Solar thermal energy, 369, 497
Solar variability, 481
Solar-energy balance, 474
Solar-energy spectrum, 397
Solar-trough collector system, 402
Solid state, 62
Solid Waste Interstate Transportation Act of 2009, 589
solid wastes, 425, 512, 601, 608
Songbirds, 31, 38, 91, 152
Sorghum, 317-318, 323, 522
Sorting, 587-588
source, 7-10, 21, 26, 34-35, 40, 44, 46, 48, 50, 55, 62,
69, 73, 75, 93, 95, 100-101, 111, 113-114,
116-117, 120-121, 129, 131, 136-137,
141-148, 153, 157, 160-162, 165, 167, 172,
175, 180-182, 184, 186, 191-192, 195, 197,
203-204, 208-211, 214-215, 217-218,
220-225, 227, 231-232, 234-238, 241,
245-246, 249, 252, 257-259, 262-263,
266-269, 274, 276, 281, 288-289, 295,
306-307, 311-313, 315, 318, 321, 323-324,
329-330, 332-333, 336, 343, 346, 352, 363,
365, 367-373, 376-378, 380-383, 386,
389-391, 396-398, 400, 402-403, 405-406,
408-409, 411-412, 415, 417, 419-420, 427,
431, 433, 436-439, 443-444, 448-450, 452,
454-458, 462-467, 469, 472-476, 478,
480-489, 491-492, 495-498, 501, 503,
507-509, 511-514, 517-519, 521-522,
525-534, 536-537, 540, 544-545, 548-550,
553, 559, 562, 564-571, 574-577, 579,
581-584, 586, 588, 591-592, 595, 597, 599,
603, 605-606, 611, 614-615, 622-624, 627,
631-632, 637-638
Source reduction, 548, 574, 581-583, 588, 591-592
South Africa, 212-213, 237, 242-243, 246, 276, 330,
420, 449, 459, 471, 587
South America, 101, 119, 147-148, 150, 181, 206, 216,
267, 340
South American Plate, 101
South Carolina, 431, 579
South Florida Ecosystem Restoration Task Force, 194
South Korea, 231, 234, 244, 246, 437, 485
South Pole, 535
Southern Africa Development Community, 330
Southern California Edison, 402
Southern Hemisphere, 403, 534, 536
Southern Oscillation, 479, 500, 502
soybeans, 74, 116, 130, 302, 304, 312, 317-318, 320,
323, 347, 350, 522
Spain, 19, 207, 211, 348, 402, 420, 456
Spawning, 173
Special interest groups, 16-17, 23-25, 45
specialists, 155
Specialization, 92, 96, 98, 202
species
invasive, 102-104, 126, 136, 148, 150-152,
154-158, 161, 163, 168, 170-171, 176,
181
invertebrates, 84, 146, 150-151, 270, 546
keystone, 87, 90, 102, 107, 131, 154
naturalized, 103
non-native, 102, 150, 152, 170, 185
richness, 141
umbrella, 154, 193, 241
Species approach, 187
species interactions
disease, 88
Speed of light, 421
sperm whale, 188
Sperm whales, 188
Sphinx moth, 353
Spiders, 291, 350
Splash erosion, 295, 297, 307
Springs, 69, 113, 261-263, 272, 282, 411, 483
Squid, 122
Squirrels, 58, 85, 112, 119, 128, 151
Sri Lanka, 207, 233, 330, 455
stability, 37, 85, 107, 123, 145, 148, 200, 224-225,
244, 250, 314, 380, 487
Stabilization scenarios, 494-495
stable isotopes, 426
Standing stock, 181
Standing-crop biomass, 116
Star anise, 143
starch, 69, 319, 408
starling, 151
State Implementation Plan (SIP), 525
Steam engines, 367
steel, 1, 157, 187, 297, 382, 429-430, 432, 506, 526,
582-583, 586, 606
Stellwagen Bank, 189
Sterilization, 239
Stern, Nicholas, 498
stewardship
ethics, 47
values-based, 635
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic
Pollutants, 598, 615
stocks, 8, 14, 134, 163, 178, 185-187, 196, 241, 323
Stomach cancer, 2
Stomata, 282, 290, 307, 521
Storm drains, 546, 550, 553-554, 570
Storm intensities, 490
Storm tracks, 492
Storm water, 259, 546, 554
Storm-water management, 553
stratosphere, 15-16, 472-473, 479-480, 487, 499-500,
502-503, 507-508, 514, 532-541
Streams
exotic, 119, 150
Stress, 21, 59-60, 80, 278-279, 318, 322, 350, 394,
434, 521-522
Strip cropping, 298, 305-306
Strip mining, 194, 301, 391, 402, 425
strip-cropping, 565
Striped bass, 270
Subduction, 101
Subduction zone, 101
Sublimation, 62
Submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV), 561-563, 571
Subsidies
for agriculture, 331
subsistence agriculture, 133, 182, 213, 309-311, 328
Subsistence-agriculture societies, 236
Subsoil, 118, 288, 292-293, 299, 307, 559
subspecies, 139, 141, 160
Subtropical regions, 260, 282
suburbs, 141, 174, 194, 346, 509, 618, 620-628,
631-632, 637, 639
Sudan, 207, 235, 329
Sukuma people, 133
Sulawesi, 101, 155
Sulfate aerosols, 480-481, 499
Sulfates, 74-75, 258, 264, 480
Sulfides, 551
Sulfur, 2-3, 20, 54, 63-64, 70, 74-77, 110, 203, 264,
384-386, 396, 418, 425, 438, 460, 472, 498,
506-507, 509, 511-513, 515-519, 521-522,
524-525, 529-530, 540-541, 580
sulfur dioxide
emissions of, 418, 425, 513, 516, 525, 530, 541
Sulfur oxides, 74, 384, 460
Sulfur (S), 63
Sunflowers, 604
Sunspots, 481
Superfund Act, 39, 588
Superfund sites, 22, 604-605, 608, 611, 613
surface impoundments, 600-602
Surface mining, 385, 389
Surface runoff, 258, 262, 280
Surface runoff loop, 262
surface temperature, 475, 481
Surinam, 143
Suriname, 183, 207
Surveillance, 5, 158, 445, 458, 465, 601, 613
Survival curve, 60
Survival of the fittest, 91
Survivorship curves, 85-86
Suspended, 36, 268, 512, 526, 541, 545, 551, 558,
561, 570
Suspended particulate matter, 512, 541
sustainability
technology and, 134, 233
Sustainable agriculture, 204, 301-302, 304-305, 309,
325, 332, 334-337
Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development
Initiative (SARD), 301
Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education
(SARE), 304
Sustainable communities
urban blight and, 618, 629
Sustainable communities movement, 632
sustainable development
for developing countries, 221
World Bank and, 251
sustainable economy, 1, 6-7, 25
Sustainable ecosystems, 40
Sustainable forestry, 182, 196
Sustainable future
stewardship for, 635
Sustainable societies, 40, 50
Sustainable yield
optimum, 40
Sustainable yields, 40, 177
Sustained yield, 182, 198
SustainLane, 631-632
Svalbard Global Seed Vault, 143
swamp, 79, 121, 159, 374
Swamp pink, 159
Swamps, 60, 115, 122, 256, 374
Swans, 122
Swaziland, 207
Swells, 140
Switzerland, 207, 244, 418, 420, 447, 485, 494-495,
501, 532, 540, 630
Swordfish, 11, 184
Symbiosis
parasitic, 94
Synergisms, 60
Synergistic effects, 60, 80, 350, 364, 615
Synthetic oil, 384, 395
Synthetic organic chemicals, 347, 349, 445, 604
Synthetic organic compounds, 65, 79, 558, 598, 609
Synthetic organic pesticides, 346, 348-349, 357
Synthetic organic phosphates, 350
systems
biotic, 59, 77, 79, 90, 105, 117, 123, 137, 174, 391
closed, 6, 54, 186, 434
equilibrium, 110, 123, 481, 484, 494
example of, 19, 27, 49, 77, 92, 123, 171, 299, 430
feedback, 137, 372
T
taiga, 121
Tajikistan, 207
Tamiflu®, 143
Tampa Bay, 194, 274, 560
Tampa Bay seawater desalination plant, 274
Tangier Island covenant, 634-635
Tanzania, 133, 207, 449, 455
tapeworms, 88
Tar sands, 71, 382-383, 387
Tariffs, 6, 240, 250, 326
Tax base, 619, 627-628, 637, 639
tax breaks, 162, 387-388
taxonomists, 142, 146, 156
Taxonomy, 155-156, 166, 168, 286, 288, 307
Techa River, 431
Tectonic plates, 100-101, 107, 110
temperate deciduous forest, 117-118, 121, 137
Temperate deciduous forest biome, 118
Temperate forests, 57, 119
temperate grassland, 121, 288
Temperate regions, 549
temperature
apparent, 264, 481
inversions, 472, 509-510
scales, 60, 78, 479
sea surface, 189
Termites, 114-115, 119, 360, 599
Terraces, 565
terracing, 304
TerrAfrica, 299, 301, 305
Terrestrial ecosystems, 59, 70, 72-73, 115-116, 125,
129, 256, 295, 485-486, 523
Territoriality, 91-92, 105
Terrorism, 433, 494
tertiary consumers, 113
Test, 22, 42-43, 51, 61, 196, 251, 286, 297, 360, 430,
463-464, 468, 489, 549, 569, 610
Testing, 43-44, 51, 161, 163, 247, 303, 319, 344, 347,
360, 427, 431, 436, 463-464, 466, 469, 549,
570, 594-595, 603, 609-610, 613, 615
Tethys Sea, 101
Texas, 63, 150, 158, 162, 193, 231, 271-272, 339,
355, 375, 381-382, 387, 405-406, 574
Texas Gulf Coast, 162
Textiles, 21, 575, 583
Thailand, 130, 173, 206-207, 214, 230-231, 236-237,
245, 247-248, 251, 347, 404, 449, 451
657

The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity
(TEEB) report, 144
The Nature Conservancy, 147, 193, 303
Theophylline, 145
Theories, 25, 41-43, 45, 232, 493
theory, 3-4, 14, 27, 42-43, 49, 51, 81, 96, 100,
106-107, 128, 176, 178, 196, 243, 268, 320,
469
Thermal energy, 332, 369, 402, 497
Thermal inversion, 507
Thermal pollution, 373, 391, 425
Thermodynamics
first law, 67, 79-80
first law of, 79-80
second law, 66-67, 69, 79-80, 368, 374, 397
second law of, 66-67, 69, 79-80, 368, 374, 397
thermosphere, 472-473, 503
Thin-film PV cells, 401
Third level consumer, 114-115
Third-world countries, 208
Threatened and Endangered Species Recovery Act
(TESRA), 161
Threatened species, 106, 148, 154, 160, 163, 173,
194
Threshold, 19, 22, 196, 203, 356-357, 362, 364, 427,
452, 595, 615
Threshold level, 22, 595, 615
Thresholds of toxicity, 452
Thunder, 303
Thunderstorms, 451
Thyroid cancer, 431
Ticks, 89, 340
Tidal barrage, 412, 416
Tidal power, 394, 412
Tidal power plants, 412
Tidal waves, 107
tides
generating, 412
mixed, 122
spring, 546
Tier 2 Standards, 527, 529
Tigers, 119, 154, 156, 167
Till, 297, 299, 302, 305, 307, 318, 322
tillage, 277, 302, 565
tilling, 277
“Timber famine”, 142
Tipping point, 75, 127, 494, 503
Tipping points, 75, 127, 135, 206
tissues, 15, 31, 54-56, 59-61, 64-65, 70, 76, 104, 116,
152, 198, 221, 290, 320, 361, 426, 441, 457,
512, 533
Tobacco lobby, 44, 456
Toilets
low-flow, 277
Tokamak design, 436
tolerance
law of, 59, 79
range of, 59-60, 79
top predators, 131, 157, 184, 344, 348
Top-down regulation, 87
Topography, 92, 120, 194, 412, 510
Topsoil, 119, 263, 285-286, 288, 291-295, 297-299,
301, 304-307, 578
Tornadoes
wind patterns, 474
Total allowable catch (TAC), 177, 196, 198
Total fertility rate, 201, 208, 210-211, 217-219, 221,
228, 230, 232, 239
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) programs, 554
Total product life cycle, 596-597, 613, 615
Total watershed management approach, 566
Toxaphene, 346, 599-600, 614
toxic air pollutants, 525
Toxic risk pathways, 459
Toxic sites, 593, 603
Toxicity
acute toxicity, 595
toxicologists, 613
toxicology, 453, 461, 470, 593-595, 599, 613, 615
Toxics Release Inventory, 22, 596-597, 614-615
Toxics Release Inventory (TRI), 596, 615
toxins, 104, 116, 300-301, 345-346, 360, 558, 562
Toyota, 528
Toyota Prius, 528
Trade
barriers, 5-6, 27, 47, 245, 250, 256, 326, 433
food distribution and, 309, 322
imbalance, 326
trade barriers, 6, 27, 250, 256
Trade Records Analysis for Flora and Fauna in
International Commerce (TRAFFIC), 163
trade winds, 260, 280, 282, 474, 479
traditional agriculture, 312
Traffic
national parks and, 523
Tragedy of the commons, 38, 178, 196, 298
transboundary pollution, 600
Transform faults, 101
Transgenic crops, 318-320
transgenic plants, 319
Transparency, 564
transpiration, 181, 257-259, 261-262, 280-282, 290,
307
Transport, 5, 105, 172, 190, 256, 276, 322, 360, 368,
387, 403, 408, 463, 498, 534-535, 590-591,
594, 597, 600, 608, 610
transportation
automobiles, 367, 527, 539, 620, 626, 630
mass transit, 497, 624, 626, 630
Trap crops, 357
Trawling, 186-187
Treadle pumps, 275-276, 279
Treated sludge, 407, 557-559, 571
treaties, 35, 48, 153, 156, 163, 166, 330, 359-361,
493, 536
treatment, 2-3, 16, 39, 46, 48, 50, 73, 79, 131, 143,
157, 211-212, 216, 240, 247, 251, 256,
266-268, 272, 279, 334, 339, 343, 350-351,
356-357, 362, 364, 446, 448-449, 457-459,
462, 534, 544-548, 550, 553-561, 564-571,
575, 582, 587, 589-590, 592, 601, 604,
607-608, 611-612, 614-615
tree plantations, 311
tree rings, 477, 502, 523
Trees
mangroves, 190, 197, 249
Trex® decking, 583
Tributaries, 2, 544, 546, 566
trickling filters, 556, 570
Trickling-filter system, 555-556, 571
TRIS, 609
Tritium, 431, 436, 440
Trophic categories, 111, 113, 135
Trophic levels, 111, 114-117, 127, 134-135, 152, 348
Tropic of Cancer, 101, 118, 259
Tropic of Capricorn, 101, 118, 259
Tropical Andes, 165
Tropical Disease Research Program, 459
Tropical diseases, 457-458
Tropical forests, 81, 148, 181-182, 216, 242, 311, 497
Tropical rain forests
convection currents and, 260
tropical rainforest, 111
Tropical seasonal forest, 121
Tropics, 37, 122, 143, 148, 163, 189, 197, 265, 288,
302, 316, 332, 342, 449, 458, 472, 492
Tropopause, 472-473, 503, 535
troposphere, 472-474, 479, 481, 486-487, 500,
502-503, 507-508, 514, 517, 524, 531-535,
537
tropospheric ozone, 479, 508-509
Tsunamis, 107, 451
Tuberculosis, 247, 360, 448-449, 455, 457, 467, 469,
498, 628
Tubocurarine, 145
Tuna, 116, 122, 184
Tundra, 78-79, 117-121, 125, 136-137, 171-172, 192
Tundra biome, 119, 137
Turbidity, 561-562
Turbine, 66, 369, 372, 386, 388, 391, 405-406, 424,
433-434, 581
Turkey, 157, 207, 235, 405, 409
Turkmenistan, 207
Turtles, 122, 214, 366, 587
Tuvalu, 207, 471
typhoid, 167, 203, 457, 548
Typhoid fever, 167, 203, 457, 548
Typhoons, 474
U
Uganda, 207, 225, 234-236, 241, 247, 449, 459
Ukraine, 207, 288, 420, 430-431, 437
Ultraviolet radiation, 15, 531-532, 535, 541, 557
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation, 514
Under cultivation, 304, 313
Underground purification, 261
Underground storage tank, 606-607
Undernourishment, 325, 327-328, 336-337
Undernutrition, 328, 454
Underwater robots, 482
Underweight, 327-329, 336, 454, 465
Underweight children, 329, 454
Uneven-aged management, 182
Unifying themes, 30, 39, 49, 51
Union Carbide, 609
Union of Concerned Scientists, 319, 415, 432, 501
Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS), 319, 432
United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, 502
United Nations Environment Programme, 164, 262,
415
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 164
United States
aid from, 244-245, 330-331
Clean Air Act Amendments, 524-525, 530, 537, 539
climate change impacts in, 476, 491-492
consumption in, 136, 333, 368, 376-377, 631
coral reefs in, 190
electrical demand cycle, 371, 424
energy consumption in, 368
energy sources, 367-368, 371-373, 377-378, 383,
389, 391, 395-396, 402, 405, 411, 414,
419, 437-438, 440, 498, 540
hunger in, 6, 326, 331
irrigation in, 275, 307
population of, 22, 90, 162, 210, 218-219, 223, 227,
233, 315, 469, 580
population projections for, 219, 221
public policy in, 22, 413
renewable-energy use in, 396
soil in, 288, 301, 307
water use in, 275
wealth in, 455
wind power in, 395, 436
United Synthesis Product (USP), 491, 503
University of Arizona, 577
University of Colorado, 483, 501
University of Michigan, 209, 227
University of Washington, 161, 265, 566
University of Wisconsin, 128, 185, 635
Unmet need, 236, 248, 251
uplift, 100
Upwelling zones, 121, 185
Ural Mountains, 431
uranium, 372, 418, 421-423, 425-428, 430-431, 433,
435, 438, 440-441, 512, 604, 611
Uranium dioxide, 422-423
Uranium-235, 421-423, 426, 440
Uranium-238, 421, 440
urban agriculture, 309, 332-333
Urban blight
vicious cycle of, 627
Urban development, 36, 294, 632
urban ecology, 57
Urban gardens, 632
urban sprawl
environmental impacts of, 623
quality of life and, 623
smart growth and, 626
Urine, 71, 91, 116, 348, 444, 554, 594
U.S. Forest Service, 47, 104, 132-134, 198
User fees, 14
Utah, 158, 259, 271, 382, 404, 574
UV Index (EPA), 534
UV radiation, 508, 533-536
UVB radiation, 532-533, 536
Uzbekistan, 207
V
Vaccinations, 203, 448
Value
instrumental, 139, 141-142, 144-145, 154, 164,
166, 168, 173
intrinsic, 139, 141-142, 145, 154, 164, 166, 168,
205
of biodiversity, 6, 36, 49, 51, 140, 144, 153, 155,
164, 166, 182, 189, 191
of ecosystem capital, 11, 129, 140, 173-174, 176,
196
of wild species, 139-140, 142, 144, 154, 162, 171,
176
values
aesthetic, 34, 131, 144, 168, 172, 270, 624
utilitarian, 166
Values-based stewardship, 635
Vapor, 61-63, 74, 78, 256-259, 274, 281-282, 290,
307, 409, 412, 472, 478-479, 486-488, 502,
658

507, 509, 511, 516, 541, 607
variability, 36, 92, 131, 225, 256, 334, 479, 481, 489,
509
vectors, 88, 313, 340, 345, 357, 458
Vegetation
emergent, 561-562, 564, 570
herbaceous, 128
SAV, 561-564, 571
vegetation cover, 307
Venezuela, 207
Verdant Power, 412
vertebrates, 139, 146-147, 350, 593
Vertical air currents, 473
Vibrio cholerae, 548
Vietnam, 183, 230, 449, 459
Vinblastine, 143, 145
Vincristine, 143
Virginia, 165, 385, 407, 546, 579, 626, 635
virulence, 444
Viruses
West Nile virus, 445
Visible light, 397, 532
Vision 2000, 632-633
Visual pollution, 394
Vitamin A deficiency, 321, 454, 465
Volcanic activity, 74, 100, 107, 429, 480
volcanic eruptions, 37, 100, 109-110, 450
Volcanoes
eruption of, 109-110
North American, 100
Volunteering, 10, 106, 167
Vulnerability, 16, 98, 134, 163, 322, 335, 387, 432,
446, 454, 464, 468, 470, 492, 498-499
Vultures, 114
W
Wading birds, 122
Wake, 48, 82, 86, 284, 451, 494, 530, 613
Washes, 75, 299
Washington, Lake, 566, 568
Wasps, 353
waste
hazardous, 39, 46, 51, 440, 466, 547, 569, 575,
580, 582, 588, 590, 592, 593, 596-597,
600-605, 608, 610-615
municipal solid, 13-14, 573-592
Waste disposal, 39, 402, 427-429, 576, 579-581,
588-589, 591, 593, 600-601
Waste heat, 69, 114, 266, 274, 372-374, 391, 410, 428
waste management
dumps, 588
hazardous waste, 582, 590, 592, 601
landfills, 574, 580, 585, 588, 590-591, 601
solid waste, 574, 580, 582, 585, 588, 590-592
waste reduction, 580, 582, 588, 590
waste stream, 397, 580, 582, 584-585, 587
Waste treatment, 39, 131, 592
Wastes
disposal issues, 589
fecal, 114, 116, 549, 554
integrated waste management, 588, 591
yard, 306, 575-576, 581, 583, 587, 589-591
wastewater
pollutants in, 554
access to safe, 240, 256, 279, 457, 548
blue, 113, 185, 257-259, 261-262, 272-274,
280-281, 429, 438, 523, 546, 561, 566
boiling point, 418
bottled, 268-269, 274, 276, 586
currents, 122, 260, 264-265, 412, 478-479, 482,
502, 587
evaporation of, 42, 478, 596
fresh, 33-34, 133, 172, 337, 578, 631
hard, 41, 63, 79, 154-155, 162, 177, 198, 203, 205,
259, 287-288, 298, 303, 305, 313, 315,
322, 342, 414, 467, 477, 507, 509, 523,
527, 540, 633
heat capacity, 478
heavy, 23-24, 40, 97, 119, 274, 300, 305, 335, 367,
381, 386, 409, 423, 433-434, 467, 484,
517, 523, 541, 550, 553-554, 558-559,
562, 566, 569-570, 597-598, 604, 607,
620
hydrogen bonds, 62, 64, 69, 78, 257
liquid, 61-63, 67, 79, 257-258, 261, 264, 271, 281,
367, 373, 383-384, 402, 409, 412, 416,
480, 507, 511, 530, 558-560, 586, 601,
608
storm, 130-131, 173, 259, 262, 285, 295, 303, 412,
546-547, 550, 553-554, 567, 570
supply of, 249, 277, 290-291, 371, 383, 414, 580
technologies and, 19, 335, 407, 414, 469
usage, 267, 269, 281, 342, 383, 465
World Commission on Water, 279
Water buffalo, 88, 94
water conservation, 268, 275, 277, 297, 303, 307, 332
water cycle, 59, 78, 256-257, 262-266, 268, 276-277,
280, 301, 576
Water diversion, 256, 270, 565
Water harvesting, 302
Water hyacinth, 353
Water management, 256, 270, 273, 553
Water pollution
chemical pollutants, 544, 550, 568, 570
Clean Water Act and, 544, 568
pathogens and, 558-559, 561, 570
perspectives on, 544, 546
point sources of, 553
Water Pollution Control Act, 547, 567
Water quality standards, 24, 553-554, 565-568
Water resources
shortages, 274, 279, 335
Water rights, 242, 278
Water stewardship, 255, 272, 278
Water table, 255, 258, 261, 263, 272-273, 280, 282,
300, 303, 577-578, 607
Water tables
falling, 272
Water vapor, 61-63, 74, 78, 256-258, 281-282, 290,
307, 409, 472, 478-479, 486-488, 502, 507,
509, 511, 516, 541
water wars, 242, 277-278
Water-holding capacity, 261, 287, 290-291, 293, 299,
305, 307
Waterlogging, 300-301, 313
Watershed management, 278-279, 566
Waves
base, 107, 371
cause of, 532
frequency, 483
height, 472
period, 107, 490
Weapons of mass destruction, 379
Weather
cold front, 260
jet stream, 474, 502
storms, 329, 451, 476, 479, 492, 498-499, 502,
507, 550
Wegener, Alfred, 100, 107
Wells, 30, 136, 194, 261-262, 266, 272-273, 276-277,
281-282, 365, 368, 374, 380-381, 383,
386-387, 391, 546-547, 577-578, 600-601,
603-605, 608
West Africa, 200, 294
West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS), 483
westerlies, 260
Wet cleaning, 612
Wetlands
constructed, 561
marine systems, 171
reconstructed, 561
Whale watching, 189
Wheat, Mexican, 314
Wheat yields, 332
Where Is the Wealth of Nations? Measuring Capital for
the 21st Century, 8
White flight, 627, 637
White House, 13, 23-24, 481-482
White Mountains, 522
White oryx, 159
whooping crane, 154, 162
Whooping cranes, 159, 162-163
Whyte, William, 630
Wild genes, 142
Wild species
poaching of, 163
saving, 139, 155, 162, 171
wild turkey, 157
Wilderness, 22, 38, 136, 145, 190, 198, 515, 523-524
Wilderness Act of 1964, 190
Wildfire, 193
Wildfires, 174, 193, 491
wildlife
habitat, 60, 98, 102, 126, 140, 150, 152-154,
157-158, 160-161, 163, 166-168, 191,
304, 553, 561, 624, 636
Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program, 304
Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program (WHIP), 304
Wildlife refuges, 158, 190-191, 194, 198
Wildlife Services, 158, 168
Willis, Josh, 482
Wind
doldrums, 260
trade, 6, 48, 260-261, 377, 391, 474, 497, 529
Wind erosion, 284, 296, 302, 307, 512
Wind farms, 396, 405-406, 414-415
Wind power, 6, 367, 394-396, 402, 405-406, 415, 436,
497
Wind turbines, 274, 369, 395-396, 403, 405-406, 414,
575
Windbreaks, 285, 297
Windmills, 403, 405
Windrows, 558, 571, 587
Winged bean, 142
Wisconsin, 128, 162-163, 185, 309, 382, 387, 558,
579, 635
wolves, 57, 87-90, 105, 154, 157, 167, 200
Wong, Takmeng, 482
wood thrush, 147
woodpecker, 159
work, 1, 3, 6, 8-9, 11, 15, 22-25, 27, 31, 35, 38, 43-47,
49, 51, 57, 61, 66-67, 69-70, 77, 79, 84-85,
87, 90, 92, 95, 98, 106, 114, 123, 128, 133,
135, 140, 146, 154-156, 158-159, 161-162,
164-166, 171, 174, 176, 183, 185, 197,
199-200, 203, 214-215, 219-220, 226, 230,
234-239, 241-243, 248-251, 265, 273,
276-277, 279-280, 287-288, 301-302,
304-305, 309, 311, 314, 318, 330-331, 333,
335-336, 343, 346, 349-350, 359, 361-363,
367-368, 387, 389, 391, 394, 397, 400, 402,
405, 410, 414-415, 430, 435-436, 439, 444,
462-463, 467, 476-479, 482, 493, 497,
499-500, 507, 509, 520, 523, 525, 527-528,
532, 545-546, 553, 557, 559, 588, 591, 593,
596, 604, 606, 613, 619, 621, 625-626,
630-639
World Bank, 8-12, 25-26, 164, 206, 208, 212, 226-227,
232, 238, 240-243, 245, 247, 249, 251-253,
255, 277, 324, 404, 629
World Business Council for Sustainable Development,
634
World Commission on Environment and Development,
40
World Conservation Union, 151, 163
World Database on Protected Areas (WDPA), 190
World Food Program (WFP), 330
World Glacier Monitoring Service, 484
World grain trade, 323
World Health Assembly, 447, 456
World Meteorological Organization, 532, 540
World Ozone Data Center, 536
World Resources Institute, 133, 602
World Summit, 185
World Trade Organization (WTO), 5, 326
World War II, 38, 109, 192, 203, 213, 218, 241, 345,
362, 365, 368, 396, 419, 438, 509, 620, 637,
639
World Wide Fund for Nature, 183
World Wildlife Fund, 156
Worldwatch Institute, 408
worms, 83-84, 89, 113, 122, 293, 306, 309, 340, 448,
450, 457, 461, 469, 550-551, 556, 567
Wyoming, 192, 271, 276, 382, 387, 411, 422
X
Xeriscaping, 277, 279, 282
Y
Yale University, 41, 132, 469, 501
Yard sales, 582
Yard wastes, 576, 583, 591
Yarrow, 363
yellow fever, 458
Yellow River, 2
Yeltsin, Boris, 431
Yew tree, 143
Younger Dryas event, 477-478, 503
Yucca Mountain, 428-429, 438
Yunus, Muhammad, 38, 248-249, 253
Z
Zambia, 161, 206-207, 225, 244, 275-276, 459
Zebra mussels, 103
Zimbabwe, 207, 213, 232, 449
zinc, 64, 216, 454, 465, 506, 577, 598
659

Zone of leaching, 288
Zones of stress, 59, 80
zoning, 13, 50, 452, 620, 625-626, 638
Zoning laws, 620, 625-626
zoning regulations, 13
Zoos, 143, 157
Zooxanthellae, 189, 198
660

