
Envisioning 
Holograms
Design Breakthrough 
Experiences for Mixed Reality
M. Pell
Foreword by Tony Parisi

Envisioning Holograms
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-2748-0	
	
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-2749-7
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017959386
Copyright © 2017 by Mike Pell 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole 
or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical 
way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, 
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter 
developed.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a 
trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the 
names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark 
owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, 
even if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to 
whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the 
date of publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any 
legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no 
warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
Managing Director: Welmoed Spahr
Editorial Director: Todd Green
Acquisitions Editor: Jonathan Gennick
Development Editor: Jonathan Gennick
Coordinating Editor: Jill Balzano
Copy Editor: Lori Lynn Cavanaugh
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global
Artist: M. Pell
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York,  
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 
348-4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress 
Media, LLC is a California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business 
Media Finance Inc (SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit  
http://www.apress.com/rights-permissions.
Apress titles may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional use. eBook 
versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our 
Print and eBook Bulk Sales web page at http://www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Printed on acid-free paper
M. Pell
Woodinville, Washington, USA

This one is for me.

v
Table of Contents
Part I: A New Frontier
1
Chapter 1: What’s So Special About Holograms?
3
Chapter 2: Why is Holographic Design So Challenging?
17
Chapter 3: How Can Envisioning Help?
31
Chapter 4: When Should I Use Envisioning?
41
Chapter 5: Where Do We Start?
51
Part II: Envisioning Holograms
63
Chapter 6: Shifting Your Mindset
65
Chapter 7: Choosing a Technique
87
Chapter 8: Breakthrough Examples
119
Part III: The Envisioning Process
137
Chapter 9: Flow
139
Chapter 10: Frame
151
About the Author
vii
Acknowledgments
ix
Foreword
xi
Introduction
xv

vi
Chapter 11: Prototype
171
Chapter 12: Test, Refine, Restart
189
Chapter 13: Invaluable Tools
201
Part IV: Holographic Designs
223
Chapter 14: HoloScenes
225
Chapter 15: Datascrapers
249
Chapter 16: HoloArt Gallery
275
Chapter 17: Design Insights
301
Closing Thoughts
311
Index
313
Table of Contents
Table of Contents

vii
About the Author
Bold, insightful, and uncompromising,  
M. Pell is recognized as a thought leader in the 
fields of Holographic Envisioning and Smart 
Information. 
Pell currently leads Design for The Microsoft 
Garage, the company’s outlet for experimental 
projects and curiosity-fueled explorations, 
worldwide.
As a lifelong Designer/Coder, he has consistently been on the leading 
edge of design and innovation over his thirty years in high-­technology.
Career highlights include creating the first stylized Font menu at the 
dawn of the Macintosh (MenuFonts), working with Pixar to pioneer 3D 
type generation with RenderMan (TextMan), co-inventing electronic 
document interchange (Adobe Acrobat), conceptualizing dynamic 3D 
information (InfoSpaces), developing a rapid design method (Fast Design), 
and being the inventor on over a dozen U.S. Patents.
Besides his writing, M. Pell is a dynamic presenter who delivers 
entertaining talks on a wide variety of design topics. His evolution from 
intrepid entrepreneur, to VC-backed startup veteran, to corporate man for 
Adobe and Microsoft has given him a unique perspective to draw on when 
discussing how to combine business, experience, and technology to create 
experience breakthroughs.
You can discover more about M. Pell and see his current work at 
futuristic.com.

ix
Acknowledgments
Who knew?
I thought writing and illustrating a book would be relatively easy. Writing 
was fun for me, it came pretty easy, and I had endless things to say. How 
hard could it be?
Turns out that writing a book for the first time is quite the endeavor. 
Holy crap. So, it’s no surprise that I could not have done this particular 
book without the help of a ton of people and decades of experience.
First and foremost, the team at Apress took my initial concept and 
helped me shape it into what you see before you. Jonathan Gennick led 
me through the book writing and editing process like the pro that he is, 
Jill Balzano found innovative ways to accommodate my experiments, and 
Welmoed Spahr had the vision to expand the publisher’s view of itself. 
Many thanks for your support and hard work.
Next, there’s no question I continue to learn and grow every single 
day of my life because of my amazing team in The Microsoft Garage 
around the world. You all bring out the best in me and provide the right 
environment to do epic work. Thank you for crushing it every day.
And finally, for the hundreds of people who have inspired me over a 
lifetime of adventures (and expect to see your name listed here), you know 
who you are, and already know how much I appreciate you. Thank you.
Until next time,
M. Pell

xi
Foreword
A Postcard from the Bleeding Edge
In the summer of 1977, I was one of millions of American nerd boys who 
flocked to see Star Wars: Episode IV – A New Hope. Of its many iconic 
scenes, one that really stuck with me was the scene where Princess Leia 
delivered Obi-Wan Kenobi a message of vital importance to the resistance – 
via a tabletop video hologram. Though George Lucas was telling a story 
that happened long ago and far, far away to other people, he was really 
envisioning our future. And as it turned out, it wouldn’t take that long to 
become a reality.
Looking back, I think that scene from Star Wars is in no small way 
responsible for drawing me to immersive computer interfaces. I eventually 
became a professional software programmer, working on random boring 
stuff for a few years, but at every job I would find excuses to work on 3D 
graphics. 3D charts rendered to inkjet printers. Real-time wireframe 
models to visualize data on workstation computers. Nothing fancy back 
then; the tech to make the really cool stuff wouldn’t land on laptops for 
another decade, and mobile phones for another decade after that. All 
this 3D tinkering eventually led me to an absurdly ambitious project 
to build the Metaverse: virtual people in 3D-rendered environments, 
communicating in real time, transcending time and space. That project, 
which came to be known as the Virtual Reality Markup Language, or 
VRML, was ultimately too early by twenty years.
It was back then that I met Mike Pell. Since I’ve known him, Mike 
has been on a quest to create software designs that put people at the 
center. Mike was early with 3D as well, working through a series of startup 

xii
companies exploring how far he could push the boundaries of human-
computer interface. These days, years might go by between our face to face 
encounters, but Mike is the kind of guy where when you do see each other 
again, you pick up right where you left off. Our most recent reunion came 
about a year ago, with Mike firmly ensconced at Microsoft and me with 
a new job at Unity Technologies. Two old soldiers, with gray hair but the 
same sparkle in our eyes, and the same mission: to make computers work 
for us.
Forty years have gone by since the premiere of Star Wars, and 
computers have come a long way. We appear to be at the cusp of a next 
great wave of breakthroughs, including mixed reality, voice recognition, 
artificial intelligence, and the Internet of Things. Combined with genetic 
engineering and advances in materials science, the possibilities are 
magical and limitless, and without a doubt will shape the next several 
decades of human endeavor.
3D interface is no longer a theoretical possibility; it’s the new reality. 
And with all this new potential comes the need for a new approach to 
design. To create mixed reality applications, the software designer must 
transform, becoming parts and alternately architect, interior designer, 
information designer, storyteller, filmmaker, game designer, and social 
engineer. But most importantly, we need to learn to envision.
Can you envision what a 3D Wikipedia will be like? How 3D maps, with 
elevation and physical features, operate when displayed as holograms on 
your tabletop? Speaking with 3D video holograms of your loved ones in 
some future version of FaceTime? Or a 3D PowerPoint, with persuasive 
presentation graphics rendered all around you?
You can? That’s great! But sorry; pretty much anybody can do that. Now, 
really challenge yourself: for any of these scenarios, imagine where and 
when they are used, by whom, and for exactly what. Go even further: how 
Foreword
Foreword

xiii
will these experiences not just be cool, more facile and more intuitive, but 
really change our lives? I don’t think that, a decade ago, most of us imagined 
the extent to which a phone-turned-computer would upend the world the 
way it has. I think we could have predicted Yelp. Maybe even Tinder. But 
Uber? AirBnB? Snapchat?
What are the holographic analogs to those wildly disruptive, life-
changing applications? And how will we make them? That’s what this book 
is all about. It defines the conceptual framework, and shows the processes, 
techniques, and production tools to make them real. A lot of the material 
in here isn’t really specific to designing for holographic interfaces; it’s 
useful for many other endeavors. But to design for holograms, you’ll need 
all these and more.
Someday they may teach courses based on this book. I envision a 
future — probably after I have shuffled off this mortal coil — where the 
information in this book has become part of a canon on how to design and 
build the interfaces that save the planet, monitor and control automation, 
take us into outer space, and store and present the world’s information. 
Holograms will, without a doubt, be an integral part of that future 
civilization, in many more ways that George Lucas ever dreamed of.
The information in this book can make magicians of us all.
Envision that.
Tony Parisi
San Francisco, California
Foreword
Foreword

xv
Introduction
“Reality is what you want it to be.” – M. Pell
One thing you notice right away when talking with people in the high-­tech 
industry – they are very particular about terminology.
Complete strangers will correct you immediately, with disdain, if you 
use a term they care about incorrectly. Call it a geek power trip, lack of 
social graces, I don’t know. Whatever the reason, it’s uncomfortable to be 
called out for using a term incorrectly. That said, there’s often sufficient 
grey area in what these terms refer to that we’re often redefining things 
to fit our perspective. At the end of the day, it’s just people splitting hairs 
with semantics to make their position known. Which leads me to make a 
terminology assertion here before you even start reading this book.
What is Mixed Reality?
Because of the rapid pace of innovation and almost daily product 
introductions, the definition of “mixed reality” will continue to shift and 
evolve until it’s almost inconsequential. We’ll know it when we experience 
it, and it will most certainly be part of a much larger continuum of next 
generation computing interactions.
For the purposes of this book, I will define “mixed reality” in this way.
Mixed reality is the blending of digital content seamlessly into the 
physical world which appears realistic or natural.

xvi
These digital “holograms” appear integrated within our physical 
spaces and react to several environmental factors in addition to human 
interaction. Today, experiencing mixed reality is achieved by using a 
device or special optics. Tomorrow, we may not be able to separate our 
notion of normal from mixed reality.
Where mixed reality lands on the reality continuum
Mixed reality exists on a continuum that many people have defined as 
having physical reality on the far left and completely digital environments 
on the far right. My take on where mixed reality exists on this line is close 
to where Microsoft currently positions it and defines the other stops on the 
line.
Also for the purposes of this book, I will define PR, AR, MR, and VR in 
these ways…
Introduction
Introduction

xvii
Physical Reality
(PR) is what we are used to and experience every day. It’s what most 
people consider the “real world.” Digital content is generally contained 
within devices and behind glass screens.
Augmented Reality
(AR) is layering digital content over (and recently within) the physical 
world. There’s less difference between AR and mixed reality than there 
used to be. The key differentiator still seems to be the notion that AR 
content overlays the real world, rather than integrate deeply within. Again, 
that’s dissolving quickly through regular advancements.
Mixed Reality
(MR) blends holograms (digital actors) seamlessly into the physical 
world in a way that appears natural. The key aspect of mixed reality is the 
ability to stay grounded to the real world, as opposed to being completely 
immersed in a digital space. Currently, special devices and optics are used 
to experience MR.
Virtual Reality
(VR) transports you to a completely digital space where you are immersed 
within an experience. The immersion effect is amplified by having no 
sights or sounds from your current physical space. VR requires headsets, 
motion controllers, and headphones to experience the immersion.
Hope that makes things crystal clear (more like mud, I’m sure). The 
fact is, this is all very messy, overlapping, and confusing at the moment 
due to the incredible pace of innovation and creativity. Judging by the 
Introduction
Introduction

xviii
speed of convergence, there will soon be a consolidation of technology we 
use for each stop into a single experience vehicle. We’ll no longer have to 
use separate apparatus for each stop, but rather rely on a single, elegant 
solution that scales all the way from PR to AR to MR to VR, seamlessly, 
on demand, in a socially acceptable way. On the way to that eventuality, 
we’ll coin and a new term that captures the essence of combining all of the 
current stops along the reality continuum.
In the meantime, let’s use mixed reality to refer to the most exciting 
design space to explore.
What We’ll Cover
If you wanted to know more about designing captivating holograms for 
mixed reality experiences, you came to the right place. Let’s jump right in…
By sharing what I have learned through experimenting with mixed 
reality, my hope is you can move your own ideas in this space forward. For 
me, holographic design all starts with a process called envisioning – the 
act of visualizing what could be. By rapidly depicting a desired experience 
and experimenting with real-world interactions, you can quickly turn an 
initial vision into a tangible example a of truly remarkable mixed reality 
experience.
This book, Envisioning Holograms, introduces a mental framework and 
design process to conceptualize and create holographic experiences that 
have impact, are memorable, and will delight those taking part in them.
•	
Part 1 – Breaks down why mixed reality is a challenging 
design space, even for experts
•	
Part 2 – Dives into the fresh thinking needed for 
holographic design
Introduction
Introduction

xix
•	
Part 3 – Introduces easy-to-master envisioning 
techniques to bring your ideas to life
•	
Part 4 – Takes you through holographic examples and 
design insights
We stay focused on designing compelling holographic experiences, so 
it’s not a general treatment of the space or a step-by-step recipe book for 
coding up your ideas for holographic experiences. This is a book about 
design.
Who This Book Is For
This book is designed to help people in three different situations.
•	
Designers who are new to mixed reality and want to 
quickly learn best practices
•	
Developers who need to do their own design work for 
mixed reality
•	
Storytellers who want to explore this exciting new 
medium for their narratives
Primarily aimed at those designing for Microsoft HoloLens and the 
Windows Mixed Reality platform, the techniques in the book are equally 
applicable to those targeting or working with augmented reality vehicles 
such as Apple ARKit, and the Google ARCore platforms.
Introduction
Introduction

xx
What You Will Learn
We’ll cover the design thinking and mindshift needed to master 
envisioning for this new realm.
This book will help you to:
•	
Understand what makes mixed reality a challenging 
design space
•	
See how envisioning quickly and persuasively brings 
ideas to life
•	
Explore several innovative rapid envisioning 
techniques
•	
Identify the key elements of your own holographic 
experience
•	
Design an engaging holographic experience start to 
finish
Not Covered Here
Holograms are part of very large shift in the computing landscape which 
encompasses everything from augmented reality to mixed reality to 
virtual reality. This book is focused on designing compelling holographic 
experiences, so it’s not a general treatment of the space.
•	
Coding – this is not a programming book, so no mixed 
reality coding examples
•	
Hardware – we’ll go through enough to set context, but 
hardware is not the focus
Introduction
Introduction

xxi
•	
Augmented Reality – is touched on, but this is not an 
in-depth discussion
•	
Virtual Reality – is discussed, but again is not the focus 
of this book
And finally, thank you for picking up this book. Can’t wait to get 
started on this journey into mixed reality design with you. Regardless of 
your current role, I think you’ll get something out of this read that can be 
applied to several areas of your work where quickly communicating your 
vision for how things could be is key.
Envision the possibilities.
M. Pell
Seattle, Washington
Introduction
Introduction

A New Frontier
PART I

3
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_1
CHAPTER 1
What’s So Special 
About Holograms?
People are inherently dreamers.
We love to imagine what could be. It’s part of who we are. And as natural 
storytellers, we feel compelled to share our thoughts with other people. 
Those aspirational dreams have long been communicated through 
gestures, drawings, conversations, books, films, games, and more recently 
as digital experiences. Thanks to breakthrough technologies, our dreams 
have finally escaped from behind the screen. They take the form of ultra-­
realistic digital additions to our physical world, vying for our attention, 
wanting to be shared.
Our dreams are now holograms.
Modern Magic
Holograms are digital representations of literally anything we can imagine 
blended into our physical spaces. They are unlike any other digital 
construct that we have ever created for people to interact with in the 
modern age, in large part because of their fantastical nature. Holograms 
defy logic. We innately know they aren’t real, but still, we are surprised how 

4
convincingly they blend into the real world. Just like a master magician’s 
finale, holograms hold us absolutely spellbound and believing they’re real. 
 
“Fragments” illustrates just how well holograms can blend into 
our surroundings (source: Microsoft)
People often refer to the feeling of interacting with holograms as 
magical. In large part, that’s because they manage to suspend our disbelief 
just well enough for us to let go and be very present in the moment. We are 
transported. Transfixed. And even though it’s not an entirely immersive 
transportation like with virtual reality, it is enough to evoke that childlike 
wonder we too often forget we’re capable of.
The interesting part of this phenomenon is we know full well 
holograms are not real – just as most audience members realize the 
magician on stage has just tricked them through sleight of hand or 
misdirection. Yet momentarily, we are all fooled into believing an amazing 
feat has been accomplished right in front of our eyes.
Holograms are the embodiment of that grand illusion and willing belief 
in magic. And just like a magician’s best trick, they leave us wanting more.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

5
Profound Impact
Saying that holograms are completely mind blowing may not actually do 
them justice. Seeing and interacting with a hologram for the first time is 
truly memorable. For some, it is even profound. Holograms excite the 
mind with blinding speed. We see a universe of possibilities and new 
realities all in an instant. Everything suddenly seems possible. Nothing 
is out of bounds. We immediately recognize we’re right on the edge of 
something truly transformative for us as dreamers and storytellers. And in 
that way, it’s a spiritual awakening of sorts – a realization of how incredibly 
clever humans are and what we’re capable of. 
This is a bit hard to do, but I’ll try to illustrate that first time feeling.  
See if you can imagine a cute dolphin appearing out of thin air right in 
front of you, squeaking a greeting, then tearing off to swim tight circles 
through the air around you so fast your head spins. Suddenly it stops, 
winks at you, squeaks a goodbye and disappears as quickly as it came. Did 
that work? Great. But, that’s nothing like what interacting with a hologram 
feels like. Sorry. No one can really describe it. It’s familiar and believable, 
exciting and fun, yet completely surreal. So, get out there and try it for 
yourself!
One thing you’ll probably notice about holograms is they are 
fundamentally a contradiction. Clearly digital, but uncannily real at the 
same time; life sized, yet resizable. Responsive, but not alive. Within reach, 
but not touchable. They are right there, but elusive. Holograms are like 
unicorns in that way. This paradox is precisely why they have such an 
impact on people.
Chapter 1  What’s So Special About Holograms?

6
 
Real enough to touch? Medical students learn anatomy 
holographically (source: Microsoft)
Not restricted to being just animated characters or everyday objects, 
holograms can take just about any shape and make any sound. They can 
be collections of abstract shapes and colors that react to music, or appear 
as incredibly realistic books, or tower over us like giant buildings. Their 
range is astounding.
Some holograms are even capable of warping space. You can create  
the appearance of entirely new spaces within existing physical ones.  
A breath-­taking special effect used within holographic experiences is to 
punch out holes in floors or walls that seem to reveal entirely new worlds 
within. It is startlingly realistic and convincing. So much, you may not want 
to go too close.
The impact of holograms being so immensely flexible is that we can 
now express our dreams and aspirations in significantly new ways, some of 
which can’t even be imagined right now. They hold that much potential for 
true resonance.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

7
Emotional Response
Another fascinating aspect of holograms is they cannot help but elicit 
an emotional response in people. They appear to co-exist in our space 
and our minds simultaneously, which triggers an unexpectedly personal 
connection. It’s as if we are hardwired to be fascinated and drawn in by 
their charms. This is a true experience goldmine if you are a Designer or 
Storyteller. 
The most common advice given to creators of experiences is to make 
an emotional connection with the person engaged in the activity. We 
strive to leave people with a positive impression from the humanistic side. 
It’s considered the mark of a truly successful design effort. Holographic 
computing delivers that without even trying.
 
A sense of wonder is a common reaction to seeing holograms
Given the kind of emotional reaction holograms evoke, you’d think 
trying to understand why people are so drawn to holographic experiences 
would be a key consideration for any new project. Sadly, that’s often 
Chapter 1  What’s So Special About Holograms?

8
not the case. It’s so natural to tackle projects from the technological 
viewpoint first, we often rush headlong into these new endeavors with little 
consideration for the human side of the equation.
That said, we can easily avoid taking such a technologically heavy view 
of holographic computing by consciously putting people first in our design 
work. That doesn’t mean figuring out how to make the experience as 
efficient or fun as possible, or creating a cardboard cutout of the fictional 
customer. It does mean deeply understanding the entire holographic 
experience from another person’s perspective and context. What’s their 
emotional state? Is this so different from normal that it unintentionally 
causes anxiety or stress? How can we reinforce the fun aspects?
Digging into these questions with real people is just as important as 
understanding the mind-bending tech being used for holograms. Getting a 
solid foundation to make interaction decisions on will result in a huge leap 
forward from the experience design perspective.
Manageable Immersion
Unlike a virtual reality (VR) experience that completely immerses you in 
an encompassing digital world, mixed reality (MR) keeps you anchored 
to the real world by blending holograms in with the physical objects you 
naturally see around you. While VR acts as a transport mechanism to take 
us into self-contained worlds, mixed reality is an augmentation of the real 
spaces we reside in. It turns out that makes a tremendous difference in 
how someone will react to the immersion. 
Many people report being motion sick or disoriented from VR 
experiences, due in part to a fairly common condition where our brains 
can’t properly process the inputs of moving within an enclosing world 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

9
that is somehow mismatched with our bodies in the real world. Better 
techniques and newer technology are reducing the occurrences of VR 
sickness, but it’s more the nature of the complete immersion that triggers it.
Mixed reality doesn’t have as much of that discord since the person’s 
physical space is always visible and in sync with your senses. That natural 
connection to the real world keeps participants from getting sick as often, 
or often at all. Being anchored to the real world makes mixed reality much 
easier to stomach for many people (so to speak). It also allows you to see 
the people who may be watching you interacting with holograms, which 
alleviates to a degree the awkwardness and self-conscious feeling of being 
watched while fully immersed in VR.
 
Your physical environment is still visible when using mixed reality 
(source: Microsoft)
Chapter 1  What’s So Special About Holograms?

10
This more manageable type of immersion is why mixed reality is 
expected to be the dominant type of computing experience in the future. 
It remains to be seen if both approaches evolve to become more like each 
other over time, blurring the lines between complete versus manageable 
immersion.
Breakthrough Technology
You can count on one hand the number of truly breakthrough computing 
platforms that have come along in the last few decades — Desktop, Web, 
Mobile, Cloud. Each disrupted the status quo and set us on a new path into 
the future. Holographic is now without question one of those computing 
breakthroughs – and perhaps the most challenging platform for Designers 
and Developers to take full advantage of. We have once again leapt ahead 
into the future. 
Holograms are currently only visible with the aid of ultra-high 
technology apparatus. Today, those are somewhat bulky and a bit 
heavy, but by the time you read this, who knows how miniaturized and 
lightweight they have become. Our sci-fi movies predict we’ll eventually 
be able to project holograms anywhere, or use optical lenses and implants 
to enable innocuous continual use. Perhaps a ways off, those visions are 
the roadmap for innovation in this space that all started with the following 
examples of breakthrough holographic technology.
Microsoft HoloLens
At the time of its introduction in 2015, Microsoft HoloLens represented 
the absolute apex of holographic computing technology – the ability to 
see lifelike 3D holograms with an untethered headset. Resembling a pair 
of high-tech ski goggles, the first holographic computing device ran on 
a custom Holographic Processing Unit (HPU) chipset, included Wi-Fi 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

11
connectivity, built-in spatial sound, and rechargeable battery. A true 
technological marvel, the Microsoft HoloLens was just the first step on the 
journey to a rich holographic computing universe.
 
Microsoft HoloLens, the world’s first self-contained holographic 
computer
Windows Mixed Reality
The world’s first holographic operating system was originally introduced 
by Microsoft in 2015 to power the Microsoft HoloLens. Originally known 
as Windows Holographic, this variant of the Windows operating system 
provided a mixed reality platform for developers to experiment with, and 
featured the ability to integrate existing Windows Universal Apps into the 
mixed reality environment. Subsequently, Microsoft enabled compatible 
headsets to use a Windows Mixed Reality environment within Windows 
itself, mainstreaming some of the user experience that Microsoft HoloLens 
previously introduced.
Chapter 1  What’s So Special About Holograms?

12
 
The Desktop becomes immersive through Windows Mixed Reality 
(source: Microsoft)
Magic Leap
Not much is publicly known about this highly secretive, Florida-based 
startup company as of mid-2017, but Magic Leap has successfully raised 
over $1 billion USD in venture capital to bring their vision of mixed reality 
computing to market.
Touted as being the most visually realistic solution in this space based 
on early prototypes of their light field technology, the Magic Leap product 
may indeed raise the experience bar and spur great competition in the 
mixed reality marketplace.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

13
Apple ARKit
The much-anticipated entry of Apple into the world of augmented  
reality (AR) happened in June 2017, when the company introduced  
Apple ARKit – a developer’s toolset and platform for creating digital objects 
that blend in with the real world. Viewed through the screen of an iPad or 
iPhone initially, the ARKit uses the device’s camera, sensors, and custom 
software to match and integrate these AR objects quite realistically.  
Sound familiar? It is. And it does confuse things a bit when we talk about 
what mixed reality is versus augmented reality.
Historically, holograms were easy to spot because they’re so  
striking – digital content rendered in the physical world. They could be 
projected and viewed with the naked eye or through devices with special 
optics such as headsets or glasses. Augmented reality content was almost 
always seen through the 2D glass screen of phones and tablets.
As evidenced by the rapid adoption of developers, Apple ARKit is 
clearly poised to become a mainstream medium for content that looks 
an awful lot like holograms through the glass screen. Add to that the 
new Google ARCore platform for Android devices, and it’s clear to see an 
explosion of these types of experiences coming very quickly to a phone, 
tablet, or even glasses in the very near future.
The important part to understand from a design and envisioning 
perspective is that these new augmented reality platforms enable you to 
create the kinds of real-world experiences we all want to have access to. 
The semantics of AR versus MR are not important here. The fact that we 
will see an explosion of the creation and use of digital objects blended into 
the physical world on an unprecedented global scale is a game changer.
Chapter 1  What’s So Special About Holograms?

14
Key Innovations
There are several areas where we have combined hardware and software 
in unique ways to help pave the way for widespread use and adoption of 
holograms. Individually, each of these areas represent a significant step 
forward in how well our devices and interfaces work, but having all of 
these advancements combined into the same device has created a giant 
leap forward in capability and experience. 
Optics
The vast majority of time spent with holograms is indeed looking at 
them, so attaining a level of photorealism and believability is paramount. 
Through a remarkable process of projecting light into your line of sight in 
real-time, advanced hardware and software render holograms in such a 
way that our eyes treat them the same as any object we see normally. It’s 
already astonishing, and getting better quickly. We can project from the 
steady increase in resolution and refresh rates of televisions and electronic 
screens there will eventually be digital imagery that is indistinguishable 
from reality. 
Sensors and cameras
A hologram’s natural environment is the real-world space that we inhabit, 
not the confines of a flat screen. That means the devices and operating 
systems needed to create and power holograms require collections of 
sensors and sophisticated software to scan physical spaces in real time 
to orient the holograms properly. Optical sensors, an accelerometer, a 
gyroscope, and a magnetometer all contribute key pieces of environmental 
data to be processed by the headset or glasses. Understanding the space 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

15
around the person utilizing holographic computing is critically important 
to the success of the immersion and ability to perform actions as expected 
in the real world. 
Sound
This aspect of holographic computing is not touted nearly enough. As 
any fan of IMAX movies or surround sound theaters can tell you, spatially 
correct sound is an important cue in understanding your environment 
and making action believable. Holographic devices can sample the world 
around the participant with sensitive microphones and in turn render 
three-dimensional surround sound that simulates your current space 
accurately. This binaural sound capability deepens the immersion and 
believability of experiences immensely. 
Input
The means for controlling interaction is made possible by sensor arrays 
detecting movements, gestures, and voice commands that serve as the 
primary means of controlling the experience. Initially constrained to 
simple hand gestures and a limited set of verbal commands, interaction 
models for holographic computing is an area of rapid innovation. 
Handheld controllers and a variety of other external sensors and cameras 
are being used to augment voice and gesture. 
Limitless Possibilities
By now, it should be clear that holograms are only limited by our 
imaginations. They hold immense promise to deeply change the way we 
communicate and connect with each other.
Chapter 1  What’s So Special About Holograms?

16
It’s fun to think about all the new experiences and adventures that will 
be launched because of this transformational medium, which is still in its 
infancy. We cannot really begin to predict the actual impact holograms will 
have on social interactions, business, gaming, medicine, communication, 
entertainment, education, and science in the coming decades.
All we know for certain is that holographic computing is the new 
frontier we’ll all be exploring to bring our dreams to life.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

17
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_2
CHAPTER 2
Why is Holographic 
Design So 
Challenging?
We think holograms already exist.
They’re in our favorite movies, television shows, books, and videos. They 
have conversations with us, respond to our commands, and provide 
insightful data without us even asking. We interact with them as if they 
were flesh and bone, yet they retain that ephemeral quality. Holograms are 
an expected part of our future. And that’s precisely the problem.
Don’t tell anyone, but holograms aren’t real.
High Expectations
Given holograms are so prevalent throughout modern entertainment, 
we collectively hold a very high bar for what feels right when it comes to 
experiencing them in real life.

18
Movie magic has done an amazing job of portraying how these digital 
stars should react to people. Special effects have come so far there’s almost 
nothing we can’t imagine holograms doing for and with us on screen. 
Directors and writers can dream up the most amazing situations for their 
characters to utilize holograms without worrying about whether it can be 
created or not. There seems to be no limit to what clever technical wizards 
can pull off convincingly in service of compelling narratives.
The Iron Man movie series is a great place to start if you want to fast 
forward to see and hear what holographic experiences will eventually be 
like. Those films offer a glimpse of what fluid interaction and seamless 
integration of holograms looks like. They are simply just another tool 
used by Tony Stark (Iron Man) to accomplish his goals — not a special 
environment or mode he enters to get work done. As depicted in the films, 
holograms are a very welcome replacement for the ridiculous movie 
interfaces of the past. They work for us, not against us. And because of 
that injection of intelligence, we love what they represent — the bright and 
shining future.
Sci-fi movies use projection, voice control, and gestural interaction  
as the primary ways to interact with holograms. Guess what?  
We caught up.
The holograms of Iron Man appear in both ambient environments 
and integrated directly into equipment, such as a helmet’s heads-up-
display. Voice is often the primary input mechanism for Tony Stark, 
supported by articulated gestures for manipulating the holograms. 
Meticulously ­designed sound is also an important supporting element for 
the ­interaction sequences. Taken all together, there’s not much missing 
for what you’d want out of a next-gen computing interface (unless dealing 
with mechanical robots or androids is more your thing).
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

19
Now comes the hard part – translating all this convincing fiction 
into working software code that behaves as expected. As we turn our 
attention to bringing that amazing vision of holographic experiences to 
life via Windows Holographic, Microsoft HoloLens, or other mixed reality 
technologies, you quickly realize we’re still very much at the beginning of a 
long journey to discover how to make all this be as captivating as in film.
It’s harder than it seems, I assure you.
Paradigm Shift
Do you remember the first time you ever saw an IMAX movie with 3D 
glasses on?
I do. The IMAX movie Hubble 3D was so intensely beautiful, and so 
riveting, it literally brought tears to my eyes. The whole experience was 
so completely different than the normal way of seeing a film that I almost 
couldn’t pay attention to the movie itself. The spatial surround sound 
shook me to the core. I was mesmerized by the view of the Earth from 
space and the astronauts popping off the screen and appearing right in 
front of me – so close I could touch them. It was absolutely overwhelming. 
That amazing journey into space immediately changed my perception of 
what was possible as a storyteller.
Chapter 2  Why is Holographic Design So Challenging?

20
 
Astronauts float above the audience in Hubble 3D (source: IMAX)
Holographic computing is doing the same thing for us today as 
IMAX 3D did for moviegoers when it arrived in the 1980s. The IMAX 
3D technology redefined what a movie experience could be like for the 
audience. The integration of so many new elements together created a 
new standard, and raised expectations for impact, visual clarity, sonic 
landscapes, and proximity to the actors.
It completely changed things for movie makers, too.
And that is our biggest challenge in a nutshell – designing and 
developing holographic experiences is such a different paradigm than 
all the other forms of computing that have come before it, we don’t know 
what we don’t know. It’s almost like we’ve been transported to an alternate 
design universe where everything went from being flat to now fully 3D.  
All the foundational design elements are familiar, but the interaction 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

21
models are all new, inverted even. It requires a bunch of experimenting to 
learn what works. Very few people get this right the first time. Don’t get me 
wrong, it’s fun to explore this universe, but it’s difficult to find your footing.
The one thing we do know for certain is that paradigm shifts like this 
one provide great new opportunities along with challenges. Holographic 
computing is no different. It’s a clear blue sky full of new ideas and 
possibilities, and no place for old baggage and inappropriate models.
The key to designing for mixed reality is completely letting go of the past.
If you are thinking about porting an existing piece of software or 
content into the holographic world as a “flat app,” please don’t. Let’s not 
repeat ourselves inside mixed reality. Now is the time to leap ahead, not 
fall back on old approaches or drag the past into the future. The world of 
mixed reality is a new frontier that deserves your best thinking. Take the 
time to reimagine what it could be like. In fact, that’s exactly what this book 
is all about.
Our challenge is to push forward in appropriate new ways. It’s hard, 
but necessary.
New Skillset
Another challenge when moving into holographic design is the feeling of 
starting over and needing to learn a bunch of new skills and methods. As 
Designers, our first thought when working in a new design space is to leverage 
our past experiences to get a quick start. After all, our design thinking, 
process, and techniques have delivered successful outcomes more than once 
in the past. These are tried and true methods we’re talking about. Sound 
thinking, right? Most of the time it is, but it’s dead wrong for holographic.
Chapter 2  Why is Holographic Design So Challenging?

22
Designing holographic experiences requires its own skillset and 
techniques based on spatial thinking, natural inputs, and a bit of theater. 
Our standard way of solving problems for the web, mobile, or the cloud are 
not much use as we begin working with a medium so different, that’s still 
evolving, and certainly not uniform or predictable (just yet).
As we make the leap into fully immersive 3D spatial interaction, we 
should reconsider just about every aspect of our design thinking and 
development approach to better align with what’s needed here. Starting 
with a more human understanding of the person we’re designing for, and 
continuing all the way through the final execution of the tuned graphics 
and code, we should at least try to adopt the beginner’s mindset. We’re 
essentially starting fresh. And from that perspective, you might be better 
off as a young film student doing their first assignment than a software 
industry veteran who’s a bit set in their ways. Regardless, just open your 
mind and get ready to explore and learn every day.
It turns out that holograms need you to grow as a Designer.
A traditional designer’s skillset focuses on composition, typography, 
color, layout, and voice, which are not discarded here, but aren’t nearly as 
important as understanding your new holographic canvas (the physical 
space that you’re in right now, rather than the flat screen you are reading 
these words on). Consider how someone can place what you designed to 
be used on a tabletop up on the ceiling instead. How does that change your 
thinking?
Exactly. All bets are off. Mixed reality will stretch us to constantly adapt 
our design to the current context and rapidly changing conditions.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

23
In that regard, becoming fluent in holographic design is just 
like learning a new spoken language — it has its own unique flow, 
idiosyncrasies, and accents. You just cannot get around the need to 
practice every day in order to become fluent. The only problem with this 
analogy is that you can’t go out and buy a conversational book to learn 
how get in synch with your audience. That takes some time and real 
commitment to experimenting, but you’ll get there.
Spatial Thinking
In order to express yourself well with this new medium, you’ll need 
to get comfortable thinking and acting in a three-dimensional space. 
That doesn’t mean you need to immediately learn 3D modeling (that’s 
optional). It has more to do with embracing space as your canvas rather 
than flat rectangular screens. The world around you is now the stage for 
your ideas, not the confines of windows or cards. Consider all of the air 
and space that surrounds you “inbounds.” Content can be placed and 
worked with anywhere in the actual room you are in, or even behind walls 
and under floors. Anything is possible within the space we occupy, even 
sharing experiences with other people.
As you’d expect, thinking spatially rather than screen based is a major 
shift, and is certainly harder in practice than it sounds for many of us.
Almost everything before this point in the history of user experience 
design has been all about designing and controlling what’s behind 
the glass —windows, menus, icons, dialogs, and buttons. Now we find 
ourselves sharing physical space with these life-sized digital objects that 
can appear above, below, and behind you. That takes a colossal mental 
pivot to start designing completely outside the glass and into your physical 
world. It’s the realm of spatial thinking, proximity, placement, legibility, 
and physical fatigue rather than pixels and resolution breaks.
Chapter 2  Why is Holographic Design So Challenging?

24
 
The physical space all around us is our canvas for holograms 
(source: Microsoft)
Engaging in spatial design thinking raises all kinds of questions 
immediately – How does the size of the room and what’s in it affect your 
experience? Does physical proximity and positioning mess with your 
intended interaction model? Can people resize your objects to be bigger 
than the space you’re in? Why do people get to put things where they 
want?
There are tons of questions and few ready answers.
Natural Input
Because this is a relatively new design field, very few of us have mastered 
using the room itself as the interface and our whole bodies as the input 
mechanism. Yet, this type of natural input model utilizing our voice and 
whole body for interaction is foundational for holographic computing.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

25
The closest we may have come to using this kind of natural input 
model in the past was with the Kinect for Xbox. When it was first 
introduced by Microsoft in 2010, the ultra-high tech Kinect sensor array 
brought full body interaction and voice commands to the Xbox console 
gaming experience without the need for extra controllers. The marketing 
at the time cleverly proclaimed “You are the controller,” and it was never 
more true. Kinect-based games asked players to jump, wave, turn, and 
use their hands instead of using the Xbox controller. The Kinect sensor 
would detect your body movements in real-time, and as a bonus you could 
finally speak naturally to your console and command it to do things. It was 
awesome. And it felt completely new.
 
Kinect for Xbox introduced voice and body gestures as  
primary inputs
Yet, despite huge initial sales of the unit, brilliant technology, and 
engaging gameplay, there’s little new activity around Kinect games today.  
It serves as a good example of how challenging it is to land a new 
Chapter 2  Why is Holographic Design So Challenging?

26
interaction model successfully (as is the case with holographic computing). 
The difficulty of designing for that kind of full body input and interaction 
model, plus the physical space required to play the games themselves 
certainly contributed to a falloff in interest. With that said, Kinect was a 
huge technological milestone on the journey to holograms. It clearly paved 
the way for the mind-bendingly complex sensor, microphone, and camera 
technology packages needed to power holographic computing. And it 
introduced the general public to the idea of natural input and voice for 
controlling computing or mobile experiences before Siri, Alexa, or Cortana 
made their appearances as our voice-powered digital assistants.
Natural input still remains a challenge to do well.
Device Required
There’s a great deal of design and conceptualization work you can 
accomplish with just your imagination, but at some point there’s no getting 
around the fact that you’ll need to have an actual holographic device to 
create breakthrough experiences.
Holograms are too unique to be simulated accurately in software only. 
There’s a feel you only get when seeing them with your own eyes and it’s 
nothing like being inside the actual headset or a projection environment to 
sense what is happening firsthand. Today’s software emulators are great at 
getting us close, but they’re not accurate enough when it comes to nailing 
the scale, positioning, lighting, and presence relative to ourselves in the 
real world.
Any code that’s written for an emulator first is almost always tweaked 
for real world use in the device. The holograms appear too close or far 
away, aren’t quite lit properly, or aren’t blending in as expected.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

27
This device requirement should not be viewed as a deterrent to proceed 
with your ideas, just note it as a challenge to overcome at the proper time.
Limited Data
Our industry craves usage data to help make better decisions. The more 
data the better. But, let’s be honest here and point out that unlike mobile, 
there are not currently billions of holographic computing devices out there 
in the world generating petabytes of usage data each day. We know the 
number of existing units will continue to grow each year as many major 
tech companies have placed huge bets on this space developing as the 
future of computing, but there aren’t tons of data points out there to help 
us learn why some approaches work and others don’t.
Data won’t save us this time. We need to learn as we go.
At this phase of the journey, you need to be comfortable going with 
your gut instead of wasting time searching for data before making a 
decision. Form your hypothesis based on experience, then run some 
experiments to see how real people react to the approach. Adjust as you 
learn more. Don’t get me wrong here. We should always try to instrument 
our apps and services to learn what we can from the real-time telemetry 
and usage data. Just be aware that trying to base your decisions on a body 
of previous data is not going to work out in many cases.
Our best data will come from working closely with people to understand 
what works, or doesn’t from their perspective, not from usage logs.
Chapter 2  Why is Holographic Design So Challenging?

28
Real People
Unlike many other design spaces where you start from previous examples, 
telemetry data, or marketing personas to understand who you are 
designing for, mixed reality needs you to develop a true empathy for the 
people at the heart of your new experience. Real people’s emotions are the 
design center of gravity here, not the faceless “customer” cardboard cutout 
that agile teams obsess over as their target. There’s no amount of usage 
data or neatly organized focus group responses that will substitute for 
seeing a real person’s spontaneous reaction for yourself.
 
No amount of usage data beats seeing real people’s reactions to 
your designs up close
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

29
Holographic is truly personal computing.
The intimate feel of holographic experiences is partially due to the 
device sitting on your face, but more so from the digital artifacts sitting 
dead center in your field of view. Your brain is working overtime figuring 
out if these holograms are real and a threat. It’s kind of spooky. And that’s 
a game changer from an experienced design perspective. Not many of us 
believe that Apple’s Siri is a real person (yet), but these holograms that you 
see and interact with evoke emotional responses in a way we have rarely 
seen outside of “scare” virtual reality or immersive hardcore gaming. Pure 
emotion is a powerful thing to tap into. Mixed reality always has emotion 
turned on, ready to tap into.
The challenge then, and one of the key things to understand about 
moving into this realm, is that you have to (as the great golf philosopher 
Chevy Chase once said) “be the ball.” Put yourself right into the shoes of 
the person at the center of all this as often as you possibly can, through 
whatever means you can manage. It is the person using your ideas that 
matters, not the ideas themselves.
Holograms are nothing without people bringing them to life.
Envisioning
By themselves, none of the design challenges mentioned in this chapter 
are stopping us from figuring out what that next breakthrough holographic 
experience is. Combined, they are formidable but merely temporary 
obstacles to overcome by using a design technique called “envisioning,” 
which we’ll cover next.
Chapter 2  Why is Holographic Design So Challenging?

31
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_3
CHAPTER 3
How Can  
Envisioning Help?
Show me, don’t tell me.
Coming up with great ideas is relatively easy – gather a set of passionate 
people, set a goal, and before you know it you’ve got a whiteboard full 
of brilliance. You could probably rattle off several great ideas from just 
that one session. But, we all know bringing those amazing ideas to life is 
a completely different story. It’s incredibly hard work and always takes 
longer than anyone expects. There are so many aspects to define and 
details to figure out. How will it work? Look? Feel? Behave? Cost? How do 
you make it? The questions are endless.
As daunting as it is to answer all those questions up front, there is 
one aspect of early ideation that’s even harder to figure out – how do you 
motivate people to actually care about an idea?
Turns out, that’s precisely what envisioning is for.

32
Envisioning helps people understand the potential of a new space 
by using whatever means works best to depict how the experience 
would feel.
Creating an emotional connection with a new idea matters more than 
what tech ends up being used or how the business model works. People 
need to feel something to act upon it.
The envisioning design methodology helps people transfer ideas from 
their mind’s eye to a tangible form others can see and experience. It makes 
your ideas and dreams real enough to show someone else in a convincing 
fashion, just as you do in other visual mediums. When done well, it exudes 
the feeling you’re after.
Envisioning can be done with words, pictures, actions, storytelling, 
animation, or any other way of communicating that’s capable of conveying 
emotion and feeling. It’s not necessary for these pieces to be executed 
perfectly in your medium of choice, but they do need to be impactful 
enough to make an impression, or even better cause a strong reaction – 
good or bad. Even pointed commentary and questions are a good sign.
Do people get it? Does it make sense? Is it plausible? Are they asking 
for it to exist now?
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

33
 
Realistic sketches help people envision holograms acting out 
scenes from an eBook
In keeping with the goal of evoking a response, the shape envisioning 
takes and the method employed to accomplish it is nowhere near as 
important as the actual outcome it drives. The work we create to get our 
ideas across should be considered outlines, not finished pieces. Rough 
sketches are just as valuable as highly refined animations. No extra points 
are awarded for perfect form here. In fact, envisioning is often at its best 
when it appears more like a rough sketch than a polished cinematic 
masterpiece.
Just like prototyping, our work here should be thought of as disposable, 
all in the service of getting our message across and moving ideas forward.
Interestingly enough, working in this fashion helps us in several 
counterintuitive ways, as described in the following sections.
Chapter 3  How Can Envisioning Help? 

34
Poses Questions
Great envisioning poses more questions than it answers. And that’s a  
good thing.
In general, our design work is meant to answer questions not raise 
more. Yet, the more believably something is depicted, the more we need 
to know how it works, usually in great detail. Our minds fire with dozens 
of questions all at once when confronted with something just out of the 
norm. What if this or that? How does it work exactly? Could you do this 
other thing, too? It’s the same effect as when we see a phenomenally  
well-­done motion picture. We are so absorbed in the narrative or the 
feeling it conjures that we temporarily suspend our disbelief just enough to 
see it as plausible.
The highest compliment a piece can receive is when someone 
argues emphatically that it can’t possibly work that way, citing a very 
specific reason. At that point, you have clearly captured their attention. It 
doesn’t matter whether they’re right or not – you have them engaged and 
challenging the vision.
In its simplest and most effective form, envisioning poses questions 
that help people recognize the potential for change and activates 
their curiosity.
You’ll also find that even seemingly noncontroversial pieces can 
generate questions about motive and message. Just as some of our greatest 
works of art serve as master provocateurs, so too can envisioned pieces. 
Use the envisioning process to help you kick off discussions about the 
vision, rationale, and even morals behind the pieces. Invite pointed 
questions through deliberate and purposeful choices in the work itself.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

35
Getting people to engage and debate about a picture of possible 
futures is a good sign you have the right number of challenging elements 
present.
Tests Assertions
Turning ideas into tangible pieces helps test all the assertions we make 
consciously (or not) during our conceptualization and execution phases.
When ideas and dreams are made real enough to be viewed and 
debated by others, there’s a natural tendency to poke at the depiction 
and question what it is trying to represent. Intentionally or not, our 
work asserts certain things to be true, often unconsciously. Identifying 
those assertions is important to us gaining a deeper understanding and 
agreement on our direction and rationale.
Assertions come in two forms that we should pay attention to, but for 
very different reasons.
Explicit assertions are conscious choices made during creation. 
The shape something takes, its implied behavior, spatial alignment, and 
movement are all examples of aspects that can be purposely asserted. We 
make those unambiguous choices and build upon them throughout the 
piece. Those intentional choices we made will automatically be accepted 
or rejected by the viewer, helping us gauge how close we’re getting to our 
intended focus. It’s an easy way to measure progress.
Other assertions that are explicit but not done intentionally prove 
more interesting. Those choices are made subconsciously based on our 
experience and shared understanding of the larger world around us, or 
the specific situation we’re depicting. These unintentional items often go 
into the work unnoticed precisely because they are so natural or expected 
Chapter 3  How Can Envisioning Help? 

36
for the creator. Identifying and discussing these unintentional assertions 
is a great way for the team to double check things aren’t being taken for 
granted or that we’ve assumed too much from our intended audience.
Conversely, implicit assertions exist in plain sight, but are invisible.
Implicit assertions rely upon the viewer understanding our intent, 
even if key aspects of the situation are unexpressed. If you see something 
that looks like a dog, you assume it’s probably going to act like a dog based 
on your experience, even though there are no visible rules to that effect. 
We all have a shared understanding of how things act, work, and react  
(or not). The problem comes when our expectations are disrupted or 
broken by new behavior.
For example, if a human-like hologram appears to not be touching the 
floor when it first appears, we can assume the creator purposely meant it 
to float free of gravity, like a ghost. Right? No? Oh, it was just a mistake in 
the drawing or bug in the code? Got it. Not really a ghost, just a hologram 
misaligned with the environment. Easy mistake to make, but your 
audience would have mistakenly thought your hologram was intended to 
be a ghost. They implicitly realize floating objects are not bound by gravity 
like normal.
Identifying assertions in the things we envision helps us evaluate how 
well we’re communicating intent.
Understanding our implicit assertions is important as a Designer.  
It keeps us constantly thinking about unconscious bias and things we often 
take for granted about our work.
Envisioning can magnify our assertions early enough in the process 
that we have time to dig into them properly and decide how to proceed.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

37
Creates Artifacts
The process of designing anything leaves traces of the methods used and 
steps taken to arrive at a particular place. These traces are sometimes the 
smallest of things – a quick sketch, words jotted down on a scrap of paper, 
even a text message sent to ourselves as a reminder. They come in all 
shapes and sizes, and vary in their degree of fidelity. These early fragments 
of our thoughts are combined during the creation process into pieces that 
form an artifact. Those in turn act as a historical record of the journey.
Any Designer will tell you they love finding the early work of projects 
that have taken a more final form. Those early artifacts help remind us of 
our thinking at the time. Artifacts shed light on the synthesis of tangible 
ideas. And as we move through the project lifecycle, those artifacts become 
infused with our decisions rather than our random thoughts. Design 
decisions are important to recognize as milestones or pivot points along 
the way to realized plans.
 
Artifacts trace our path through the envisioning journey
Chapter 3  How Can Envisioning Help? 

38
The envisioning method results in many valuable artifacts that 
contribute to learning how to better do things for the next set of ideas. 
Those artifacts help us retain concrete records of our path to the future. 
They also give us a set of landmarks to understand our direction and 
evolving thought process.
Removes Constraints
Envisioning is used to illustrate potential paths forward, but those paths 
don’t have to be realistic or even possible in the near term. And that’s 
the beauty in this type of design work: it pushes us forward toward new 
possibilities. It’s meant to be both aspirational and inspirational.
When envisioning holograms in these early days of the platform, the 
Designer is freed from the constraints of existing paradigms to explore the 
optimal ways of doing things without being pulled back by convention. 
That’s huge. Rarely do we have new mediums to explore in this way. 
However, that does come with its own challenges.
A key difference between working with holograms and other types of 
computing platforms is the lack of precedents (except for sci-fi movies). 
We don’t readily know what’s possible or even plausible in this space. 
That makes it difficult for some people to embrace what you’re going for 
with your designs. They can’t tell if you don’t understand the capabilities 
of the platform or are just painting a vision of what could be. That’s a real 
issue sometimes, but can be worked through using hints in the pieces 
themselves.
By using persuasive visuals, we can hint at entirely new capabilities 
and illustrate underlying concepts. We don’t need to perfectly visualize 
and exhaustively define things upfront to successfully communicate these 
breakthrough holographic concepts — just the opposite in fact. Because 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

39
speed is the key to moving your early idea forward, doing a hand-drawn 
sketch or crafting a narrative about the feel of the experience you’re 
looking for is a great way to start making that connection with people, 
and opening their minds to the possibilities of an unconstrained creator’s 
palette. Hinting at capabilities in the envisioned piece is an invitation for 
discussion and debate.
The flood gates open when you find yourself designing unconstrained, 
so don’t slow down to consider if it’s plausible just yet. You’ll have many 
opportunities to refine and fill out the details of these initial explorations 
later. Keep exploring to capture more of those brilliant thoughts about 
where things could go.
Quickens Pace
Using envisioning early in the process to generate multiple directions and 
scenarios is a great way to set the pace for the rest of the project.
There’s no question a quickly scribbled vision of how your hologram 
interacts with people would not be as useful to your Developers as a digital 
motion study or a fully rigged 3D model. That said, with just a bit more 
effort than a quick doodle, you can effectively portray many aspects of 
what you are going for in a convincing manner that delivers a tangible, 
plausible, and inspiring image of what could be. Doing so will get your 
team locked in much sooner than a whiteboard sketch of a hand wavy 
interface, and avoids the long delay of creating high-quality studies or 
assets. If it looks real, it will be real in people’s minds. And that is where the 
real speed up comes from in the short term.
Making things real for your team enables them to accelerate quickly in 
their own roles.
Chapter 3  How Can Envisioning Help? 

40
Tells a Story
Marshalling support for innovative new ideas can sometimes be as easy 
as drawing the right picture or telling a compelling story. That’s the realm 
and role of envisioning. It brings our dreams to light in ways we couldn’t 
previously see or conceive of, and makes them real enough to inspire 
others to act.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

41
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_4
CHAPTER 4
When Should  
I Use Envisioning?
“Wow. That can’t really be done. Can it?”
As Designers, we know an essential part of our job is to constantly push 
past the boundaries of what is expected to illustrate how things could be. 
Its role in our methodology is to challenge conventional thinking in the 
pursuit of a more optimal way of doing things. Anyone can project along a 
linear path. It takes a special kind of talent to make a compelling argument 
for something that can’t easily be seen. And even more remarkable when it 
persuades. That’s no small feat.
Envisioning gives us a way to accomplish just that, particularly with 
holograms.
Not only does this method paint a vivid picture of future possibilities, 
it provides the perfect platform to pose hard questions, raise concerns, 
and push engineering to consider doing a lot more than initially expected. 
Done correctly, the holographic visions we create in the pursuit of 
that brighter future can be packed full of challenges to conventional 
thinking. We can design them to intentionally provoke discussion and 
debate without being overt or offensive. The future is a scary place to the 
complacent. Envisioned scenes give us a way to safely talk about things.

42
The real question for us as the conversation starts is when do we have 
the best chance of having these engaging exchanges with people?
We can only influence and deeply affect the teams and organizations 
we work with at particular times. Development cycles, school years, fiscal 
years, and the rhythm of the business dictate some natural times for these 
presentations and dialogues.
Envisioning Opportunities
The most effective times to utilize envisioning are spread evenly 
throughout the flow of our work. Each has its own advantage in terms 
of impact and timing. The common thread throughout these times is 
the need to pose questions and challenge assumptions. The outcome 
of doing that successfully is moving people off their positions in times 
of traditionally predictable behavior. Pushing ideas for holographic 
experiences forward in these situations is difficult, but entirely possible 
when you focus on key aspects and insights. 
 
Knowing when to use envisioning is key to its effectiveness
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

43
Each of the four situations outlined here have their own strengths 
and appropriateness for particular goals. They can certainly be used in 
combination, but be careful to identify why you are using each of them for 
your audience – whether that’s your team or people you are evaluating the 
ideas with.
Let’s go through each of the four envisioning approaches and 
situations, so you can see when they are most effective in the process.
1.  Early Exploration
INSIGHT TO LEVERAGE: Anything is possible at the beginning.
TIMING: Very early
LIMITS: Relatively unconstrained
You’ll find that people are most open to radical new ideas at the very 
beginning of cycles. There’s a feeling of optimism, excitement, and 
possibility that wasn’t present previously. The start of anything is a magical 
time for hopes and dreams. They are spoken out loud for the first time. It’s 
the perfect time to spring into action and legitimately capture those ideals. 
Articulated in compelling, impassioned pleas for something new, these 
explorations aren’t constrained by technology, schedule, or resources. 
They are in many cases the most pure expression of what the team wishes 
could be.
Holograms are exactly what you need them to be in this phase – malleable 
digital actors or surprisingly realistic objects of fascination. Anything is 
possible at the start, so use that to make your points. Tee up the most 
controversial issues to get them out into the open. This is your big chance, so 
don’t hold back. You’ll be glad you didn’t when finished.
Chapter 4  When Should I Use Envisioning? 

44
For example, I have been doing data visualization for quite some 
time. I find it extremely frustrating to not have access to highly fluid data 
exploration tools when initially working with a data set. More time is 
spent setting up the interface to display the data “just so” than looking for 
insights.
What if I could somehow bypass the cumbersome interface completely 
and just jump right into exploring the data itself? That’s a nice thought, 
but using traditional toolsets isn’t going to get us anywhere close to that. 
Conversely, by using envisioning techniques we can depict that possibility 
as realistically as needed to start a conversation. It’s still too rough to be 
taken as a definitive path toward the desired outcome, but it’s right there 
for anyone to ponder.
 
Envisioning lets us ask questions like “What if we could explore 
data by being inside it?”
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

45
Another aspect of doing early explorations for mixed reality is the need 
to research and understand how physical environments affect people. How 
do they interact with them currently? How do existing physical objects and 
places succeed or fail in a similarly functional design space? Observing 
people in today’s scenarios is a great start here. Digging into the endless 
volumes of architecture, space planning, and wayfinding books is another 
excellent source of background research to help get you up-to-speed if that 
isn’t your background.
And finally, keep in mind just how much flexibility you have in coming 
up with compelling scenarios and executions in this initial exploratory 
period. Use those for all they’re worth in this phase to show people just 
how far we can go. Try to push the boundaries of what’s expected by doing 
some explorations that are ridiculous, even by your own standards. Be 
bold. Be unpredictable. Be free.
Always remember that holograms are constrained only by your 
imagination.
2.  Vision Setting
INSIGHT TO LEVERAGE: We all want to shoot for the stars.
TIMING: Still early, right after initial explorations
LIMITS: Fairly constrained
Envisioning is generally considered “of the future” and can easily feel more 
inspirational than accurate. When used to push off in new directions of 
exploration (many of which are entirely aspirational) we don’t have to be 
completely realistic to the current capabilities of the platforms or tools that 
currently exist. 
Chapter 4  When Should I Use Envisioning? 

46
 
Showing the difficult, but plausible, aspects of a vision can  
really sell it
For example, in some of the aspirational vision work I’ve done there’s 
an underlying premise that anyone can see the holograms in open spaces 
because they have been publicly shared and the technology used to see 
them is prevalent and frequently used. None of that is true today, but that’s 
not the point. It illustrates a possible future we can all work toward, which 
makes this a shared vision. Holographic visions can help drive future 
behavior and investment.
Conversely, when setting the vision for a project (to inspire your 
team members and get everyone on the same page) it may be more 
advantageous to show your ideas more realistically, remaining true 
to existing capabilities and norms. This type of design is done to help 
people visualize something that has yet to be built, but makes it seem 
attainable without much issue. It’s meant as a blueprint of sorts rather 
than an aspirational suggestion. The real difference between this type of 
envisioning and a more fanciful treatment of the subject matter is that 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

47
people can recognize its realistic nature and can connect the dots on how 
it comes to be.
Combining both realistic and futuristic aspects of ideas is my favorite 
way to work in this medium, as you’ll see throughout my examples. 
You can combine established practices and capabilities with significant 
improvements to take your audience where you need the story to go. That 
could mean pushing on the technology aspects of projects and platforms, 
or to setting new ideas forth to explore interaction and engagement 
possibilities.
Envisioning is what you need it to be, realistic or fanciful.
3.  Challenging Norms
INSIGHT TO LEVERAGE: Being incremental gets us nowhere fast. 
TIMING: Midpoint of the cycle
LIMITS: Relatively unconstrained
One of the most effective uses of envisioning is taking people out of their 
comfort zone. There’s something really powerful about getting people to a 
place where they can imagine a different path forward. That doesn’t come 
easy, though. Whether illustrating a promising new direction or shaking 
up the status quo, the most difficult job envisioning faces is helping to 
challenge well-entrenched positions and norms.
For example, when it comes to interaction standards people have 
almost violent reactions to any suggestion there’s another method that’s 
just as familiar or comfortable. It’s scary how deeply people dig in to defend 
prevailing methods when there are so many alternatives to consider.  
I’m not advocating change just for change sake, but let’s take the 
Chapter 4  When Should I Use Envisioning? 

48
opportunity to understand what other ways of doing things offer. You never 
know. A promising experiment one day becomes a de facto standard the 
next. I mean really – did anyone set out to make the hamburger menu 
icon a web standard for mobile? No. It happened because someone 
experimented with it.
 
Why can’t we get better previews of conference sessions?  
And why not direct me there?
The best response to people dragging their dogmatic norms from the 
past into the holographic future is using envisioning and prototyping to 
illustrate the better, more authentic way forward. Holographic computing 
is wide open for innovation. We should do our best to take advantage of 
that rare opportunity whenever we can.
Don’t be different to be different. Be different to push us all ahead.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

49
4.  Leaping Ahead
INSIGHT TO LEVERAGE: True competitive advantage is not v.next. 
TIMING: towards the end of the cycle
LIMITS: Unconstrained
This is my favorite type of envisioning by far. It relies on disconnecting 
from present day to embrace the distant future, and poses that golden 
question “What if?” without worrying about current feasibility. Its most 
powerful aspect for the Designer is the fearless leap into the unknown. 
Removing the constraint of today’s limitations gives us an entirely new 
palette to work with. Why bother doing something that’s just incrementally 
better than its predecessor with all that freedom? That’s just ridiculous, 
right?
True competitive advantage is not found right next door. It can only be 
spotted from the future.
Leaping ahead through envisioning transports us to where we wish we 
could be. It has limitless possibilities to influence and shape our thinking 
about today’s challenges, much like science fiction has done throughout 
the last century. Producing imagery, animations, or working code that 
takes us further than anyone thought possible given the prevailing 
technology or approach. It is transformational in situations where people 
feel boxed in and held back. It reignites the hope found at the outset of 
projects but often extinguished as time moves on and reality sets in. This 
type of activity is incredibly valuable just from that standpoint alone – 
returning the spark to our imaginations and pushing us to boldly fast 
forward to what’s five or ten versions out.
Chapter 4  When Should I Use Envisioning? 

50
 
What would it really take to get real telepresence? It seems close, 
but just out of reach.
Leaping ahead through envisioning can illuminate a clear path to our 
most definitive competitive advantage. Exercises like envisioning help 
to crystalize why we set off on a given path in the first place. There are 
particular attributes in any product or service that hold the key to true 
differentiation and separation in the marketplace. Isolating and amplifying 
those through the visual magnification of envisioning is a great way to get 
people thinking about what it would take to get there.
Pushing Toward the Impossible
Entirely new approaches emerge as a result of the push toward the 
impossible, or at least the improbable. Fiction becomes fact (or at least 
plausible). Knowing when to use envisioning to persuade and influence is 
an important part of your journey to being an effective Designer.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

51
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_5
CHAPTER 5
Where Do We Start?
Follow the yellow brick road.
Given the general availability of devices and free toolsets for Windows 
Mixed Reality, now is a great time for anyone to jump right in and start 
experimenting with creating holographic experiences for mixed reality. 
Just one catch though – designing for mixed reality requires a completely 
different mindset, approach, language, and skillset than just about every 
other major computing shift that has come before it.
It’s not just about being a great Designer or Developer anymore. There 
are new rules at play. Design fundamentals aside, there are some unique 
aspects to master about designing for mixed reality that have little to do 
with your past work.
The most valuable skill you can master is to learn how to forget.
Every new generation of computing platforms requires a shift in how 
we practice our craft. Most have to do with learning new patterns of layout, 
typographic usage, and interaction models. Mixed reality breaks the mold 
by causing you to throw everything you know about previous platforms 
out the window and reconsider it all. Really. Not joking. But, that’s the fun 
of it – having to push ourselves into uncomfortable territory helps us grow 
as Designers. It’s a bit humbling to be that unsure of the “right” way to 

52
proceed due to the counterintuitive nature of this whole endeavor. It seems 
we should know how to do this kind of design without trying very hard, 
yet the things we try first out of habit fail miserably. This is not at all like its 
predecessors.
This new design space has more to do with how we interact with our 
physical world than with the digital world we’ve been building up over 
the last four decades. Holographic computing is all about leveraging our 
normal patterns of interacting with the real world as the primary interface. 
No longer do we map our intentions to well-defined interactions through 
a mouse and keyboard. We simply do what comes natural. That sounds 
deceptively simple, and it is. There are several deep aspects of this more 
natural interface we need to dig into.
Spatial awareness is chief among the new aspects we’ll be wrestling 
with. It’s amazing how unintuitive this one is at first. You’d think since we 
live and breathe all day every day in a three-dimensional world we’d have 
this one nailed. Not even. Stepping back and having to explain how you 
deal with the real world in 3D is much harder than just doing it. Trust me 
on this one. It’s exactly the same as when someone asks you to explain 
how you know to crop an image just right or pick the most efficient design 
pattern when coding something. Your accumulated experiences over years 
and years have blinded you to how we actually accomplish these things – 
you just know instinctively how to get them done without thinking too 
hard. It’s the same thing with spatial awareness. Learning how to embrace 
it is the key to interaction design for mixed reality.
The best way I have found to get better at spatial awareness design is 
to observe closely the world around you at every opportunity. How close 
or far are objects from you? Is there anything moving or making noise you 
don’t usually notice? Can you see everything clearly?
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

53
As you get deeper into spatial awareness and experimenting with 
mixed reality design and development, you’ll notice there are four distinct 
aspects of the design process that are quite different than anything you’ve 
done before:
•	
mindset – thoughts about this mixed reality space
•	
approach – actions taken when working on designs
•	
language – phrases and images we use to convey 
concepts
•	
skillset – abilities we use to execute our vision
 
These four aspects of mixed reality design differ greatly from  
previous platforms
Mindset
The best place to start when considering holographic design is trying to 
shift your own mindset to allow the ideas to flow freely and unconstrained 
by the past.
Chapter 5  Where Do We Start?

54
There is no question you need to think differently than you’re used 
to with Desktop, Web, Mobile, or Cloud models, but not for the obvious 
reason (i.e., 3D interaction). It’s the people part that needs deeper 
exploration. Our role in this computing model has completely changed.
No longer do people click buttons, pull down menus, scroll through 
windows, or drag icons around a screen to get things to happen. You do 
exactly what you do in the real world – manipulate objects with your hands 
and voice. Direct manipulation is no longer a complex set of interactions 
using double indirection that requires layers of translation. Want to see 
something better? Walk right up to it. Not in the right place? Pick it up and 
move it with your hand.
This inversion of the classic software interaction model means we 
need to focus on how people respond to their new environment and input 
model rather than the mechanics of a standard GUI interface. That aspect 
of holographic design is very similar to tackling the new conversational 
interface paradigm. Being completely voice based is a drastic departure 
for a visually oriented interface Designer. You can no longer rely on clever 
visuals to assist. Audio cues and spoken responses are your only feedback 
mechanisms. This seems deceptively simple at first, but nothing could be 
further from the reality of designing for voice input. It’s a tough mental 
shift to make and lock into.
You’ll find a similarly challenging mental switch when taking on 
holographic design. It requires imagination and empathy to put yourself 
inside other people’s thoughts, motivations, and expectations when they’re 
immersed in your scenarios. They are deeper into experiences than ever 
before. That’s a big responsibility. It takes reconciling the observations you 
make when mentally switching between thoughts of the participant, your 
role as an observer, and the qualities needed by holograms themselves to 
get this right.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

55
 
The mindset required for holographic design revolves around  
these three inputs
Our mindset for holographic experience design has to be grounded in 
how we act in our physical spaces. This is not an artificial layer to interact 
with. It becomes part of the world itself. Our goal is to inject new elements 
that cannot be found in reality to create true value for the people who trust 
us with their time and responsibilities. Someday, our mindset will dictate 
that holograms are integral to our experiences. In time, we’ll forget it didn’t 
exist in this way before.
Approach
If we look closely at how high-tech products and services are traditionally 
created, we can identify a repeatable process that has yielded decades of 
successful ventures. Start by identifying a painful problem, figure out how 
to help reduce the pain, cash the checks. Easy. The approach for this new 
paradigm isn’t quite so straightforward.
Chapter 5  Where Do We Start?

56
 
You are actually at the center of everything in mixed reality
Very few of us have mastered using the room itself as the interface and 
ourselves as the controller and user interface (with the exception of avid 
Xbox Kinect game players). Almost everything before this has been all 
about controlling what’s behind the glass — now we find ourselves sharing 
physical space with crazy digital objects. You need to mentally pivot to 
design completely outside the glass in favor of being completely integrated 
into your physical world.
Historically, the way to approach this type of design would be from 
the “user” perspective. That’s how we’ve always done things in experience 
design. Figure out how the person will want to do whatever it is we’re 
designing, then optimize all of the user interface layout and interactions 
around that experience. The interface and user are separate things. Simple 
enough.
Conversely, the best way we have found to approach this holographic 
design exercise is to put ourselves in the middle of the action – “be the ball.” 
We need to figure out what the hologram itself needs out of this exchange. 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

57
Weird, right? Why would we want to empower the thing we’d normally 
think was completely under our control and beholden to our commands? 
Great question.
This new approach is based on a very personal interface with the 
things that share our space. We need to connect with those things that we 
previously took for granted as merely objects. They were owned or mostly 
unimportant. Conversely, holograms are just as real as we want them to 
be. Therefore, we cannot assume they don’t have needs, expectations, 
and even feelings. That’s the big difference in the approach from previous 
generations of computing platforms to holographic.
Our new approach starts with trying to consider holograms as equals, 
regardless of whether they represent inanimate objects or living creatures. 
This is where empathy comes in. Something that is a non-living thing in 
the real world can very much be a vibrant and significant entity in the 
holographic world. Putting ourselves in the place of a hologram is a very 
different approach to working on interfaces. You’ll be surprised at how 
many innovative ideas you come up with by empowering and enabling the 
holographic actors in your scene to be more than what they appear to be 
visually. For example, things we consider simple tools can be humanized 
to feel like helpful friends or professional assistants instead of just objects 
to be picked up and used normally. They should not be expected going by 
initial appearance, but a pleasant surprise within the experience.
Language
To express yourself clearly in this new field, you’ll want to get comfortable 
thinking and acting in a three-dimensional space. There’s really no getting 
around that. You know this is true from your own experiences abroad. 
Practicing to speak a foreign language in the classroom or reciting phrases 
in your head as you listen to a language tutor on your smartphone is not 
Chapter 5  Where Do We Start?

58
at all like conversing with a native speaker in another country. That part of 
becoming fluent in 3D is just like learning a new spoken language — you 
learn by trying it out in the real world and making a few embarrassing 
gaffs along the way. Everybody has the same experience when trying to 
converse in a new language.
A great way to get comfortable with the language of mixed reality is 
to dive into using a 3D creation tool like Unity. Very popular with game 
and virtual reality developers, you’d be hard pressed to find a better 
introductory toolset. It’s a bit technical looking at first to someone who 
hasn’t coded or done any modeling, yet you’ll find it is quite approachable 
and easy to get results. The time you can spend getting a basic 
understanding of how people fly these tools will pay huge dividends in 
being able to discuss your thoughts in terms of a composed 3D scene using 
objects, planes, lights, materials, motion, and behaviors.
 
The Unity toolset is a great way to get started with creating  
3D experiences
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

59
The language of holograms is a unique dialect of 3D which has its own 
flow, idiosyncrasies, and accents. It has a specific vocabulary and way to 
describe interactions. We’ll talk about how holograms can be interacted 
with using gaze, gestures, and voice a bit later. For now, it’s good to know 
that a similar language comes from theater and film direction. Mastering 
how to describe the thoughts and actions of holograms can be thought of 
as a director filling in an actor on their motivation for a scene.
All this said, let’s be honest here and point out this language is still 
evolving. The obvious problem is that you can’t go out and purchase 
Conversational Mixed Reality from Amazon to learn how get in synch with 
your holograms or audience. Fluency in this new language comes over 
time as you jump in and practice.
Skillset
At this point, you’re thinking I’m going to say that learning how to model 
and animate 3D characters is the most valuable skill you can learn to bring 
your holographic ideas to life, right? 
Well, that’s a great guess. I can’t argue that having that production skill 
wouldn’t help things move along more quickly for any project. Modeling 
and animating sequences would be the most direct way to express your 
ideas about how holograms will interact with people. And it gets you closer 
to a final implementation.
But, modeling is really not the most important new skill to master for 
holographic design. Storytelling is.
If you haven’t needed to learn how to make an emotional connection 
through your verbal storytelling or visual storyboards I’d start there. Just as 
in filmmaking, being able to explain how the story captures the attention of 
Chapter 5  Where Do We Start?

60
the viewer is a foundational skill for anyone on the creative team. Making 
that emotional connection with the audience and explaining how it is 
achieved through story and action is a skill we can all use regardless of our 
role on the team. A great way to master this is by hand drawing storyboards 
that illustrate the scenes. It doesn’t have to be professional quality, the 
sketchier the better actually. The point is to convey the connection. That’s 
what it all revolves around with holographic design – how you engage the 
audience and capture their imagination.
 
The most important skills to develop for doing holographic design
Secondarily, learning how to quickly sketch in 3D is pretty useful. 
There are a number of ways to do this – paper drawings can be used, 
but VR sketching apps and coding directly in Unity are the most popular 
ways to dimensionally capture your best thoughts on how things play out 
in mixed reality. The goal is to show other people what you are thinking 
about the setup and subsequent interactions, so don’t worry about it being 
perfect. Just get the point across and move on. These sketches will capture 
the essence of what you are after, not the fine details. So, let it flow. Be 
quick. Be brilliant. Be done. Move on.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

61
And finally, an incredibly helpful skill to master as we enter this new 
world of mixed reality is being a great participant. Jump into the headset 
as often as possible so you know what’s possible and what’s desirable. 
There’s absolutely no substitute for being there. Get right inside an 
augmented world someone has created for you to interact with. You will 
always find new things to consider about the decisions made and the 
promise unmet. No amount of thought, discussion, or debate will inform 
your ability to design breakthrough holographic experiences than being 
able to relate what you are going for to known examples.
There’s also no amount of projecting based on past experience that 
will work for you here. Imagine you are asked to describe how it felt 
for astronauts to see the Earth below them during a spacewalk. You 
can probably approximate the feelings, but I’m guessing anyone who 
actually had that experience was forever changed by the majesty and 
overwhelming sense of awe of being there. No one can conjure that 
amount of authenticity and be believable. Get in there and relate your own 
feelings of being in mixed reality with holograms.
Just Do It
Spending too much time figuring out which of the four areas mentioned 
above to start with when designing holographic experiences is kind of 
pointless. Just jump in anywhere. It really doesn’t matter in the end. 
What does matter is that you are actually doing it, not just thinking about 
it. If you gravitate toward the storytelling aspect that’s an awesome and 
valuable place to start, but diving headlong into creating 3D scenes as 
working prototypes for your ideas is equally great.
Next up, we cover how you can use the envisioning methodology to 
make some quick progress.
Chapter 5  Where Do We Start?

Envisioning 
Holograms
PART II

65
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_6
CHAPTER 6
Shifting Your Mindset
Seeing is believing. Or is it?
Being able to imagine something that doesn’t exist is one of life’s greatest gifts. 
We are all born with this ability. It’s an integral part of our minds growing 
and developing. As young children, our imaginations are working overtime, 
providing us with everything from new play friends to scary monsters. We are 
instantly transported to faraway lands and magical times. Plastic sand pails 
turn into medieval knight’s helmets. Our stuffed animals have invisible friends 
who love to share secrets. Our developing minds are constantly questioning, 
probing, projecting, and remembering fragments of experiences. We are 
both imagination engines and interrogation machines at once, to the utter 
frustration of the adults in our lives. The mind is an amazing thing.
Then one day some time in our young lives we are told to stop making 
things up.
Until then, there was probably no reason to think what we imagined 
to be true, or wanted to be true, was anything but good. It was natural and 
second nature. Unless adults thought our imaginations were getting us into 
trouble in some way, our daydreams and night visions were every bit a part 
of lives as the real world itself. But, in that moment of being put on notice 
that imaginary things had no place in the real world, our thinking changed. 
It was simply not right for those things to be more important than what 
was right in front of us. 

66
And since that time, many of us haven’t allowed ourselves the pleasure 
of dreaming our days away. Imagining became a seldom and solitary 
escape, not an everyday norm.
That’s a problem for us. In order to envision the possibilities of mixed 
reality, we need to get back to those days of free imagination. We need to 
shift our mindset from the worries and constraint of the present reality to 
the excitement and wonder of the possible future. It’s time to ignore what 
is, and get onto what could be.
Envisioning is how we get back to the impossible.
Letting Go
I know what this is going to sound like, but there’s no way to get around 
it. To be great at designing holograms you have to let go of the past. 
Completely.
Envisioning breakthrough experiences will only come when you free 
your mind of all the bias, process, constraints, assumptions, and assertions 
you currently work within. To truly embrace the future takes the courage to 
turn your back on the past and its baggage. It really doesn’t apply anymore. 
This is a whole new deal.
We can’t drag the mistakes of the past into the dawn of a new era.
What we can do with the past is remember the lessons we learned 
along the way to getting here. Just do it. Trying and failing is natural. 
Practicing is nonnegotiable. People will always surprise you. There’s a 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

67
million of those hard-earned lessons to pull from. Just don’t think that the 
mountain of knowledge you have from that previous era still applies. It 
doesn’t. For all intents and purposes, you are starting over.
Just like a skateboarder learning how to snowboard for the first time, 
there are some basics that are universal to help you make the leap (falling 
hard, for example), but for the most part we are explorers charting our 
own path through the next frontier. So little is known about what’s “right” 
for this new space, it is ridiculous to think we’ll have this figured anytime 
soon.
The best we can do is relax, let go, and drop in.
Seeing the World
Another key mindshift to make is in how we perceive our environment and 
everything in it.
The envisioning process starts with consciously observing the world 
around you. Sounds obvious, but trust me, it’s not that simple. It takes 
practice to be very observant and conscious of how things appear and 
behave in the real world. There are so many subtleties, so much incredible 
detail. Most of it is lost on us each day. Just whizzes right by.
Try it for yourself. Go outside and pick anything natural to look at. 
What you’ll notice if you allow yourself time to truly see it, is an almost 
impossible to comprehend amount of beauty, color, shape, composition, 
material, lighting, and shadow. So many aspects to consider. How do we 
move through our lives without noticing all this?
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

68
Now compare the natural to man-made objects. The patterns are 
different, but in some cases just as beautiful. We humans are not without 
talent. Yet in other cases, the things people make are hardly worth a 
second look.
The day you start trying to really see the small things we often overlook 
is the day a whole new universe of possibilities opens up to you. In 
those moments you gain the skill and clarity to envision breakthrough 
interactions. Why? Intently trying to see details frees the mind from the 
current condition and lets us focus. What a gift to not use more often.
A former Design manager of mine taught me an easy exercise that 
brings the value of purposeful seeing to light almost immediately. He 
challenged me to randomly choose something new to deeply look at 
on the way to work each day. That could be a leaf, a tree, a building, 
a person, something in a store window, an animal – it doesn’t matter. 
What’s important is that you identify an aspect of the entity that you never 
noticed before. And if you continue to do this exercise every time you go 
somewhere, you’ll soon realize that we’re almost always on autopilot when 
it comes to our environment.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

69
 
Notice the incredible amount of detail in the fur icing of these  
cupcake creatures
Ask any experienced Designer how they get better at their craft and 
they’ll tell you a big part is developing the ability to recall how things look 
and act when they’re not right in front of you. It’s something to constantly 
work on since it’s a fundamental and indispensable skill in this field.
Time to break ourselves of the ridiculous habit of taking our physical 
world for granted.
Being the World
Understanding how people and things feel and what motivates their 
actions (and reactions) is invaluable to designing breakthrough 
experiences. I equate that to being them. We need to become the 
holograms we design to genuinely understand the world they exist in. That 
takes some empathy, immersion, and creative thinking to pull off.
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

70
A bit later in the book we’ll dig into a very fun and effective technique 
to gain insight into how it feels to be something else. We’ll literally become 
a hologram through casual acting and improvisation. Putting ourselves 
and our collaborators into situations where we are physically interacting 
with holograms and the space they inhabit gives us feedback that no real-­
time telemetry system or instrumentation of any kind yields – the human 
factor. Better understanding feelings and emotions play a huge role in 
taking the perspective of someone or something else in our envisioning 
process.
For now, let’s focus on a few key aspects of becoming what we are 
modeling.
Empathy can be built by simply observing how things behave in their 
natural environments and seeing if we can put ourselves in their places. 
Start watching birds takeoff and land out your window. Quietly observe 
how your child plays with their pet. Try contemplating what that lamp 
thinks about all day as it collects dust. Put yourself in someone else’s shoes 
for a while and see how they’d view you through their eyes.
Actions speak louder than words they say. They are the result of 
stimulus. Regardless of the thing you pick to observe, you’ll notice that 
everything behaves in its own way. Even more interesting is how they 
act when they’re engaged. Getting in tune with how state changes work 
and the actions they elicit will help us nail the design experiences that 
truly move us. Remember that holograms can be as active or passive as 
you want them to be. Shifting from one state to another heightens our 
awareness. That’s when things get real. Signature moments emerge from 
these shifts and subsequent actions.
Behavior is a complex thing to tackle in preliminary design exercises. 
We know there’s both an instinctual and learned part of behavior. I’m 
not even going there. It’s enough for now to start off just being a good 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

71
observer of basic behavior and perhaps the motivation behind it. We 
need holograms to behave in expected ways given familiar situations. Yet, 
there’s an opportunity to have them surprise us when we least expect it. 
Behavioral modification is completely possible using machine learning 
and artificial intelligence, so why not think about how things can learn 
over time to enhance the experience.
Motion is precisely why we needed to invent slow motion. It’s utterly 
fascinating how much we miss of even the simplest motions when they 
happen at full speed. Think about those ultra-slow motion shots of bees 
landing on flowers or wild beasts attacking each other. Riveting. Never 
mind understanding how the actual physics work, just watching all the 
movement closely is insanely intense. We could spend years studying the 
intricacies of movement, but for our work with envisioning it suffices to be 
able to remember and depict approximately how things move.
Finding Inspiration
Training your mind to look deeply into the real world is only half of the 
envisioning equation — the other half is the ability to come up with fresh 
ideas on demand.
Spontaneous idea generation is a bit tougher than it sounds because 
you need a certain amount of inspiration to spark the imagination. To find 
that inspiration at will, you’ll have to let your mind wander more than 
usual. It’s not like a casual daydream though. It’s a purposeful, directed 
conjuring of imaginary things on a regular basis. Perpetual hallucination is 
a bit too far. Seeing the unexpected from time to time is just right.
We’ll use the real world for inspiration whenever we can (because 
it’s right there). Let’s start practicing that by looking around wherever we 
happen to be right now. People will probably think you’re weird for staring 
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

72
blankly into space, waiting for something to move you, but whatever. Pretty 
soon holograms will start materializing out of nowhere. Your imagination 
makes them appear just as you want them to be, and perhaps even more 
intriguing than we’d ever be able to produce. Never mind the skepticism. 
Conjure at will. You’ll find that once you start exercising that imagination 
muscle it gets to be second nature and incredibly fun.
The ideas for many of the best holographic experiences come from 
ordinary objects and situations in the real world, not the digital realm.
Hearing that we’ll mostly use the physical world for inspiration can be 
counter-intuitive and a bit off-putting to the new holographic designer of 
digital objects, but it’s true. You’ll realize that even the wildest digital ideas 
are somehow rooted in the physical world. That’s how our minds work. 
We’re observers and extrapolators.
Amazing how we can find inspiration even in the most mundane of 
places.
INSPIRATION EXERCISE #1 - TRANSITION
Let’s take this very ordinary scene from a doctor’s waiting room for 
example. What unexpected things can you imagine happening within this 
space? 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

73
 
What if that sea turtle wasn’t trapped behind the glass?
You could easily imagine that giant sea turtle being shown in the 
television screen somehow escaping and starting to swim through the 
waiting room air right in front of us. Our minds make that relatively easy 
to do. But, how would it move exactly? What color would it be? Where are 
its friends? What does it sound like? Is its shell clean or beat up? How fast 
does it move? Does it look realistic or more like a garbled video projection?
Chances are unless you live in a region where sea turtles come up onto 
the beach to sun themselves, you’d be hard pressed to answer any of those 
questions. Conversely, if you started practicing being truly observant of 
things in the physical world, next time you were driving along a beach road 
in Hawaii and saw one of these magnificent creatures parked on a rock 
in the sun you’d surely be mentally cataloguing all of the details of their 
appearance and behavior for the day when you were asked to describe it 
all as a hologram.
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

74
Regardless of whether you every get to see a giant turtle in person or 
not, remember that everywhere you go is another new opportunity to 
observe and dig into the possibilities.
INSPIRATION EXERCISE #2 - TRANSFORMATION
Let’s practice that envisioning inspiration exercise again. This time we’ll 
use something that’s inanimate as our subject and see if we can bring it 
life. 
What do you see when you look up at this ordinary emergency light 
fixture?
 
This emergency light fixture looks like what to you?
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

75
Right! It’s a chameleon-like robot. I bet you can imagine it leaping 
down off the wall and jumping around on the floor with you just like 
charming chameleon robots do, right? OK, didn’t think so. But, I saw it. 
And it was awesome.
Now, I can’t see anything but that chameleon creature when I look 
at that light fixture. It has become something memorable and fun to me. 
Would be easy to act out how this thing behaves on the floor, or even 
quickly sketch out what it looks like. Of course, it is. And all of that is 
possible because my imagination took me to the place of thinking this 
was real enough to see without the aid of any technology. Our brains are 
amazing things, indeed.
Now for the real question. Could I describe this vision and experience 
to other people? Would they believe me? Could they see it, too?
Chances are you would convincing describe what you’ve seen well 
enough for others to see it, too. Wouldn’t necessarily be your exact vision, 
but close enough to enjoy talking about together.
INSPIRATION EXERCISE #3 - APPEARING
One more time. There are situations where you encounter somewhat 
empty spaces and start to wonder what types of holograms could fill them. 
Perhaps it’s the lack of people. Or maybe something just feels off. Whatever 
it is, your mind will start to fill in empty spaces with things that seem to 
appear out of nowhere. One minute the space is empty. The next it’s full of 
something that clearly was not there before. 
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

76
Let’s give this a try. What do you imagine is in the atrium beyond the 
glass of this lobby?
 
What hologram do you see behind the glass wall? Me too ;-)
Correct! There’s a dinosaur as big as a house right on the other side of 
the lobby glass wall. It keeps shuffling, taking little steps, shaking its head 
around, and occasionally roaring louder than I’m ready for between bites 
of the leaves on the trees. Guess it’s hungry. For me.
Oh, wait. You weren’t seeing that until I mentioned it? My bad. What 
was there? OK. You went a different direction on this one. And that’s 
fantastic.
Think you get the idea. Holograms can be anywhere. Holograms can 
be anything.
Wherever you happen to be throughout the day, take the opportunity 
to imagine what’s missing from the space you are in or what would be a 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

77
really pleasant surprise to encounter there. You’d be shocked at where your 
imagination takes you without trying very hard. The key is to let your mind 
go where it wants to, just like when you were a young kid. This is all part of 
the mindshift we need to make to get comfortable envisioning holograms 
in the real world.
Adding or Augmenting
One of the finer points of envisioning is how holograms are used within a 
space.
Making whatever you desire appear on demand gets to be easy over 
time, but there is a bit more to this space filling than merely conjuring 
at will. You want to be thoughtful and purposeful in how the different 
holographic elements are combined within a room. Although we need to 
consider their position and layout, it’s more interesting to talk about their 
function and presence.
Two methods of injecting holograms into a space are adding and 
augmenting. To me, these are quite different and used for particular 
reasons. Some would consider the difference between them a very subtle 
distinction, so it’s worth talking about here.
Augmenting existing things with holograms should enhance them. 
It’s a great effect to see something floating on or near an “ordinary” thing, 
but not all that shocking given the number of times this is depicted in 
sci-fi movies. In the real world you’ll see good examples of this method 
in many Augmented Reality (AR) systems, where they typically layer 
additional information on top of the real world to help you have a better 
understanding of something. That’s cool, but I actually find that pretty 
boring and an old vision of how to use this technology.
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

78
Given the ability to accurately place holographic objects on and near 
people and objects gives up the chance to do more than tether floating 
information cards to things. We can explore what it means to augment the 
real world with amazing new elements.
 
“Augmenting” with holograms enhances an existing person or 
object
The important part to note is that augmenting amplifies what’s 
already there. We’re not putting an entirely new thing into a space, we are 
supplementing what we can already see.
Adding new elements to a space using holograms will generally be 
more of a surprise to people, which is a great opportunity to blow people’s 
minds. They probably weren’t expecting something to appear in that way, 
so it’s all new to them. The trick is mixing holograms into the real world in 
such a way that truly feels integrated and right. Even with great tools and 
some experience, that’s easier said than done.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

79
Choosing to add a hologram to a space changes that environment 
digitally, sometimes in a dramatic fashion.
 
“Adding” holograms to an environment brings in independent  
new elements
Key with adding is that the object or character is self-contained and 
not reliant upon an existing element to exist. Added holograms blend in 
and are perfectly fine as tiny bumble bees as well as huge automobiles. The 
effect of adding is to bring something new to interact with.
We’ll end up blending both of those techniques into a seamless 
experience fairly often, and in fact that’s a hallmark of some of the best 
holographic experiences — they bring something new, but behave in an 
expected and seemingly natural way.
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

80
Always On
For me, seeing holograms where they don’t exist is something I can’t turn 
off that easily. My mind naturally wants to fill empty space with holograms 
now. It’s so easy to do and often happens without consciously thinking 
about it. Occupational hazard I suppose. Perhaps this book should have 
come with a warning sticker.
 
Once you start, it’s hard to stop imagining how holograms can  
impact environments
You’ll find that as you move through life with these thoughts of filling 
spaces with holographic actors, scenes present themselves to you like 
freezeframes in a bad 80’s music video. It will be a sudden realization that 
a room or area has holograms in it already – it’s just that no one can see 
them except you. Or conversely, you have a nagging feeling that a space is 
calling out for holograms of some sort. You just can’t quite put your finger 
on what type yet.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

81
As an example, I walked into a hotel one night and saw this empty 
lobby. I started thinking to myself in passing how it felt so cold despite 
being a really nicely designed space for people to use. There was no life in 
it at all that night.
 
Such a beautiful space, yet so empty
I was in a hurry to get somewhere at the time, so instead of stopping to 
figure out exactly what kind of holographic scene I’d love to see happening 
in there, I just pulled out my phone and took a quick photo. Didn’t think 
much about it at the time.
Some days later, I looked back at the photo and it came to me. What 
was missing that night was the sense the hotel was active and alive. People 
were choosing to hang out in the lobby because it was so cool in there. 
They wanted to be in there relaxing and enjoying themselves.
Here’s what that new scene looked like to me.
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

82
 
Why can’t this lobby be full of live music and dancing holograms?
Instead of just a gorgeous modern lobby full of empty chairs and 
well-lit plants, we see a bunch of people in there enjoying some live music 
courtesy of a holographic DJ and their spirit dancers. There’s even a super 
cool fire pit for people to virtually warm themselves as they dig the show.
That’s the kind of lobby I’d want to hang out in. You?
Goes to show that even with our new habit of constantly looking for 
holograms in new spaces, it sometimes takes a bit of time and focused 
thought to create those truly memorable experiences that best fit a space.
The key to finding new areas to explore is keeping your own personal 
holographic generator on at all times. The more you try these mindshifting 
techniques, the more you discover.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

83
Realistic or Futuristic
It’s important to note as we talk about filling spaces with holograms, that 
by its nature envisioning does not have to be completely realistic. It doesn’t 
even have to adhere to the current capabilities of the platforms or tools 
that currently exist. Envisioning is generally “of the future” and as such can 
feel more inspirational than realistic.
For example, in my HoloScenes series there’s an underlying premise 
that anyone can see the holograms in open spaces because they have 
been publicly shared and the technology used to see them is prevalent 
and frequently used. None of that is true today, but that’s not the point. It 
illustrates a possible future we can work toward. We project that someday it 
will be true, or at least we want it to be, so that’s enough to base our work on.
Fanciful or futuristic explorations are the hallmark of envisioning. We 
let our thoughts go where they want to, without constraint, to see where 
they lead us. This path is expected and encouraged.
Conversely, envisioning can be used to show your ideas quite 
realistically, remaining true to expected behavior, existing capabilities, 
and social norms. This type of design is done to help people visualize 
something that has yet to be built. It’s meant as a blueprint of sorts rather 
than a directional suggestion. The real difference between this type of 
envisioning and a more fanciful treatment of the subject matter is that 
people can recognize the realistic nature of it immediately.
Combining both realistic and futuristic aspects of ideas is my favorite 
way to work in this medium, as you’ll see throughout my examples. 
You can combine established practices and capabilities with hopeful 
improvements to take your audience where you need the story to 
go — whether to push on the technology aspects of the project and 
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

84
platform, or to set new ideas forth for interaction and participation 
possibilities.
Envisioning is what you need it to be, realistic or futuristic. Both get us 
to the places we need to be in order to share and discuss ideas with other 
people.
Capturing Thoughts
In the case of being more realistic with your explorations, you don’t need 
to perfectly visualize and exhaustively define things upfront in holographic 
to successfully communicate the concepts — just the opposite in fact. Since 
speed is the key to moving your idea forward, doing a hand drawn sketch 
or crafting a narrative about the feel of the experience you’re looking for is 
a great way to start the envisioning process.
You’ll have many opportunities to refine and fill out the details of 
initial explorations, so don’t slow down in when you need to capture that 
brilliant thought about where things need to go.
Conversely, if you have the skills to jump in and capture your thoughts 
in code, 3D models, or high fidelity mockups go for it! That runs counter to 
traditional design methodologies of staying low fidelity at first, but there’s 
nothing traditional about holographic computing.
There’s no “right way” to envision your ideas. Just do it fast and keep 
moving.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

85
Shifting Your Mindset
Shifting your mindset through all of the above methods gets us ready 
to start actually working on creating tangible artifacts and sketches to 
share and discuss with other people. The next section goes into the many 
different ways to get there quickly.
Chapter 6  Shifting Your Mindset

87
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_7
CHAPTER 7
Choosing a  
Technique
“Whatever works” is the best way.
When it comes to capturing our best ideas, anything goes. There’s no right 
or wrong, most efficient, or best way to do envisioning. Any method that 
lets you quickly convey what you are thinking to another person is the 
correct way to proceed.
Don’t listen to anyone telling you they know the best process or 
methodology for prototyping mixed reality experiences – there is no “right 
way.” This whole field is evolving so quickly we are best off using whatever 
is available and makes sense at the moment, rather than making a huge 
investment in just one technique. Our time is better spent trying out as 
many approaches as we can in the quest to find that sweet spot that feels 
right and gets the job done.
Since envisioning is all about capturing and sharing with others, I think 
you’ll find these techniques are generally the most useful (listed easiest to 
hardest, which also happens to be quickest to most time consuming):

88
•	
Imagination — no work required. Just think and it 
appears.
•	
Narratives — verbal storytelling is a great way to make 
a real connection.
•	
Photos — my method of choice, and the one we’ll dig 
into below.
•	
Sketching — fast, but not as impactful as other 
methods.
•	
PowerPoint — a Designer’s secret weapon; highly 
underrated.
•	
Acting — channel your best TV sitcom acting skills.
•	
Videos  — super bonus points for doing this one; huge 
payoff.
•	
Prototyping  — leverage the medium’s devices to 
portray experiences.
•	
Coding — the best way to bring ideas to life if you can 
do it.
•	
Making — combining hardware and software to create 
new possibilities.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

89
 
Envisioning techniques cover a wide spectrum across ease  
and technology
Let’s quickly spin through these methods to see where their strengths 
and challenges are. They range all the way from being incredibly simple 
(where no technology of any kind is needed), all the way up to requiring a 
room full of specialized hardware to achieve good results.
Imagination
The easiest way to get started with designing engaging holograms for 
mixed reality isn’t what you’d think of first. Almost all design endeavors 
start with hand sketching of some sort, whether that’s for a website, new 
console controller, self-driving vehicle dashboard, or a movie scene. That 
really doesn’t help us much with holograms. Your mind is a much better 
sketchpad than our tried and true method of putting pen to paper.
I know. It doesn’t seem like using your imagination would be better 
than sketching onto paper to envision something. Yet, that’s the case. The 
problem with sketching is that we can’t replicate how we feel when we 
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

90
experience things when they are confined to paper. It’s one of those things 
that is just easier to imagine than capture on paper.
By letting our thoughts guide the design rather than our hands, we get 
much further, much faster. When you let go and see how things unfold, 
there’s a freedom that can’t be matched with existing tools, regardless 
of their type. The mind is without question the fastest, most high fidelity 
sketching tool we could ever hope for. Someday, perhaps our thoughts will 
be synched with some technology that can record and present what we 
think in real-time. Until that time, our own imagination is the optimal way 
to envision.
Your own imagination will always be the highest fidelity, most vivid, 
best simulator of breakthrough holographic experiences. Use it.
Thoughts flash into our minds when we least expect, and often not at 
all when we are trying our hardest to summon them. Ask any musician 
what happens when they sit down to write a hit song. They’ll all say 
the same thing – nothing. You can’t force genius, just like you can’t be 
brilliant on demand (all the time that is ;-) When those flashes come, you 
often enjoy the moment, but don’t think about capturing it. Some writers 
say they keep pen and paper near their bedside in an attempt to snare 
fragments upon waking from a dream. In our case, your best bet is to focus 
hard on immediately replaying in your mind’s eye the amazing holograms 
you saw.
The difference in how we apply this technique to envisioning 
compared to trying to recall a memorable dream is the need to remember 
the detail. Some people are incredibly good at recalling the weirdest small 
details from their night visions. It seems odd to those of us who don’t have 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

91
that capability to describe exactly what we saw unfolding. Many of us can’t 
even remember if we were dreaming or not. And still other things are too 
pleasurable or ominous to replay in our mind’s eye immediately upon 
becoming conscious enough to realize we were dreaming.
Knowing that our own imagination and wildest dreams are the 
quickest route to conjuring rich holographic experiences, we have to figure 
out how to play back detail from our visions. Fortunately, it is something 
that can be practiced. Starting out simply, we can train our minds to give 
us the detail we need to move from hazy impression to fully formed idea.
Let’s try an experiment to simulate waking from a dream where you 
imagined something that startled you.
As you read this, imagine a giant boulder just off to your right. When 
you glance over at it there’s nothing unusual about it. Yes, it’s a big rock, 
but there’s nothing notable or unique about that. Or is there? Notice how 
there are a lot of different colors within the incredibly rough texture of its 
outer surface. The size of it makes you think about its mass and weight. 
Could it easily crush you if it rolled the wrong way? Come to think of it, that 
boulder looks a little unsteady because of some pebbles and shifting dirt 
at its base. Wonder what would happen if it broke loose and started to roll. 
Oh! That’s why I woke up startled. The boulder did break free and started 
to roll right toward me just like that scene in Raiders of the Lost Ark where 
Indiana Jones almost gets crushed. He had to run as fast as he could to 
avoid it. Now that the details are more clear to me, I could probably convey 
them to someone else. Got it.
Guess what? This is exactly the same exercise we did earlier where 
we trained our eye to see things more purposefully. We just took it a 
step further by sourcing it from our own imagination rather than reality. 
Training ourselves to effectively focus our thoughts into a form that can 
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

92
be shared with others is critical to envisioning. Conjuring detailed visions 
on demand is a skill to practice and lean heavily on as we move forward 
through the envisioning process.
Narratives
The other way to quickly envision and communicate your ideas for 
incredibly cool holograms is to simply tell a super detailed story about 
them. For centuries, people have been able to convey the most memorable 
tales using just words. Some of us have mastered painting such vivid 
picture in the listener’s head that they can literally see it, just as if they were 
there. Motion pictures closed the loop on this capability in recent time, 
but the art of verbal storytelling and crafting narratives can still serve us 
extremely well for envisioning purposes.
One of the best times to envision through storytelling is when you 
know there’s a narrative arc or long sequence you’ll be taking the listener 
through. Be aware of complicated storylines or scenes that require some 
detailed explanation to fully appreciate.
The real advantage to using a verbal narrative is a bit of a cheat – 
you can customize and change the story depending on who’s 
listening.
It’s a time-honored tradition to engage the audience by making 
connections they can relate to. The act of listening creates an opportunity 
for them to participate in their own way, experiencing the story in their 
own minds, intertwining their own history into your narrative.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

93
 
The act of verbally telling stories to conjure specific imagery is 
quick and effective
Writing out narratives is another great way to land a compelling 
story, and just as valuable as speaking to an audience. Some people have 
trouble as verbal storytellers, yet excel at crafting compelling stories 
through words. If that’s the preferred way to work, go for it. A great written 
description of how the holographic experience will unfold can conjure 
imagery for people as well as visual artifacts if we get the key impressions 
across.
Photos
Taking photos of interesting real-world scenes you come across is the best 
way I’ve found to jumpstart the envisioning process. Think of it as scouting 
film locations for your holographic experience (even though they don’t 
exist there yet). Without ever building a prototype, you can use a photo as 
the foundation of a visual sketch of the overall experience you’re after. It’s a 
scene for your ideas to be showcased in.
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

94
Be on the lookout for physical places that are calling out for something 
to be added holographically. Sometimes places will strike you as “empty 
but cool” for some reason. Whenever you get that feeling, immediately 
stop what you’re doing, whip out your phone, and snap a picture. Move 
along.
 
You can imagine people and holograms in any empty scene
Remember to go back through your pictures when you have time to 
harvest any that move you. They will undoubtedly be scattered across your 
Camera Roll in odd sequences. As you locate them, quickly consider the 
possibilities. Then share the photos with yourself or set them aside in a 
collection you’ll want to grow over time.
These sets of photos with nothing in them is a treasure chest of future 
ideas.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

95
Sketching
From our earliest age, we have always been able to draw pictures. Some 
sketches recall our dreams, some record history, yet others share ideas. It’s 
a very natural thing for us to draw, yet unless we pursue careers in the arts 
or have jobs where we need to scribble at high speed onto whiteboards, as 
adults this talent goes to waste.
Envisioning is a great reason to dive back into drawing pictures.
Sketching is a great way to quickly convey the basics of a holographic 
idea, how it sits within a physical environment, or the general feel of 
motion within the scene. There’s nothing like jamming out a quick drawing 
of the key aspects of your ideas to add fuel to the fire. It becomes real in 
just a matter of seconds (or minutes if you’re being a bit detailed).
The greatest aspect of sketching is its relative speed to other methods 
that result in artifacts. It may not be as rich, but it’s fast and that matters a 
ton when trying to cover a lot of design ground in the envisioning phase.
That said, I’ll be honest here – sketching with a pen is not actually 
the easiest way to convey holographic designs to other people. In fact, 
sketching three dimensional scenes on paper is one of the more difficult 
ways to capture all the richness of mixed reality. There’s an oddness to the 
spatial and perspective nature of mixed reality that sometimes becomes 
a distraction when drawing it. You’ll find that it’s not nearly as difficult 
to sketch mixed reality scenes as it is virtual reality with its spherical 
distortions.
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

96
 
Sketching a mixed reality scene in a single frame doesn’t do it 
justice
Storyboards are a specialized form of sketching that yield a much 
better result in the case of envisioning. Rather than focusing on particular 
aspects or scenes, the storyboard pulls together the larger story arc into 
a familiar sequence of frames, not unlike a comic strip or book. The 
advantage of using simple storyboards over more detailed holographic 
sketches is the focus on the movement and interaction they enable. It is 
in many ways the real reason storyboards exist – to tell the story itself, not 
relay the fine details.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

97
 
Storyboards are a much easier method to convey mixed reality 
ideas
Combined with other methods, sketching brings a rough quality that’s 
highly desirable for envisioning work. Try using the quicker and rougher form 
of storyboarding over precision drawing to quickly capture your new ideas.
PowerPoint
Who would have thought that using a piece of office productivity software 
would be such a great way to prototype mixed reality? Probably not you, 
but it’s true. Microsoft PowerPoint is flat out one of the world’s great rapid 
prototyping tools – although almost no one considers it for that purpose. 
The ability to quickly combine different types of media with built-in 
graphics and inking is a hard-to-beat solution for rapidly envisioning 
anything. Making that even more valuable is PowerPoint’s animation, 
sound, and video playback capabilities.
Just as you’d use a program like Adobe InDesign to layout a print article 
comprised of different blocks of text and images, think of PowerPoint as a 
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

98
freeform composition surface. It couldn’t be easier to Paste or Import just 
about any type of media element into a slide where it can be combined, 
overlapped, or sequenced with other items. From there, you can simply 
rearrange, add, remove, and edit things on the slide surface. Just about 
any combination of objects is possible. We can even export many other 
popular file types to share these compositions.
 
Using Microsoft PowerPoint to composite very different types of  
media for prototyping
The value in using PowerPoint as a compositing tool versus a more 
specialized three-dimensional modeling and animation program is exactly 
that – PowerPoint was built to be used by anyone with little training, versus 
those high-end pieces of software being designed for use by highly skilled 
experts in the field.
Leveraging this widely available program also has the tremendous 
advantage of allowing editing and revision by just about anyone else who 
you need input from on the ideas. It becomes not only a creation platform, 
but also a distribution mechanism that enables collaboration.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

99
Acting
Sometimes the most brilliant solutions to our problems hide in plain sight. 
That’s exactly the case with using the centuries old technique of acting to 
breathe life into futuristic visions. If you think about it, physically acting 
out how you want a holographic experience to work is a great way to get 
the interaction and behavioral aspects approximated quickly. People are 
the center of the holographic experiences we’re designing, so why not use 
them as our prototyping mechanism?
We can draw all the pictures and tell all the stories we want to try and 
get a sequence across to a collaborator, but nothing works as well (short 
of coding a working prototype) or more directly than just acting out how 
the encounter with holograms will go. People are always at the center of 
envisioning. This approach reinforces that foundational belief like no other 
method.
Acting also has the benefit of enabling us to see firsthand how all of 
the different participants in the experience are affected – the immersed 
person, observers of the interaction, and even the holograms themselves. 
The most powerful aspect of acting for envisioning is being put in the 
shoes of each person and hologram. Taking another’s perspective is always 
enlightening, and in this case, it’s often completely eye opening.
For instance, it would be easy to overlook how the hologram itself felt 
about interacting with a person or group. We can choose to surface them 
or not, but giving them the benefit of being more than just digital objects 
that do our bidding is our challenge as Designers. There’s more to the 
picture than meets the eye. Holograms can be as stiff and cold, or as funny 
and light-hearted as we want them to be. Acting as the hologram is our 
opportunity to explore how they may want to deal with people.
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

100
Yes, holograms have feelings, too.
An important part of this type of immersive exploration through acting 
is figuring out how to recreate scenes or sequences. It’s not hard – just 
takes a bit of thought. If you only have yourself available at the moment, 
you have little choice other than using props and inanimate stand-ins to 
represent people and things. Even this mostly unresponsive style of using 
chairs, tripods, pillows, stuffed animals (or just boxes) helps create the 
spatial relationships we talked about earlier.
Moving through the room in a constrained manner is a critical part of 
getting interaction right. We play off the props that are setup in the scene. A 
stuffed animal won’t respond to us like a real hologram, but we can easily 
imagine it doing so. Combining our imagination technique with this one 
comes in handy in this scenario.
 
People can represent holograms, not just inanimate props
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

101
Having more people available to help create the scene is incredibly 
valuable and also turns out to be a tremendous amount of fun. Now you 
can have a person (or yourself) act as the holograms. They will be able to 
portray them in any way that’s needed, even ad-libbing, or improvising 
new behaviors and responses. Picture being able to test out whether it 
was awkward for your giant holographic movie screen to pause Netflix 
and comment on the love interest, or even swap in an urgent Snapchat 
message from a friend. You could certainly code that up or create a 
scripted prototype to try out the idea, but more fun to do it in real-­
time with someone playing the part of the screen and infinitely more 
flexible. The possibilities are endless when people act out the roles in our 
envisioned experiences.
Videos
There’s a long history of creating vision videos in just about any industry 
you can think of. Doing a bit of web searching on “vision video” will return 
a treasure trove of futuristic looking shorts that portray what could be. 
These high gloss productions are favorite method of teams to portray their 
vision of where they are headed to, and what the expected outcome for the 
customer is.
The common thread through most of these vision videos is they were 
intended to direct thoughts and efforts in a particular direction. They are 
unquestionably sales videos, cleverly disguised as beautiful commercials 
for the future.
In a similar way, using video as a storytelling and sales tool is the most 
valuable way I have found to leverage this high-impact medium of mixed 
reality. Even if there are code prototypes available to show off functionality 
in person, capturing the holographic action via video gives you means to 
reach a wide audience for exposure to the ideas. That makes collaborating 
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

102
with a wider range of people so much simpler. You also have the ability to 
add voiceovers and graphic overlays to point out elements that could be 
lost in a live demo.
 
Video used as storytelling tool for promising mixed reality ideas
Because much of today’s most impactful communication is through 
video, investing in using it for envisioning is a good bet. Whether it takes 
the form of a short Snapchat clip or a three-minute short film, video is 
the natural choice to get our important messages across. Additionally, 
the convenience and ubiquitous access to smartphones has replaced the 
need for any fancy video equipment to do envisioning work. Just about any 
smartphone is capable of creating acceptable quality videos in this realm.
The number of different ways to utilize these videos for envisioning 
is staggering. Video envisioning covers the spectrum from just capturing 
live shots of people acting out scenes, all the way up to highly polished 
video masterpieces that composite holograms right into live action scenes. 
You can even imagine making videos of your sketched storyboards and 
narrative stories.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

103
Think of envisioning videos as short films with a story arc, hooking 
narrative, and compelling action to keep people engaged and not tuning 
out. One minute is a reasonable length to shoot for in relaying the key 
elements of the holographic experience.
Prototyping
Traditionally, you’d think of prototyping as creating a working proof-of-­
concept or at least a mocked up version of an experience. These are done 
in the fidelity that makes most sense for the intended audience, whether 
that was teammates, management, or stakeholders.
The type of prototyping that we’re using in the envisioning space helps 
illustrate the intended outcome. It is always a goal to work in the actual 
technology itself to establish a compelling vision in a form that can be 
experienced first hand. Paper prototyping is not going to cut it for mixed 
reality. It’s too far removed from the actual medium to be effective as a 
prototype. We need to jump into the device we’re targeting to achieve the 
goal of relaying how it will actually feel once built.
The funny thing is we don’t actually have to build the real experience 
for this type of envisioning to be successful. Anything close wins. 
For example, building a scene with static holograms that appear in 
approximately the right place, approximately the right size, with a decent 
level of fidelity, evoke a strong enough reaction in the participant to make 
it a valuable exercise. The key is being in the actual device we’re targeting – 
whether that’s a headset, laptop, or augmented reality glasses. This is 
where it all gets real.
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

104
Fortunately, there is new software showing up regularly to help with 
this process of creating content within mixed reality to illustrate our ideas. 
This method of prototyping in-device does require apps that allow content 
creation, or using native development tools to produce the experience.
There are many different types of apps that help with in-device 
holographic visualization.
•	
AR Camera Apps – using augmented reality and 
smartphone camera capabilities.
•	
MR Modelers – special purpose mixed reality sketching 
apps.
•	
3D Sketching – physically drawing in space across a 
variety of mediums and devices.
•	
VR Prototyping – toolsets designed for virtual reality 
also help in mixed reality.
•	
Cinematic Tools – taking a film director’s perspective is 
incredibly useful.
AR Camera Apps 
Augmented Reality camera apps make it easy to superimpose digital 
content over photos or live action video sequences. In many cases you 
just select a graphic overlay for what you see through the camera, and 
the software does all the hard work of aligning perspective and tracking 
movement by people or objects in frame.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

105
 
Augmented reality features built for smartphone cameras are  
great for prototyping
The augmented reality space is already overlapping with mixed reality, 
so it’s a natural placed to look for tools to assist in prototyping. Many easy-­
to-­use apps are available from Facebook, Snapchat, and other platform 
providers that bring incredible functionality to bear through camera-based 
spatial location mapping and artificial intelligence fueled computer vision 
to identify objects with high accuracy. These remarkable apps make it 
simple to test out ideas for adding holograms to scenes. This is a similar 
method to drawing over photos, or creating more involved videos using 
compositing. Don’t get hung up on whether the digital content overlaid 
on the real world is actually a hologram or not – it very well could be if you 
chose to make it one.
MR Modelers 
Mixed reality modeling tools generate holographic items that can be 
placed, sized, and examined within the device. This type of app helps us 
judge the effectiveness of our decisions about the spatial aspects of our 
experience. Is something too big or too far away? Is that really going to 
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

106
convince anyone to come closer and interact? What is the visual quality of 
that when rendered in-device?
These mixed reality tools are different than the traditional 3D modeling 
software programs you might use for creating objects to 3D print or make 
digital animations. These prototyping tools have been designed specifically 
for use in mixed reality, leveraging existing objects and images as stand-ins 
for finished holograms. They can also use primitive volumetric shapes in 
place of more refined items to enable quicker workflow.
 
Microsoft HoloSketch lets you compose using 3D models and  
primitives (source: Microsoft)
The great advantage in using this method of prototyping is that you 
are quickly composing scenes and scenarios within the device itself, 
requiring no translation from medium to medium at a later time. This 
type of prototyping tool is fantastic for quick blocking out of holographic 
experiences. We expect to see more of this type of medium native tool to 
emerge as the market grows and becomes more accessible to Designers.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

107
VR Sketching 
Three-dimensional sketching apps made for virtual reality allow us to 
do the most amazing thing – sweep out paint strokes that literally hang 
in mid-air. Sounds simple, but it is the most incredibly hard to explain 
special effect I have ever encountered in design. The impact is immediate 
and breathtaking – just like seeing a hologram for the first time. Using real 
space to paint a scene full of digital objects is not only super useful, it’s 
unbelievably fun. You’ll have to try it for yourself to see. Trust me, this is 
the future of rapid prototyping across many different types of industries.
 
Tilt Brush uses VR hardware to enable painting within 3D space
Using brush strokes of various sizes, colors, textures, and opacity, you 
can construct entire sequences full of rich digital objects as stand-ins for 
holograms. Everything is possible here since you are unconstrained by 
specific object shapes or models. You build up objects stroke by stroke, 
creating volumetric pieces to size and place wherever you like. Most 
people compose the scene just by walking around, squatting down, and 
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

108
reaching just like you were doing this in the physical world – which of 
course you are.
There is a related type of 3D Sketching app that doesn’t rely upon 
virtual reality, but rather a Desktop computer, its touchscreen, a pen, and 
a specialized peripheral called the Surface Dial. The Microsoft Surface 
Studio was built for creative people to experiment with different types of 
input and interaction when making things. One of the best examples of an 
innovative approach to sketching using this set of hardware elements is a 
Windows app called Mental Canvas.
 
Mental Canvas enables 3D Sketching through the use of the  
Surface Dial and Pen (source: Mental Canvas)
This type of 3D Sketching app allows you to sketch deeply into space 
using the Surface Dial to adjust the Z depth of the pen. Imagine using 
layers to represent depth in 3D space, without having to use layers. You 
simply twist the Dial to move the camera position in and out, side to side. 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

109
Amazing freedom to the illustrator. This does have the same limitations 
of sketching – you must be skilled to get a great result for mixed reality 
envisioning. Yet, this sort of drawing in 3D space is mind-blowingly fun 
and extremely valuable for trying things out quickly.
VR Prototyping 
Virtual reality prototyping tools are designed to help you plan and execute 
virtual reality experiences while in-device. That kind of completely 
immersive authoring and composition tool has been a dream of designers 
for decades. In addition to direct manipulation modeling, it enables an 
exact reproduction of the final experience within the target run-time 
environment. Straightforward import of models and images makes this 
approach relatively easy to work with, even for the novice prototyper. The 
key here is having some assets ready to go before the prototyping session 
begins to save time.
Much like the VR Sketching apps, VR Prototyping requires finessing 
your toolset within a physical space. Completely blocked out from the 
physical world, VR Prototyping tools can be a bit of a challenge to use for 
mixed reality since your spaces need to be recreated digitally. That said, 
the interfaces closely match the expected paradigms from the hosting 
platform, so ramp up is quick.
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

110
 
Storyboard VR was designed to help you do rapid prototyping  
(source: Artefact)
One VR Prototyping app that stands out is Storyboard VR by the design 
and innovation consultancy Artefact. Creating by them internally to help 
with visualizing and iterating through new ideas quickly, it’s now available 
to anyone.
Having prototyping tools like this is an invaluable resource to any 
team, but the obvious issue with leveraging these tools for mixed reality is 
they were built specifically for VR. So, expect to spend quite a bit of time 
working to learn the best ways to setup scenes that translate well to mixed 
reality.
Cinematic Tools 
These motion picture and film-oriented tools are perhaps the most 
underrated and rarest of these prototyping aids. Not until recently 
have people even thought about repurposing these for use with VR and 
MR. It’s a clever idea. These tools come at the problem of envisioning 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

111
from a completely different place – the mind of a film director or 
cinematographer.
Turns out, that’s exactly whose head we want to peek into to gain some 
inspiration for doing breakthrough mixed reality design. Utilizing the 
ways of master storytellers over the decades, film directors are all about 
bringing their vision to life well, and within reasonable time and budget. 
They create film experiences that operate on many levels at once – most 
importantly making that emotional connection with people that we talked 
about early on. There’s much to be learned from this discipline that can be 
used in mixed reality.
The digital tools they now have at their disposal are augmenting or 
even replacing teams of specialists who know camera angles, lighting, 
wardrobe, placement, special effects, and action sequences inside out. 
And most amazingly, some of these cinematic storyboarding tools run on 
tablets and smartphones, as well as within VR headsets and MR devices.
 
FilmMaker Live can be used on tablets or even phones to quickly 
compose scenes
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

112
Considering a holographic experience as a well-crafted film is a game 
changer. There are so many similarities and overlapping concepts. We also 
have great examples of immersive filmmaking in the VR film space to look 
at for inspiration. Phenomenally creative work is being done every day to 
explore how to best utilize this distinctive method of storytelling using VR 
for motion pictures and short films.
Fortunately for us, the foundational elements of cinema (connection, 
framing, pacing, reveals, camera angles, dialogue, story arc, and more) 
are found within our design space, too. They just manifest themselves 
a bit differently. We cannot control how people will react to a scenario 
that we setup or introduce. You are the controller. This is all unfolding in 
real-time, with little way for us to definitively predict or force particular 
actions to occur. We, as designers of these experiences, are cast as passive 
participants while our actors take control. How fun is that?
The new frontier for mixed reality design is to learn how to leverage 
the incredible library of brilliant storytelling work that already exists 
throughout the history of filmmaking. Getting a better understanding of 
how and why cinematographers compose their shots will help us envision 
particular scenarios with a level of persuasiveness that’s sometimes lacking 
in our work. Knowing what film directors do to focus the viewer on certain 
elements in a shot helps teach us about composition and training our eye 
to see from the participant’s viewpoint.
So much to learn, so little time.
Code Prototypes 
Writing computer code is perhaps the most expensive form of prototyping 
along several different dimensions. The first is coding itself. This not only 
requires writing the code (which is usually time consuming), but add to 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

113
that the debugging, deployment, testing, bug fixing, refactoring, rewrites, 
and source code management. Next you have the overhead of using source 
code control systems like GitHub to keep things backed up and usable by 
multiple people at the same time. Finally, incorporate the tax of using team 
collaboration software like Slack or Microsoft Teams to keep everyone up-­
to-­date as to changes and progress.
All told, the real cost of using real code is significantly higher than 
many other methods. Yet, the benefit of having a prototype to use for 
envisioning exercises is unparalleled when it comes to “being real.” Even 
the best simulation of running code via a digital prototyping method will 
leave the question “can it really be done?” unanswered. That unnerves 
many people in management for good reason. They need to know if your 
vison can actually be executed. However crude, using real working code 
gets you that much closer to really getting it live.
Code prototyping for mixed reality experiences is typically done using 
Microsoft Visual Studio, Unity, Photoshop, Sound editors, and whatever 
3D modeling and animation programs are needed to generate high-­
quality assets. Code prototyping follows the same general process and 
methodology as actual development cycles. It’s amazing what we’ll do to 
get real code working.
Prototyping Summary
Regardless of your prototyping approach, the benefit of getting something 
tangible to share and test out is something you cannot overstate.
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

114
Coding
Although we can produce some of the most exciting and persuasive demos 
ever using no code whatsoever, some people will continue to say that any 
type of envisioning is just glorified hand waving if you don’t use real code. I 
can’t really argue with that. In the end, code wins. Decisively. 
If you have a way to do your prototyping or envisioning work in code, 
you’ll be light years ahead when needing to get support from management 
or prove it can be done the way you imagine.
As mentioned, there are so many industrial-strength toolsets available 
for free today, it’s almost embarrassing. How many free modelers can one 
person use at a time? Another unbelievable part is that the two main tools 
required for mixed reality applications are available for download and are 
constantly updated.
Microsoft Visual Studio is the programming environment that most 
closely aligns to Windows Mixed Reality and the HoloLens. A truly 
industrial-strength environment, Visual Studio is used to not only code 
against the APIs needed to get specialized functionality implemented in, 
but it also deploys the final bits to an emulator or the device itself.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

115
 
Visual Studio has a HoloLens emulator to test and debug mixed  
reality projects
There is also close connection with 3D composition programs like 
Unity in coding environments. Unity has its own facility for coding and 
running test versions of programs for mixed reality, but much effort has 
been put into optimizing the workflow between Visual Studio and Unity. 
A top-tier game development environment, Unity has established itself as 
the go to tool for mixed reality code projects.
Making
Blessed are the Makers. Makers have the rare ability to turn the 
unthinkable into a working (often fragile) prototype that blows everyone’s 
mind who sees it. It takes curiosity, drive, and true passion to hurtle 
headfirst into combining multiple mediums together (such as hardware 
and software) with no idea of whether it’s actually going to work or not. 
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

116
Making is the pinnacle of envisioning in many ways. It’s filled with lots 
of experimenting, dead ends, starting over, and just plain having fun in the 
pursuit of synthesizing something custom and utterly one of a kind. Maker 
creations are truly inspirational and fuel true breakthroughs because they 
are so amazing to see in person.
Never underestimate the importance of making things real. Nothing 
beats working code and hardware.
Using Making techniques to create things that could be considered 
full-on proof-of-concept or working prototypes is still very much 
envisioning, it’s just an advanced flavor. Because they are very real 
instantiations of ideas (as opposed to mockups or theoretical concepts), 
Maker prototypes are some of the most difficult and time consuming to 
land well.
You’ll find that some of the most important envisioning can only 
be done through this method of building hybrids that require unusual 
combinations of mediums. For example, creating early versions of real 
working holographic headsets so that real holograms could be seen 
and experimented with took world-class hardware, optics, and software 
engineering, but it also took Makers following their “let’s just see if it 
works” approach to pull it off.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

117
 
The “Spectator View” technique for HoloLens is an example of  
Making for envisioning
I can’t emphasize enough how critical it is to introduce working 
technology prototypes into the mix when realizing true breakthroughs 
are at stake. Sometimes we have to prove that a particular part of 
the impossible vision is feasible before we can convince the team or 
management the vision can be realized. That’s where Makers come in 
and are worth their weight in gold. It’s takes a special talent to know 
how to conjure solutions that are real. I’m the first person to say that any 
kind of envisioning works as long as it’s convincing, but there is clearly 
something over the top cool about a Maker’s envisioning prototype. Maker 
envisioning brings wonder to ordinary, and turns healthy skeptics into 
believers.
Chapter 7  Choosing a Technique 

118
Choosing One
Knowing which envisioning method to choose is one of the skills you’ll 
pickup by practicing regularly. It becomes pretty obvious after a while, 
kind of like reaching for the right golf club to try and make the green with, 
but that doesn’t mean it’s any easier to execute well.
Any of the above will help you communicate your ideas to your 
intended audience. Just do it.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

119
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_8
CHAPTER 8
Breakthrough 
Examples
You can’t see the future in your rear-view mirror.
The whole point of this book is to help you approach your work in a way 
that will result in real breakthrough experiences. In practice, leaping 
forward is a bit harder than you’d think. First, considering yourself 
visionary and predicting exactly how things will unfold is fun, but far from 
reliable. Next, when looking around to see what you can copy from current 
competitors, remember that it isn’t going to get you anywhere in the 
marketplace. And finally, contrary to the myth, deeply analyzing the past is 
not the best way to predict leaps into the future.
Envisioning gives us a better way to tap into the future.
Turns out the future is hiding in plain sight. By combining all three 
of those perspectives (past, present, and future) we can synthesize 
experiences that feel very new but are still familiar. We don’t rely too 
heavily on any one of the three viewpoints, but rather blend them and 
follow our instincts to emphasize particular aspects of each that best lend 
themselves to the scenario we are working through.

120
 
Combining the past, present, and future into an insightful 
perspective
For example, if we were looking at developing innovative sports 
coverage using mixed reality, a natural place to start would be with 
futuristic sci-fi movies that overlay information onto quick moving objects. 
That would translate well to augment the players. We can also see similar 
digital callout technology already being used in today’s broadcast sports. 
Looking back into the archives, we’ll notice a huge shift in how the action 
was televised with the advent of remotely driven camera rigs that could 
follow the action without being on the field and in the way of the players or 
officials.
Taken together as one combined viewpoint, you would suggest that 
our mixed reality leap forward for sports coverage would be to put us right 
into the middle of the action through elaborate camera tricks. This would 
be superior to completely immersive virtual reality broadcasts due in large 
part to being able to see and anchor yourself to familiar surroundings 
while watching. The real world acting as an anchor would potentially keep 
incidence of motion sickness down while enjoying fast-paced action. Not a 
perfect vision, but a good start.
Let’s go through some other examples where we’ve truly leapt ahead 
by combining different viewpoints and examine why they work.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

121
Visualization
One the areas that will benefit the most from the rise of mixed reality is 
the visualization of data and complex concepts. We have made significant 
progress over the last decade in depicting data sets, but we have made 
little progress in being able to interpret them quickly. We keep drawing the 
same difficult to understand charts over and over again.
There are countless examples of data being poorly rendered in 3D or 
shown as awkward digital appendages of real-world objects, so 3D and 
AR are not the answer here. It’s also not the tech that’s holding us back, 
it’s more that we haven’t been able to leverage people’s abilities to quickly 
comprehend and compare based on our natural ability to deal with our 
three-dimensional world. That situation is about to change due to the 
much richer palette available to all of us using holographic visualization.
Room-scale Data
Remember when we talked about the first time you ever saw a 3D movie? 
It was mind-bendingly different than anything you had seen before. Not 
because it was surreal, but rather because it felt ultra-real in a strange and 
new way. Seeing holographic data visualization done at room-scale is 
exactly like that. It’s truly transformational from an experience standpoint. 
It’s not that you are inside the data itself – that’s perhaps best done with 
virtual reality. The thing that gets you the most is how real the data now 
seems after it has escaped from behind the screen into your world.
Chapter 8  Breakthrough Examples

122
 
Imagine being inside a room-scale datacenter visualization  
showing storage problems
Room-scale data feels so right that you start to question whether it 
can actually be that easy to comprehend, or if you’re missing something 
important about all this. You’re not. It’s just that we can finally deal with 
things in more natural way to make comparisons and judgements. We have 
become so used to seeing data visualized and charted in a very particular 
manner over the last decade, that when faced with any new technique our 
kneejerk reaction is that it must somehow be wrong. Trust me on this one, 
when you see data you are familiar with at room-scale, you want it to be 
right even if it isn’t. That’s the power of mixed reality in action.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

123
 
Working with data that is building-sized is another extraordinary 
aspect of mixed reality
BREAKTHROUGHS
The real leap room-scale data has more to do with the experience 
than the visualization itself. There will always be skeptics who point 
to the inefficiencies and distortion of data when it’s presented in three 
dimensions. What you don’t realize until you are standing knee deep in 
data (literally) is the visceral power of that experience. Our ability to make 
sense of the physical world and its contents kick in immediately. Coupled 
with even a passing familiarity of the data itself, the act of viewing room-­
scale visualizations is a bolt of lightning breakthrough for those of us who 
look for insights.
Consider the following aspects:
Understanding. One of the hardest parts of designing data 
visualizations is being clear enough upon first inspection to create 
understanding in the mind of the viewer. Many data charts are not 
Chapter 8  Breakthrough Examples

124
designed to be easily read and analyzed. Holographic visualization has the 
built-in advantage of producing a feeling of “getting it” due to our ability to 
compare and contrast three-dimensional objects quickly. Used deftly, this 
aspect can reduce the time-to-understanding measures in this field.
Initial Impression. Holographic visualization also has another built-
in advantage of producing a first impression of shock (in a good way). It’s 
hard to describe how it makes you feel when data envelopes you, or is 
spread out across a table. This qualifies as a real breakthrough moment. It 
suffices to say it’s nothing you’ll soon forget.
Visual Fidelity. We know that in most cases there’s little reason to 
use 3D charts over 2D to convey meaning. A well-constructed flat chart 
is plenty clear most of the time. But, there are those times when using 3D 
adds some other dimension of information that results in better clarity 
or insight. Holographic visualization has the property of allowing you to 
view it from new and more natural angles which creates a situation where 
insight surfaces more readily.
Direct Manipulation. You will immediately reach out to touch and 
try to directly interact with the data objects when looking at holographic 
visualization for the first time. It’s an instinctual reaction. They are right 
there. Why wouldn’t we want to see what happens? Well, now we can. 
It’s incredibly satisfying to use physical gestures to work with digital data 
objects.
Broadcast Media
Many of the early examples of pushing the envelope of mixed reality 
experiences focused on entertainment and education as many of their 
common scenarios lend themselves well to holographic content. It’s not 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

125
hard to imagine being inside a game or an atom for that matter using this 
new technology. 
As you’d expect, the seemingly more mundane area of broadcast news 
has been left mostly untreated. There were some interesting experiments 
during the 2016 United States presidential election coverage where pundits 
and reporters were beamed into the main studio set from remote locations, 
appearing as full-sized holograms. Interesting use of telepresence concepts 
and mixed reality tech, but not completely surprising or implausible.
That all changed recently with the debut of a broadcast-quality mixed 
reality video compositing solutions to seamlessly integrate live action TV 
reporters with digital content to astonishing effect.
 
This Vizrt demo beams interactive virtual graphics from 
Astucemedia live into the broadcast studio (source: Vizrt)
Chapter 8  Breakthrough Examples

126
Breaking the Fifth Wall
In his insightful post Breaking the Fifth Wall, James Corbett notes we 
have recently been able to move past the charming cinematic technique 
known as “breaking the fourth wall” (where a film character surprises the 
audience by talking directly to them mid-scene) to an entirely new level of 
sophistication.
Using mixed reality techniques, digital actors can now not only break 
out of character to address viewers, but also inhabit the same physical 
space as the audience. People and things can now join you wherever you 
happen to be viewing from.
This is somewhat profound. We can now shift the audience from mere 
observer to active participant in close proximity to live action. This new 
capability called “breaking the fifth wall” by Corbett extends the original 
film metaphor to have characters literally leap out of the screen and into 
your physical space. There are nearly endless possibilities for this new 
mixed reality technique in broadcast news and sports.
BREAKTHROUGHS
The emphasis here is on cutting-edge video processing technologies for 
mixed reality. These new technologies enable the following techniques:
Real-Time Live Action Compositing. It’s one thing to be able to 
experience live action news reports or sporting events and feel like you’re 
really there on the field. Virtual reality has been able to create that effect 
for a while through 360-degree video. But, we haven’t until now been able 
to pull live action content into our own physical space – the complete 
opposite arrangement of what’s come before. Careful to not interfere with 
that fly ball or get swept up by that storm.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

127
Come To Me. We are comfortable asking for the ability to travel great 
distances without leaving home. Again, that’s old news in the VR realm. 
What is not even thought about usually is asking for people and things to 
come into my own living room or office as digital objects that are perfectly 
placed, sized, and aligned with my world.
Dynamic AR callouts. Notice in the previous images the 2D textual 
information and 3D graphics that are deeply integrated with the live action 
content on screen. This level of alignment and tracking is possible today 
within mixed reality, but the difference here is that the capability now 
scales up to allow for many of these augmented reality style callouts to 
accurately track critical aspects of the broadcast.
Art
There is perhaps no area of creativity more interested in leveraging new 
technologies to educate the curious than the fine art world. Museums had 
traditionally been able to offer guided tours of their collections to patrons 
by using staffers and volunteers. They learn all about pieces of high interest 
so that they can answer questions on the artist, period, and contemporary 
works. As low-cost technologies came to market that would enable 
unattended tours, museums started investing in them. The state-of-the-art 
technology until recently was a multimedia affair using tablets to see video 
clips and hear narrator voiceovers. Now with mixed reality, it’s possible to 
explore completely different dimensions of these artworks.
Artist-in-Presence
One of the most important aspects of artwork is of course the artist. There 
are sometimes plaques and wall displays containing some background 
information on them if you look. Yet, far too many artists go unrecognized 
Chapter 8  Breakthrough Examples

128
and unheralded because they are not featured as people along with 
their works. Somehow, we detached the person from the art, never to be 
reunited again except in art history books. Within galleries, the artist is 
predominately invisible. Until now.
With a bit of foresight and forethought about what aspects of their work 
the general public will want to know about, artists can maintain a round-­
the-­clock presence with their work to answer questions, chat with art 
lovers, and just have some fun with the gallery patrons.
 
Finally, artists can explain their motivation and methods to us in 
a personal way
BREAKTHROUGHS
Much of the innovation here comes from adding fun to a traditionally 
subdued experience. Imagine the following experiences next time you visit 
a museum:
Meet the Artist. Just as we never expected to be able to have a video 
phone in our pockets, the idea of having a conversation with an artist 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

129
about their work didn’t ever seem to come up. Goes without saying that 
possibility approached zero after their death. Now, using easy 3D capture 
techniques, we can either beam in live artists to moderate discussions 
in real-time with students, or have artists posthumously explain their 
thoughts and process to gallery visitors on demand. It’s also easy to 
imagine vast amounts of digital content on the artist themselves being 
available right there along with the pieces.
Get Closer. By digitizing the artwork itself, it can now be viewed from 
any angle, at any size, from any location on the planet or off. The primary 
benefit of hi-fi reproductions is not the ability to zoom in to great detail, 
but rather to have the piece hold its quality constant as it is viewed and 
placed at any size that seems to fit the location it’s being viewed in.
View Related Work. A common question when an art patron comes 
across a piece they admire is “Are there any other pieces like this one in 
the collection?” By using voice input to ask these types of things casually, 
the overall experience and discovery of new artwork is greatly magnified. 
Serendipitous exposure to new ideas and styles is increased.
Entertainment
Music and dancing never go out of style, but it seems to be getting harder 
and harder to see the popular acts we like. If we do manage to get a few 
astronomically expensive tickets, it’s often so crowded or restricted at the 
venue that cutting loose and dancing up a storm is either impossible or 
frowned upon by security. Thanks to magic of technology, we could all don 
VR headsets and watch acts perform from the comfort of our living rooms, 
but what’s the fun in not being able to dance without smashing into your 
furniture? Immersive experiences are great, but much better to be able to 
see and interact with friends and loved ones while you enjoy the moments 
together in real life.
Chapter 8  Breakthrough Examples

130
DJ Holo
With the ability to see everything happening around you in mixed reality 
situations, this scenario of dancing wildly around while listening to your 
favorite performers live with friends is entirely possible today. Using 
the beam in approach mentioned earlier in the Breaking the Fifth Wall 
example, we can literally bring the acts we’re dying to see to wherever we 
want to gather and rave. 
There’s two parts to this of course – the ability to see and hear the 
holographic versions of the artists, and the ability of others to see the 
same thing. Done and done. Thanks to the shared experience code freely 
available for holographic platforms, we can synch the show for more than 
one person at a time. We can even add some special guests to the ambient 
environment in the form of holographic sidekicks or stage props.
The only thing we didn’t talk about yet within this breakthrough 
experience is how ridiculous you and your friends will look singing and 
dancing around with special optics on to an invisible and silent band 
wherever you happen to be. Whatever, right? This is fun. And in the years 
to come, others will be able to see and hear the act just fine without any 
special optics or headsets thanks to holographic projection technology.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

131
 
Inviting the hottest DJ around into your lobby for live beats is just 
around the corner
BREAKTHROUGHS
Shared real-time experiences are still in their infancy. This is an area of 
rapid developments. Expect to see experiments in the following areas in 
the years to come:
Living Room Shows. Who hasn’t dreamed of having their favorite 
artists play a show in the privacy of their own home or backyard? Using the 
evolving volumetric video broadcasting technologies, performers can push 
out shows over broadband that can be subscribed to wherever you want on 
multiple types of devices. Whether on the go, or at home, you’ll be able to 
catch the show in life-size or scaled down to fit on a tabletop.
Virtual Tickets. Being able to broadcast and receive holographic 
performers on multiple types of devices opens up an entirely new market 
for live and pre-­recorded content on-demand and via subscriptions.
Chapter 8  Breakthrough Examples

132
Holographic Friends. You don’t really have to invite your friends 
or coworkers over to throw a party while catching the show. The same 
presence techniques that we use to broadcast and monitor the show can 
be used to pull other people into the space (or mute them if they get a little 
out of hand).
Emerging Technologies
One of the most fun things about envisioning is projecting your thoughts 
forward enough to catch a glimpse of things that won’t exist for a while. It’s 
usually not the case those things are impossible to create, it’s more likely 
the technology they are based on doesn’t exist in a form that can be put to 
that use immediately. Even though we try to never lead with technology as 
a driver rather than human needs or curiosity, it’s exhilarating to see what 
those combinations of emerging tech and novel approaches can create. It’s 
tempting to try and predict which will become true breakthroughs (even if 
they’re still on our mental drawing board).
Let’s go through that exercise of designing breakthrough holographic 
experiences based on the latest crop of emerging technologies listed 
below. The real question of course is how do holograms help turn these 
technology-influenced ideas into true innovations for people?
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

133
Some examples of breakthroughs powered by emerging technologies:
 
Artificial Intelligence – In a few simplest ways, holograms already feel 
like they embody some sort of AI because of their digital presence. What if 
the power of Alexa, Cortana, Siri, and Watson was somehow omnipresent 
and active when dealing with holograms. We’re kind of used to talking 
with a few of these already in public. Do we need to infuse this type of 
conversation with an AI into every hologram?
 
Machine Learning – There’s nothing worse than a dumb hologram. 
We have come to expect that any kind of digital object or program will 
understand our intent and the environment it exists in, plus offer solid 
suggestions based on even minimal information or interactions. This is 
more a function of modern apps and services rather than strictly a mixed 
reality play, but we need to design this into our scenarios.
Chapter 8  Breakthrough Examples

134
 
Robotics – Will robots of all shapes and sizes need their own digital 
companions to keep from going crazy? Are those companions going to 
appear to us as holograms? I think so. Also, think about a world where 
robots are more common in the workplace and the home. How do 
holograms blend into those types of interactions? Will there be a balance 
during interactions where each player knows the intent and responds 
accordingly, or will robots and holograms collide in awkward ways? We’ll 
see shortly.
 
Autonomous Vehicles – You would think that the near future of 
transportation will come with its own holographic additions and advances. 
What better way to spend your commute time or long train ride than 
conversing with a holographic entity. Certainly, the media we consume 
will be punctuated by holographic experiences during this travel time. But, 
will we want to be talking with holograms that other people may not be 
able to see?
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

135
 
Sensors and the Internet of Things – What a fantastic opportunity exists 
to reinvent how we deal with dashboards of information reporting the 
exabytes of information pouring in each second from our billions of 
sensors around the world. Holographic displays bring the promise of using 
effective dimensional data visualization to help people better understand 
the state and trends within these incredibly complex systems.
What’s Your Breakthrough?
With all these features of other experiences bouncing around in your head, 
it’s time to dive into creating our own breakthroughs. Let’s get started by 
running through an easy to learn approach to constructing some working 
prototypes of our holographic innovations.
Chapter 8  Breakthrough Examples

The Envisioning 
Process
PART III

139
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_9
CHAPTER 9
Flow
Q: Most efficient way to crush the soul of creativity?
A: Formal process.
If you work in any fast-moving industry for long enough, you’ll come to 
either love or despise process. It’s inevitable. We all have to work with 
so many people, teams, and partners on increasing complex systems 
and services, it’s only natural to try and impose some order to stave off 
potential chaos. Nothing wrong with that, in fact it’s needed for deeply 
technical projects.
Similarly, you’ll also see highly prescriptive process and methodology 
in creative pursuits. Some of it is necessary when integrating within 
engineering teams and projects. Some of it not. Turns out that even the 
most experienced and disciplined designers and creatives crave order in 
the face of so many moving parts. Not me.
In response to the customary desire to structure, define, and tightly 
schedule the creative parts of projects, I helped pioneer a working design 
methodology that could help you with envisioning. It works well with 
pursuits that should flow instead of march. Its fundamental principle is all 
about moving ideas from A to B as quickly as possible. We refer to it simply 
as Fast Design.

140
 
Fast Design is all about quickly moving from A to B, not adhering  
to process.
Fast Design avoids much of the traditional structure and step-wise 
process in favor of a more unstructured, common-sense approach to 
moving things along. Start by figuring out the optimal design or solution, 
think about what it would take to get there, and go. You’ll soon realize 
much of what you want to do is difficult given the current situation 
(resources, schedule, funds), but you’ll push forward quickly anyway doing 
the best you can in the brief time you’ve allocated to figure all this out.
You will find that Fast Design is a great way to envision holograms 
and other creative deliverables, but might not be the correct approach for 
delivering the engineering designs for the next aircraft or high-speed train 
you’ll be riding in. It trades off rigor for speed, correctness for doneness. 
Not for everyone. Not for all situations. But, perfect for envisioning 
breakthrough holographic experiences due to its bias toward action and 
output.
Our goal is to move through this “process” as quickly possible, so we 
can start building these experiences for real (or just keep exploring if the 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

141
ideas are really flowing freely). Let’s not make this any more complicated 
than it needs to be. Dream. Capture. Build. Test. Refine, and repeat as 
needed.
 
The envisioning flow is a suggested set of activities, not a rigid 
methodology
We’ll cover how this applies to envisioning holograms in detail over 
the next few chapters, but for now here’s a super quick overview of the 
different segments and a few important observations from using it to make 
our visions real enough to share with other people.
Ideate
 
Chapter 9  Flow

142
We’ve talked quite a bit about ideation, conceptualization, and just 
daydreaming in the first part of the book. All that’s left to say on this phase 
is that you should practice it as much as possible. Try to produce lots of 
ideas without passing any judgement on them. It really is unbounded 
exploration. Doing this frequently helps get fresh ideas out your head and 
into the world to know which genuinely resonate with others.
For example, the envisioning piece on the cover of this book was 
inspired by the thought that a beautiful hotel lobby doesn’t have to feel 
so cold just because it’s empty at the moment. Holograms could always 
inhabit these spaces, waiting for people to activate the space and its vibe. 
Lots of ideas popped into my head right after that initial thought, but some 
other good ones were a direct result of sitting down and ideating with 
paper and a pen. There were some weird ideas in that batch, like the one 
I ultimately decided on – a light creature moving to the beats of a live DJ 
being beamed into the room from afar.
People don’t have to like the ideas, understand them, or even want to 
experience your ideas for themselves – but, just the act of listening to their 
feedback will be an enormous help in deciding for yourself what to pursue. 
No one can tell you what’s right or wrong when it comes to envisioning, 
nonetheless they can let you know what makes sense to them or what 
seems plausible.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

143
Frame
 
This phase is essential to doing envisioning well. Framing is not about 
vetting an idea as much as giving it some boundaries to explore within. 
You wouldn’t want to start eliminating possible outcomes at this early 
stage, but rather give yourself as set of guardrails to bump into along the 
way to contain your effort. These guardrails become a decision framework 
for focusing your effort down just a bit. 
Continuing with the cover example, deciding early on that multiple 
people should be able to enjoy the warmer hotel lobby vibe at the same 
time established a bounding box around experience. Without that, it could 
have gone down the path of being intended as totally unique scenarios 
for each person. That type of guide may seem obvious or simple to arrive 
at, and it is, yet it saves a tremendous amount of wasted effort as we move 
toward deeply exploring the idea.
Chapter 9  Flow

144
Creating a lightweight decision framework for the design helps you 
make a few initial choices quickly. These tend to be which scenario best 
illustrates the idea, what technique can help you go the fastest, and how 
much time you want to spend exploring all this.
Done quickly and without overthinking anything, framing can also be 
a very fun part of envisioning. Moving to decisions feels good. Things start 
snapping into place. The flow starts working and your envisioning project 
is off and running.
Prototype
 
Building a prototype of your breakthrough idea is distinctly different than 
the creation phase. Here, the emphasis is on the detailed work of putting 
enough pieces together correctly so another person can try it out, or at 
least get the gist. It’s necessary to bring things to life as quickly as possible, 
so don’t try to be right all of the time, just try to be fast most the time.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

145
As we discussed, there are many kinds of prototypes that run the 
gamut from it being all in your head all the way up to working code and 
hardware. Some will be better than others at landing the idea, but it really 
doesn’t matter which method you choose if you get right into it.
In this example, my choice to quickly prototype the concept of 
warming up a hotel lobby was to bring the dancing light creature to life 
through a simple code prototype so that the movement and reaction could 
be tested out. Rather than just animating something like this After Effects, 
wiring up a 3D character to move and react to ambient sound is a decent 
amount of work and constitutes a technical proof.
It’s been my observation over many years that people on product 
teams either love or can’t stand the technical prototyping phase of a 
project. The more technical the person, the more they like it. The more 
creative the person, the more soul crushing. Here’s why – this activity is all 
about making the hard choices required to narrow your focus and execute 
something concrete. Highly stimulating and gratifying to some, yet it feels 
more like the depths of despair for others as the optimal transforms to the 
doable, and the original dream is somewhat diminished.
Fortunately, turning holographic ideas into working prototypes of any 
sort is typically very rewarding because of its freshness and necessity to 
learn new things.
Chapter 9  Flow

146
Test
 
In the old days, testing a product or service meant focus groups, formal 
usability studies with one way mirrors, weeks of analysis, and voluminous 
findings. Not anymore. Testing something out has devolved to informal 
questioning over a latte or cornering unsuspecting people in the lobby of 
your building. Regardless of the method, the point is to get someone else’s 
thoughts and opinions on something you are invariably way too close to. 
People’s first takes are incredibly valuable if you truly listen and give them 
a chance to sink in, good or bad.
When I tested this dancing light creature with its own DJ concept out 
on people as an envisioned prototype, their first reaction was what anyone 
would have hoped for – loved it. Wanted more than I could provide in a 
quick prototype for sure, which led to many great suggestions for where to 
take it next. It occurred to me that my test was conducted with friends and 
coworkers who might not have wanted to hurt my feelings with a negative 
reaction, so I needed to consider how to get this out to a much wider 
audience to gage the reaction more objectively.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

147
Don’t be afraid to go wide with your testing of holographic ideas (if you 
can think of way to do that well). Video comes to mind as an easy way to 
reach a very broad and diverse audience quickly. Open it up to comments 
and strap in. Chances are it’ll be a bit of a rough ride regardless of the 
merits, I can assure you. People love giving you constructive criticism 
along with praise.
Refine
 
In today’s world of agile development techniques and continuous releases, 
it seems odd to call out the need to refine our holographic ideas. We expect 
they will be flawed in some way (as all high-tech products are) or not land 
quite as nicely as we originally imagined. Refinement seems a natural part 
of our method, no?
No. That’s not the kind of refining were talking about here. This section 
should probably be called Learning, but it’s more action oriented than that 
sounds. After we test something and listen carefully to the feedback, we 
Chapter 9  Flow

148
should learn from that and immediately change whatever was called out 
and test it again within hours or even minutes if possible. Really.
The problem with today’s approach to agile development is that it’s 
anything but. Truly agile means fast, which for us means now. Trust your 
early tester’s reactions and try out different approaches with them in lo-fi 
if necessary to learn quickly. Try morphing the idea or even go as far as 
completely pivoting if you have to.
With this example, the refinement came in the form of learning that 
some people won’t get into something like this live show in a hotel lobby 
because they’re still very self-conscious about letting go in public. Hard to 
not feel a bit odd when you’re the only one grooving to an invisible ten foot 
tall light creature and holographic DJ. Human nature sometimes trumps 
any good idea.
Restart
 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

149
True breakthroughs are rare. They can’t be scheduled or predicted. 
Musicians don’t try to write a hit song every time. They just keep 
practicing, creating, and pushing themselves to go outside their comfort 
zone. That’s when the magic happens. Same applies here. Ideas are 
typically not perfect on the first go round. Use your gut instinct to try out 
something that seems radical. Restart the ideation process for no good 
reason. Throw everything you’ve done out. Don’t let there be any sacred 
artifacts that can’t be discarded for the sake of moving the project forward.
The cover idea turned out to be a great example of working the 
envisioning process and letting it take you where you need to push 
and explore. I would not have thought about using a particular shader 
technique for the visual appearance of the light creature without 
collaborating with a coworker on this. Being able to inject your own 
music was always part of the idea, but I needed to see that people could 
also enjoy someone else’s playlist just as much before letting that idea 
go. Restarting the project as more of a concert experience rather than 
interactive playlist jam was something I originally would have thought to 
be limiting, but turned out to be the better choice.
Don’t be afraid to restart the whole process and do it differently next 
time. At the same time, you can choose to not restart and press on. Either 
way, you’ll find that envisioning will change your normal method of 
approaching creation and development of ideas.
Let’s Go!
Now that you’ve had a quick look at the way we’ll be envisioning it’s time to 
get started. Try to pick an idea you want to bring to life and turn the page to 
dig in and break through.
Chapter 9  Flow

151
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_10
CHAPTER 10
Frame
It’s not the punchline that gets ‘em. It’s the setup.
The framing process transitions us into the detailed work portion of 
envisioning. It helps define our creative exploration and set things in 
motion down a particular path. Framing starts with fitting a particular 
scenario into a conceptual picture frame to define its boundaries, and ends 
by propelling you into the build-out phase.
The framing we do for envisioning holograms is not so different than 
a film director framing a shot on the set. In filmmaking, some elements of 
the sound stage or outdoor set are in the camera’s viewfinder and others 
aren’t. Choices about lighting, dialogue, composition, speed, sound, 
and camera movement are all taken into account and distilled into a 
manifestation of the director’s vision. Framing holographic ideas is no 
different.

152
 
Framing for envisioning is not so different than in filmmaking
A purposeful decision to set some boundaries and constraints when 
figuring out where you’re going with your initial ideas is the essence of 
framing. It’s a great practice in any kind of design. Even if it’s the biggest, 
wildest, most ridiculously rad idea you’ve ever had, quickly putting a few 
constraints in place will help narrow your thoughts just enough for you to 
make progress. I think we all know the worst thing you can do at the beginning 
of a project is to start second guessing yourself on every little aspect or 
continually spin around and around on idea variations rather than just picking 
one. You may not choose correctly, but at least you are moving forward.
Overview
Regardless of the idea itself, deciding and internalizing what’s in and out 
is an important part of any creative project. It’s a bit difficult to shut down 
exciting possibilities, but necessary at this phase. You work through the list 
one-by-one. Narrow the focus. Identify the essence. Choose the hero. Put it 
in gear. 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

153
Think of framing as having three major parts to work through – making 
initial decisions, understanding key aspects, and seeing things from 
different perspectives.
 
Framing is your intentional setup for impactful work
Let’s start by deciding on a few key elements to get us moving.
Initial Decisions
Normally, you carefully consider decisions on how to proceed at the 
beginning of the typical creative or technical project before committing to 
a particular approach. It’s just too expensive to go down wrong paths or 
dead ends.
Conversely, with envisioning, if you think too hard about how to best 
capture your thoughts you’ll never pick one and get started. We always try 
to bias toward action with envisioning, let’s just get to it.
Chapter 10  Frame

154
The initial choices you need to make are which idea, what scenario 
best illustrates it, which envisioning technique to use, and in how long a 
timeframe are we working.
Idea
The first decision is an obvious one – what idea are you going to depict? 
What are you trying to visualize to share with others? Don’t try to figure out 
which of your dozens of ideas is the best. Pick the one you feel could be 
explained best given your skillset and team.
For example, maybe you want to depict telepresence to your audience. 
Telepresence is broad, and could be in a business setting, a medical 
setting, an educational setting, and the list goes on and on. Don’t waste 
time examining every scenario in a futile attempt to find “the best” one.
Just choose! Flip a coin if you must, or just choose one that’s “good 
enough.” Got one in mind? Great. Let’s move on to figuring out how to tell 
its story.
Scenario
Every breakthrough idea has a compelling scenario that really brings it to 
life for people. Scenarios are a sequence of actions (or possible outcomes) 
that highlight the human side of the idea you are excited about. These are 
effectively short stories or individual scenes in a play.
Well-constructed scenarios allow for paths through the narrative, 
provide some sort of tension (just like good sequences within films or 
books), and ultimately leave us with a satisfying ending. Scenarios don’t 
need to be complicated. In fact, you can typically explain a scenario in just 
a few well-crafted sentences.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

155
Scenarios follow all the same rules as stories – they have a beginning, 
middle, and climactic ending. The setup of a scenario involves a situation 
or problem the main character is grappling with. Next, something happens 
to introduce our heroes (the holograms) into the scene, and finally through 
interaction we see how they have made the situation so much better or 
more interesting.
Remember that it’s never about the technology when we’re doing 
envisioning, so this scenario so focus on the human side of the equation. 
It needs to show off how your idea and associated tech will help people do 
something they can’t quite accomplish today.
Picking the right scenario to go deep on can seem daunting. It 
shouldn’t be. There’s no data required to figure this out. It’s more about 
listening to your gut instinct on what story will play out best for people in 
this narrative form.
Technique
With so many compelling ways to capture and express your ideas for 
mixed reality experiences like sketching or acting things out, it shouldn’t 
be that hard to just pick one and start running. But, like many other things 
in life it’s never really that simple. As the sage designer Bill Buxton points 
out, all design techniques are great at some things and lacking in others. 
Some envisioning approaches are quick to execute since they’re a bit 
less refined, while others are slick and persuasive in order to provide an 
amazing emotional connection. There’s no shortage of ways to tell your 
story memorably. The trick is picking the one that lets you work through it 
quickly to create something that can be shared and discussed.
Chapter 10  Frame

156
We’ll cover why certain techniques work better than others in the next 
section, but for now here are the decision points when choosing – those 
easiest for non-technical people to leverage, the most persuasive, higher 
production quality, and those best for delving into interaction questions.
 
Deciding on which envisioning technique to use should be goal 
based, not skills based
Is the scenario a technical one or not? Does it require special software 
or hardware to pull off? Will this be a quick exploration or is it more 
involved? All of those questions figure into the final decision on technique.
In the end, your final decision may come down to which technique 
you’re most familiar and comfortable with. And frankly, that’s just human 
nature. We’re not always going to jump into a completely new learning 
situation just to broaden our skillset or satisfy our curiosity. There are 
deadlines, clients, and schedules to appease. All that said, time permitting, 
I’d encourage you to try various approaches to see for yourself the pros and 
cons of each, so the next round of envisioning is that much easier. For now, 
let’s just pick and move.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

157
Timeframe
Nothing sucks the life out of a new project faster than putting a schedule 
in place before doing any real work. Really. Once you set the end date of 
something it’s almost as if you just shutdown the creative possibilities. 
When you start working backwards to figure out what fits and what doesn’t 
in your schedule, you have essentially boxed yourself into a forgone 
conclusion. I suppose that’s the reality of creating things within agile 
development sprints these days, but doesn’t mean you have to run your 
envisioning project that way.
We can choose to look at the envisioning phase of projects another 
way, where the overall fixed timeframes provide a great opportunity to 
reconsider our approach. Why not do many small explorations that far 
less in-depth rather than one super deep dive to cover more ground and a 
wider scope?
 
The value of doing many quick explorations versus one long sprint 
is magnified in MR
Chapter 10  Frame

158
This situation highlights the classic dilemma in project management – 
go faster to get further in a shorter time with less quality, or spend the 
time to more deeply explore the design space? In envisioning, we need to 
lean toward the first approach, meaning faster is better in almost all cases. 
Overthinking and overanalyzing things is not helping anyone.
Deciding to aggressively timebox an envisioning exploration forces you 
to consider the key aspects upfront (or run the risk of floundering about 
toward the middle of the project).
Key Aspects
Identifying and deciding upon the most important characteristics of 
your envisioning project really comes down to just a few key factors – the 
impact it needs to deliver, the outcome you are trying to achieve, the 
skillset you possess to execute with, and the degree of realism required to 
persuade.
Impact
The ability to leave a lasting impression directly affects the success of your 
envisioning efforts. Creating real impact means influencing someone’s 
thinking in significant ways. That often requires you to distill things down 
to just one or two key impressions. Identifying those can be a difficult 
thing to pull off, but when done well, these signature moments will stay 
with people long after they first encounter them. The great ones leave 
permanent imprints on our memories because of the connections they 
made. 
It’s a tall order, impact. Given we are trying to evoke particular 
emotions and feelings in the viewer, it’s best to consider impact as a goal 
rather than an expected result. We can say that our chosen approach will 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

159
cause people to laugh or be entertained, but it’s another thing entirely to 
believe we can alter their thinking.
The delivery mechanism (or medium) used also plays a critical role in 
getting to the desired impact. Pick something too low fidelity and you can’t 
create enough of an impression to be memorable. Choose a higher fidelity 
and you’ll find yourself too busy to try out different ideas. Best to shoot 
for something in the middle that delivers the emotions you need without 
dragging you into a drawn out production process.
One subtle thing to realize as we’re working through these key aspects 
is that creating impact is not the same as driving an outcome. Impact is 
emotional. Outcome is action oriented.
Outcome
Behaviors and actions that happen as a result of an envisioned experience 
are the outcomes of our effort. Outcomes are the easiest aspect to picture 
and define, yet hard to predictably achieve. People’s behavior will vary. 
Environmental factors play a role. Even the quality of the execution figures 
into how scenarios turn out in practice. Outcomes happen. They do not 
follow logically. 
That said, there’s a good reason to try and propel the scenario 
toward the desired outcome through any means you feel is appropriate. 
Well-designed outcomes yield higher satisfaction from the participant. 
Giving people direction, advice, or hints as to the next logical step along 
their scenario’s path helps to provide a sense of accomplishment and 
achievement, much like leveling-up in a video game. We want people to 
have a sense of satisfaction from their efforts.
Chapter 10  Frame

160
The skill of knowing which envisioning approach and technique is 
most efficient in getting to a desired result comes with practice. That’s 
why we talk about exploring quickly and often, to gain that comfort 
and expertise. If you are trying to convince someone to fund your idea, 
choosing a higher fidelity technique like video or working code is probably 
going to get you further than a sketchy hand-drawn storyboard to show 
your coworkers. Fidelity and style definitely affect impression and 
ultimately outcome.
Another interesting part of determining outcomes is figuring out 
how to deal with unintended side effects and unexpected consequences. 
Just because we didn’t realize our scenarios would result in unforeseen 
outcomes doesn’t mean they aren’t valuable. Digging into the thought 
process and actions that led to the side effect or consequence will help you 
become a better interaction designer. Look for these opportunities as you 
work through the build-out and testing of your ideas.
Skillset
The talents that enable people to communicate using particular 
techniques are the skillset we’re most interested in understanding and 
harnessing. Individual skills in this area can be as specific as the ability to 
draw and create 3D animations, or be so general as to not usually show up 
on a resume (such as being convincing or persuasive).
Knowing what skills you and your team have before starting down the 
build sequence is helpful in planning or establishing a confidence level. 
That said, lack of skills shouldn’t be an argument to not try something 
out. In this new medium of mixed reality, new skills should be picked 
up as needed. Don’t be afraid of what you don’t know how to do. Being 
uncomfortable is the new normal in this field. It’s all happening so fast, 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

161
it’s best to set off in the direction you think will result in convincing 
storytelling and then find ways to get there as you go along.
Another aspect of growing your skillset as you go is purposely seeking 
out diverse perspectives and new techniques. It’s incredibly clear from 
working with fast moving, innovative teams that having a more diverse 
background and expertise results in a better collaboration and outcomes. 
Whether you are working by yourself or can recruit a team to collaborate 
with, try to find ways to leverage the skills you may not feel as comfortable 
leading with – dramatic storytelling, technical detail, visionary aesthetic, 
whatever it takes to get the idea across persuasively.
Realism
It’s important to note that by its nature envisioning does not have to be 
completely realistic to the current capabilities of the platforms or tools that 
currently exist. Envisioning is generally “of the future” and as such can feel 
more inspirational than factual.
As designers, part of our job is to push the boundaries of what could 
be to illustrate how things should be. Conceptual design or envisioning 
is a great way to do that. When done well, it poses hard questions, raises 
concerns, pushes engineering to consider, and creates dialog to further 
explore the issues. At its best, this type of envisioning is inspirational and 
provides a North Star for aspirations and dreams.
For example, in my HoloScenes series there’s an underlying premise 
that anyone can see the holograms in open spaces because they have 
been publicly shared and the technology used to see them is prevalent 
and frequently used. None of that is true today, but that’s not the point. It 
illustrates a possible future that we can work toward.
Chapter 10  Frame

162
Envisioning can also be used to show your ideas quite realistically, 
remaining true to existing capabilities and norms. This type of design 
is done to help people visualize something that has yet to be built. It’s 
meant as a blueprint of sorts rather than a directional suggestion. The real 
difference between this type of envisioning and a more fanciful treatment 
of the subject matter is that people can recognize the realistic nature.
 
Using highly detailed models for your holograms is stunning, but 
can affect performance
Combining both realistic and futuristic aspects of ideas is my favorite 
way to work in this medium as you saw throughout my examples. 
We can combine established practices and capabilities with hopeful 
improvements to take your audience where you need the story to 
go — whether to push on the technology side of the project and platform, or 
to set new ideas forth for interaction and participatory possibilities.
Envisioning is exactly what you need it to be, realistic or fanciful. It’s an 
aspect that determines how your idea will ultimately be perceived.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

163
Different Perspectives
It’s always valuable to take the viewpoint of another person (or whole 
group) to understand their perspective on something. That’s magnified 
when you’re trying to convince or persuade someone about anything. In 
the case of envisioning, we should consider how the incredibly diverse 
experiences and backgrounds of everyone involved will affect their 
perception of what we’re trying to get across. This goes beyond listening to 
another’s viewpoint. You need to find a way to embrace and integrate other 
people’s thoughts, even if they run counter to yours. I can tell you from 
personal experience, doing this well helps strengthen the core ideas.
 
Try looking at the overall holographic experience from each  
vantage point
The baseline for understanding perspectives starts with the 
participant’s viewpoint, but needs to include several other critical players 
in the scenario.
Chapter 10  Frame

164
The Creators
It’s all too easy to forget about those behind the scenes – the creators of 
the holographic experiences people participate in. Theirs are some of the 
most important views to consider. Understanding and taking stock of the 
perspectives of those who’ll be creating these visions will help determine 
the right path to head down. Chances are several people will be involved 
in bringing this to life, so let’s understand how each of their roles is best 
suited to help move the vision to reality. This is no means exhaustive, just 
a representative sampling of the roles you undoubtedly have on your team 
or possess yourself.
Designers tend to take a three hundred sixty-degree approach to the 
scenario, wanting to explore all of the different elements in play before 
committing to any particular execution. We like to understand the people 
side of the scenario, the motivations, setup, and emotional aspects as well 
as the interactions and tech. That well-rounded viewpoint makes working 
through the scenario that much easier. Add to that the attention-to-detail 
that most designers have and you’ve covered a huge amount of ground by 
engaging with people in this role.
Developers love to dig right into the technical aspects of the 
scenario, making sure we get how this will all unfold from an executional 
perspective. That’s incredibly valuable in the early stages of figuring out 
the scenario (as long as this reality check doesn’t squash ideas). There’s 
always going to be technical issues when turning ideas into working code. 
The trick is to not let the weight of the challenge drive the enthusiasm out 
of the effort to overcome it.
Storytellers (otherwise known as marketers and executives) are worth 
their weight in gold during the early phases of envisioning. We’re not all as 
skilled in weaving narratives that stick with people long after they’ve heard 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

165
them, nor are we articulate and concise enough about our own thoughts to 
convey them clearly and succinctly. Some of us are natural storytellers, yet 
the majority of us can certainly use another pair of ears to listen and repeat 
back to us what we wish we had said. People who spend most of their 
working lives constructing narratives and quickly getting to the point often 
have the innate ability to see into the heart of complex scenarios.
The Participants
Empathizing with the perspective of the people within the experience is 
really important when envisioning. We talk at length about the fictitious 
“user” (which doesn’t actually exist, don’t get me started) but little about 
the viewpoint of real people with feelings and emotions. Putting yourself 
into situations you can’t normally relate to is eye opening and enlightening 
if you let it be. It’s something you may need to work at a bit to get good at.
There’s also a very old adage in the high-tech industry that goes 
something like “Don’t design for yourself, because you’re not the user.” 
That couldn’t be further from the truth when it comes to designing 
holographic experiences. We are all still enthralled with this new medium, 
so even the most experienced among us have similar reactions. The shine 
doesn’t wear off that fast. Taking the viewpoint of someone in the mix isn’t 
that hard – it’s natural. Be the ball. Put yourself and your own views inside 
the scenario and explore how you’d feel in that position. Lean into it. Own 
it. Then test it yourself. Be ready to prove your findings to others through 
immersing them, too.
After understanding how you’d feel within the scenario, ask others 
how they’d feel. Listen carefully. Ask questions. Other people’s views are 
often the bolt of lightning you need to disrupt a locked in view. Don’t let 
the sting of a contradictory opinion shut you down. Make sure you really 
get what they’re saying, then ask them to act it out if possible. Now here’s 
Chapter 10  Frame

166
the kicker - take the feedback you get from others more seriously than 
your own perspective. I’m not saying temper or bend your vision to fit 
other’s views, but the fact is there are so many things we can’t see from 
our vantage point we need to err on the side of other’s viewpoints. There’s 
a whole spectrum of things we miss – from cultural norms to intellectual 
sophistication. Political views. Age appropriateness. Technical savviness. 
They all play into how your vision is accepted or not by the audience.
This is another great example where putting people before technology 
helps get you into a much better positon to start from. Consider how 
people will react to your vision before doing much else. It’ll help guide 
every decision from then on.
The Onlookers
Let’s not forget about the people who aren’t directly involved in action. 
They aren’t distanced like an audience in a play. They are standing right 
next to you. Knowing how these onlookers think and feel about what 
they’re witnessing can only help to positively influence the work. They 
may or may not be directly interacting with the digital actors themselves, 
but they are certainly a key part of the overall experience. The participant 
is aware of them and vice versa. They play off each other, perhaps not as 
intensely as a live band and its crowd feed off each other, but there’s a 
constant awareness.
It’s also easy to forget all this holographic stuff is a mighty strange 
thing to behold for the first time as an observer. Let’s not kid ourselves. 
People with headsets, visors, or glasses waving their arms and talking with 
invisible objects or people is pretty strange. It’s hard to not react to that.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

167
 
Don’t kid yourself. People wearing special optics are not  
blending in.
Remember how you reacted the first time you saw someone wearing 
one of those ear-mounted Bluetooth headsets? Exactly. It’s weird. Hard 
to have some reaction or at least an internal conversation as an onlooker. 
Even someone talking to their personal assistant on a mobile gives you 
pause every now and then. Just be aware that we are not quite at that point 
of people regarding this type of interaction as an every day, run of the mill 
occurrence. Something to keep in mind.
You look completely ridiculous wearing any kind of headset or mixed 
reality gear. Just accept it and move on.
Since the participant can see all of the onlookers in mixed reality, they 
probably should come into play in some fashion when as the scenario 
unfolds. Well-designed scenarios fully integrate these spectators into 
the action rather than ignoring their existence. Why not utilize them are 
key elements in the narrative if they exist? And if not, be prepared for 
Chapter 10  Frame

168
interruptions by onlookers and people who genuinely belong in that same 
space as the participant.
The Holograms
You better believe holograms have a unique perspective. Not merely digital 
actors or props, holograms are the stars of the show. They need to emote, 
provoke, and entertain as much as any actor on the stage. That requires a 
perspective and a point-of-view to properly calibrate. This is another great 
design exercise to jump into – put yourself in the position of the hologram, 
whatever it is, and play out the possibilities within the scenario from that 
perspective. We talked earlier about how physically acting out a scene is a 
valuable technique for envisioning. This situation of needing to understand 
a hologram’s perspective and viewpoint is perfect for that technique.
Finally, let’s agree that holograms have feelings, too. Not kidding here. 
They are not just digital constructs that carry out our programming within 
the scenario and do our bidding. They show as much emotion as we do  
(if we as creators think that far into the scenario). We need to treat 
holograms as actors in the play, co-stars in the production, meaningful 
partners in our endeavor. It doesn’t matter whether a hologram is a rock or 
a rock star – they both have the ability to understand and react to anything 
in the scenario if we make it so.
Imagine how it would feel to have a holographic rock react to the 
emotional state of the scenario participant, much like a 1970s mood ring 
would purportedly change colors depending upon its wearer’s emotions. 
Does a mood ring chemically responding to changes in body temperature 
and pulse constitute an emotional perspective? Of course not. But, that’s 
the kind of effect that creates a connection with people and makes them 
believe in the illusion. The mood ring provided a means of tracking and 
responding to physical state, not so different than we can provide via our 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

169
elaborate sensors and cameras. The hologram doesn’t actually need to 
understand the participant, but it can reflect what it observes about their 
current frame of mind to work on that connection.
 
Even the hint of emotion from a hologram endears them to you
Emotions are the most powerful motivators we have in any kind of 
storytelling, so it follows that holograms employing at least a semblance 
of emotion when interacting to any kind of stimuli will add to the overall 
immersive illusion. Using this premise that holograms do really have 
feelings adds a powerful driver of action to any scenario. It can easily be 
overdone or misused, but imagine the possibilities if we learn how to add 
just enough to cross the line into belief.
Transition to Building
Now that we have a basic frame around our idea which includes the right 
perspectives, some initial decisions to guide us, and insight on the key 
aspects, we can turn our attention to the business of making it tangible 
enough for others to experience and comment on.
Chapter 10  Frame

171
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_11
CHAPTER 11
Prototype
So, you wanted to see it actually work?
The prototyping phase of envisioning is all about putting it in gear and 
mashing the accelerator down to the floor. We need to create something 
tangible to experiment with quickly, because the greatest ideas don’t 
amount to diddly squat if people can’t try them out themselves on some 
level. We need to make ideas just real enough to judge whether they’re 
making a connection with the participant or not.
To get there, let’s first cover the general steps in prototyping and what 
type of techniques may be useful to different roles. Then in later chapters, 
we’ll dig deep into specific techniques through real-world examples.

172
 
Prototype using simple shapes to quickly get on-device  
positioning correct
Preflight
Ordinarily, you’d think the prototyping phase of the project means going 
straight into execution mode. If you’re a developer, you start coding. If 
you’re a designer, you start drawing. If you’re a storyteller, you start talking. 
But, we know better than that. There are a few things to decide before we 
start running as fast as possible – the key one being what do we focus on 
and prioritize? 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

173
 
Figure out what envisioning aspect you are going to prioritize  
up front
Another aspect to consider before doing anything else is thinking 
about potential issues that we may run into that could delay or derail 
things. Nothing should stop us from moving ahead with the idea, but it 
is handy to preflight the good and the bad that could happen as we start 
moving quickly. What’s the biggest challenge you can think of right off? No 
big deal really, or it’s really going to take some effort to figure that one out? 
Either way, give it a quick thought before jumping in. Could turn out that 
quick thought changes how you’ll answer some key questions.
What special equipment will you need to run down your idea? Do you 
just need relatively simple means to get the idea across or does it require 
a full-blown VR setup and skilled crew to help? Is a special room or setup 
required? What resources do you have access to?
All those questions should be thought about quickly during the 
preflight check.
Chapter 11  Prototype

174
Focus
Before we leap headlong into our prototyping exercise, we need to reflect 
back on the real reason for creating the prototype in the first place. 
Are we trying to get our idea in front of others as quickly as possible? 
Does our idea need to dramatically impact someone’s thinking? Is our 
prototype meant to silence the critics by demonstrating something 
technically difficult can actually be achieved? Something else?
The hard part here is choosing just one of question to focus on in this 
particular prototyping exercise. It’s easy to fall into the trap of saying is for 
many reasons, but you’ll be spread way too thin if you can’t focus on just 
one reason over the others.
 
Efficient prototyping requires identifying your focus early on
The choice typically falls into one of three categories – seizing an 
opportunity, making an impression, or doing a technical proof. Since there 
will always be prototypes, let’s just pick. Choose whichever focus suits you. 
Got one? Great. Now let’s figure out how to get the prototype done.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

175
Priority
It’s often said we can’t really focus on more than one thing at a time. In 
a similar way, you really won’t be able to go very quickly through the 
prototyping phase if you try to prioritize more than one key aspect of the 
process. 
There’s an old saying among project managers that out of the three 
main aspects of projects to keep in balance (speed, quality, and cost), 
you can really only have two. Same thing applies in prototyping. There are 
natural tradeoffs that prevent you from achieving all three. If you go fast, 
you suffer on quality. If you dig in on quality, you sacrifice speed and cost, 
etc. Except, I’d go even further with mixed reality prototyping and say you 
should consider focusing on just one goal from a process standpoint.
Ruthlessly prioritize just one aspect of your prototyping.
For example, getting the basic idea of your holographic experience 
across as quickly as possible (speed) will prevent you from going super 
deep on details (quality), but it will probably save you time and effort 
(cost). That’s fine if we’re making speed the priority. Sacrificing some 
quality and reducing the amount of work put it gets us to done.
Another example is committing to coding up an actual working demo 
of a key aspect of the experience (quality). You know it will take additional 
time and money (cost), but without that extra effort your idea may not be 
able to proceed much further and lose momentum (speed). Sometimes 
making it real for people is the right choice despite the longer development 
time.
Chapter 11  Prototype

176
The tradeoffs here are endless. Fortunately, there are some pretty clear 
reasons why you’d want to prioritize one aspect over another that we can 
use as guidance.
1. Window of Opportunity
If your goal is to capitalize on a situation that will evaporate quickly, there’s 
no choice but to prioritize going as fast as possible when creating your 
prototype (whatever form that may be). We all have stories of not being 
able to react quickly enough when opportunities present themselves, and 
they are no fun at all to retell. If the window is open, go for it.
Priority = Speed
When you have to force something into existence to illustrate an idea 
quickly, there’s no question you have to prioritize speed of execution over 
everything else, even if that means the overall quality is lower than you’d 
like or it costs more to do because of the time crunch. This holographic 
computing space is moving at light speed, so the limited window of 
opportunity aspect will rise to the top fairly often. Embrace the chance to 
haul ass and get things done as fast as you possibly can. It’s actually a nice 
change if you work on product teams to play it fast and loose rather than 
have to apply rigor to everything you do. 
Table 11-1 discusses the impact on speed of different prototyping 
methods that you may choose. There is no one method that is faster than 
the others – they all rely on your skillset. Choose a method that seems 
reasonably appropriate given your skills and available resources. Are you a 
natural writer? Then maybe writing is fastest for you. Do you have access to 
video production resources and expertise? Then maybe incorporate video 
into your prototyping work. Choose a method that plays off your own skills 
and available resources, and that is also effective in communicating your 
idea to others.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

177
Table 11-1. The impact of focusing on speed in prototyping
Speed = Quick Prototypes
When speed is the priority you’re looking for mediums and methods where 
you can get to the tangible output fast, but that doesn’t mean you have to 
remove any of the methods available to you. Some people are almost as 
fast coding something up as others using a dedicated prototyping tool to 
create in. This is where you need to look closely at your collective skillset 
and match the vehicle to the talent.
Make an Impression
If the goal is to blow away the people who see your prototype for the first 
time, spend all your time figuring out what that signature moment is and 
spend all your time making that work flawlessly. Put your emphasis on a 
quality experience showing off that key capability.
Priority = Quality
There’s never a second chance to make a first impression they say, so if you 
have to nail that first exposure to the idea, quality is your priority. There 
are times when you absolutely have to portray the idea in the best light 
possible, whatever the cost in time or resources. That means investing 
Chapter 11  Prototype

178
in the story flow, getting key interactions right, high quality visuals, and 
possibly making it a working demo to really blow people away when they 
see it. 
Table 11-2 highlights the impact of different prototyping methods 
on quality. Be sure to consider quality along with speed when choosing a 
method. You want “good enough” just as much as “fast enough.” Getting 
both right is important.
Table 11-2. The impact of focusing on quality in prototyping
Quality = Impressive Prototypes
Making a big impression doesn’t mean you have to prototype your concept 
to the nth degree of detail or have every whizzbang feature you thought 
of. What it does mean is you do have to deliver something stunning and 
memorable to your audience. There’s lots of ways to get there, not all 
of them artistic or technical. Using the element of surprise is one of the 
prototyper’s best tools, regardless how it is played out. Find a way to be 
impressive with your method of choice.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

179
Technical Proof 
There are times when important people just won’t believe you can pull 
off that new-to-world feature of your holographic experience, no matter 
how well you describe you’ll do it. Those are the times you’ll have to dig in 
and write the code or create hardware to prove it’s possible. There’s an old 
saying that goes “Code wins.” It’s true.
Priority = Cost
We can look at the cost of technical prototyping in two ways – a negative 
drag on the project, or a normal unavoidable part of doing business. In 
the first case, you’ll spend all your time trying to reduce non-essential 
prototyping activities and approaches which limits your potential output. 
Nothing wrong with doing code prototyping on the cheap, we just need to 
frame the activities a bit differently to be efficient. Conversely, seeing some 
cost to prototyping being normal allows you to focus on the output of the 
exercise and hopefully higher quality feedback. That said, spending lots of 
time and money on technical prototyping doesn’t always return the value 
you’d think. There’s a balance here, and Table 11-3 helps you to find it. 
Table 11-3. The impact of focusing on cost in prototyping
Chapter 11  Prototype

180
If you’re lucky enough to have access to super talented engineer who can 
create a technical proof almost as fast as a designer can put together a good 
wireframe, you’re golden. That’s really the optimal situation for technical 
prototyping since the overall speed is not necessarily sacrificed by building 
out working tech. If things are more iffy than that – perhaps the tech is new 
and full of unknowns, chances are this form of prototyping will take the 
longest of any other. It may be completely justified, but it can get away from 
you from a time perspective if you don’t pay attention to actual progress.
Cost = Technical Prototypes
Doing anything with real code and/or hardware is a time sink any way you 
look at it. Yes, people can be incredibly fast at what they do – but there’s so 
many things that can go wrong with this approach of creating something 
real you have to watch really carefully for cost overruns and estimates 
being way under.
Methods
Now that we are clear on our priority for this prototype, let’s figure out 
what method to use. We have talked about lots of different ways to test 
our ideas out, but which is the best one for this particular idea, focus, and 
priority? How do we determine that?
The method you choose has a lot to do with who you are, what skills 
you have on your team, or what you hope to learn during this work. 
For Designers
Designers are multi-talented, multi-faceted, multi-dimensional thinkers 
and doers. Recognizing that designers can tackle everything from the 
overall feel of the experience all the way down to the specific details of 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

181
interaction, we tend to look at a few general methods that can convey all of 
that and more. If you don’t code, you’ll want to find a developer to help get 
the output of your initial work onto a device.
 
Designers should jot down some key aspects for Devs, not just 
jump into sketching
Common prototyping methods for designers:
Narratives come naturally to many designers as we are required to be 
storytellers in our roles. Being able to verbally convey an exciting story 
about breakthrough experiences should be relatively easy for many 
designers.
Storyboarding is almost an everyday thing for designers, so this will tend 
to be a very quick way to illustrate holographic concepts through sketching 
out frame-based stories like you’d see in film production.
Visual walkthroughs can be done using art tools and a playback 
mechanism like web pages or presentation software. A good example of 
Chapter 11  Prototype

182
this is a PowerPoint deck that contains some transitions and animation to 
get the basic feel across.
Design clickthroughs are typically created using specialized tools for 
rapid prototyping. These apps let you link screens together to allow for 
unattended demos.
AR videos are a quick way to get the basic gist of a holographic experience 
across by leveraging the real world, which is really the point of all this. This 
is a great choice to illustrate how things will work in physical spaces by 
using AR photo effects on your phone or tablet as the enabling mechanism.
Acting things out is seemingly a low fidelity way to illustrate experiences, 
but it’s without question one of the best methods. The involvement of 
people as holograms within experiences brings an unlimited amount of 
functionality to any scenario since it’s being driven by people instead of 
canned imagery or constrained software.
3D scene-based prototypes are done using software that allows the 
composition of 3D models, sound, lighting, and interactivity into spatial 
scenes. Much like game development tools, these specialized apps can 
output full fidelity mixed reality experiences that are deployed to devices.
Code prototypes are not out of reach for multi-­talented designers. In fact, 
many younger designers are just as comfortable coding as they are slinging 
pixels. If you can code up your ideas and get them onto actual devices, 
you’re a unicorn rock star. Leverage it.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

183
For Developers
Knowing how to code in this quickly evolving world of mixed reality is a 
real advantage. Much of the real learning about work truly works well only 
comes from getting prototypes onto devices so they can be experienced 
properly, in full fidelity. Developers may not always have the design skills 
to make things as aesthetically pleasing or easy to work with as a designer 
could, but there’s a lot to be said for just making it work. These code heavy 
methods are the desirable ones for developers to prototype with.
 
Get your code prototypes onto a real device as soon as possible  
to avoid costly mistakes
Common prototyping methods for developers:
Narratives are thought of a bit differently by developers. They typically 
would tell the story of the breakthrough experience as tech walkthrough 
on a whiteboard, diagraming and talking about specific aspects of the tech 
and ecosystem. Just as effective in many ways as anything a designer would 
do for the right audience.
Chapter 11  Prototype

184
3D scene-based prototypes use the same composition apps used by 
designers, but devs will be able to bring a lot more interactivity and special 
behavior to the scenes created within the tool via scripting languages or 
writing custom code. These are super high quality when teaming with a 
designer for higher quality artwork and assets.
Code prototypes are what developers do naturally. They are super-fast 
and good at developing at this level of fidelity and functionality. These 
working code prototypes are the best we can do if a technical proof is 
required to persuade nonbelievers.
Hybrid prototypes bring together hardware, software, and services in new 
and novel ways. They can typically only be executed by Makers, those of us 
who are comfortable connecting hardware elements with custom software. 
Often needed for innovative demos.
For Storytellers
There’s a real talent to telling engaging and memorable stories. Not 
everyone has it. Those of us that do should lean heavily on it to create 
prototypes of their ideas. Some of the best envisioning work that’s ever 
been done was primarily storytelling through high production quality 
vision videos and television commercials. Many marketers, salespeople, 
and executives have the budgets and experience to capture compelling 
stories for this new medium.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

185
 
Storytellers will want to channel their best Don Draper in the 
conference room
Common prototyping methods for storytellers:
Narratives are the core competency of storytellers. We are really good at 
not only telling a good story, but one that’s memorable. That’s gold in the 
prototyping world.
Storyboards serve as the primary way to visually convey stories over 
a period of time. It’s not difficult for anyone to draw up a frame-based 
storyboard, but there’s a real talent to doing it in way that emotes the right 
level excitement to hook participants.
High production value videos are things of beauty. They are what every 
designer wishes could be done for their ideas, but they typically don’t have 
their own budgets for these types of undertakings. These are long and 
involved to produce, but worth it for setting vision of what could be in a 
convincing and memorable way.
Chapter 11  Prototype

186
Funding code prototypes is not that common for storytellers, but look 
at what producers like James Cameron and George Lucas are able to 
accomplish by doing early stage technical proofs as motion tests before 
funding major motion pictures. Same principle.
Environment
It’s becomes pretty apparent after all the discussion about different 
methods that we may need adjust our space to accommodate this type of 
work. Or maybe we need to scout out more appropriate workspaces to get 
the kind of work done that help envision our ideas successfully. 
 
Prototyping environments can be as simple as your desk, or take 
up an entire room
The setup for doing your prototyping and experiments is in many 
ways just as important as the methods you choose to execute them. Mixed 
reality is all about putting holograms within our world, physical or virtual. 
The backdrop for your prototyping could be as simple as the workspace 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

187
you are in. What’s in your workspace that’s interesting. Do you have a 
working VR setup or immersive headset to try ideas out with?
Whatever prototyping environment you decide on at first will 
inevitably change over time.
Output
Regardless of who you are, how you work, and who’s on your team, the 
output of your rapid prototyping work is the only thing that really matters. 
You need to get tangible demos in front of people, so ride like the wind to 
get those demos out there in people’s hands at the right level of fidelity and 
quality given the time you have allocated to get the job done. 
A win is a win, they say. That couldn’t be more true for prototyping.
Chapter 11  Prototype

189
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_12
CHAPTER 12
Test, Refine, Restart
The truth stings, doesn’t it?
The hardest thing for anyone to hear about their idea is that someone else 
doesn’t “get it” or they don’t see the brilliance that sparked the creation 
in the first place. That’s life in the big city. We will always be surprised 
and enlightened by what we hear from other people about the concepts 
we’re envisioning. That’s the whole point of doing this. There’s no way we 
can anticipate what people will react to. Some of the key concepts may 
be totally lost on particular people and excite others. That thing you were 
positive would wow everyone? Nothing.
 
“The best laid plans” they say..

190
All that said, there’s an equally awesome side of putting your work out 
there. People react to it. Maybe even love it. That’s incredibly energizing. 
When you put a quick prototype in front of an audience and they do get it, 
all the hard work and time fades away. Connecting is what we all aspire to 
through envisioning.
Now that we have a prototype to test out and refine, let’s get to it.
Testing
In emerging fields like holographic computing, being able to test out a 
hypothesis quickly and iterate on the findings is critical. The entire space is 
moving, expanding, and evolving in real-time. Our testing approach needs 
to be adapted to that morphing environment.
The days of doing professionally moderated focus groups, controlled 
lab studies, and formal reporting are fading fast in favor of more 
immediate touch points with real customers. Not to mention many 
startups and individual efforts can’t afford to work in that way. Web and 
mobile development practices over the last decade pioneered low-cost 
A/B testing methodologies and continual flighting of small-scale tests. We 
can learn how to leverage those to gain insights into people’s thinking and 
feelings about our ideas. The key is picking the ones that are compatible 
with our quick pace.
“Excuse Me…”
Get comfortable interrupting strangers. The most effective way to quickly 
test out an early stage concept is to just show it to someone who has no 
idea you’re about to ask them anything about it. No bias. No expectations. 
No canned response. This form of guerilla testing is best done one-on-­one, 
politely, respectfully, and in public spaces. Try to match the venue with 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

191
your potential audience if possible. You also need to come up a test 
vehicle that suits that place. For example, you can’t just roll up into your 
local neighborhood Starbuck’s with a full-on VR rig setup without their 
approval. Conversely, you could easily show someone mockups on a 
tablet, laptop, or printed images without causing too much disruption. 
Using a self-contained headset like Microsoft HoloLens or similar is easy, 
but will cause a bit of a spectacle. Whatever, right?
When first approaching someone, quickly explain what you are 
doing, then ask if they’d be ok spending a few minutes giving you their 
reaction and advice. You don’t want to make anyone uncomfortable 
by approaching them unexpectedly, so be aware of any physical and 
verbal cues that this may not be the right person or time. If you notice 
any of them, apologize for interrupting and just walk away. Also realize 
that mixed reality is a very new concept to many people, so you might 
have to give them a bit of background without coloring their thinking or 
biasing their response. We’re looking for honest first reaction, not coerced 
feedback. Listen, don’t argue or dispute what people are saying. Just record 
their responses in some way and find your next willing participant.
A rewarding aspect of this kind of quick hit testing is the unexpected 
resonance or excitement when someone is blown away by your idea.
Recorded Session
Another effective way to get feedback on early stage ideas you’ve 
envisioned is to recruit people to come into a controlled space and record 
them (with permission) as they experience things for the first time. Just 
setup a relatively quiet space where you can talk with them as they are 
engaging. Shoot a video of them talking through what they see, hear, and 
feel – it will be invaluable when trying to objectively evaluate the result of 
Chapter 12  Test, Refine, Restart

192
the test. We often remember things a bit differently than it happens from 
the camera’s perspective. Good to have that other view to refer back to.
 
Use a video-capable DSLR camera on a tripod to participate 
yourself
Some prototyping methods produce output that can be used as 
physical props in the test process, such as printouts of images you 
created or video sequences. Best to let the test participant hold them or 
manipulate those themselves. It makes it a bit more direct and personal.
Whenever possible, digital prototypes should be used on-device to 
test out ideas. That might be as simple as a click through slide deck, or 
as immersive as a full on working technology prototype. Don’t be afraid 
to put things that are rough in front of people. Any level of fidelity works 
for these digital demos. These moments are where we get a more visceral 
reaction and truer indication of connection or not.
Either way, you’ll want to video record both the external view of the 
person experiencing it within a physical space, and also the internal or 
in-device first person view of whatever tech you are using. One exciting 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

193
new development here is the ability to video record everything about the 
test session using advanced video compositing techniques that give us a 
complete view of the experience.
Using the Spectator View technology with the Microsoft HoloLens and 
an HD video camera, we can see and hear the person interacting with our 
holographic prototype from a third person perspective. It creates a movie 
like effect where we’re seeing the scene from an observer’s vantage point. 
Very helpful to take this viewpoint as it tends to be much easier to watch 
due to the stability of the camera versus the shakiness of a first-person 
camera viewpoint.
 
Using “Spectator View” with HoloLens captures people and 
holograms (source: Microsoft)
The same type of composited scene is possible with VR headsets 
and green screens using consumer grade equipment. The visuals 
generated from these are striking because of the immersive nature of the 
environments. Seeing the person, the digital content, and the space all 
together in one view is magical.
Chapter 12  Test, Refine, Restart

194
 
Green screen techniques allow other people to see your experience
Even though using VR provides a completely immersive experience 
versus seeing part of the physical room around you, it gives us a great 
workbench to experiment within and measure responses to.
Wide Release
The in-person and recorded session approaches don’t scale up very well, 
so if you need to validate the early stage idea with a much wider array of 
people, consider trying to get your prototypes out to diverse audience 
through social media or via recruiting within online discussion groups. 
This approach is a bit more unusual in the case of envisioning early stage 
concepts as it’s hard to have any sort of back and forth with the participant. 
Also, keep in mind it’s a completely uncontrolled environment and you’ll 
get the expected noise in with actual feedback.
The obvious challenges here is produce a prototype that can setup 
and experienced unsupervised. We also need to make it easy to share 
comments with us either during or after trying it out. There are lots of 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

195
online services for setting up feedback channels, post surveys, and keeping 
track of suggestions for improvements. If you’re working at this large scale, 
invest some time in leveraging these mechanisms. This effort is obviously 
important to determining where you stand with this envisioned idea.
The upside of this approach is getting to a much wider audience for 
testing, much faster than any other way. The downside doing this testing 
in the open with little control over the sharing and discussion of these 
activities. Perhaps fine in some cases, detrimental to furthering the idea in 
others.
Results
Internalizing feedback objectively is extremely difficult. We’re emotional 
beings. Actions don’t lie. Criticism cuts deep. Try not to interpret or map 
what you saw and heard to a favorable outcome. It’s human nature to 
want our ideas to be liked. There’s an inherent bias to be big fans of our 
own ideas. That said, let it be what it is. Good or bad, people are going to 
say and do some things you never expected. That’s not a bad thing. Any 
feedback is valuable if you try to understand the comments as a quick 
read on a new idea. Everyone is different. People are unpredictable. What 
one person thinks or does never defines it for all. Don’t be discouraged by 
negative feedback or overly encouraged by positive reactions. Don’t dig in, 
be open to changing things up.
Refinement
Testing is just the beginning of the fun. Once we have some initial feedback 
from other people, it’s time to tighten things up and move forward. In 
some cases, that means making major changes in approach or execution. 
Don’t be afraid of doing that level of adjustment. These are early stage 
Chapter 12  Test, Refine, Restart

196
ideas, so we could have missed the mark. Other times we can get away 
with small tweaks and call it good. And as with everything else we do in 
envisioning, this phase needs to go fast. There are a few useful things to 
plan for during this phase of the envisioning process – making changes 
while you test, and trying different approaches in flight.
Quick Turn Changes
It’s optimal to be able to take in feedback, make a quick change, and then 
retest to see if there’s an improvement. That kind of quick turn refinement 
takes some prior planning though. It’s easily accomplished if you are using 
particular kinds of prototypes that allow for that. For example, if someone 
says they were confused by a certain response from a hologram, it would 
be great to jump in and make a change to try out on the next participant. 
If it’s a code prototype, there are ways to structure your code and assets to 
allow for fast changes. In a similar way, redrawing images, changing out 
physical props, or acting the part of an element in the experience to try 
something new can get you better data.
Alternate Methods
There will be times that it becomes very apparent the method you are 
using to test out your idea isn’t working. It may be that the medium doesn’t 
give you enough fidelity to get everything across that you’re trying for. 
Or conversely, the method you’re using is too literal when you needed 
more left to the imagination at this point on the envisioning process. 
Whatever triggers it, there are times when quick thinking is needed to 
save the day and keep gathering valuable feedback from people. Don’t be 
afraid to jump in and change things up, even if it requires some degree of 
improvisation or handwaving to hold the story together.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

197
Whatever works is the best way to proceed. Just because a highly 
crafted video piece isn’t getting the point across well enough, doesn’t 
mean that you can’t just start drawing a storyboard out on a whiteboard 
to keep the person engaged and offering up ideas. Try anything you 
think might work. Don’t be self-conscious about doing this in front of the 
person. They’ll appreciate your creativity and drive to get more feedback 
and data.
Reflection
Once we have enough comments and video to analyze, there will be a 
general impression that comes through about the holographic experience 
you originally conceived. It’s important to note, good or bad. That general 
impression is often far more important than feedback on specific features 
or aspects. It lets you know if you’re on the right track or if you have missed 
making a connection with participant for some reason.
When someone says, “It was cool, but blah,” we tend to focus on what 
words follows the “but”. That part tells us what went wrong or was missing. 
Nobody likes hearing criticism of their big ideas, whether constructively 
conveyed or not, but it is valuable to try and work through objectively. Yet, 
the first part of that “It was cool…” is the general impression that is easy to 
dismiss if we’re too focused on the criticism part. Zoom out a few levels to 
try and give yourself some perspective on the entire body of feedback. It’s 
this process of stepping back and talking about feedback that allows us to 
actually reflect on what people are saying.
Chapter 12  Test, Refine, Restart

198
 
Reflection doesn’t help unless you actually give it the time and 
attention it truly deserves
Reflection will invariably lead to a decision about continuing on with 
the idea as its currently captured, or taking another shot at it with the 
benefit of all this feedback, or just moving on to something else.
Press On
If you and the team are encouraged by what you observed and discussed, 
there’s no question you’ll want to keep pushing on. Try to challenge 
yourself to not be satisfied with what you already have. Look for small 
refinements or big shifts to get an even better experience for people next 
time. And don’t forget to savor the win. You successfully envisioned 
something that connected with people. That deserves some celebration.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

199
Reboot
Having a test go poorly because people don’t get the key aspects of the 
holographic experience is sometimes a blessing in disguise. It can result in 
you refocusing your effort on getting to the essence more quickly or clearly. 
There may be certain aspects you didn’t work out quite well enough that 
will now get attention. Or perhaps you overestimated how easy or clear 
something would come through to people. Whatever it is, you missed the 
mark. This is your chance to fix it – or it’s your chance to start over again. 
Embrace it. Love it, in fact. There’s not a Designer I have ever met that 
didn’t relish the chance to try something again once they’ve executed it 
once. You invariably learned something and will have the opportunity to 
do better next time. Rebooting the envisioning process with all of this new 
input will lead to some amazing new thoughts and executions.
Abandon
There’s a point in some prototyping projects when you have to make that 
tough decision to stop work and move on. No shame in that. In fact, I’d say 
you learn more from this “failure to connect” than any successful testing 
session. Having to move away from things you worked hard at or are 
emotionally invested in open up all kinds of new thoughts about how to do 
things differently next time. Those are the fuel we need to envision better 
next time. Walking away from a particular execution of an idea is not giving 
up on the idea, it’s pointing out that you didn’t choose the right way to 
depict or make the connection. Walk away, but explore why that may have 
happened.
Chapter 12  Test, Refine, Restart

200
Restart
The formal end of any envisioning exercise is to start again.
Regardless of how the testing, evaluation, and reflection on outcomes 
went, you just became a better Envisioneer by listening carefully to the 
feedback from people and deciding what to do with it. It’s never a waste 
of time to go through this process. You always can find some new aspect 
of the people, process, technology, or experience that informs a better 
idea. Then immediately restart the next envisioning process with what you 
learned this time.
Push yourself to try working a completely different way or use a new 
technique that will challenge you. Keep generating more ideas and testing 
them out. It’s the only way that your best ideas will come to light and 
eventually make their way into the hands of real people.
Sometimes (re)starting is the only way to finish.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

201
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_13
CHAPTER 13
Invaluable Tools
“Right tool for the right job” doesn’t apply anymore.
Designing experiences for mixed reality is an expedition into the unknown. 
You can’t possibly know all the right tools and gear to bring along ahead of 
time. And we need to be fine with that. It’s just too new of a design field to 
immediately get the best way to proceed at any particular time. The only 
thing we know for sure is it takes a willingness to experiment, learn from 
our failures, and then get back into the action by trying some off the wall 
ideas to keep things moving. Our toolset will evolve over time, informed by 
trial and error.
 
Tools of the trade for mixed reality envisioning include  
VR headsets

202
Ingenuity
The type of envisioning we’re doing requires quite the diverse toolset – 
some of which haven’t even been invented yet. That’s where you come in. 
One of the ideas you’re chasing down may need a new kind of tool to be 
fabricated right on the spot. Some ingenuity is required.
Every day brings inspiring examples of people figuring out how to 
use existing tools for completely new reasons in this field. Some of them 
are fairly complicated, like leveraging VR motion controllers as camera 
trackers for video compositing (probably not the inventor’s original 
intention) or creating a whole new software tool from scratch just to help 
designers prototype the placement, scale, and manipulation of items.
Other times we’ll be using tried and true old friends in completely new 
ways. Who thought PowerPoint would be so useful animating holographic 
scenes quickly? Did anyone see the voice recorder app on your phone as 
the best way to get your narrative down?
The search for new ways to create will have us regularly checking into 
tools that we’ve only heard about in passing. Needing to find a specialized 
tool for just part of scenario is situation normal. Downloading, trying, and 
discarding trials of things happens pretty regularly, too. It’s all part of being 
willing to try out ideas regardless of what needs to be learned along the 
journey.
Just like the toolset, our traditional roles as people on the team are 
expanded, blown apart, and recombined in new ways. Developers are 
sketching things out regularly. Designers create interactive prototypes by 
coding. Storytellers embrace new methods that combine both technology 
and personal interaction. There are no hard lines that separate our 
disciplines in mixed reality. We are all who we need to be at that particular 
moment to move things along.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

203
By now it must be apparent that exploring and creating for this brave 
new world of mixed reality means we’ll all be uncomfortable at points 
because we just plain don’t know how to get to the end. And honestly, 
that’s the fun of it.
Design Tools
There are a handful of digital design tools that just about every designer 
uses – Photoshop, Illustrator, and After Effects. If you’re into 3D, throw 
in Maya or Cinema 4D. Mobile? Sketch, right. All of these tools and 
many more augment our natural ability to visualize, draw, model, paint, 
and generally be crafty with our hands and minds. We have become so 
comfortable using them in particular ways they often become the basis for 
most of what we do design-wise each day.
That’s about to change.
Envisioning for mixed reality is all about your ability to blend 
convincing digital holograms into the world. There’s no app for that. 
We have to come up with ways of combining existing features of several 
different tools together to synthesize these visions. There’s literally no 
blueprint for how to do this well. Embrace the fun of discovering how to 
accomplish these new effects, not how fast or easily they come. You’ll be 
surprised at how many novel ways of getting things to work pop into your 
head when you’re in it for the ride.
Here are a few tools to consider combining with others to create a new 
playbook and tool palette for your mixed reality work.
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

204
Paint 3D
One of the new breed of apps that makes 3D approachable for anyone, 
Microsoft Paint 3D is deceivingly powerful. Available for free as part of 
the Microsoft Windows 10 Creators Update release, Paint 3D builds on 
the simple paint program metaphor by effortlessly extending it into three 
dimensions – while adding mind-blowing new capabilities. Beside the 
basics of extruding simple drawings and shapes into 3D objects, Paint 3D 
also helps you place beautiful pre-built 3D models within a virtual space 
that can be shared with others online. Hundreds of high quality models 
are available from the online service Microsoft Remix3D.com, making easy 
to put scenes together quickly if modeling isn’t your strong suit. Think of 
anything you create in Paint 3D as a stand-in hologram.
 
Microsoft Paint 3D is a great intro to 3D and terrifically useful in 
prototyping
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

205
In a pleasant throwback UI surprise, Paint 3D offers a pro-active 
training overlay to get novices into 3D very quickly by previewing what 
the basic widgets do. The focus is clearly on the creator new to 3D, but the 
app delivers the goods for experts, too. The ability to export to a 3D model 
in geometry format for use in Unity and other composition programs is 
a huge plus. Fast in, fast out. The rendering and shading of objects is way 
better than you’d think for an app like this.
SUPERPOWER – Paint 3D is an incredibly useful tool for quick 
creation of placeholder holograms and composition of the scene to be 
translated in the real world. No device required. And the ability to paint 
directly on a 3D object is just crazy for a seemingly simple tool like this.
HoloSketch
As a mixed reality designer, there are times when you just need to “block 
out” an idea in the physical space it would occupy as a sanity check. 
Nothing can substitute for seeing how holograms will actually appear 
within the physical space you are working in. HoloSketch from Microsoft 
Design Labs is great at that task without requiring anything other than a 
HoloLens. Available in the Windows Store for HoloLens, just run the app 
and start pulling in models from OneDrive or create your own on the spot 
with built-in primitives and text.
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

206
 
HoloSketch excels at the composition part of prototyping  
(source: Microsoft)
The ability to compose a scene is just one step in the prototyping 
process, but it’s a critical one. Ask any filmmaker about what makes a 
scene memorable, and beside the emotional aspect of the dialogue and 
interaction, the placement and relative positioning of elements in the 
scene makes a huge difference in the impact for the viewer. HoloSketch 
gives you a straightforward way to try out many iterations of your ideas.
SUPERPOWER – HoloSketch gives you the ability to easily import 
and place holograms in-device. Nothing beats the ability to quickly 
holographic placeholders within the physical world.
Unity
Without question, the most useful all-around tool for working in mixed 
reality is Unity. This constantly improving tool allows designers and 
developers to create, compose, and test out their mixed reality ideas with 
real models and code within an integrated development environment (IDE).  
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

207
Formerly considered a more technical tool for multi-platform game 
development, Unity is now very approachable tool for anyone to do simple 
modeling, 3D scene composition, wiring up interactivity, and applying 
incredible special effects.
Unity supports the preview of your project within its own window or 
a software device emulator, and serves as the first stop for many in the 
development path to getting actual bits on device.
 
Unity gives anyone a straightforward way to get from idea to 
working code
Designers have often loathed the prospect of learning true 3D 
modelers and animation systems, not to mention development 
environments. Although Unity is all of those things, the benefits of diving 
in and leveraging it get real with your ideas far outweighs any effort 
overcoming the slight learning curve. It’s also built to support a very 
interactive and fluid workflow. Trust, me, Unity is your best friend for 
prototyping and turning your envisioning work into real projects.
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

208
SUPERPOWER – Unity is a one stop shop for everything mixed reality. 
This must have tool enables you to go all the way from idea to modeling, 
composition, adding object interactivity, previewing behavior, and finally 
preparing a project for on-device deployment.
Adobe Audition
Sound is the most overlooked aspect of mixed reality experiences (initially). 
Once you realize how impactful the right sounds and ambient soundtrack 
have on the overall experience you will automatically start figuring out 
where to incorporate them. That’s where Adobe Audition comes in.
The mixed reality platforms allow you to place ordinary sounds you’d 
create or edit in Audition anywhere in the 3D space. By setting those 
sounds to particular sound levels and applying special effects, you can help 
the listener hear them coming from discreet positions – perhaps behind or 
even above them. That kind of spatial sound magic needs you to add code 
or assign sonic behaviors to objects in programs like Unity. Spatial sound is 
a very convincing effect and incredibly useful interface tool for designers.
 
Adobe Audition delivers what you’ll need for audio design
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

209
Audio software and 3D modeling software are among the most 
complex and scary looking software humans have ever produced. Don’t 
let that dissuade you from jumping in and learning just enough about the 
basics to get some great use out of this pro quality tool. Coming up with 
just the right sound for your ambient environment, individual interactions 
with holograms, and interface cues can all make the difference between a 
good app and a breakthrough experience.
Adobe Audition is just one of the many sound creation and editing 
apps you could use to record and manipulate sound – its key benefit being 
its high quality and comes included with an Adobe Creative Cloud suite 
subscription.
SUPERPOWER – every sound-related function available to you in 
one place with Audition. Sound is so important to the overall holographic 
experience that learning how to leverage the power here is a real advantage 
to the envisioneer.
Mental Canvas
The first time you see a 3D sketching app at work you realize it’s completely 
natural, obvious, and one of those things that you could even imagine 
existing for real. Mental Canvas is a giant leap forward for sketching and 
an absolute wonder to use. Using a standard digital sketchbook metaphor, 
Mental Canvas brings an innovative set of functionalities to the task of 
sketching out scenes – the ability to zoom through the 3D space that your 
sketch exists in.
Formerly, digital sketches were done in layers just like in Photoshop. 
Mental Canvas changes the game by adding depth to the mix, made even 
more graceful and fluid through the use of the Microsoft Dial and a Pen on 
the Microsoft Surface touchscreen computer.
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

210
 
Mental Canvas brings a third dimension to sketching using the 
Surface Dial and Pen
The combination of the Dial, Pen, and Surface touchscreen creates the 
perfect storm of productivity for the drawing crowd. There’s never been 
anything quite like this available to artists and designers to add depth to 
scenes in such a natural way. Huge advance.
SUPERPOWER – being able to zoom through space to examine 
different areas of your holographic idea sketch is ground-breaking and 
incredibly useful during rapid ideation. This setup allows you to move 
through the scene in early sketch form to convey key elements.
Photoshop and Illustrator
Unlike many other areas of production design, you shouldn’t reach for 
these workhorse tools first. Using Adobe Photoshop or Adobe Illustrator 
would mean you’re probably thinking of locking in to high-fidelity comps 
of your ideas in 2D, which is fine, but not the optimal path to fully immerse 
yourself for mixed reality. Once you get going with other techniques, these 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

211
tools are great for compositing static elements together into comps to 
share with people, creating storyboard frames, or doing some conceptual 
illustrations. 
It’s hard to overstate the utility of these two applications in the 
workflow for mixed reality (or any creative endeavor for that matter). The 
interesting twist is that we’ll be using them more like a game designer 
would – for conceptual sketches, high-quality texture creation, image 
labels, stand-in assets, and more.
 
Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Illustrator are your best choice for 
2D asset creation
These incredibly deep tools also come in handy to create just any kind 
of visual asset imaginable for our prototypes ahead of time so that part of 
our process flows more smoothly. There are other apps that do this same 
kind of creation and editing, but none are used more widely, and have 
more online tutorials walking you through amazing techniques step-by-­
step.
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

212
SUPERPOWER – same as always, Adobe Photoshop and Adobe 
Illustrator are the best at what they do. They are highly reliable tools to 
help produce the critical parts of our digital assets.
Development Tools
When envisioning your projects, there will be times when you have to 
build out the prototype as working code. No getting around that. Perhaps 
it’s because you need to do a technical proof of some innovative feature, or 
it’s important to test out a theory about how things could work on-device. 
Sometimes it you may even need to hookup peripherals, sensors, or other 
pieces of hardware to get a working prototype together. Regardless, there 
are only a few programming editors and professional environments people 
universally trust to be solid and up to managing anything from quick 
one-offs to hugely complex projects. In these early days of envisioning, 
anything goes, but I’d suggest giving yourself a solid head start by using 
these proven toolsets. 
Visual Studio
The various flavors of Microsoft Visual Studio serve as industrial-strength 
development environments for mixed reality development. The Windows 
Mixed Reality platform requires this and the Windows SDK to produce the 
packages that are deployed to the device itself. Familiar to any developer 
who has leveraged Microsoft technologies, this dependable workhorse 
has some useful new features to help with deployment and debugging of 
mixed reality apps.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

213
 
Microsoft Visual Studio is an industrial-strength development 
tool for mixed reality
The incredible flexibility, extensibility, and accessibility of Visual 
Studio lends itself well to being a foundational part of this evolving 
platform. As new libraries and SDKs come online for mixed reality, you can 
be they’ll be available within Visual Studio first.
SUPERPOWER – Visual Studio has always been known for its world-­
class debugging tools, whether using an emulator or remotely on device. 
IntelliSense rules.
Apple Xcode
There are some holographic prototyping techniques that Apple Xcode and 
its associate augmented reality development SDK called ARKit would be 
perfect for. Being able to simulate putting a hologram into a physical space 
using your iPhone or iPad as the viewing device is more than handy. Even 
though I wouldn’t consider the augmented reality objects ARKit displays 
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

214
as true holograms, they are great stand-ins. The fact that they’re available 
on such ubiquitous hardware makes this a very attractive choice for trying 
out quick thoughts about placement and feel if you don’t have access to 
the HoloLens or other mixed reality headsets.
 
Xcode and the ARKit enable you to create Augmented Reality  
apps for iOS devices
Another advantage to using Apple Xcode to develop some of your 
prototypes is taking the opportunity to see how iOS and MacOS apps fit 
into the mixed reality ecosystem. There are plenty of places where using 
the most popular services from inside your mixed reality experience is 
exactly the right thing to do. No better way to investigate those possible 
outcomes than trying it out in-context on a device.
SUPERPOWER – Xcode is a fantastic development environment for 
coding in, and let’s face it – iOS is still a fun platform to develop and  
test on.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

215
GitHub
You might not think right off that a popular source code repository and 
revision management system like GitHub is a key tool for mixed reality 
development but given the number of changes and updates needed to 
move your projects quickly forward, this service is almost a must have.
Besides the obvious benefits of keeping our projects organized and 
shareable, there are so many occasions where having a previous version 
of code or assets would have saved us an enormous amount of time in the 
form of do-overs and recoding.
 
GitHub makes it easy to version control and share your project 
with other developers
Another benefit of using a service like GitHub is the ability to create 
your own public profile that details your interests, skills, and recent 
projects. What a great way to find people who share similar tech interests. 
Collaboration and sharing are highly encouraged in this type of tool, but 
you can also protect your projects as private if you need space to explore 
on your own.
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

216
SUPERPOWER – GitHub is the industry’s best practice for keeping 
code accessible, backed up, and shareable among collaborators. You want 
to be able to easily rollback or fork branches for new explorations with no 
fear.
Storytelling Tools
There have always been great tools to help capture the elements of 
persuasive storytelling. Some of them are quite manual (writing down 
a narrative on paper, drawing a storyboard, making an animation) 
and others almost effortless (recording someone’s voice, filming their 
actions, using a book as reference). In the case of getting down your best 
storytelling ideas for envisioning purposes, we have a diverse set of tools 
to rely on. They let us quickly capture the essence of the story so we can 
convey to other people with too much effort – which it turns out is the most 
important aspect of all this.
Voice Recorder
There’s no faster way to get your ideas across to other people than just 
speaking them out loud. Straight from your thoughts to their ears, no tools 
to get in the way of your flow. Storytellers love telling stories obviously, so 
let’s leverage that for envisioning ideas.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

217
 
Using a smartphone to record your narrative is fast and  
(mostly) free
There are a gazillion free voice recording apps for just about every kind 
of smartphone there is, so no reason to not have one ready to record your 
thoughts whenever the ideas hit you. These apps all allow you to get the 
recording onto your computer or share with other people.
SUPERPOWER – We love hearing people’s voices telling us engaging 
stories.
Smartphone Video
Just about every smartphone has a decent quality video camera built-­
in. People use them without even thinking to record events and share 
snippets of video on social media. We often have friends or family act 
silly and do things they’d normally not do just because the video is being 
recorded. We can use that to our advantage by having people help us act 
out the scenes behind our holographic ideas. Some people will be the 
holograms and others the participants. Have some fun with it.
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

218
 
Getting people (or things) to help act out your holographic 
scenarios isn’t that hard
We are all so familiar with how to share these recorded videos with 
teammates, collaborators, or prospective audiences, this overly obvious 
tool should become a very popular way of getting early ideas in front of 
people.
SUPERPOWER – Video is a super effective way to get the gist of an 
experience across because you are using real people in physical spaces 
who can react to direct and ad lib where necessary.
Autodesk SketchBook
Autodesk SketchBook is still one of my favorite tools. Here’s why… even 
the most rudimentary and quickly drawn storyboard sequence has more 
power to convey and move people than most professionally written 
commercials. There’s a natural connection formed when we see hand 
drawn artwork of any kind – even better when it’s trying to tell us a story. 
Perhaps it’s all those childhood memories of a happier time drawing away 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

219
for the pure pleasure of it. Not sure. But, I do know when storyboards are 
drawn in this way the command people’s attention, at least for a short 
period. And as storytellers, that’s all we can ask for.
 
Autodesk SketchBook is a great digital storyboarding tool for 
envisioning
The other important thing about SketchBook is it was designed for 
the pen. So much better than trying to draw with a mouse! It’s like night 
and day if you’ve never tried drawing that way. Another key to getting the 
most out of SketchBook is using the layers just like you would in an Adobe 
product. It gives you a simple way to draw the background frames, then 
start layering elements and characters on top, successively. Don’t like what 
you did? Erase it or just hide that layer. SketchBook Pro is an upgrade that 
gives you unlimited layers among other amazing features. I’d buy it just for 
the unlimited layers, they are so fundamental to using the tool.
SUPERPOWER – SketchBook lets you make that deep emotional 
connection with your story by the nature of it being hand drawn. And it’s a 
world-class digital sketching tool to boot.
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

220
Filmmaker Live
What if you could see a mixed reality sequence unfold just like you were 
directing a motion picture? What if nothing had to be prebuilt before you 
jumped in and starting building sets and adding actors? Filmmaker Live by 
Accelerated Pictures is a new breed of cinematic tool that lets you do just 
that. It brings new-to-world envisioning capabilities to the iPad, Surface 
tablet, or even smartphones. The app puts you in the director’s chair and 
gives you the power of an entire film crew to block out scenes, figure out 
timing, and actually run the actors through their lines and cues. It’s a 
completely different way of thinking about envisioning. Brilliant and fun.
 
Filmmaker Live is a cinematic tool for storytelling in MR and VR
By taking the perspective of a cinematic production, we not only get 
a glimpse into that world of filmmaking, but our world of mixed reality 
design and development takes on a different feel – more along the lines 
of what a cinematographer may experience as they search for the right 
camera angles and aesthetic look. It’s a fascinating learning experience 
and very helpful in thinking about how our participants and onlookers will 
experience the action.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

221
SUPERPOWER – Filmmaker Live gives us a glimpse into the future of 
envisioning. By taking the viewpoint of a director on set, we can focus on 
the cinematic elements of our story – something that’s been more difficult 
to understand and practice before now.
PowerPoint
Last but certainly not least, the venerable presentation app Microsoft 
PowerPoint is one of your best methods for getting the story across in its 
early form. I’m not saying you should put together a densely-packed slide 
with bullet points telling your story in stilted sentence fragments, no. I am 
suggesting that you may not know how incredibly powerful the much-­
maligned program is at conveying stories using imagery and animation. 
In fact, I’d bet that you have never really witnessed the full storytelling 
capabilities of PowerPoint or Keynote for that matter.
 
Your story ideas can be animated and annotated quickly in 
PowerPoint
Chapter 13  Invaluable Tools

222
These programs have the ability to embed images, video, sound, text, 
ink, links, and true interactivity to create stunningly persuasive stories. 
The animation capabilities of individual elements or groups is way more 
sophisticated than most people realize. Dozens of special effects and 
timings can be applied to slide transitions, clicks or touches, and auto-­
playing sequences.
And the best part of using this type of presentation tool is the ability for 
anyone else to edit it easily. The collaborative nature of our work makes 
PowerPoint an incredibly useful tool to work with.
SUPERPOWER – The ability for anyone to create and share these story 
ideas makes PowerPoint or other presentation software a great tool choice. 
The super bonus here is that anyone else can edit the story so easily and 
send it back, making collaboration simple.
Future Tools
There’s undoubtedly going to be some ultra slick new tools and 
approaches for building out holographic experiences by the time you read 
this. My hope is that you are among those who share your best thoughts on 
how to get from A to B quickly, using unorthodox or even crazy sounding 
methods to get things done. Be part of the solution for other explorers.
Tools are only as good as the imagination flying them.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

Holographic Designs
PART IV

225
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_14
CHAPTER 14
HoloScenes
If a picture is worth a thousand words, why go 
further?
Designers understand and harness the power of illusion all the time. 
Arranging elements just so and using visual effects to transform our 
perception of them can make even the improbable seem real.
This first holographic envisioning technique we’ll walk through is all 
about illusion, which makes it incredibly handy for creating a memorable 
impression. As described in this chapter, it’s very well suited to anyone 
who can fly common graphics applications just enough to do basic 
manipulations. This method also works really well for me in situations 
where I need to get a particular aesthetic or visual feel across. Even though 
it’s highly visual, it becomes quick to execute once you get the hang of it. 
As good for realistic as it is for fanciful explorations.

226
 
Example exploration from my HoloScenes envisioning series
Filmed on Location
This rapid envisioning methodology was developed while working on 
a series of holographic design explorations I named HoloScenes. The 
key part of the technique is using photos of real-world empty spaces as 
a backdrop for fully integrated people and holograms to get the desired 
effect for your concept. Done well, it’s an inspirational experience. Don’t 
be self-conscious about the visual quality, just use it as a handy technique 
for depicting your ideas quickly. 
Interestingly enough, this technique wasn’t intentional or well-­
thought out. It just evolved very naturally over time, almost unconsciously. 
As we talked about earlier, for whatever reason I am strongly drawn to 
photograph empty spaces I come across in my travels. There’s only ever a 
brief impression at the moment I snap the picture of what could be there in 
the future, but I’m sure something belongs there. That something almost 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

227
always ends up being people interacting with holograms. I have no ideas 
why my mind works that way, but it’s the reason I ended up writing this 
book. Weird. I know.
Eventually, after collecting lots of photos of empty spaces in my 
Camera Roll, I had the idea of doing a series based on them. The thought 
of using smartphone photos from all over the world as the foundational 
element for the explorations felt good to me. Global locales seemed to 
help fuel ideas for very different experiences. So, that part became very 
intentional – purposely trying to depict very different experiences based 
on situation, location, and what time of day they occur. Diversity of 
experience became an early decision in my envisioning framework for this 
series.
As I sorted through dozens of photos I identified as potential locations, 
holograms started appearing out of thin air within each photo along with 
outlines of people. From there, it was relatively easy to mentally fill out 
the motion, sounds, and behaviors very quickly. That led naturally to me 
piloting an imaginary camera around the scene, looking for interesting 
angles.
That last interaction made me think about the cinematic aspect of 
composing these explorations – which is how I arrived at naming this 
technique Filmed on Location. There was always a running inside joke at 
the end of Pixar short films in the 1980’s that referred by them being filmed 
on location with RenderMan, a ground breaking 3D photorealistic renderer 
subsequently used in their animated motion pictures. I kind of felt like a 
Pixar film director during pre-production when thinking about my own 
compositions, so the idea stuck. Turned out to be fun and useful way to 
describe it.
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

228
The Technique
Working through the process of building out a scene using a photo as the 
foundational backdrop helped define much of what I now consider the 
best way to quickly envision.
The steps to re-create HoloScenes images shown in Table 14-1 are 
quite straightforward and map onto the envisioning flow we outlined 
earlier.
Table 14-1. A technique for envisioning that feels like it was  
filmed on location
Let’s dig into how this type of photo-based envisioning works  
step-by-­step.
Step 1. IDEATE
There are two ways to approach ideation with this technique. The first is 
a casual journey where ideas come to you over time, and the other is a 
focused exploration of particular concepts. Both work well, it just depends 
on the situation you find yourself in.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

229
Casual - Unlike some kinds of more involved envisioning, there really 
isn’t a discreet ideation phase in this case because I find it to be a bit more 
accidental. Once you learn to capture inspirational scenes in photos as 
you encounter them, this type of envisioning tends to just happen at its 
own pace. Think of taking location photos as a continuous background 
task. You may end up never using them, but you will have amassed a great 
collection to pick from.
Focused – If there’s a very particular concept you want to test out 
with people, the HoloScenes technique helps you put it into context. 
You’ll be on the lookout for a certain kind of scene to support your idea, 
so you could go on a very focused hunt for photos of it. Either way, let the 
concepts come to you naturally. If you try to force ideas into the scenes you 
find on your travels, it will show through.
Photograph empty spaces
Taking photos of interesting real-world scenes you come across is the best 
way I’ve found to jumpstart the holographic envisioning process. Think 
of taking such photos as a new habit for scouting film locations of your 
holographic experiences.
Be on the lookout for physical places and spaces that are calling out 
for something to be added holographically. Whenever you get that feeling, 
immediately stop what you’re doing, whip out your phone, and snap a 
picture. Move along.
Sometimes places will strike you as “empty but cool” for some reason. 
Remember to go back through your pictures when you have time to 
harvest any of those that move you. Quickly consider the possibilities when 
triaging the photos. Then share the promising ones with yourself or set 
them aside in a collection you’ll want to grow over time.
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

230
There’s nothing that makes one photo better than another for 
envisioning, but I have found it’s easier to work with places that have 
furniture or interesting features, but no people. Try for a mix of daylight 
and indoor shots. Pay attention to the colors in the scene – they are 
powerful cues.
Use your Camera Roll to collect photos of empty places for  
rapid envisioning
I can’t tell you how many photos I have of empty spaces. Hundreds, 
certainly. Photos full of things, but no people. And therein lies the most 
interesting paradox in envisioning holographic experiences — you cannot 
have a successful design without people being the design center. Yet, many 
of the most interesting ideas come to us when looking at empty space. 
Go figure. Having any people appear in these spaces could distract you 
from what it could be used for, so best to shoot empty spaces and let your 
imagination fill them in.
Tip  Using your own photos rather than pulling random images off 
the Web keeps you out of copyright infringement issues.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

231
Step 2. FRAME
Making a few good decisions right up front will allow the rest of the 
envisioning process to flow. That’s what framing is all about.
Choose a scenario backdrop
There will be a time when you need to illustrate how using holograms in a 
particular situation would play out for some project that you are working 
on. Designers do this kind of storytelling all the time. While trying to help 
other people visualize how things would play out in certain scenarios, 
consider using some of the photos you’ve taken to establish the feel of the 
scene and get across some key aspects without too much effort.
Go through your collection of potential backdrop photos with a 
completely open mind to see what jumps out at you. You may have no 
idea what you’re looking for exactly, which is fine. I tend to feel like the 
right photo will make itself known to you in some way. Just like scouting 
locations for a short film, the scene you ultimately choose will need to 
convey a particular feel and support the interactions of the people (and 
holograms) that inhabit it.
Whatever photo you come up with for this envisioning exercise 
should speak to you in a truly compelling way. We’re always shooting for 
breakthrough scenarios, so your chosen photo needs to fuel great ideas for 
filling the space. The nice thing about this technique is it’s so easy to switch 
out photos or have multiple scenarios for each one. Keep the ideas flowing, 
but pick a good one.
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

232
 
This lobby’s low seating screamed out as needing something  
on them
The photo you eventually choose will need to enable a scenario, or 
sequence of events that could plausibly happen. For example, looking 
at a photo of an empty conference room would certainly lend itself to a 
scenario where people are meeting to discuss something. Having a soccer 
match within that room isn’t a plausible scenario for that photo. Would 
feel off, right?
Identifying scenarios that feel like a natural fit for the photo is critical. 
Don’t try to force a photo into doing a job it’s not meant for — something 
about it will look odd or inauthentic. You’ll see how this works when you 
try this out. The photos actually speak to you if you let them. Go with the 
flow, and write down some notes on what could work if it helps. Set a copy 
of the photos you like most aside.
Tip  Use your strongest photos as the basis for an envisioned scene. 
No point in distracting the audience with low-quality, grainy, or blurry 
images in your work.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

233
Identify key elements
What was that first thing that flashed into your mind when you looked 
at the photo you chose from your collection? Was it people interacting 
with something? A creature? Interface floating in the air? Game going 
on? Whatever it was is a huge hint to what the focus for this envisioning 
scenario should be. Why? Intuition and instinct are incredibly useful 
guides to us when envisioning. Your own imagination and subconscious 
saw something immediately that wasn’t there based on all of your 
experiences and knowledge. Dig in and evaluate whatever that was first. 
At the very least, try to pick something similar enough to your initial 
impression that feels unforced.
After you identify that initial idea, start asking yourself a few key 
questions about the scene:
•	
Who would be in the scene?
•	
What would they be doing with holograms?
•	
Where would this be taking place?
•	
How would it play out?
•	
When would this feel like something you’d want to do 
yourself?
You notice the active word in all those questions is would. It’s a 
forward-looking exercise, so our thinking is geared toward what’s possible, 
not what is. What would this scene tell us about the future of holographic 
computing if we let it?
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

234
Think about the purpose for doing this exploration in the first place.
•	
Illustrating innovative technology
•	
Showcasing new-to-world functionality
•	
Imagining a breakthrough experience
•	
Commenting on what could be, editorial fashion.
Here’s how I applied that thinking to my example in this section.
 
The space lent itself to particular vision for interaction and play
What came to mind immediately in that photo of the empty museum 
lobby is the tremendous amount of empty space that wants to be filled 
with people and holograms. Going with my first impression, I found myself 
thinking there was probably a family enjoying the space on a Sunday 
afternoon. The kids would be running around getting into trouble, poking 
at things they shouldn’t. The adults keeping watchful, but having their own 
conversations.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

235
Another aspect of the photo that really jumped out at me was the 
large empty outdoor patio just behind the glass wall. What a great place 
for a huge holographic creature to be angrily pacing around waiting for 
unsuspecting museum guests to scare or eat. Or something.
It would be easy to say in hindsight I had a clear vision for all the 
interactions and technology that would eventually be injected into the 
scene, but that’s not true. I would realize as I worked with scene there 
were opportunities to editorially comment on telepresence and people’s 
manners in public spaces when interacting with holograms. It also allowed 
me to theorize about the future of play and toys. But, none of those 
elements that eventually found their way into the exploration were thought 
of initially. I just liked the space as a canvas for holographic adventures.
The photo lent itself to all kinds of interpretations, but the easiest one 
for me was this scene of a family enjoying the day out, but encountering 
something very unexpected. I could have locked in on that scenario and 
tried many different photos to depict it, but that photo spoke to me in that 
way, so I went with it.
Tip   Try using different photos for the same scenario exploration. 
Then try different scenarios with the same photo.
Step 3. PROTOTYPE
This is where we start creating the final form of the exploration. Each 
successive layer of information we add to the original photo brings another 
key element into focus. 
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

236
Sketch the hero
Every epic scene has a hero. Find yours. Heroes are most likely going to be 
some wickedly cool hologram you imagine, but they don’t have to be. It 
could be that a modest hologram enhances a real-world hero that’s already 
there. People make the best heroes.
Start by doing a quick sketch of how the hero will be shown within the 
scene. Import the photo you picked into an app that will let you scribble on 
top of it (figuratively or literally). PowerPoint in presentation mode works 
great for this. Alias Sketchbook is another favorite of mine for this purpose. 
But, something as simple as Paint works great, too. You could even print 
the photo out and just draw right on top of it with a fat Sharpie. Whatever 
works best for you.
 
Sketch your hero on top of the scene photo
Show the intent you hope to convey later through higher fidelity. 
For now, think through how the hero in this scene will play off of other 
elements. People, objects, time of day, motion, and lighting all affect how 
your hero is perceived.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

237
Once you have an idea of how the hero will behave, use markup lines 
to illustrate movement or interaction even at this early phase of sketching. 
You’ll find this is what really sells the idea.
Tip   Try a few different approaches to depicting your hero, but keep 
it fast and fluid. Nothing to obsess over. Just get the general feel 
across.
Add some people
First a production note - after getting a basic scene sketched out, it’s time 
to turn the corner and make this real. That means choosing an app or 
medium that allows you to layer different elements in and manipulate 
them as needed. Think of the layering mechanism in Photoshop or 
Illustrator as a guide. Any app with layers can get the job done, so don’t 
obsess over not having the right tool. You could even draw them by hand in 
overlay fashion on paper or with cutouts.
As we talked about at the beginning of this post, people are the key to 
any holographic scene. You need to make that human connection with 
the audience you’ll be showing this exploration to. It should be completely 
obvious why someone would be doing whatever it is within this scenario. 
Showing people that are present and engaged within the scene makes that 
easier.
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

238
 
Quickly add in some people to give you an idea of their 
relationship to the holograms
As we’re targeting a higher resolution comp for this exploration, it’s 
time to find some better people than our sketchy stand-ins. You can use 
any representation of a person that fits with your scenario and artistic style 
for this part. They don’t need to be real or even completely photorealistic 
to get the job done here. I often use the silhouette technique favored by 
architects and conceptual artists. I find that easiest from the production 
aspect to convey some design decisions I made, and it also complements 
the visual treatment I am going for.
For me, the translucent nature of the people in these renderings is 
appealing but not quite the right approach, so I settled on a different visual 
language we’ll see later where people who are present are drawn in black 
silhouette and holograms representing people who are not there are drawn 
in translucent blue.
Also, you don’t have to be an artist to get that great people effect in 
your project. Try a web search for ‘people silhouette’ and switch to the 
Image results. You’ll see lots of examples of the type of people you need 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

239
to add, whether as full color photography or silhouettes (my preference). 
You’d be amazed how many different body types, sizes, poses, and actions 
are available.
We need all kinds of poses — sitting, standing, action shots, doing 
specific activities, and so on. Think about what you’ll need for the current 
piece — don’t get slowed down by finding the exact perfect set of these.
 
Reasonably priced libraries of posed people are available online
Go ahead and find vector art (resolution independent) that is royalty 
free or buy some as an investment in your envisioning work.
Once you have the people picked out with the proper poses or at 
least the right attitude, drop them into the scene in a realistic size and 
perspective (so we don’t distract the audience with our gaffs). Remember, 
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

240
people are the anchors that make or break the believability of the 
envisioned experience. So, get in there and distort or twist the people into 
believable perspectives.
Generate a few large size comps of the scene with your sketchy hero 
and the people who should be in the scenario. You may have to futz with 
the angle and perspective of the people you add if you’re interested in a 
realistic feel. That’s easily done in apps that allow for distorting shapes or 
adding perspective.
 
Drop in the posed people to bring the space to life
You’ll see in my example, I added a family with the mom and two little 
kids. I also thought this kind of scene would be perfect for grandpa to join 
the fun. Wonder what he thinks of the creature in the atrium. We’ll see.
Tip   You’ll be using many different people in your envisioning work, 
so best to start another collection of vector silhouettes, too.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

241
Swap in holograms
Now that the scene has people and a stand-in hero, time to add the other 
holograms that support the activities and scenario. My suggestion here is to 
use the highest fidelity representations you can find (either as prebuilt 3D 
models or dimensional photographs), or create your own custom 3D models 
of holograms to make a high impact first impression with your audience.
The integration and compositing step of this technique is where you 
can spend a ton of time if you’re not careful. The goal is to rapidly depict 
what you’re after with fully lit and integrated content — but not at the 
expense of being done and moving onto other important explorations.
There’s nothing wrong with low-fidelity sketches or rudimentary stand-
ins. They just lack the magic of a photorealistic hologram (which you are 
going to presumably build if this exercise is successful). It does take longer to 
carefully integrate holograms that look realistic into the scene, but the payoff 
is worth in — both in your envisioned pieces and also in the final form.
 
Find a hero hologram that will fit in. Punch it out of any 
background so it’s isolated.
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

242
As you add it to the scene itself within your app of choice, be sure to 
fit it to the background photo convincingly. That means adjusting the 
perspective and lighting to match. Undoubtedly, it will have to be cropped, 
occluded, or twisted to fit where you need it. It’s not easy sometimes, but 
we’re in a hurry so just do your best here.
 
Note the parts that needed to be occluded for realism in 
placement
After going through all that, step back for a moment to see if your scene 
has already come to life by just adding the hero hologram and people.
If not, you’ve missed something important. Look critically at each part. 
Is the photo not the right angle? Are the people not the right size or looking 
disinterested? Does the hero not look like a real hologram? Whatever it is, 
isolate and fix it so we can move on.
Next step is adding our supporting cast to the scene. Create or find all 
of the other holograms that fill out the overall experience. Same rules apply 
here — use the highest fidelity stand-ins you can find within the shortest 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

243
amount of time. Take care to adjust their size, orientation, and visual 
appearance to be just convincing enough to get the job done.
 
Layers show the different scene elements and ordering in 
Photoshop
This is where the detail comes in. You’ll most likely be illustrating 
specific features.
Tip  It’s tempting to go overboard when adding all the detail of the 
supporting holograms. Go ahead :-)
Step 4. TEST
It’s tempting to keep futzing with the envisioned image until it’s close to 
perfect. Don’t. 
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

244
Show it around
Once our envisioned scenario is even close to being convincing we need 
to show it someone else to get some feedback and test out the initial 
hypothesis about what the scene could depict. The intent here is to literally 
just show your comps to a few people to get a quick reaction.
Don’t setup a formal test. Print out the comp or take a laptop around 
showing the image. With no prompting by you whatsoever, did they say out 
loud what your intent was when you started the envisioning process? Be 
honest here. It’s ok if they didn’t get it. Just means you have more work to do.
Even if they did get it right away, I bet they made some suggestion or 
asked why something was a certain way. Remember those. Go back and 
fix the scene so it reflects that feedback if it makes sense. Buy that person a 
coffee and call it good.
Even in this super early phase of ideation and experiments, you have to 
be willing to listen carefully to people’s feedback. It’s human nature to not 
want to hear criticism after working so hard. But, maybe it is true that your 
holographic unicorn looks like a horse with a fake horn. That’s fine. We’ll 
get it next time around.
Tip  Seek contrarian opinions and nonbelievers. It strengthens your 
work to hear criticism of the ideas themselves. You’ll benefit from it.
Step 5. REFINE
Our final stage is tweaking the areas that just aren’t doing it, or conversely, 
we need to wholesale swap out elements to get closer to the vision. 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

245
Sharpen the focus
After getting some feedback on the earlier version, you probably will want 
to make a final pass to get all objects sized properly, adjust overall lighting, 
get rid of extraneous elements that don’t help tell your story.
In our example, it became clear after some feedback that I was missing 
an opportunity to comment on how telepresence could add something 
significant to the scenario. Turns out that grandpa wanted to go to the 
museum with the grandkids, but he’s not as mobile as he used to be. Much 
better to virtually invite him and have him appear in the lobby along with 
the family to join in with the festivities. You’d have full audio but he would 
appear as a translucent blue hologram in the scene (that particular look 
being my design choice for depicting people who are not actually in the 
space, but rather holoported in).
 
Note the translucent blue treatment on the person who is not there 
in person
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

246
This phase allowed a bit more consideration of other interesting 
aspects that were not immediately apparent right off. Use this phase to 
punch up key features and fade back things that are not important to 
scenario and storytelling.
As an example of some polish you can apply at this point, don’t 
overlook the importance of sound, even in a static image. You wouldn’t 
want to go see an IMAX 3D movie with no surround sound, right? Same 
thing here. And easy enough to add if you have access to PowerPoint. Just 
embed a sound within a PowerPoint slide by assigning a sound file to that 
slide that auto plays when the slide is projected.
Tip  Punch up the parts that support your most important points to 
land. Make them the clear focus of the composition.
Step 6. RESTART
Now that we have a finished exploration in static or in semi-interactive 
state, it’s time to make the hard call. Do we keep going because it’s 
promising and we missed a few things, or just leave it as an artifact from 
our envisioning journey and move on? 
Try it again
The bias in this type of technique is toward forward motion. We want to 
keep exploring, trying things out, failing, and trying again. So, given that 
our first thought is probably going to be move on, try it again in a different 
way or completely scrap what we’ve done.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

247
There’s not right answer here. You will know by the reaction of other 
people whether you tapped into something important or undiscovered 
with your initial work. Careful to not let your ego or invested time color 
your thinking here (just as with any type of design work). There’s nothing 
wrong with completely starting over again with the same idea, knowing 
you didn’t quite nail it this time around. It’s difficult to get something 
you’re happy with right off. Take practice.
Regardless of whether you choose to move on or keep digging in, we’ve 
learned a valuable technique to leverage in the future. It gets us the impact 
and persuasion that can help move the idea to the next level.
Tip   There’s no shame in leaving a work alone and moving on. In 
fact, it’s really the desired behavior for this technique.
Summary
Leveraging photos of real places helps to ground any holographic ideas 
you want to test out. Always keep an eye out for places where you can 
holographically film on location.
Chapter 14  HoloScenes

249
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_15
CHAPTER 15
Datascrapers
Tron had it right. Data is a vast, towering world to be 
explored. End of Line.
Storytellers are expert at creating vast, captivating landscapes for their 
tales to inhabit. To me, there’s no place more vast and captivating than 
New York City, with its gigantic, gleaming skyscrapers and endless spaces 
to explore. When seen in person, the scale of those buildings is truly 
humbling. It’s with that sense of scale in mind that I created a “data art” 
series called Datascrapers in 2016. 
 
“Underlying Data” is exploration from my Datascrapers series

250
This work evolved from me exploring U.S. census data sets in a 
visualization tool. The data set contained information about level of 
education, income, and geographic region, among many other facets. As I 
visualized data in various ways three-dimensionally, the imagery became 
very reminiscent of skyscrapers in my beloved NYC.
 
Overlaying the data constructs onto the NYC skyline aligned  
my approach
The more I looked at the data from different camera angles and 
with various color palettes applied, the social implications of the data’s 
foundation began to seep through. I was seeing thematic statements of 
inequity and struggle within the thousands of data points. Socially tinged 
messages bled from the artwork (at least to me). There was a story of 
struggle that needed to be told through data in the form of artwork, at least 
to me. It was very moving at the time I was working on it, and remains one 
of my favorite envisioning pieces.
But, it wasn’t until after I had completed the series that I realized the 
better way to get the social themes within Datascrapers across to people – 
they needed to be experienced firsthand. These data forms should exist as 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

251
giant, looming holograms that you could walk through to see and feel the 
impact of the thousands of individual stories represented by those census 
datapoints.
Data wants to be free they say. I think it also wants to reflect its own 
magnitude.
Data-Inspired Holograms
Reflecting on Datascrapers recently, it became clear that I was overlooking 
some other key design insights from that series in my current work of 
creating holographic experiences. 
Datascrapers evolved from data being cast in a new light, onto a giant 
canvas. The scale of the data became the design center, which drove the 
magnitude of the pieces. And the familiarity of the shapes (skyscrapers) 
made a connection with people when first viewing the pieces.
That last point, familiarity, really stuck with me. In our rush to leap 
forward, we often create things that are foreign looking, sometimes 
confusing our audience at first.
Familiarity is not the enemy of innovation.
So, rather than spending all my time trying to imagine completely 
new constructs to bring to life as holograms, why wasn’t I starting with the 
familiar?
Good question. The answer of course is that familiarity is somewhat 
counter to breakthrough thinking, which encourages us to leap forward, 
shattering the envelope. Focusing on today’s familiar things seems counter 
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

252
to innovation. Yet, we already have so many ways to create and consume 
today, why not leverage them?
Applying that thinking to the subject of data, we could spend from now 
until forever converting that common language of business (data) into 
incredible holograms. Maybe looking at the familiar representations of 
data more openly, we can unlock countless new possibilities.
By using productivity tools like Microsoft Office, or more sophisticated 
business intelligence services like Power BI and Tableau, we can 
leverage our data as inspiration for holograms. This isn’t new-to-world 
or unexpected. People have been (poorly) imagining 3D versions of our 
business data for decades. The difference is that now we have the mixed 
reality medium to better support this type of exploration with data.
Everyday Data
Data-inspired holograms (perhaps “datagrams”) have been right in front of 
us all along. Hidden in plain sight. Waiting for someone to free them from 
their incredibly ordinary containers. It just didn’t occur to me how easy it 
was to achieve. By taking a new approach, we could be the masters of our 
own holographic destiny, not merely spectators beholden to mysterious 
wizards of code and cinematic special effects. 
Clearly, you don’t have to use high-end 3D modeling and animation 
software to create compelling holograms that are composed of or inspired 
by data. You don’t need to be a data scientist either. We can just leverage 
the things that create and consume data in completely new ways. Whether 
its text, photos, videos, numbers, or audio clips, the output of our daily 
routines can be seen as the new inputs of holographic data generators.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

253
 
Data insights are not always revealed through conventional 
visualization
To be clear, I consider “data” anything from a single bit of information, 
to a collection colors in a striking image, or even the sound of notes in a 
majestic symphony. Data certainly is not just exabytes of numbers. It’s 
whatever we consider the output of creation and existence. We are awash 
in data, yet we only tend to see it in traditional ways.
What if that didn’t have to be?
For example, think about how you regularly generate and analyze 
your business reports in Excel today to convey key information. There are 
insights to be found just by looking through the data in the spreadsheets 
or by going over the charts you generate. By carefully looking for things 
that pop out as trends, we increase our understanding. Pretty standard 
today. Now, think about a very real future where artificial intelligence 
works in the background to help surface insights for us and renders those 
in holographic form for us to explore. It’s already happening. Just not with 
holograms.
Another area to consider is visualizing what’s happening within large-­
scale datacenters. It always seemed inevitable that we’d be able to see 
inside those thousands of server blades and warehouses full of equipment 
racks to see what the current state of affairs really was. Our dashboards 
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

254
do a fine job of showing us the numbers and trendlines. What they don’t 
show us is the same thing in the form we crave – bounded by the physical 
containers the unparalleled feats of computing take place within.
 
Storage capacity data taking the form of server racks in a  
virtual datacenter
Finding the places where we have lots of data or even just a few 
datapoints that are critically important metrics can be springboards for 
ideas about making the familiar extraordinary.
The Technique
The future of holographic experiences has everything to do with 
channeling the output of today’s productivity tools into AI-powered, 
interactive holograms.
Use any productivity or data tool available to you as an idea generator 
for holograms. If you make a 3D chart and think it’s a hologram, please 
stop. That’s not it. Re-read this book from Chapter 1 then try again. The 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

255
form holograms take doesn’t need to be recognizable as characters or 
creatures, but they should represent familiar concepts from your data that 
has come to life digitally.
The steps of the Datascrapers technique listed in Table 15-1 are a 
bit more involved than others, but also map onto the envisioning flow 
we outlined earlier. The ideation phase is longer than other techniques 
because it’s where all the heavy lifting is done.
 
Table 15-1. A technique for creating data-inspired holograms.
The following sections show this process step-by-step. Let’s work 
through creating data-inspired holograms using the Datascrapers 
technique.
Step 1. IDEATE
Start by choosing a subject you know well to ideate over for a limited 
amount of time. Don’t spend more than ten minutes thinking about it. 
That should be enough time to get your best ideas out into the open. For 
example, there must be a few important aspects of your business or career 
that rely on data to measure or report progress. You probably deal with 
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

256
them in email, spreadsheets, meeting presentations, mobile dashboards, 
or raw numbers. Regardless, consider the impact and importance of that 
data on your thinking and actions. We’re looking for a place to leap ahead 
in our use of this, creating a breakthrough data experience.
Identify data type
Let’s start by choosing an activity or point in time where you collect data 
for some purpose, or rely on data to guide decisions or communicate 
key metrics. That situation requires the use of a particular type of data – 
numeric, textual, graphic, and so on.
Think about the data itself in that instance, and the form that data 
takes when it’s being looked at by people. I don’t mean what kind of chart 
or graph. That’s an artificial mapping. Think about the data’s pure form - is 
it numerical, graphical, auditory, tactile? Simple or complex? Is it static 
or dynamic? Historical, evolving, or real time? Knowing how to answer all 
those questions will help with the next part – transferring the essence of 
the data into a more usable form.
 
For example, you may need to analyze census data to figure out how 
to distribute funds to communities for better social programs. That data 
is typically in a spreadsheet with many columns of text and numbers that 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

257
represent individuals who live in specific areas, who reported different 
levels of education and income.
That data’s form is columnar text and numbers. Pretty straightforward. 
Once you have isolated the form of the data you’re most interested in, it’s 
time to unleash it as a hologram.
Tip  Don’t overthink this step. We’re just trying to be clear on the 
starting form of the data so we can compare it to the holographic 
form.
Free the data
Now comes the interesting part (and the most difficult it turns out). 
We’re going to convert the existing data from its current form into a new 
holographic container that provides something you don’t get currently. 
The hope is that transformation reveals a leap forward in the ability to 
understand or work with the data. But, to do that, we have to free the data 
from its current form and container. 
Ask questions - This doesn’t require any fancy tools, just thinking 
through a few things.
•	
What’s the most logical conversion from current form 
to a 3D shape? Why?
•	
Would the new form convey the important aspects 
more clearly?
•	
Would it be quicker to understand?
•	
What new kinds of actions could you take?
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

258
I’m not saying these answers will come easy, or that converting a 
traditional media form to a three-dimensional holographic representation 
is a straightforward thing to do. In fact, if we’re being completely 
honest here, it’s actually quite advanced on the design thinking and 
conceptualization scale. But, I know you’re up to it.
Sketch ideas – To answer some of things questions you’ll want to 
sketch out how the data transformation might play out.
 
Try sketching out a few quick transitions from current form to 
released
In my example, I took census data in columnar format and converted 
it into a map of the region that the data represented. Then I looked at 
what additional value we could add now that we’re working in multiple 
dimensions. That turned out to be using the z-axis or height of data points 
applied to the flat map. The new form of the information is not just a table 
of text and numbers in columns, but an easy to recognize map of the 
region with data points rising above the map plane representing income 
from the census data. Using more dimensions to overlay information is a 
prime method for realizing better recognition and understanding.
Figure out the scale - Another thing to consider is the scale or size 
of the new form. You can easily fall into the trap of thinking that the new 
holographic form of your data needs to be exactly like the original form 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

259
you have isolated. Not true. In fact, that’s most often the exact wrong 
thing to do. Familiar is always a good foundation to build upon when 
transitioning someone to a new experience based on existing behaviors. 
That said, the whole point of envisioning our data in a new form is to 
literally release it from its current container and let it flow into an entirely 
new shape, of any size, to most optimally represent it in a more malleable 
and understandable form.
 
It would make sense to view US Census data in a map-like shape
You’ll find that often in holographic design it pays off to make the 
experience revolve around a room-scale set of holograms, using life-sized 
characters and accurate dimensions of objects. That’s not to say every 
experience has to be a 1:1 real-world match, but you’ll be surprised how 
the recognition and comfort with your experience goes up with things 
appear in their natural sizes. Wait, you say. Data has no real-world size – 
it’s just a bunch of numbers, right? No, actually those numbers represent 
things in the real world, or theoretical world, or alternate universe. No 
matter. Things have size. Think about using it to your advantage.
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

260
Match shape to its creator - Now that we have a rough idea of the 
shape of the new holographic container for our data, what type of tool 
creates that basic shape? Exactly. Nothing. No really, that’s not quite true. 
There’s probably something that can create the dimensional shape you 
are looking at in your sketch. Pretty certain that tool won’t export the 
shape directly as a hologram (few do), but you can probably figure out 
what type of app or tool can create that shape with particular parameters 
(size, shape, color, orientation, etc.). For example, I could use any search 
engine’s map tool to create a flat map of the areas my census data covers.
Identifying this data shape creation tool now will save us a ton of time 
later.
Avoid doing this - Now that you have the gist of how that works, let’s 
talk through a few things that might trip you up along the way to finding a 
new representation for your original form.
Here are some things to avoid when releasing your data from its 
original form.
•	
Don’t try to keep too closely to the original form of the 
data. The key to unlocking the value has to do with 
finding the most logical physical world representation 
of things that are often shown as lists of numbers.
•	
Resist the temptation to fit your data onto a tabletop or 
in a small area that resembles how you consume it on 
glass today. That’s wrongheaded more often than not. 
Go big or go home.
•	
Don’t reuse existing 3D charting and visualization 
forms for holographic data. Walking around 3D pie 
charts doesn’t make them any more understandable or 
accurate.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

261
Now that we have a few different sketches of holographic forms that 
our data could be released into, it’s time to imagine how we might interact 
with them if they were right in front of us.
Tip  The biggest advantage of using mixed reality for representing 
data is to make it as large as is called for. Go room-scale first.
Step 2. FRAME
Some of the decisions we need to make up front lock us into a particular 
direction. Don’t think of that as a bad thing though. It’s going to speed up 
the overall workflow and get us to a testable state quicker. 
Choose data set
For each new experiment with a data-inspired hologram, we need to pick a 
specific data set to work with so our interactions are grounded and focused 
in something we can test and measure. If we were to use made up data, 
it would be hard to know if what we’re doing is any better or worse than 
expected.
Having some degree of familiarity with the data set we pick ensures 
we will realize when it becomes unrecognizable or distorted. By using a 
data set that matches the original data type from the ideation phase, we’ve 
aligned the container and its contents.
For example, I picked a spreadsheet containing the U.S. census data for 
a particular year (2012) covering the continental United States.
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

262
You aren’t limited to choosing a big data set or a data feed from service. 
Use your own sales data charts. Get a report of your credit card spending in 
spreadsheet form. Download the number of steps you’ve taken this month 
from your fitness app. Whatever works for you. Again, the key is being 
familiar with the data.
Tip  Don’t try to use a gigantic data set to prototype with, unless it 
has been cleaned and you can visualize it quickly. We need to go fast.
Choose a generator app
To create all of the variations of the new holographic data form, we need 
an app that generate the shape or something close to it without too much 
trouble. 
The best kinds of apps to choose when doing this type of envisioning 
are those that allow fluid exploration and rapid creation of content. In our 
case, being able to generate the form that we think unlocks the insights or 
important aspects of the data.
Programs that let you do 3D modeling and animation are great for 
this task if you know how to use them efficiently. We need throughput, so 
don’t discount more consumer-grade software. Programs like Paint 3D, 
SketchUp, Blocks are all good choices. For the more advanced forms you 
want to bring to life try out things like Maya for complex combinations or 
Tilt Brush for the freedom of creating flowing shapes.
Since my example deals with census data and the regions it applies 
to, I choose an app that can do more than generate shapes. This kind of 
app specializes in dealing with data sets. SandDance, a Microsoft Garage 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

263
project, is a world-class data exploration web service that allows you to 
load just about any data set and visualize it in many different ways. It also 
happens to be built into Microsoft’s flagship data product Power BI.
For my purposes it’s a perfect fit since it can plot data points on a grid 
that would resemble a map due to inclusion of latitude and longitude in 
each census data point.
 
SandDance, a Microsoft Garage project, proved to be a great  
form generation app
You don’t have to use anything like SandDance for your data form 
generator. For example, if the shape you were thinking about using is more 
like a person or character, use a 3D modeler that can pose figures in any 
position you need. Or conversely, if your form resembles architectural spaces 
or furniture, use something like SketchUp to quickly generate those forms.
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

264
Tip  The app you choose to generate the new data shape doesn’t 
have to output a 3D shape to be useful.
Step 3. PROTOTYPE
Our task in this portion is getting the output of the generation app into 
something that lets us not only show the new form, but tell the story 
behind it. In a perfect world, that would be done through a working 
prototype. Short of that, we can take some shortcuts to achieve the same 
end – a compelling showcase for the insights you’ve unlocked in various 
tangible forms. 
Generate multiple examples
Now that we have a generator app picked out and are fairly comfortable 
flying it, time to start cranking out lots of experimental forms.
Generate at least one good example of what you’re trying to depict first. 
Examine it a bit critically to see if it embodies the key aspects we look for – 
clarity, impact, depth, ability to generate questions, and a newness that 
wasn’t there before.
To warm up, try adding slight variations on the basic shape, but 
then go radical and completely change one important element in each 
successive iteration to see if helps. Make copies of the base form so you can 
really try out big changes without worrying about losing a good path. Save 
lots of tries. You never know which one will be the best “take” when you 
look back over them.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

265
 
Building on the basic form, generate several very different 
approaches
Elements to experiment with are the form’s shape, size, orientation, 
color, camera angle, lighting, overlays, or different data to fill it out. We’re 
looking for those moments where you know something has either locked 
in or gone too far in the wrong direction. Both help dial in the appearance 
and presentation we’re looking for.
This part of the process can be a time sink because of all this tinkering, 
so watch how much you invest. Speed is our friend, always.
Tip  Push hard to not fall into the trap of making slight alterations on 
the same basic idea. Not enough payoff for that kind of prototyping.
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

266
Play out interactions
One of the best things about envisioning is the ability to figure out how 
things will behave without writing a single line of code. We can simply use 
our imaginations, or better yet, our teammates and coworkers, to help act 
out how these data-inspired holograms respond to our inquiries, actions, 
or even inaction.
Having just generated a bunch of different variations of our new 
data form, it’s time to see if this works for people. That requires figuring 
out the interaction basics and then engaging with people to try out our 
assumptions.
Using the Acting Out technique, let’s have the new holographic form 
we just created by played by a person instead of a pillow or inanimate 
object. By using a real person, we enable a much richer set of interactions 
and possibilities. We may even be inspired by the way they play the part, 
respond to stimulus, or ad lib a funny retort. So many subtle interactions 
come to light when the object we’re modeling is played by a person. And in 
this case, how funny that a new representation of data is brought to life by 
a living, breathing entity.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

267
 
It doesn’t take much convincing to get people acting as holograms
The things we want to learn by acting out common interactions are not 
complicated.
•	
Basic capabilities – what can the datagram do 
(described simply)?
•	
Common scenarios – what do people expect this data 
object to do for them?
•	
Pleasant surprises – are there unexpected moments 
that unfold to thrill people?
•	
Magical moments – did you unlock a new insight that 
was non-obvious before?
Of all the things we get to do during envisioning, this step is the most 
fun. You always learn a great deal from being inside the interactions with 
real people, no question. Yet, the lasting impression from the phase is the 
laughter that inevitably comes with running this type of design. Give it a 
try. I guarantee it’ll become a standard part of your envisioning, no matter 
what the subject happens to be.
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

268
Tip  Make videos of the interactions between real people and the 
newly envisioned data shapes. You’ll learn something or at least have 
a good laugh.
Package it up
Now that we have basic data form figured out and know roughly how it 
behaves, time to put it into a vehicle that can deliver the intended impact 
to our audience. The whole point of this is to get in in front of people that 
will (hopefully) see the value in using our new representation. We’ll have 
to think about the best to reach them in the natural flow of their work.
Consider the intent of this envisioning exercise when you choose the 
packaging. Think back on why we started doing this experiment in the 
first place. Was it to quickly convey a concept? Impress upon someone 
the need to unlock the data in this way? Show a technical proof it could be 
done in this way?
Quickest – Use the HoloScenes technique of combining the 
holographic form of the data with a photo of a physical space, like 
someone’s office or home. This is an easy way to depict exactly how you’d 
like to see this play out. You control the setup, camera angle, overlays 
on the data, and position of people in the scene for maximum impact. 
Downside is not being able to show the interactions in motion. They are 
implied, but left to interpretation.
Effective – Wireframing the scene and animating the key interactions 
can easily be done using PowerPoint or other presentation software. They 
have all the capabilities you need to drop in photos, drawing, models, 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

269
and add your own markup over the top. By creating a clickable model 
that responds to someone’s touching things or issuing voice commands, 
you can simulate pretty well what you are going for. The downside is this 
technique is clearly more lofi than you’d optimally want for high impact. It 
will be seen for what it is – a quick and dirty interactive sketch.
Highest Impact – A slightly polished video production of the scene 
playing out with the interactions you figured out through acting is going 
to win people over. They may know right away you used slick video 
compositing to drop the holograms into the scene, but being able to show 
the richness of the presentation and interaction aspects provide a value 
that’s hard to get in other forms of envisioning. The downside is you need 
at least some rudimentary video editing and compositing skills on the 
team.
Most Impressive – Working prototypes using real data sets are 
without question going to make the biggest impression on people entirely 
because they are real. The old saying “Code wins” is apt here. Being able to 
demonstrate the concept with working models, data, and code will excite 
people’s imaginations and have them telling you exactly what needs to be 
better. Mission accomplished. Downside is this is expensive time-wise and 
requires resources to get working.
Tip  The way you first show these ideas to people will impact 
their perceived viability and value. Pick well by understanding your 
audience.
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

270
Step 4. TEST
As with other envisioning techniques, trying it out on someone will 
surprise you in some way. It always does. The things we see clearly as the 
envisioners of these new forms are not always as clear to other people right 
away. Doesn’t mean it isn’t good or valuable. Does mean we need to listen 
carefully to why. 
Show it around
This is where your narrative and storytelling skills come in. You could 
construct a good test for the data form where you do a before and after 
type of comparison.
Start with telling the story to someone about how you normally work 
with the type of data you choose originally. Show them how you’d normally 
consume or work with it. Quickly run through the difficulties. Conjecture 
about the opportunities to improve it. Then reveal the new data form. Stop 
talking.
What people should immediately jump to is how it can be improved 
or how it’s more clear, understandable, or actionable. What you hope to 
not hear is silence, denoting you missed the mark. Of course, hearing this 
doesn’t make sense is a good indicator you may want to try another one of 
your explorations out on them. Either way, the idea is moving forward.
Tip  It’s normal for people to reject a new form of something they 
are used to. Don’t let that dissuade you from exploring its value.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

271
Step 5. REFINE
Based on the feedback from your tests, there are probably some areas that 
need attention. Being more clear about what the data is, how the form 
represents it, and what actions are possible most commonly get refined 
during this phase. This is also a great time to add in your secret weapons to 
assist with persuasion. 
Apply special effects
Now that we have the basics down, there are several things you can apply 
to the presentation vehicle you choose to show off the holographic data 
form in its best light.
 
Lighting – The key to any great rendering of 3D objects is how they 
are lit. Using convincing light takes away some of the resistance and lets 
the viewer focus on the substance. You can bring still frames or individual 
elements into Photoshop to touch them up quickly. Don’t have to use a 
full-blown 3D modeler to get this done.
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

272
 
Sound – More impactful than visuals in many ways, spatial sound  
(or any sound for that matter) will punch up the important moments in 
the consumption or interaction. Try using any sounds as placeholders just 
to get the timing right for its intended purpose. Then find the right one. 
Nothing is worse than using the wrong sound.
 
Atmosphere – One of the most visually interesting things to 
experiment with is adding cinematic effects to your holographic data 
forms. Placing the elements into a real-world scene is a way to convey the 
scale of the data it represents. Atmosphere like fog, rain, clouds, or bright 
sun illicit a particular feel that can work to your advantage. Experiment 
here with focus.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

273
 
Affordances – There are typically widgets that we use to manipulate 
digital objects that sometimes are left as part of the surrounding chrome 
or interface of the programs we use. There are times when we can embed 
those within our holograms to assist with actions. The key is inserting 
them in natural and straightforward ways so they don’t district from the 
data and insights themselves. An example of that is a “datablade” that cuts 
through the data set to focus on one particular slice.
Tip  Don’t underestimate the importance of using sound to make 
your holographic data come to life. It’s almost always overlooked in 
normal data.
Step 6. RESTART
It’s logical to just continue testing the refined ideas out on people once 
you’ve gotten them to a point where it’s a plausible evolution of the current 
data form (which is no small feat in itself). I’d suggest that when you reach 
that point of being comfortable with the exploration, it’s a clear indicator 
that you’ve done enough on that tack. Good time to take stock of what you 
learned and accomplished, because it’s time to move on. 
Chapter 15  Datascrapers

274
Find new data
The best way to prove whether you really hit on something valuable or 
even a breakthrough experience is to “reload” your new hologram with 
new data. Maybe it’s from a different year or completely different region. 
Perhaps you try to fit a whole new type of data into your container to see if 
it still holds up. Whatever you decide to try will help you learn more about 
the original idea you had for this particular form.
A great way to tell if you should dig deeper with this prototype is getting 
a new data set to almost work. That last bit that didn’t is your new area of 
exploration. Why was that? The form or data set? What if there was a ton 
of data that needed to be visualized and worked with in this way – would it 
work?
We can’t possibly anticipate all the different kinds of actual data people 
will want to use your holographic container for, so pushing ourselves to try 
data that’s non-obvious is always an eye-opening experience.
Summary
Using holographic containers to free data from its current confines is an 
extremely promising area of exploration. We need your thinking here to 
unlock the potential.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

275
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_16
CHAPTER 16
HoloArt Gallery
The spellbinding stories behind our artwork are too 
often lost to history.
Developers aren’t recognized as the true artists they actually are. Being 
both a coder and designer, I can tell you without question developers are 
some of the most creative people on the planet. The reason we don’t often 
think about that is the way they work and express themselves. Their impact 
is often seen in terms of the output, not the process. And therein lies the 
tragedy.
Solving seemingly impossible engineering challenges seems like all 
critical thinking and whiteboard equation scribbling. But, it’s far from that. 
There’s passion, brilliant leaps of faith, horrendous failures, and stunning 
redemption. The story arch in a modern high tech development project 
rivals any action film – you just never hear about it in that way. It’s all taken 
in stride and brushed off as yesterday’s news in the quest for the newest 
new thing.

276
 
Behind-the-scenes stories of how art projects evolve are too rare
We are all missing out some incredibly entertaining tales and valuable 
lessons when these background stories are known only by their creators. The 
same is true of any artwork that’s not hanging in a museum with a placard 
explaining a bit about the artist and why the work exists. As a fellow artist, I 
am fascinated with the motivation and circumstances behind art pieces. Yet, 
I’ll never hear from the artist themselves about the creation process. Or will I?
Holographic computing has the power to change all that in a truly 
magical way.
Backstory
My sister Sharon Pell-Lie was an exceptional mixed-media artist living in 
New York City. She loved to create unique pieces that fused her favorite 
things, superhero-inspired women and their cute felines, on unusual 
backdrops. But, more interesting than that combo is how her artwork  
(on display at pellmell.com) illustrates a technique that we’ve been 
discussing for holograms.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

277
Sharon had a real talent for combining different materials and 
influences into a coherent style that oozed approachable playfulness. 
She was able to infuse her own style and opinions into pieces that were 
seemingly unrelated to her own life, yet they were deeply personal in 
hidden ways (the hallmark of editorial envisioning). I often wondered how 
Sharon saw what others didn’t in those old maps she would use as the 
backdrops of her artistic journeys. It’s as if the subjects she painted existed 
to her alone until they were reduced to brush strokes on the canvas. She 
visualized the unseen within the familiar, which is exactly what we’re 
doing.
 
Sharon Pell-Lie saw what was there but hidden, and found  
a way to uniquely capture it
Does this sound familiar? Of course, it does. It’s what we have been 
talking about this entire time – holograms are already waiting in your 
imagination to be set free for others to enjoy.
Sharon collected old maps and postcards the way I suggested you 
should continuously collect photos of empty spaces. In her travels around 
NYC, her beloved Paris, or Seattle, she’d spot these unassuming treasures 
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

278
and buy them on the spot. Which is my point exactly – whenever the 
opportunity arises to capture something that speaks to you, do it right 
then. You don’t have to know what you’ll use it for later. Just capture it and 
store it for the future.
Sharon was also quite prolific at creating her art. There are hundreds 
of pieces of different periods, styles, and subjects, that it’s hard to catalog 
them all. And so many interesting stories behind each one. Whenever I’d 
ask her about certain pieces that I liked personally, and she’d tell me a 
story that was completely unexpected about its motivation and timing. 
Those were priceless stories, now lost to the sands of time and fading 
memories.
Spellbinding Holograms
That got me thinking. In this era of video recording everything, free tools, 
and oodles of storage, why don’t we capture more about our creation 
process as its happening? Musicians often bring videographers into the 
studio to capture the recording process. Why not artists? Why not coders? 
It’s with that thought I set out to capture what it would be like to talk 
with the artist or coder of something way after they had finished it. Through 
the use of mixed reality, I imagined we could bring that experience to life in 
a completely new way. Without having to visit the artist’s studio or coder’s 
lair, we could have a personal conversation with them about their work.
In my case, I thought back on how Sharon would tell me the stories of 
what inspired particular pieces (sometimes by real people, sometimes by 
her cats, sometimes just odd circumstances). The details were interesting, 
but to me the more memorable part was how she told those stories. 
“Spellbinding” is the word that came to mind, which is exactly what she 
named her art series of playful women and their favorite feline friends.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

279
The S*Pellbinders art series of is full of stories that are forever locked 
inside those paintings. I have a personal mission to unlock them, and I 
think mixed reality is exactly the right medium for them to be shared. But 
to realize that vision, I’ll have to overcome a gigantic hurdle.
 
Close-up of “Capgirl” by Sharon Pell-Lie from the S*Pellbinders 
series
The challenge with this particular holographic exploration would 
not be artistic or informational though, it was clearly a technical one. 
How exactly would you bring the artist and any of their collaborators into 
the mixed reality space without resorting to hanging a two-dimensional 
video screen in the air (very unsatisfying, so why bother). Was it possible 
to create three-dimensional avatars of the real artist (living or dead) to 
inhabit the space and talk about their work? Seemed possible based on 
some technology demonstrations and any sci-fi movie ever made, but 
could I somehow do this myself as a working prototype to prove its viable? 
Of course :-)
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

280
And that same exact desire to create spellbinding holographic 
experiences will drive you to experiment with code and real hardware 
during your journey, too.
The Process
Because this envisioning technique is best for creating working prototypes 
of technical proofs, some on-device testing will be needed to see if we get 
all the way there or not. Having a mixed reality development environment 
setup or creation app to experiment with is required. The steps for getting 
this accomplished quickly as shown in Table 16-1.
Table 16-1. A technique for doing technical proofs with  
holograms
Nothing to fear if you don’t code. Just find someone who does 
program, and owes you a big favor or works for cheap. This will take longer 
than you or they think.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

281
Step 1. IDEATE
This is the time to brainstorm how you could potentially build out 
a working prototype of that signature moment in your holographic 
experience so people know it’s actually possible. Usually we try to stay 
away from jumping right to solutions in the brainstorming or ideation 
phase, but not here. We need ideas for how to get this real, quickly. 
Identify the challenge
Try to focus in on the hardest part of the working prototype or the most 
critical aspect to get working to achieve your desired outcome (make an 
impact, show technical proof, set a vision). It’s important to get a handle 
on this early on so you know whether to keep going or bail on the idea 
of creating a working prototype at this point. No shame in discovering 
you can’t quite make this happen at the moment. The shame would be 
investing a ton of time with nothing to show at the end. In most cases, 
you’ll find there’s a middle ground where you can shoot for the stars and at 
least make to orbit.
In my example, the hardest part of the concept would be getting a 
convincing facsimile of the artist to exist along with their artwork, whether 
real or digital. The intent was to have them tell the viewer of their art the 
backstory or other interesting things about the work. People don’t record 
these types of explanations every time they create something. A bit much 
to expect. Is it too unrealistic? Is there even tech available that would 
allow us to create a holographic avatar without having an extraordinarily 
expensive setup?
Regardless of the answers, I had the technical challenge identified. 
What’s yours?
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

282
Brainstorm the approach
Now that we have the most difficult technical challenge identified, let’s 
figure out how we can get it working as a proof of concept (or at least 
well enough to prove it could be done with additional time, money, or 
resources). This is where having a friend or coworker who keeps up on 
all latest breakthroughs in various fields comes in handy. If that person 
isn’t readily available to brainstorm with you, use our Filmed on Location 
technique to illustrate what you’re after and post it for others to help you 
figure out how to get there. You’d be surprised how helpful the mixed 
reality community is in identifying existing tech or methods to help out.
The point of this exercise is not to start 3D modeling or coding it up 
right away (as tempting as that is). We want to figure out the approach 
we’ll take so we know what we’re in for. This does not mean we’re going 
to start scheduling sprints, setup a backlog, or any of that other agile 
non-sense. Just focus on how you can technically achieve that signature 
moment in the experience. Geek out. Draw weird diagrams on the 
whiteboard. Search for demos on the web. Identify some APIs or SDKs you 
could use. Then stop. Move on.
For example, when working on the exploration around Sharon’s 
artwork, I went through the basics of what we’d need to do to bring it to 
life.
•	
Putting a set of digital paintings in space – easy.
•	
Augmenting an existing piece of real artwork with 
digital overlays – fairly easy.
•	
See the artwork close-up without degradation or visual 
artifacts – a bit tricky.
•	
Talking with an artist who’s not around – that’s 
ridiculously hard.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

283
Given all that, the first thing that sprung to mind in approaching the 
problem of creating the holographic artists was how they bring actors who 
have passed away back to the screen for major motion pictures. From my 
limited understanding, they roughly map the deceased actor’s face and 
hair onto a similar actor’s body or a digital stand-in. Through a detailed 
digital post production process the actor is blended seamlessly into the 
scene. Easy. If you have millions of dollars in the budget, that is. Wonder if 
there’s a low-cost way to get there? Turns out, there is.
 
Incredibly slick software from Loom.ai quickly creates avatars 
from photos (source: Loom.ai)
By using an incredibly high tech combination of computer vision, 
machine learning, and motion picture special effects, companies like 
Loom.ai have figured out how to turn an ordinary selfie or photograph 
into an expressive 3D avatar. Delivered as both an API and SDK for 
developers to leverage in their own applications, this kind of advancement 
heralds the start of an entirely new era in being able to “exist” digitally and 
recognizably without high cost scanning procedures.
Great. That works for me. Problem solved. Let’s move on.
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

284
Step 2. FRAME
Since we’re coding this working prototype, we need to put a few well-­
chosen constraints in place to stop ourselves from heading directly into the 
ditch chasing some shiny target. Way too easy to waste time on the non-­
essentials when the goal is to get this up and working as fast as possible. 
Limit the scenario
We can’t go fast and do everything at the same time. Let’s try to narrow the 
things we need hookup in this by reducing the surface area. By walking 
step-by-step through the intended scenario, we can look for the minimal 
set of objects, functionality, and behaviors we need to implement. The 
scenario doesn’t have to be super-detailed to serve its purpose. We can just 
list what you’d reasonably expect to happen (even though it rarely unfolds 
in that way) with this and try to focus our audience on that narrow “golden 
path” through the scenario.
In my case, the scenario sets up a potentially rich set of interactions 
if an artist suddenly appeared and started talking about their work. How 
could we limit the functionality and still have a compelling experience?
A few obvious questions pop to mind.
•	
First, would the viewer even notice anything is different 
about the artwork?
•	
How does the artist know when to engage the viewer?
•	
Can the viewer stop that narrative and ask questions?
•	
Would you allow rewind or fast forward? Is that rude to 
the holographic artist?
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

285
The purpose of asking these seemingly open-ended questions is to 
make sure you cover just enough of what’s reasonably expected by the 
participant to achieve your goal of testing this out.
Focus on payoff
Going back to one of the earliest things we talked about, the whole point 
of this “spellbinding” working prototype is to impress and amaze people 
with what you envisioned as possible. The only way to really accomplish 
that is to create a suitably impressive illusion. That’s the payoff. Laser focus 
on how to trigger and pull off the signature moment of your exploration 
every time, so that anyone who experiences it comes away with the same 
impression – blown away. That’s how you craft breakthrough experiences 
demos.
 
Bringing those signature moments to life are the real payoff in 
your prototype
Going through few steps can help us arrive at that destination for this 
working prototype.
•	
Roughly plot out the expected paths through the 
prototype, meaning what will the participant 
most likely do first, next, instead of, unexpectedly, 
unquestionably.
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

286
•	
Identify the signature moment in this prototype so that 
you can get it hooked up properly.
•	
Make sure the payoff is worth the effort. Be critical of 
the idea.
Once you have the answers, get going on building this out as fast as 
possible, testing whatever parts you can along the way to make sure it’s 
coming together as expected. Doesn’t have to be perfect to try out on 
someone.
Step 3. PROTOTYPE
This is the fun part. Kinda. Prototyping is incredibly rewarding when things 
are flowing and you’re the master of the universe. It’s frustratingly hard 
work when things aren’t quite coming together. And that condition seems 
to oscillate from one to the other on an hourly basis. So, to combat the bad 
parts, let’s start off with the straightforward part for an easy score. 
Oh, wait. You’re not a designer or 3D modeler. Okay, I got you…
 
AN ALL-PURPOSE WEAPON - If you don’t already have it, download 
a copy of the Unity development environment to easily construct the 
elements of our holographic experience. Unity is the leading tool for 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

287
building the elements of just about any kind of mixed reality experience. In 
fact, I think you’d be hard pressed to find a developer in the industry who 
hasn’t at least tried it out for AR, VR, or Gaming projects. Unity is a one-­
stop shop for us since it enables scene composition, modeling, animation, 
lighting, special effects, and is extensible through add-ins. Trust me on this 
one, Unity is your new best friend when it comes to quickly prototyping 
mixed reality experiences.
Create the scene
Our holograms need somewhere to exist when they come to life, so let’s 
call that a “scene” for the moment. The scene we’re talking about now is 
essentially what you see when an experience first starts. It could feel like 
objects have been added to the space you’re in now, or you could feel like 
you’ve been transported to a completely different place. 
In a composition tool like Unity, or any other 3D modeler, you can 
import or create placeholder objects to setup the basic scene’s background 
elements and bit players. By definition, everything you add to the scene is 
a hologram, yet we tend to think of them as the background objects and 
any heroes you identified in your scenario.
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

288
 
Here’s what my initial scene looked like in Unity before our hero 
makes her appearance
Calling this collection of holographic artwork a “scene” is a bit 
confusing as they are drawn with no background or floor (note the preview 
that shows the black or transparent aspect), but rather the real world 
showing through. It would make a bit more sense if it was done for VR 
or an immersive headset, since that’s a self-contained world that has its 
own floor plane and skybox (a game developer term for the half sphere 
that constitutes the sky and horizon in virtual environment). In VR, you’re 
inside an encapsulated world, so creating a scene to fill out with sky, 
setting, furniture, vehicles, characters, or whatever you imagine is logical. 
Expansive spaces like oceans or outer space are fine to consider scenes, too.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

289
 
The skybox paradigm in Unity helps set up a scene using the 
horizon and sky
Conversely, in mixed reality, the notion of a scene is a bit trickier to 
define. Even calling it a scene in mixed reality is really a misnomer. It isn’t 
so much a traditional scene as a situation that has three possible setups – 
preset positioning, participant positioning, and dynamic. Yet, the term 
scene is widespread and easy to understand, so we’ll go with it.
Let’s talk a bit about how objects are placed and positioned within this 
situation or scene.
Preset Positioning – During the layout phase in the tool, elements 
are arranged to relate to the viewer and each other in a predetermined 
way, and then placed that way in the scene. You could also do this by 
writing some code to position the key elements in particular places within 
the scene at runtime. For example, placing artwork on the nearest wall. 
Holographic platforms try to make that floor, wall, and tabletop surface 
placement easy to achieve via code APIs.
Participant Positioning – No one likes being told where they have 
to keep things. That holds true in mixed reality as well. When we inject 
holograms into your physical space, it can be very off-putting if they end 
up in awkward or unnatural places. Because the hardware we’re relying on 
needs to scan and figure out for itself where the floor and walls are (which 
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

290
can take a bit of time) it’s a common paradigm to ask the participant to 
place the holograms where they like. The elements are then rendered at 
that distance and position from the viewer.
Dynamic Positioning – Some of the best examples of mixed reality 
blending completely into the real world use a combination of auto-
positioning and manual placement. These experiences typically need to 
position things on the floor, walls, or table tops to anchor them in places 
that make sense to the participant. Dynamic elements can later “find” 
the right place to appear based on room scans. An example would be a 
hologram appearing to sit down on your couch by itself.
You’ll have to figure out the best initial state for your scene based on 
what you hope the interaction model will be. My suggestion is to go back 
to any play testing you may have done to see which resonated with people 
the most. Set something up in Unity (or whatever app you’re using for 
scene composition) and try it out through a quick previewer or software 
emulator of any specialized hardware you’re targeting. You’ll get a rough 
idea of what the scene will feel like from that emulation, but there’s no 
substitute for trying it out in the target device. What a thrill the first time 
you see the scene draw in the room you are working in.
After settling on one of the positioning options you have essentially 
set the stage for the stars of the show to make their appearance – the 
holographic actors.
Add the hero
In our scenario, there’s always a center of attention that commands 
attention or entertains us during normal interaction. It doesn’t have to 
be immediately introduced or apparent. In fact, making the participant 
discover the hero as they explore is a great plan. Creating the memorable 
illusion for that hero is where we want to spend our prototyping time. 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

291
Just like any good movie or play, the hero can make a dramatic 
entrance or be well blended into the background before making 
themselves known. Figure out which approach is right for your scenario 
and place your holographic hero in that initial position either as a relative 
position from the viewer’s eye (the camera) or calculate where to place it 
dynamically with code.
 
An early sketch for the developer of where the hero should  
appear near the artwork
In my example, Sharon’s artwork will always appear several meters in 
front of the viewer, not auto-placed on a wall. The reason for that initial 
setup has everything to do with the kind of interaction I am trying to foster. 
I want to encourage exploration where people walk up to the paintings, 
look around them, and to their surprise discover the hero, our artist, who 
appears and starts a conversation. That scenario wouldn’t be nearly as 
interesting if the pieces just hung on a wall as they normally do.
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

292
 
Our artist, Sharon Pell-Lie, appears and starts a conversation 
when you approach
The hero’s entrance is a surprise in this case, but it doesn’t have to be. 
Just engaging with the object in some other way could have easily been the 
trigger we needed to start the interaction.
Wire the interactions
It’s one thing to make a static scene show up on-device, and yet another 
to have the holographic heroes respond to your input, or act out their own 
behaviors. That’s incredibly important to hook up as soon as possible. 
Why? Blame the iPhone. We’ve all been programmed and conditioned 
to respond to anything that looks like it might have something more to it 
by tapping, swiping, or talking to it. There’s nothing worse than engaging 
something cool looking and have it just sit there and ignore you. 
Remember earlier we talked about narrowing the focus of this 
prototype? This is why. We don’t want to wire up tons of different objects 
or interactions just to get an initial read on whether this holographic 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

293
experience is compelling or not. So, let’s get just a few things working well 
enough to test out and dial in a good feel for people.
 
You’ll edit the code for your behaviors in a development 
environment like Visual Studio
If you are using Unity for this prototype, you can use its built-in code 
editor to help wire up the interactions with objects. Most people tend to 
use their full development environment to do the coding and debugging 
associated with object behaviors. In our case, Microsoft Visual Studio is 
the best development system to pair with Unity and Microsoft HoloLens. 
Other mixed reality systems have their own preferred development 
environments. The integration is good enough to allow for a productive 
workflow, and the Unity tool is constantly being updated with amazing 
new features to aid developers and designers.
In many cases, just a few lines of JavaScript or C# are enough to get the 
behavior we’re after. As I mentioned in the Introduction, this isn’t intended 
to be a step-by-step programming book, so I’ll leave the details of how to 
code up functionality for your holograms to the excellent tutorials found 
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

294
on the development sites for Microsoft, Unity, Apple, Magic Leap, and 
others. As a coder myself, I can tell you that it’s a massive amount of fun to 
learn how these platforms work. Try it out for yourself.
Once our basic behaviors are hooked up with code, it’s time to test it 
out using the hardware that’s required to see the holograms in our physical 
spaces.
Step 4. TEST
There’s no getting around the need to test our working prototypes of 
holographic experiences on the actual hardware. Emulators, previewers, or 
even video don’t do holograms justice. Seeing holograms in person evokes 
responses that aren’t replicated easily by anything other our own eyes and 
brains. We are seemingly hardwired to respond and connect deeply with 
holograms. 
Let’s get this onto whatever device is going to help us see the 
holograms in our environment.
On-device testing
All of the development tools we use for holographic computing have a 
clear workflow to get the magic bits onto real hardware in addition to the 
previewers and emulators they come with. The process for transferring the 
app or other vehicle onto the target device is usually harder than it needs 
to be, but not overwhelmingly difficult. Mainly has to do with making a 
Wi-Fi connection with the device or using a cable to transfer the software. 
When it finally works, it’s amazing.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

295
 
Seeing the artwork appear mid-air for the first time was indeed 
spellbinding
What we’re looking for once the prototype is on the device is the same 
as any other project – does it look right? Behave correctly? Exhibit any 
strange behavior? We’re going to follow the scenario outline we created 
earlier as we work our way through things. But, you’ll notice that you keep 
getting distracted by something. It’s almost unavoidable. Holograms are 
incredibly interesting to see in person. You get as close as possible to see 
and touch them. It’s addictive.
Another thing to remember is that once you have someone else try this 
out, there’s bound to be things that you didn’t account for – if for no other 
reason than they think differently than you do, press different things, try 
odd voice commands, or just don’t do anything you’d expect. People are so 
unpredictable, even for experts in designing breakthrough experiences.
Once you make it far enough along through your golden path of the 
scenario, see if the interactions and signature moment are anywhere close 
to what you expected. Didn’t think so. Back to the laboratory to tighten 
things up a bit.
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

296
Step 5. REFINE
You’ll have a ton of things to consider once you’ve tested the prototype 
out. The key is to not get overwhelmed and start over too fast, or 
conversely dig in too deeply to fix things. There’s a balance in moving 
things forward to learn more. We want to go fast so we fail fast. Or 
something like that. I’d rather think of it as learning from our experiments 
instead of failing. Either way. 
One thing that you’ll probably notice about this example I’m using 
of Sharon’s artwork is that the early versions seem awfully stark. Just the 
pieces themselves and the artist explaining the backstory is cool, but 
even cool isn’t enough sometimes. We seem to need more supporting 
information about the work itself like I’d find in a museum placard. I’m 
also feeling like there’s some functionality that I am used to on my iPad 
and Surface that I’m missing. Why can’t I zoom? Share this with my 
friends? Look at other works by Sharon or related artists? Exactly. We’re 
not done, even in prototype form. We’ve created something so cool that 
people want more. A job well done is rewarded by a bigger job they say. 
Thanks.
Tweak the interactions
The first thing to refine is the easy stuff that we either missed or just got 
wrong. We do that as a best practice in case we have another opportunity 
to test out with someone else while we’re adjusting things. Always have a 
demo ready they say. In our case, that we can take care of the placard with 
the artwork information super fast and be ready for more testing or keep 
fixing things up.
The next thing we didn’t have originally was the ability to see other 
pieces within the same spatial position as the current artwork. Why is that 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

297
important? In a constrained space, we can early cycle through an entire 
collection of work without ever moving our position. Handy. The question 
of course is what’s the best way to do that? Voice command, “next”? 
Gesturing toward one side or another? Air tapping a familiar affordance to 
avoid relearning new models? Bingo. Winner. Let’s just do that and test it 
out.
 
The refined experience features textual overlays, navigation, and 
more artwork
Once our list of high value fixes is complete, we’ll jump back into the 
real device to test things out and then look for new people to try it out on. 
It’s important during this tuning up phase to temper the desire to add 
new functionality with the goal of having just enough to meet our goal of 
making a big impact through a real code prototype, doing a technical proof 
of concept, or just getting a jump on the real implementation. Don’t over-­
invest in the prototype.
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

298
Step 6. RESTART
It’s always tempting to refactor the code for better efficiency or 
organization once you have a working prototype together. Don’t do it. 
Prototypes are meant to snapshots of ideas that were created to test a 
hypothesis or demonstrate a set of behaviors. Prototypes are meant to be 
disposable, not clung onto. Let it go. Move on. There are thousands more 
for you to build. 
What went right?
A better use of time at the end of the prototyping cycle for the envisioning 
experiment is to reflect back on what we actually learned from this time 
around. It’s human nature to first focus on what went wrong, but try 
reversing that and start with what went well.
•	
Did we successfully hit our goal this time out?
•	
Were people excited to try it out?
•	
Are there reusable pieces of code or hardware we can 
leverage next time?
•	
What did we learn about our process, talents, and team 
chemistry?
Be honest about these reflections. No shame in discovering that things 
really didn’t go to plan, even if you had a blast during the cycle.
There’s always something to take away from these kinds of hands-­
on experiments with code to create working prototypes. That something 
may be the way we dramatically flamed out and crashed in the eleventh 
hour, or how we were so close to having it working but just couldn’t get it 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

299
together. No matter the final outcome, this type of prototyping to create 
spellbinding, breakthrough holographic experiences teaches us how to be 
better next time.
Summary
There’s nothing better than creating a working prototype that people can 
test out on their own without our intervention or instruction. In the world 
of envisioning, presenting people with holograms they can interact with 
right where they’re standing can’t be beat for a true measure of impact. 
This kind of envisioning is the best test of this promising new realm.
Chapter 16  HoloArt Gallery

301
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7_17
CHAPTER 17
Design Insights
Holograms have feelings just like you. Really.
As you do more holographic envisioning, certain things become apparent – 
you don’t position holograms locked to a person’s face, you can’t get closer 
than 1 meter before holograms distort, and holograms that don’t react 
aren’t interesting in the least. These design insights aren’t rocket science 
or divined by years of study. They make themselves apparent over time, 
during failed experiments, and our brightest triumphs.
 
By no means an exhaustive list of what to do or not, here’s a few 
hard-won nuggets of wisdom that may help you design breakthrough 
holographic experiences faster than normal.

302
Know Your Audience
This observation and truth is no different than any other form of design 
or communication. You can’t possibly make a real connection if you don’t 
know who you are talking to and why they’d care what you have to say 
(whether literally or through holographic experiences).
 
Focus on people, not technology
Nothing good ever came from putting technology before people. We 
become enamored with our inventions and sometimes forget that it’s 
people who they’re intended for, not just their creators’ satisfaction. 
We’ve all been there. There are certain times when we create a piece of 
technology that’s so incredibly awesome we don’t really care if anyone else 
sees the brilliance besides us. It’s in those moments that we are most guilty 
of the sin of ego.
Technologists love technology. We strive to be the first to bring 
something to the world, regardless of what it will be used for or who it’s 
ultimately destined to be used by. We invent for the sake of inventing 
sometimes. That’s a very human thing to do. But, in this field where almost 
everything is new-to-world, we have a responsibility to think about how 
people come into play before we spring these technical marvels on the world. 
People shouldn’t be your afterthought, we should be your guiding light.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

303
Be inclusive
Now, more than any other time in our brief history on this planet, we need 
to be thoughtful and inclusive in everything we do. With so much conflict 
and strife in our world, the future we leave to the next generation will be 
shaped by our actions toward other people. That behavior is reflected 
in our daily interactions and our design work. Human decency is not 
an optional feature, it’s the responsibility of all of us, every day, every 
situation.
Designing breakthrough holographic experiences that only resonate or 
apply to just one group of people is not only wrongheaded, it’s dangerous. 
It furthers an oblivious state of existence to human needs, desires, and 
hopes in favor of catering to the privileged and able-bodied. Not all of us 
on planet Earth are afforded the same upbringings and lives. Those of us 
who are in a position to create tools and experiences for future generations 
need to make kind and just decisions to ensure a future that welcomes all 
people. That responsibility starts with trying to understand and empathize 
with those not like ourselves, so that our work is truly inclusive.
Think situationally
Almost everything we’ve previously learned about designing high tech 
products and services revolves around scenarios and tasks. It’s at the heart 
of interaction design in that field. We’re taught to break things down into 
discreet actions that help us accomplish something pressing. Our mindset 
is fixed on understanding what people want to do, and then making it 
easier or faster to accomplish it. Productivity and efficiency drives much of 
that thought.
Conversely, mixed reality design revolves around fluid situations. You 
have no idea what someone who has never seen, heard, or interacted 
Chapter 17  Design Insights

304
with a hologram is going to do next. It’s a bit hard to design for that. We 
can test our assumptions over and over again, but you’ll find more often 
than not that people are caught up in the experience of it all, not focused 
on accomplishing a task. There are certainly many examples of discreet 
actions that people want to accomplish when in mixed reality, yet their 
behavior is more closely tied to dealing with this new situation.
It’s not common for people to be in mixed reality environments for 
extended periods of time or all day long quite yet. For now, we don our 
headsets, glasses, and other devices to do something specific, not general 
purpose. And for that reason, the situational nature of the interaction, 
we should abandon the approach of being task oriented and adopt the 
thought of being experientially driven in mixed reality. Let’s not expect 
productivity at the amusement park.
Acknowledge emotion
Once upon a time, computers were simple. We clicked buttons and pulled 
down menus to tell the machine what we wanted it to do. Sometimes it 
cooperated, sometimes it didn’t. But, if it didn’t you’d know why through 
a horrendously worded error message. The cause and effect was easy to 
understand because it was almost mechanical like any other tool in your 
garage. You were clear on who was in charge (the computer) and what to 
expect (not much). No personality, no emotion. Nothing personal, it was 
just a mechanical process with measured outputs. 
Now, fast forward to the age of artificial intelligence.
Our machines now “think” and have what passes for rudimentary 
emotion. They know when we’re upset with them. It follows that as designers 
of holographic systems and experiences in this age, we need to embrace the 
role of emotion in our designs and how the language of interaction needs 
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

305
to take emotion into account. We can’t think our interactions with these 
machines is purely transactional any longer. They mimic our emotions, we 
need to be willing to acknowledge that and respond with experience design 
that takes all that into account. Be open minded about the ideas that our 
former mechanical tools are now actually offended when we leave them out.
Know Your Medium
The closest medium I can think of that captures most of what we’re doing 
with holographic computing is the film industry. Wait you say – that’s a 
passive experience that has nothing to do with mixed reality. True on the 
surface perhaps, but the closer we look at the cinema as a medium and the 
industry behind motion pictures, the more we can learn from it.
 
Illusion
The reason people go to movies is to be entertained, right? Some consider 
it a more cerebral pursuit, but I think we can all agree that seeing a film in 
the theater is an immersive experience that takes us away from our lives 
for a few hours. There’s a powerful illusion created by the film’s director 
and actors which allows us to slip into their world just enough to feel 
something. That illusion makes us willing voyeurs of their world, and on 
occasion emotional participants.
Chapter 17  Design Insights

306
Holographic experiences have all of those properties, and more. 
We create the illusion that lifelike digital objects embody intelligence, 
awareness, and understanding. And when we’re really good at what we do, 
they evoke emotions in their audience. There’s something more powerful 
than motion pictures in our holograms – they’re right there, touchable, in 
our space, part of our world, not stuck behind the screen.
Holograms naturally create an illusion more powerful than our most 
trusted escape hatch, the motion picture. Not bad for a bunch of light and 
code.
Stagecraft
The problem with holograms is that they’re holograms. We can only see 
these futuristic light entities with special optics (at the moment). When 
I’m looking a hologram, to you, it looks like I’m staring at something that 
isn’t there. Like a crazy person. Talking to and gesturing at nothing but 
air. Not optimal for promoting a new technology we need lots of people 
to see and understand. For now, relying on stagecraft is the only means to 
demonstrate this properly.
We use some mind-bendingly sophisticated technology to do real-­
time video compositing to combine people and holograms into the same 
place at the same time. The scenes need to be viewed through devices or 
projected onto screens for now. The result is that you can see me and my 
holograms together, doing whatever we’re doing.
This necessary stagecraft will be less bothersome in the near future, 
but for now, the need to rely on this kind of extensive real-time production 
to present our holographic work in the best light is a difficult reality of the 
medium.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

307
Magic
There’s a real magic involved with holograms. Not the manufactured 
illusion kind, though. This holographic magic has more to do with the 
deep emotional impact they make than a street magician’s misdirection. 
I’d like to think holograms generate an invisible connection signal at a 
wavelength that we can’t help but lock into to explain this phenomenon 
somewhat scientifically, but we both know that’s complete nonsense. 
Holograms rely on real magic to touch us.
Someday, some incredibly smart researcher will able to visualize how 
this all really works, but for now just know that we are powerless to resist 
the magic of interacting with these digital sorcerers. Go ahead, try it for 
yourself. You’ll see why all kids believe in magic. It’s real.
Know Your Palette
Every artist has to become intimately familiar with their tool palette to get 
the most out of themselves and their work. Same deal with holographic 
computing.
 
Chapter 17  Design Insights

308
Space
The hardest thing to learn and master about our holographic toolset is 
thinking spatially. The empty space between objects is as much a factor 
in how we design experiences as the holograms themselves. Space itself is 
an active design element to utilize in our work, just like an artist’s canvas. 
Understanding how to design for and with it is a bit harder than it sounds.
Those of us who have been designing for high tech experiences are 
used to our work being trapped behind rectangular sheets of black glass. 
That all goes away in this new realm. It’s as if you shattered that glass 
screen and all of the digital contents trapped within it just flew out into 
the room around you. We have an entirely new interaction paradigm to 
internalize and become fluent in. Everything is different. Don’t think it’s 
the same. It’s not.
Holograms
You may think of the digital actors in our story as main characters and stars 
of the show, but they are as much paint as protagonist. Use the holograms 
in your experience as the vivid colors that brings the story to life. Use their 
blendable nature to combine disparate ideas into an aesthetically pleasing 
hue. Paint’s best characteristic is its ability to be worked with. So too is a 
hologram’s.
The funny part of this analogy is that you and I are actually the actors 
of these digital paintings, not the holograms, even though they are 
the ones seen as the center of attention. Once you see holograms as a 
means to decorate and embellish the scene instead of the stars, they can 
be leveraged in the same ways an artist will punctuate their work with 
splashes of colorful brilliance or restraint.
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

309
Interaction
If space is the canvas, holograms the paint, that must mean interactions 
are the brush strokes. The interaction between humans and hologram is 
the act of painting in our metaphor. The flow of painting is mimicked as 
we go back and forth. We create dynamic collaborations and unexpected 
outcomes each time we engage each other. There’s no script that controls 
how our encounters will unfold when holograms are driven by artificial 
intelligence and machine learning.
Think about how an artist never really knows exactly what their 
painting will look like when they start the piece. That’s because the act of 
painting it creates opportunities to experiment, fail, recover, and break 
through to new heights. Just like interacting with holograms.
Know your role
The secret to envisioning a successful holographic experience is not 
thinking you know how to envision a successful holographic experience. 
As much as we’d like to think we have this all down, we don’t. Try 
as you might, people will always surprise you with their behavior and 
attitudes. Let it happen. Be flexible and adaptable to any situation 
that arises when you’re envisioning your breakthrough holographic 
masterpiece. Commit to listening and reacting to what people tell you. Try 
out what you hear.
Chapter 17  Design Insights

310
 
It’s almost like running a restaurant. When you’re thinking fixed menu, 
customers want a buffet. Switch to buffet style and they complain about 
the service. Hire better people and people loudly complain about the 
higher prices. Drop the price and they leave bad reviews on the quality of 
the food. You really can’t win here.
Just be flexible and keep trying to bring a better experience to whatever 
situation you’re in at the moment. Go with the flow, learn along the way.
Know when to stop
All good things must end they say. Envisioning doesn’t need to go on 
forever. It has a useful place and time in your holographic adventures, then 
it’s just another tool to pick up when you’re ready to get back into it. 
In the meantime, let me tell you about this great idea for a 
breakthrough experience…
ENVISIONING HOLOGRAMS

311
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7
Closing Thoughts
 
With so many advancements, breakthroughs, failures, and creativity, 
there’s no better way to keep up on what’s happening with holograms 
and mixed reality than to actively insert yourself into the worldwide 
community of people who are experimenting and pushing us all forward 
with their efforts every day. Be curious, publish your work, and please 
share what you learn while searching for those breakthroughs.
When you get a chance, check in on the latest developments at this 
book’s website.
www.EnvisioningHolograms.com

313
© Mike Pell 2017 
M. Pell, Envisioning Holograms, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2749-7
Index
A, B
Artworks, 127
Augmented reality (AR) camera 
apps, 104
C
Challenges
design space, 21
device requirement, 27
envisioning, 29
IMAX movie, 19
real people’s emotions, 28
spatial thinking, 23
usage data, 27
for Xbox, 25
D
Data-inspired holograms
frame technique
choose data, 261
generate app, 262
ideate technique, 255
free data, 257
identify data, 256
prototype technique, 264
refine technique, 271
restart, 273
testing, 270
Datascrapers
data consumption, 252
data-inspired holograms (see 
Data-inspired holograms)
description, 249
Design insights, 301
audience
acknowledge emotion, 304
focus on people, 302
think situationally, 303
thoughtful and  
inclusive, 303
medium
illusion, 305
magic holograms, 307
stagecraft, 306
palette
brush strokes, 309
digital paintings, 308
empty space, 308
roles, 309
when to stop, 310

314
Design process, 53
approach, 55
language, 58
mindset, 53
skillset, 59
Design tools, 203
Adobe Audition, 208
HoloSketch, 205
Mental Canvas, 209
Paint 3D, 204
Photoshop and Illustrator, 211
unity, 206
Development tools, 212
Apple Xcode, 213
GitHub, 215
Visual Studio, 212
E
Emerging techonology, 132
artificial intelligence, 133
autonomous vehicles, 134
Internet of Things, 134
machine learning, 133
robotics, 133
sensors, 134
Entertainment, 129
DJ Holo, 130
real-time experiences, 131
Envisioning, 29, 32
artifacts creation, 37
assertions, 35
challenging norms, 47
early exploration, 43
leaping ahead, 49
opportunities, 42
pace settings, 39
poses questions, 34
remove constraints, 38
techniques, 89
acting, 99
coding, 114
crafting narratives, 92
imagination, 89
making, 115
photos, 93
PowerPoint, 97
prototyping, 103
sketching, 95
verbal  
storytelling, 92
videos, 101
vision settings, 45
VR headsets, 201
F, G
Filmed on location hologram
frame technique, 231
identify elements, 233
scenario backdrop, 231
IDEATE technique, 228
casual, 229
focused, 229
photograph  
empty spaces, 229
Index

315
prototype technique, 235
add people, 237
sketch the hero, 236
swap in  
holograms, 241
refine technique, 244
restart, 246
testing, 243
Flow, 139
fast design, 140
frame, 143
ideate, 142
prototype, 144
refine, 147
restart, 149
test, 146
Framing process, 151
envisioning, 152
initial  
decisions, 153
idea, 154
scenario, 154
techniques, 156
timeframes, 157
key aspects
impact, 158
outcomes, 159
realism, 161
skillset, 160
overview, 152
perspectives, 163
creators, 164
holograms, 168
onlookers, 166
participants, 165
Future tools, 222
H
HoloArt gallery. See Spellbinding 
hologram
Holograms
breakthrough technology, 10
Apple ARKit, 13
Microsoft HoloLens, 11
Windows Mixed Reality, 11
emotional response, 7
innovations, 14
input, 15
optics, 14
sensors and cameras, 15
sound, 15
manageable immmersion, 8
modern magic, 4
profound impact, 5
Holographic Processing Unit 
(HPU), 10
HoloScenes
envisioning series, 226
filmed on location (see Filmed 
on location holograms)
I, J, K, L
Integrated development 
environment (IDE), 206
Iron Man movie, 18
Index

316
M, N, O
Media broadcast, 125
Breaking the Fifth Wall, 126
cutting-edge video processing 
technology, 126
Mindset, 65
actions, 70
adding and augmenting, 77
behavior, 70
breakthrough experiences, 66
capture thoughts, 84
design manager, 68
empathy, 70
envisioning process, 67
fanciful/futuristic  
explorations, 83
inspiration, 71
appearing, 75
transformation, 74
transition, 72
mindshifting techniques, 82
motion, 71
warning sticker, 80
P, Q
Prototyping, 103
AR camera apps, 104
cinematic tools, 110
code prototyping, 113
for designers, 180
acting, 182
AR videos, 182
code prototypes, 182
design clickthroughs, 182
narratives, 181
storyboarding, 181
3D scene-based  
prototypes, 182
visual walkthroughs, 181
for developers, 183
code prototypes, 184
hybrid prototypes, 184
narratives, 183
3D scene-based  
prototypes, 184
environment, 186
focus, 174
MR modelers, 105
output, 187
preflight check, 172
priority, 175
cost, 179
quality, 178
speed, 176
for storytellers, 184
funding code prototypes, 186
narratives, 185
production value videos, 185
storyboards, 185
VR prototyping, 109
VR sketching, 107
R
Refinement, 195
alternate methods, 196
quick turn changes, 196
Index

317
Reflection, 197
abandon, 199
press on, 198
reboot, 199
Restart, 200
S
Scene creation, 287
dynamic positioning, 290
participant positioning, 289
preset positioning, 289
Spatial awareness, 52
Spectator View technology, 193
Spellbinding hologram
description, 278
frame technique, 284
ideate technique, 281
prototype technique, 286
add hero, 290
scene creation, 287
wire interaction, 292
refine technique, 296
restart, 298
testing, 294
Storytelling tools, 216
Autodesk SketchBook, 218
Filmmaker Live, 220
PowerPoint, 221
smartphone video, 217
voice recorder, 216
T, U
Testing, 190
guerilla testing, 190
recorded session, 191
results, 195
wide release, 194
V, W, X, Y, Z
Visualization, 121
breakthrough  
aspects, 123
direct manipulation, 124
initial impression, 124
understanding, 123
visual fidelity, 124
room-scale data, 121
Index

